Immediately after this, the King of Naples, the King of Westphalia, the King of Wurtemberg,
and the king and princesses of the Imperial family, arrived at Paris to be present at the fetes
given by the city of Paris to his Majesty in commemoration of the victories and the pacification
of Germany, and at the same time to celebrate the anniversary of the coronation.  The session
of the legislative corps was also about to open. It was necessary, in the interval between
the scene which I have just described and the day on which the decree of divorce was signed,
that the Empress should be present on all these occasions, and attend all these fetes, under
the eyes of an immense crowd of people, at a time when solitude alone could have in any degree
alleviated her sorrow; it was also necessary that she should cover up her face with rouge in
order to conceal her pallor and the signs of a month passed in tears.  What tortures she endured,
and how much she must have bewailed this elevation, of which nothing remained to her but the
necessity of concealing her feelings!

On the 3d of December their Majesties repaired to Notre Dame, where a 'Te Deum' was sung; after
which the Imperial cortege marched to the palace of the Corps Legislatif, and the opening of
the session was held with unusual magnificence.  The Emperor took his place amidst inexpressible
enthusiasm, and never had his appearance excited such bursts of applause: even the Empress
was more cheerful for an instant, and seemed to enjoy these proofs of affection for one who
was soon to be no longer her husband; but when he began to speak she relapsed into her gloomy
reflections.

It was almost five o'clock when the cortege returned to the Tuileries, and the Imperial banquet
was to take place at half-past seven.  During this interval, a reception of the ambassadors
was held, after which the guests passed on to the gallery of Diana.

The Emperor held a grand dining in his coronation robes, and wearing his plumed hat, which
he did not remove for an instant.  He ate more than was his custom, notwithstanding the distress
under which he seemed to be laboring, glanced around and behind him every moment, causing the
grand chamberlain continually to bend forward to receive orders which he did not give.  The
Empress was seated in front of him, most magnificently dressed in an embroidered robe blazing
with diamonds; but her face expressed even more suffering than in the morning.

On the right of the Emperor was seated the King of Saxony, in a white uniform with red facings,
and collar richly embroidered in silver, wearing a false cue of prodigious length.

By the side of the King of Saxony was the King of Westphalia, Jerome Bonaparte, in a white
satin tunic, and girdle ornamented with pearls and diamonds, which reached almost up to his
arms.  His neck was bare and white, and he wore no whiskers and very little beard; a collar
of magnificent lace fell over his shoulders; and a black velvet cap ornamented with white plumes,
which was the most elegant in the assembly, completed this costume.  Next him was the King
of Wurtemberg with his enormous stomach, which forced him to sit some distance from the table;
and the King of Naples, in so magnificent a costume that it might almost be considered extravagant,
covered with crosses and stars, who played with his fork, without eating or drinking.

On the right of the Empress was Madame Mere, the Queen of Westphalia, the Princess Borghese,
and Queen Hortense, pale as the Empress, but rendered only more beautiful by her sadness, her
face presenting a striking contrast on this occasion to that of the Princess Pauline, who never
appeared in better spirits.  Princess Pauline wore an exceedingly handsome toilet; but this
did not increase the charms of her person nearly so much as that worn by the Queen of Holland,
which, though simple, was elegant and full of taste.

Next day a magnificent fete was held at the Hotel de Ville, where the Empress displayed her
accustomed grace and kind consideration.  This was the last time she appeared on occasions
of ceremony.

A few days after all these rejoicings, the Vice-king of Italy, Eugene de Beauharnais, arrived,
and learned from the lips of the Empress herself the terrible measure which circumstances were
about to render necessary. This news overcame him: agitated and despairing, he sought his Majesty;
and, as if he could not believe what he had just heard asked the Emperor if it was true that
a divorce was about to take place.  The Emperor made a sign in the affirmative, and, with deep
grief depicted on his countenance, held out his hand to his adopted son.  "Sire, allow me to
quit your service."--"What!"--"Yes, Sire; the son of one who is no longer Empress cannot remain
vice-king.  I wish to accompany my mother to her retreat, and console her."--"Do you wish to
leave me, Eugene?  You?  Ah, you do not know how imperious are the reasons which force me to
pursue such a course.  And if I obtain this son, the object of my most cherished wishes, this
son who is so necessary to me, who will take my place with him when I shall be absent?  Who
will be a father to him when I die?  Who will rear him, and who will make a man of him?"  Tears
filled the Emperor's eyes as he pronounced these words; he again took Eugene's hand, and drawing
him to his arms, embraced him tenderly.  I did not hear the remainder of this interesting conversation.

At last the fatal day arrived; it was the 16th of December.  The Imperial family were assembled
in ceremonial costume, when the Empress entered in a simple white dress, entirely devoid of
ornament; she was pale, but calm, and leaned on the arm of Queen Hortense, who was equally
as pale, and much more agitated than her august mother.  The Prince de Beauharnais stood beside
the Emperor, and trembled so violently that it was thought he would fall every moment.  When
the Empress entered, Count Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angely read the act of separation.

This was heard in the midst of profound silence, and the deepest concern was depicted on every
face.  The Empress appeared calmer than any one else in the assemblage, although tears incessantly
flowed from her eyes. She was seated in an armchair in the midst of the saloon, resting her
elbow on a table, while Queen Hortense stood sobbing behind her.  The reading of the act ended,
the Empress rose, dried her eyes, and in a voice which was almost firm, pronounced the words
of assent, then seated herself in a chair, took a pen from the hand of M. Regnaud de Saint-Jean
d'Angely, and signed the act.  She then withdrew, leaning on the arm of Queen Hortense; and
Prince Eugene endeavored to retire at the same moment through the cabinet, but his strength
failed, and he fell insensible between the two doors.  The cabinet usher immediately raised
him up, and committed him to the care of his aide-de-camp, who lavished on him every attention
which his sad condition demanded.

During this terrible ceremony the Emperor uttered not a word, made not a gesture, but stood
immovable as a statue, his gaze fixed and almost wild, and remained silent and gloomy all day.
In the evening, when he had just retired, as I was awaiting his last orders, the door opened,
and the Empress entered, her hair in disorder, and her countenance showing great agitation.
This sight terrified me.  Josephine (for she was now no more than Josephine) advanced towards
the Emperor with a trembling step, and when she reached him, paused, and weeping in the most
heartrending manner, threw herself on the bed, placed her arms around the Emperor's neck, and
lavished on him most endearing caresses.  I cannot describe my emotions.  The Emperor wept
also, sat up and pressed Josephine to his heart, saying to her, "Come, my good Josephine, be
more reasonable! Come, courage, courage; I will always be your friend."  Stifled by her sobs,
the Empress could not reply; and there followed a silent scene, in which their tears and sobs
flowed together, and said more than the tenderest expressions could have done.  At last his
Majesty, recovering from this momentary forgetfulness as from a dream, perceived that I was
there, and said to me in a voice choked with tears, "Withdraw, Constant." I obeyed, and went
into the adjoining saloon; and an hour after Josephine passed me, still sad and in tears, giving
me a kind nod as she passed. I then returned to the sleeping-room to remove the light as usual;
the Emperor was silent as death, and so covered with the bedclothes that his face could not
be seen.

The next morning when I entered the Emperor's room he did not mention this visit of the Empress;
but I found him suffering and dejected, and sighs which he could not repress issued from his
breast.  He did not speak during the whole time his toilet lasted, and as soon as it was completed
entered his cabinet.  This was the day on which Josephine was to leave the Tuileries for Malmaison,
and all persons not engaged in their duties assembled in the vestibule to see once more this
dethroned empress whom all hearts followed in her exile.  They looked at her without daring
to speak, as Josephine appeared, completely veiled, one hand resting on the shoulder of one
of her ladies, and the other holding a handkerchief to her eyes.  A concert of inexpressible
lamentations arose as this adored woman crossed the short space which separated her from her
carriage, and entered it without even a glance at the palace she was--quitting--quitting forever;--the
blinds were immediately lowered, and the horses set off at full speed.

CHAPTER XXIV.

The marriage of the Emperor to Marie Louise was the first step in a new career.  He flattered
himself that it would be as glorious as that he had just brought to a close, but it was to
be far otherwise.  Before entering on a recital of the events of the year 1810, I shall narrate
some recollections, jotted down at random, which, although I can assign them no precise date,
were, nevertheless, anterior to the period we have now reached.

The Empress Josephine had long been jealous of the beautiful Madame Gazani, one of her readers,
and treated her coldly; and when she complained to the Emperor, he spoke to Josephine on the
subject, and requested her to show more consideration for her reader, who deserved it on account
of her attachment to the person of the Empress, and added that she was wrong in supposing that
there was between Madame Gazani and himself the least liaison.  The Empress, without being
convinced by this last declaration of the Emperor, had nevertheless become much more cordial
to Madame Gazani, when one morning the Emperor, who apparently was afraid the beautiful Genoese
might obtain some ascendency over her, suddenly entered the Empress's apartment, and said to
her, "I do not wish to see Madame Gazani here longer; she must return to Italy."  This time
it was the good Josephine who defended her reader.  There were already rumors of a divorce;
and the Empress remarked to his Majesty, "You know well, my friend, that the best means of
being rid of Madame Gazani's presence is to allow her to remain with me.  Let me keep her,
then. We can weep together; she and I understand each other well."

From this time the Empress was a firm friend of Madame Gazani, who accompanied her to Malmaison
and Navarre.  What increased the kind feelings of the Empress for this lady was that she thought
her distressed by the Emperor's inconstancy.  For my part, I have always believed that Madame
Gazani's attachment to the Emperor was sincere, and her pride must have suffered when she was
dismissed; but she had no difficulty in consoling herself in the midst of the homage and adoration
which naturally surrounded such a pretty woman.

The name of the Empress Josephine recalls two anecdotes which the Emperor himself related to
me.  The outrageous extravagance in the Empress's household was a continual vexation to him,
and he had dismissed several furnishers of whose disposition to abuse Josephine's ready credulity
he had ample proof.

One morning he entered the Empress's apartments unannounced, and found there assembled several
ladies holding a secret toilet council, and a celebrated milliner making an official report
as to all the handsomest and most elegant novelties.  She was one of the very persons whom
the Emperor had expressly forbidden to enter the palace; and he did not anticipate finding
her there.  Yet he made no outburst; and Josephine, who knew him better than any one else,
was the only one who understood the irony of his look as he retired, saying, "Continue ladies;
I am sorry to have disturbed you."  The milliner, much astonished that she was not put rudely
out of the door, hastened to retire; but when she reached the last step of the stairs leading
to the apartments of her Majesty the Empress, she encountered an agent of the police, who requested
her as politely as possible to enter a cab which awaited her in the Court of the Carrousel.
In vain she protested that she much preferred walking; the agent, who had received precise
instructions, seized her arm in such a manner as to prevent all reply, and she was obliged
to obey, and to take in this unpleasant company the road to Bicetre.

Some one related to the Emperor that this arrest had caused much talk in Paris, and that he
was loudly accused of wishing to restore the Bastile; that many persons had visited the prisoner,
and expressed their sympathy, and there was a procession of carriages constantly before the prison.

His Majesty took no notice of this, and was much amused by the interest excited in this seller
of topknots, as he called her.  "I will," said his Majesty on this subject, "let the gossips
talk, who think it a point of honor to ruin themselves for gewgaws; but I want this old Jewess
to learn that I put her inside because she had forgotten that I told her to stay outside."

Another celebrated milliner also excited the surprise and anger of his Majesty one day by observations
which no one in France except this man would have had the audacity to make.  The Emperor, who
was accustomed, as I have said, to examine at the end of every month the accounts of his household,
thought the bill of the milliner in question exorbitant, and ordered me to summon him.  I sent
for him; and he came in less than ten minutes, and was introduced into his Majesty's apartment
while he was at his toilet.  "Monsieur," said the Emperor, his eyes fixed on the account, "your
prices are ridiculous, more ridiculous, if possible, than the silly, foolish people who think
they need your goods.  Reduce this to a reasonable amount or I will do it myself."  The merchant,
who held in his hand the duplicate of his bill, began to explain article by article the price
of his goods, and concluded the somewhat long narration with a mild surprise that the sum total
was no more.  The Emperor, whom I was dressing during all this harangue, could hardly restrain
his impatience; and I had already foreseen that this singular scene would end unpleasantly,
when the milliner filled up the measure of his assurance by taking the unparalleled liberty
of remarking to his Majesty that the sum allowed for her Majesty's toilet was insufficient,
and that there were simple citizens' wives who spent more than that.  I must confess that at
this last impertinence I trembled for the shoulders of this imprudent person, and watched the
Emperor's movements anxiously.  Nevertheless, to my great astonishment, he contented himself
with crumpling in his hand the bill of the audacious milliner, and, his arms folded on his
breast, made two steps towards him, pronouncing this word only, "Really!"  with such an accent
and such a look that the merchant rushed to the door, and took to his heels without waiting
for a settlement.

The Emperor did not like me to leave the chateau, as he wished always to have me within call,
even when my duties were over and he did not need me; and I think it was with this idea of
detaining me that his Majesty several times gave me copying to do.  Sometimes, also, the Emperor
wished notes to be taken while he was in bed or in his bath, and said to me, "Constant, take
a pen and write;" but I always refused, and went to summon M. de Meneval.  I have already stated
that the misfortunes of the Revolution had caused my education to be more imperfect than it
should have been; but even had it been as good as it is defective, I much doubt whether I would
ever have been able to write from the Emperor's dictation.  It was no easy thing to fill this
office, and required that one should be well accustomed to it; for he spoke quickly, all in
one breath, made no pause, and was impatient when obliged to repeat.

In order to have me always at hand, the Emperor gave me permission to hunt in the Park of Saint-Cloud,
and was kind enough to remark that since I was very fond of hunting, in granting me this privilege
he was very glad to have combined my pleasure with his need of me.  I was the only person to
whom permission was given to hunt in the park.  At the same time the Emperor made me a present
of a handsome double-barreled gun which had been presented to him at Liege, and which I have
still in my possession.  His Majesty himself did not like double-barreled guns, and used in
preference the simple, small guns which had belonged to Louis XVI., and on which this monarch,
who was an excellent gunsmith, had worked, it is said, with his own hands.

The sight of these guns often led the Emperor to speak of Louis XVI., which he never did except
in terms of respect and pity.  "That unfortunate prince," said the Emperor, "was good, wise,
and learned.  At another period he would have been an excellent king, but he was worth nothing
in a time of revolution.  He was lacking in resolution and firmness, and could resist neither
the foolishness nor the insolence of the Jacobins.  The courtiers delivered him up to the Jacobins,
and they led him to the scaffold.  In his place I would have mounted my horse, and, with a
few concessions on one side, and a few cracks of my whip on the other, I would have reduced
things to order."

When the diplomatic corps came to pay their respects to the Emperor at Saint-Cloud (the same
custom was in use at the Tuileries), tea, coffee, chocolate, or whatever these gentlemen requested,
was served in the saloon of the ambassadors.  M. Colin, steward controller, was present at
this collation, which was served by the domestics of the service.

There was at Saint-Cloud an apartment which the Emperor fancied very much; it opened on a beautiful
avenue of chestnut-trees in the private park, where he could walk at any hour without being
seen.  This apartment was surrounded with full-length portraits of all the princesses of the
Imperial family, and was called the family salon.  Their Highnesses were represented standing,
surrounded by their children; the Queen of Westphalia only was seated.  She had, as I have
said, a very fine bust, but the rest of her figure was ungraceful.  Her Majesty the Queen of
Naples was represented with her four children; Queen Hortense with only one, the oldest of
her living sons; the Queen of Spain with her two daughters; Princess Eliza with hers, dressed
like a boy; the Vice-Queen alone, having no child at the time this portrait was made; Princess
Pauline was also alone.

The theater and hunting were my chief amusements at Saint-Cloud.  During my stay at this chateau
I received a visit from a distant cousin whom I had not seen for many years.  All that he had
heard of the luxury which surrounded the Emperor, and the magnificence of the court, had vividly
excited his curiosity, which I took pleasure in gratifying; and he was struck with wonder,
at every step.  One evening when there was a play at the chateau, I took him into my box, which
was near the pit; and the view which the hall offered when filled so delighted my cousin, that
I was obliged to name each personage in order to satisfy his insatiable curiosity, which took
them all in succession, one by one.  It was a short time before the marriage of the Emperor
to the Archduchess of Austria, and the court was more brilliant than ever.  I showed my cousin
in succession their Majesties, the King and Queen of Westphalia, the King and Queen of Naples,
the Queen of Holland, King of Bavaria, their Highnesses the Grand Duchess of Tuscany, Prince
and Princess Borghese, the Princess of Baden, the Grand Duke of Wurzburg, etc., besides the
numerous dignitaries, princes, marshals, ambassadors, etc., by whom the hall was filled.  My
cousin was in ecstasy, and thought himself at least a foot taller from being in the midst of
this gilded multitude, and consequently paid no attention to the play, being much more interested
in the interior of the hall; and when we left the theater could not tell me what piece had
been played.  His enthusiasm, however, did not carry him so far as to make him forget the incredible
tales that had been related to him about the pickpockets of the capital, and the recommendations
which had been made to him on this subject.  In the promenades at the theater, in every assemblage
whatever, my cousin watched with anxious solicitude over his purse, watch, and handkerchief;
and this habitual prudence did not abandon him even at the court theater, for just as we were
leaving our box, to mingle with the brilliant crowd which came out of the pit and descended
from the boxes, he said to me with the utmost coolness, covering with his hand his chain and
the seals of his watch, "After all, it is well to take precautions; one does not know every
one here."

At the time of his marriage the Emperor was more than ever overwhelmed with petitions, and
granted, as I shall relate farther on, a large number of pardons and petitions.

All petitions sent to the Emperor were handed by him to the aide-de-camp on duty, who carried
them to his Majesty's cabinet, and received orders to make a report on them the next day; and
not even as many as ten times did I find any petitions in his Majesty's pockets, though I always
examined them carefully, and even these rare instances were owing to the fact that the Emperor
had no aide-de-camp near him when they were presented.  It is then untrue, as has been so often
said and written, that the Emperor placed in a private pocket, which was called the good pocket,
the petitions he wished to grant, without even examining them. All petitions which deserved
it received an answer, and I remember that I personally presented a large number to his Majesty;
he did not put these in his pocket, and in almost every instance I had the happiness of seeing
them granted.  I must, however, make an exception of some which I presented for the Cerf-Berr
brothers, who claimed payment for supplies furnished the armies of the republic; for to them
the Emperor was always inexorable.  I was told that this was because Messieurs Cerf-Berr had
refused General Bonaparte a certain sum which he needed during the campaign of Italy.

These gentlemen interested me deeply in their cause; and I several times presented their petition
to his Majesty, and in spite of the care I took to place it in his Majesty's hands only when
be was in good humor, I received no reply.  I nevertheless continued to present the petition,
though I perceived that when the Emperor caught a glimpse of it he always became angry; and
at length one morning, just as his toilet was completed, I handed him as usual his gloves,
handkerchief, and snuff-box, and attached to it again this unfortunate paper.  His Majesty
passed on into his cabinet, and I remained in the room attending to my duties, and while busied
with these saw the Emperor re-enter, a paper in his hand. He said to me, "Come, Constant, read
this; you will see that you are mistaken, and the government owes nothing to the Cerf-Berr
brothers; so say nothing more to me about it; they are regular Arabs."  I threw my eyes on
the paper, and read a few words obediently; and though I understood almost nothing of it, from
that moment I was certain that the claim of these gentlemen would never be paid.  I was grieved
at this, and knowing their disappointment, made them an offer of services which they refused.
The Cerf-Berr brothers, notwithstanding my want of success, were convinced of the zeal I had
manifested in their service, and thanked me warmly.  Each time I addressed a petition to the
Emperor, I saw M. de Meneval, whom I begged to take charge of it.  He was very obliging, and
had the kindness to inform me whether my demands could hope for success; and he told me that
as for the Cerf-Berr brothers, he did not think the Emperor would ever compensate them.

In fact, this family, at one time wealthy, but who had lost an immense patrimony in advances
made to the Directory, never received any liquidation of these claims, which were confided
to a man of great honesty, but too much disposed to justify the name given him.

Madame Theodore Cerf-Berr on my invitation had presented herself several times with her children
at Rambouillet and Saint-Cloud, to beseech the Emperor to do her justice.  This respectable
mother of a family whom nothing could dismay, again presented herself with the eldest of her
daughters at Compiegne.  She awaited the Emperor in the forest, and throwing herself in the
midst of the horses, succeeded in handing him her petition; but this time what was the result?
Madame and Mademoiselle Cerf-Berr had hardly re-entered the hotel where they were staying,
when an officer of the secret police came and requested them to accompany him. He made them
enter a mean cart filled with straw, and conducted them under the escort of two gens d'armes
to the prefecture of police at Paris, where they were forced to sign a contract never to present
themselves again before the Emperor, and on this condition were restored to liberty.

About this time an occasion arose in which I was more successful. General Lemarrois, one of
the oldest of his Majesty's aides-de-camp, a soldier of well-known courage, who won all hearts
by his excellent qualities, was for some time out of favor with the Emperor, and several times
endeavored to obtain an audience with him; but whether it was that the request was not made
known to his Majesty, or he did not wish to reply, M. Lemarrois received no answer.  In order
to settle the matter he conceived the idea of addressing himself to me, entreating me to present
his petition at an opportune moment.  I did this, and had the happiness to succeed; and in
consequence M. Lemarrois obtained an audience with such gratifying results that a short time
after he obtained the governorship of Magdeburg.

The Emperor was absent-minded, and often forgot where he had put the petitions which were handed
to him, and thus they were sometimes left in his coats, and when I found them there I carried
them to his Majesty's cabinet and handed them to M. de Meneval or M. Fain; and often, too,
the, papers for which he was hunting were found in the apartments of the Empress.  Sometimes
the Emperor gave me papers to put away, and those I placed in a box of which I alone had the
key.  One day there was a great commotion in the private apartments over a paper which could
not be found.  These were the circumstances:

Near the Emperor's cabinet was a small room in which the secretaries stayed, furnished with
a desk, on which notes or petitions were--often placed.  This room was usually occupied by
the cabinet usher, and the Emperor was accustomed to enter it if he wished to hold a private
conversation without being overheard by the secretaries.  When the Emperor entered this room
the usher withdrew and remained outside the door; he was responsible for everything in this
room, which was never opened except by express orders from his Majesty.

Marshal Bessieres had several days before presented to the Emperor a request for promotion
from a colonel of the army which he had warmly supported.  One morning the marshal entered
the little room of which I have just spoken, and finding his petition already signed lying
on the desk, he carried it off, without being noticed by my wife's uncle who was on duty. 
A few hours after, the Emperor wished to examine this petition again, and was very sure he
had left it in this small room; but it was not there, and it was thought that the usher must
have allowed some one to enter without his Majesty's orders.  Search was made everywhere in
this room and in the Emperor's cabinet, and even in the apartments of the Empress, and at last
it was necessary to announce to his Majesty that the search had been in vain; whereupon the
Emperor gave way to one of those bursts of anger which were so terrible though fortunately
so rare, which terrified the whole chateau, and the poor usher received orders never to appear
in his sight again.  At last Marshal Bessieres, having been told of this terrible commotion,
came to accuse himself.  The Emperor was appeased, the usher restored to favor, and everything
forgotten; though each one was more careful than ever that nothing should be disturbed, and
that the Emperor should find at his finger's end whatever papers he needed.

The Emperor would not allow any one to be introduced without his permission, either into the
Empress's apartments or his own; and this was the one fault for which the people of the household
could not expect pardon.  Once, I do not exactly remember when, the wife of one of the Swiss
Guard allowed one of her lovers to enter the apartments of the Empress; and this unfortunate
woman, without the knowledge of her imprudent mistress, took in soft wax an impression of the
key of the jewel-box which I have already mentioned as having belonged to Queen Marie Antoinette,
and, by means of a false key made from this impression, succeeded in stealing several articles
of jewelry.  The police soon discovered the author of the robbery who was punished as he deserved,
though another person was also punished who did not deserve it, for the poor husband lost his
place.

CHAPTER XXV

After his divorce from the Empress Josephine, the Emperor appeared much preoccupied; and as
it was known that he thought of marrying again, all persons at the chateau and in his Majesty's
service were greatly concerned about this marriage, though all our conjectures concerning the
princess destined to share the Imperial crown proved to be wrong.  Some spoke of a Russian
princess, while others said the Emperor would marry none but a French woman; but no one thought
of an Austrian archduchess. When the marriage had been decided, nothing was spoken of at the
court but the youth, grace, and native goodness of the new Empress.  The Emperor was very gay,
and paid more attention to his toilet, giving me orders to renew his wardrobe, and to order
better fitting coats, made in a more modern style.  The Emperor also sat for his portrait,
which the Prince de Neuchatel carried to Marie Louise; and the Emperor received at the same
time that of his young wife, with which he appeared delighted.

The Emperor, in order to win Marie Louise's affection, did more undignified things than he
had ever done for any woman.  For instance, one day when he was alone with Queen Hortense and
the Princess Stephanie, the latter mischievously asked him if he knew how to waltz; and his
Majesty replied that he had never been able to go beyond the first lesson, because after two
or three turns he became so dizzy that he was compelled to stop.  "When I was at l'ecole militaire,"
added the Emperor, "I tried again and again to overcome dizziness which waltzing produced,
but I could not succeed.  Our dancing-master having advised us, in learning to waltz, to take
a chair in our arms instead of a lady, I never failed to fall with the chair, which I pressed
so lovingly that it broke; and thus the chairs in my room, and that of two or three of my companions,
were destroyed, one after the other."  This tale told in the most animated and amusing manner
by his Majesty excited bursts of laughter from the two princesses.

When this hilarity had somewhat subsided, Princess Stephanie returned to the charge, saying,
"It really is a pity that your Majesty does not know how to waltz, for the Germans are wild
over waltzing, and the Empress will naturally share the taste of her compatriots; she can have
no partner but the Emperor, and thus she will be deprived of a great pleasure through your
Majesty's fault."--"You are right!" replied the Emperor; "well, give me a lesson, and you will
have a specimen of my skill."  Whereupon he rose, took a few turns with Princess Stephanie,
humming the air of the Queen of Prussia; but he could not take more than two or three turns,
and even this he did so awkwardly that it increased the amusement of these ladies.  Then the
Princess of Baden stopped, saying, "Sire, that is quite enough to convince me that you will
never be anything but a poor pupil.  You were made to give lessons, not to take them."

Early in March the Prince de Neuchatel set out for Vienna commissioned to officially request
the hand of the Empress in marriage.  The Archduke Charles, as proxy of the Emperor, married
the Archduchess Marie Louise, and she set out at once for France, the little town of Brannan,
on the frontier between Austria and Bavaria, having been designated as the place at which her
Majesty was to pass into the care of a French suite.  The road from Strasburg was soon filled
with carriages conveying to Brannan. the household of the new Empress.  Most of these ladies
had passed from the household of the Empress Josephine into that of Marie Louise.

The Emperor wished to see for himself if the trousseau and wedding presents intended for his
new wife were worthy of him and of her, consequently all the clothing and linen were brought
to the Tuileries, spread out before him, and packed under his own eyes.  The good taste and
elegance of each article were equaled only by the richness of the materials.  The furnishers
and modistes of Paris had worked according to models sent from Vienna; and when these models
were presented to the Emperor he took one of the shoes, which were remarkably small, and with
it gave me a blow on the cheek in the form of a caress.  "See, Constant," said his Majesty,
"that is a shoe of good augury.  Have you ever seen a foot like that?  This is made to be held
in the hand."

