"It seems," she said to her aunt, "as if all the world had sent their representatives here.
It makes me almost sad that there is no one to see us off."

Then her eye rested upon a gentleman who evidently had no one to see him off. He was leaning
on the railing upon the opposite side of the ship, smoking a cigar. His back was toward all
this bustle and confusion, and he seemed to have an air of isolation and of indifference to
what was going on about him. His tall person was clad in a heavy overcoat, which seemed to
combine comfort with elegance, and gave to him, even in his leaning posture, a distingue air.
But that which drew Annie's attention was the difference of his manner from that of all others,
who were either excited by their surroundings, or were turning wistfully and eagerly toward
friends whom it might be long before they saw again. The motionless, apathetic figure, smoking
quietly, with his hat drawn down over his eyes, and looking away from everything and everybody,
came to have a fascination for her.

The steamer slowly and majestically moved out into the stream. Shouts, cries, final words,
hoarse orders from the officers--a perfect babel of sounds--filled the air, but the silently-curling
smoke-wreaths were the only suggestion of life from that strangely indifferent form. He seemed
like one so deeply absorbed in his own thoughts that he would have to be awakened as from sleep.

Suddenly he turned and came toward them with the air of one who feels himself alone, though
jostled in a crowd, and instantly, with a strange thrill at heart, Annie recognized Walter Gregory.

Hunting saw him also, and Annie noted that, while the blackest frown gathered on his brow,
he grew very pale.

In his absorption, Gregory would have passed by them, but Annie said, "Mr. Gregory, are you
not going to speak to us?"

He started violently, and his face mantled with hot blood, and Annie also felt that she was
blushing unaccountably. But he recovered instantly, and came and shook her hand most cordially,
saying, "This is a strangely unexpected pleasure. And Miss Morton, also! When was I ever so
fortunate before?"

Then he saw Hunting, to whom he bowed with his old, distant manner, and Hunting returned the
acknowledgment in the most stiff and formal way.

"Do you know," said Annie, "I have been watching you with curiosity for some time past, though
I did not know who you were till you turned. I could not account for your apathy and indifference
to this scene, which to me is so novel and exciting, and which seems to find every one interested
save yourself. I should hardly have thought you alive if you had not been smoking."

"Well," he said, "I have been abroad so often that it has become like crossing the ferry, and
I was expecting no one down to see me off. But you do not look well;" and both she and Miss
Eulie noticed that he glanced uneasily from her to Hunting, and did not seem sure how he should
address her.

"Miss Walton has just recovered from a long illness," said Miss Eulie, quietly.

His face instantly brightened, and as quickly changed to an expression of sincerest sympathy.

"Not seriously ill, I hope," he said, earnestly.

"I'm afraid I was," replied Annie, adding, cheerfully, "I am quite well now, though."

His face became as pale as it had been flushed a moment before, and he said, in a low tone,
"I did not know it."

His manner touched her, and proved that there was no indifference on his part toward her, though
there might be to the bustling world around him.

Then he inquired particularly after each member of the household, and especially after old
Daddy Tuggar.

Annie told him how delighted the children had been with the toys and books. "And as for Daddy
Tuggar," she said, smiling, "he has been in the clouds, literally and metaphorically, ever
since you sent him the tobacco. Whenever I go to see him he says, most cheerfully, 'It's all
settled, Miss Annie. It grows clearer with every pipe' (while I can scarcely see him), 'I'm
all right, 'cause I'm an awful sinner.'"

She was rather surprised at the look of glad sympathy which Gregory gave her, but he only said,
"He is to be envied."

Then at her request he began to point out the objects of interest they were passing, and with
quiet courtesy drew Hunting into the conversation, who rather ungraciously permitted it because
he could not help himself.

Annie again, with pain, saw the unfavorable contrast of her lover with this man, who certainly
proved himself the more finished gentleman, if nothing else.

With almost a child's delight she said, "You have no idea how novel and interesting all this
is to me, though so old and matter-of-fact to you. I have always wanted to cross the ocean,
and look forward to this voyage with unmingled pleasure."

"I'm sincerely sorry such a disastrous change is so soon to take place in your sensations,
for it will be rough outside to-day, and I fear you and Miss Morton will soon be suffering
from the most forlorn and prosaic of maladies."

"I won't give up to it," said Annie, resolutely.

"I have no doubt," he replied, humorously, "as our quaint old friend used to say, that you
are 'well meanin',' but we must all submit to fate. I fear you will soon be confined to the
dismal lower regions."

"Are you sick?"

"I was at first."

His prediction was soon verified. From almost a feeling of rapture and a sense of the sublime
as they looked out upon the broad Atlantic with its tumultuous waves, the ladies suddenly became
silent, and glanced nervously toward the stairway that led to the cabin.

Gregory promptly gave his arm to Miss Eulie, while Hunting followed with Annie, and that was
the last appearance of the ladies for three days.

CHAPTER XXXIII

COLLISION AT SEA--WHAT A CHRISTIAN COULD DO

On the morning of the fourth day, as the sea had become more calm, the ladies ventured upon
deck for a short time. Gregory immediately joined them and complimented their courage in coming
out during a winter voyage.

"Nature and I are friends all the year round," said Annie, with a faint attempt at a smile,
for she was still sick and faint. "I rather like her wild, rough moods. It has been a great
trial to my patience to lie in my berth, helpless and miserable from what you well term a 'prosaic
malady,' when I was longing to see the ocean. Now that we have made a desperate attempt to
reach deck, there is nothing to see. Do you think this dense fog will last long?"

"I hope not, especially for your sake. But do not regret coming out, for you will soon feel
better for it."

"I do already; I believe I could live out of doors. Have you been ill?"

"O no; I should have been a sailor."

"Mr. Hunting has fared almost as badly as we," said Annie, determined that they should make
one group.

"Indeed! I'm sorry," said Gregory, quietly.

"I hate the ocean," snarled Hunting, with a grim, white face; "I'm always sick."

"And I'm afraid of it," said Miss Eulie. "How can they find their way through such a mist?
Then, we might run into something."

"In any case you are safe, Miss Morton," said Gregory, with a smile.

She gave him a bright look and replied, "I trust we all are. But the sea is rough, boisterous,
treacherous, and mysterious, just the qualities I don't like. What a perfect emblem of mystery
this fog is through which we are going so rapidly!"

"Well," said Gregory, with one of his expressive shrugs, "I find all these experiences equally
on the land, especially the latter."

Annie gave him a quick, inquiring look, while color came into even Hunting's pale face.

Annie felt no little curiosity as to Gregory's developing character, for though he had said
nothing definite, his softened manner and quiet dignity made him seem very unlike his old self.

"How do you pass your time?" she asked.

"Well, I read a great deal, and I take considerable exercise, for I wish fully to regain my
health."

She gave him a grateful look. He was keeping his promise. She said, "You look very much better
than I expected to see you, and I'm very glad, for you were almost ghostly when you left us.
What do you find so interesting to read?"

His color rose instantly, but he said with a smile, "A good old book that I brought with me."

The expression of his face answered her swift, questioning look. It was her Bible. Neither
Miss Eulie nor Hunting understood why she became so quiet; but the latter, who was watching
them closely, thought he detected some secret understanding. In his jealous egotism it could
only mean what was adverse to himself, and he had an attack of something worse than sea-sickness.

Gregory quietly turned the conversation upon ocean travel, and for a half-hour entertained
the ladies without any effort on their part, and then they went back to their state-rooms.

By evening the ship was running so steadily that they all came out to supper. Gregory, who
was a personal friend of the captain, had secured them a place near the head of the table,
where they received the best of attention. Annie, evidently, was recovering rapidly, and took
a genuine interest in the novel life and scenes around her. She found herself vis-a-vis and
side by side with great diversities of character, and listened with an amused, intelligent
face to the brisk conversation. She noted with surprise that Gregory seemed quite a favorite,
but soon saw the reason in his effort to make the hour pass pleasantly to his fellow-passengers.
The captain had given him a seat at his right hand, and appealed to him on every disputed point
that was outside of his special province.

She was also pleased to see how Gregory toned up the table-talk and skilfully led it away from
disagreeable topics. But he had a rather difficult task, for, sitting near her, was a man whose
ostentatious dress reflected his character and words.

Some one was relating an anecdote of a narrow escape, and another remarked, "That's what I
should call a special Providence."

"Special Providence!" said Annie's loud neighbor, contemptuously. "A grown man is very weak-minded
to believe in any Providence whatever."

There was a shocked, pained expression on many faces, and Annie's eyes flashed with indignation.
She turned to Hunting, expecting him to resent such an insult to their faith, but saw only
a cold sneer on his face. Hunting was decidedly English in his style, and would travel around
the world and never speak to a stranger, or make an acquaintance, if he could help it. Then,
instinctively, she turned to Gregory. He was looking fixedly at the man, whose manner had attracted
general attention. But he only said, "Then I am very weak-minded."

There was a general expression of pleased surprise and sympathy on the faces of those who understood
his reply, while the captain stared at him in some astonishment.

"I beg your pardon, sir," said the man; "I meant nothing personal. It was only a rather blunt
way of saying that I didn't believe in any such things myself."

"I give you credit for your honesty, but some of us do."

"Then you pretend to be a Christian?"

"I should not pretend to be one under any circumstances," said Gregory, with the perfection
of quiet dignity, "and I am very sorry to say that I am not so favored. But I have full belief
in a Providence, both special and general."

"I like your honesty, too," said the man, seemingly anxious for an argument. "By the word 'pretend'
I only meant claim, or assert. But it seems to me that the facts in the case are all against
your belief. I find nothing but law in the universe. You might as well say that this ship is
run by special Providence, when, in fact, it is run by accurately gauged machinery, system,
and rules."

"Now your argument is lame," said the captain, laughing. "We have plenty of good machinery,
system, and rules aboard, but if I wasn't around, looking after everything all the time, as
a special Providence, I'm afraid you'd find salt water before Liverpool."

A general laugh followed this sally, and Gregory said: "And so I believe that the Divine Providence
superintends His own laws and system. I think my friend the captain has given a most happy
illustration of the truth, and I had no idea he was so good a theologian."

"That's not an argument," said the man, considerably crestfallen. "That's only a joke."

"By the way, Mr. Gregory, it seems to me that your views have changed since you crossed with
me last," remarked the captain.

"I frankly admit they have," was the prompt reply. "Perhaps I can explain myself by the following
question: If you find, by a careful observation, that you are heading your ship the wrong way,
what do you do?"

"Put her about on the right course."

"That is just what I have tried to do, sir. I think my meaning is plain?"

"Nothing could be clearer, and I'd rather be aboard now than when you were on the old tack."

Annie gave Gregory a glance of glad, grateful approval that warmed his heart like sunshine.

Hunting said, enviously, sotto voce, "I think such conversation at a public table wretched taste."

"I cannot agree with you," said Annie, decidedly; "but, granting it, Mr. Gregory did not introduce
the subject, and I wish you had spoken as he did when every Christian at the table was insulted."

He colored deeply, but judiciously said nothing.

With increasing pain she thought, "He who says he is not a Christian acts more like one than
he who claims the character."

But she now had the strongest hopes for Gregory, and longed for a private talk with him.

The next day it blew quite a gale, and Hunting and Miss Eulie were helplessly confined to their
staterooms. But Annie had become a sailor, and having done all she could for her aunt, came
upon deck, where she saw Gregory walking back and forth with almost the steadiness of one of
the ship's officers.

She tried to go to him, but would have fallen had he not seen her and reached her side almost
at a bound. With a gentleness and tenderness as real as delicate, he placed her in a sheltered
nook where she could see the waves in their mad sport, and said, "Now you can see old ocean
in one of his best moods. The wind, though strong, is right abaft, filling all the sails they
dare carry, and we are making grand progress."

"How wonderful it is!" cried Annie, looking with a child's interest upon the scene. "Just see
those briny mountains, with foam and spray for foliage. If our own Highlands with their mingled
evergreens and snow were changed from granite to water, and set in this wild motion, it could
hardly seem more strange and sublime. Look at that great monster coming so threateningly toward
us. It seems as if we should be engulfed beyond a chance."

"Now see how gracefully the ship will surmount it," said Gregory, smiling.

"O dear!" said she, sighing, "if we could only rise above our troubles in the same way!" Then,
feeling that she had touched on delicate ground, she hastened to add, "This boundless waste
increases my old childish wonder how people ever find their way across the ocean."

"The captain is even now illustrating your own teaching and practice in regard to the longer
and more difficult voyage of life," said Gregory, meaningly. "He is 'looking up'--taking an
observation of the heavens, and will soon know just where we are and how to steer."

Annie looked at him wistfully, and said, in a low tone, "I was so glad to learn, last evening,
that you had taken an observation also, and I was so very grateful, too, that you had the courage
to defend our faith."

