On Thursday afternoon at three o'clock Cornelia retired to her bedroom, and with the help of
the devoted Mary proceeded to make an elaborate toilette for the drive.  Those wonderful trunks
seemed to contain garments suitable for every possible occasion which could arise; for every
fluctuation of weather, for every degree of festivity.  From one of the number out came a long
driving coat, snowy white, light of texture, an ideal garment for a warm yet dusty summer's
day, which being fastened down the side by huge pearl buttons, displayed a degree of smartness
nothing short of uncanny in an untrimmed garment.  To wear with the coat there was a jaunty
cap, and a pair of driving gloves with wide, gauntleted cuffs.  Cornelia made faces at herself
in the glass as her custom was the while she arranged the "set" of her hat, puffed out her
shaded locks, and affably cross-questioned her attendant on her private affairs.

"Mury, how's your friend?"

"He isn't so well as he was, miss, thank you all the same.  He's been a bit upset in his indigestion."

"Think of that now!  Isn't that sad!  You buy him a bottle of physic and send it along.  I'll
pay!  It's not a mite of use having a friend with indigestion.  He'll be just as doleful, and
you want him to give you a real good time. ...  How's your mother getting along?"

"Nicely, thank you, miss.  She said she didn't know how to thank you enough for the shawl.
Her poor old bones haven't ached half so much since she's had it to hap round her of a night."

"Isn't that sweet!  Hustle up now with my high shoes, and don't mind buttoning in bits of flesh
as you did last time.  I'd just as lief be left out.  See here, Mury, I want everything put
back in its place after I'm gone!  I hate to find a muss when I get back, and that blue muslin
has got to be pressed out for to-night, and those bits of lace washed, and the parcels changed
at the shop.  Mind, it's got to be all done by the time I am back.  And see here, next time
you go out to meet your friend, there's that taffetas waist you can have for yourself!  You'll
look dandy in it, and he'll be so proud.  Maybe it will help the indigestion better than physic."

Mary was incoherent with delight, and promised ardently to execute all the young lady's orders,
knowing full well that it was the silver afternoon, and that her time should of rights be fully
occupied with household duties.  She promised, and she intended to perform.  By dint of smiles,
pleasant words, kindly interests in "friends," and ceaseless doles of finery and physic, Cornelia
had established such a hold upon the affections of the staff, that her wish already took precedent
of her aunt's law.  Mary mentally condemned half the contents of the silver cupboard to neglect,
the while she ironed out foaming frills and floating sash ends.

Mrs Ramsden accompanied Elma to the gate of The Nook, and stood beside Miss Briskett looking
on with dubious eyes, while the two girls took their places in the high dog-cart.  A groom
had driven the horse from the livery stable, and both good ladies expected him to take possession
of the back seat, in the double capacity of chaperon and guide.  It came, therefore, as a shock,
when Cornelia dismissed the man with a smile, and a rain of silver dropped into an eager hand,
but protestations, feeble and stern, were alike disregarded.

"How do you suppose we are going to talk, with him perched there, with his ears sticking out,
listening to every word we say?  We don't want any men poking round, this journey!" laughed
Cornelia, settling herself in her seat, and taking the reins in her gauntleted hands.  Miss
Briskett was dismayed to feel a thrill of pride mingling with her displeasure, for the girl
looked so fresh, so trim, so sparklingly alive perched up on her high driving seat.  Elma Ramsden,
for all her superior beauty, looked tame and insignificant beside her.  Although she would
not condescend to look around, Miss Briskett divined that behind the curtains of the neighbouring
houses the occupants were looking on with admiring curiosity, and noting every detail of the
girl's attire.  If Cornelia were self-willed and defiant, in appearance at least she was a
worthy representative of her race.  The stern lines of the spinster's mouth relaxed into an
unwilling smile as she said urgently--

"But, my dear, the horse!  I am responsible for your safety.  Are you quite sure that you are
capable of managing him?"

Cornelia's ripple of amusement was sufficiently expressive.  "One old mare in a hired trap,
when I've driven a four-in-hand over some of the wickedest roads in America!  If we are smashed,
Aunt Soph, you can lay it to providence, and not to my driving.  Don't get to worrying if we
are late.  If we're killed you'll hear all about it soon enough.  You can only die once, and
a carriage spill is a good slick way of getting it over."

"Cornelia, I insist--"

"Miss Cornelia, I beg--"

The cart dashed suddenly onward in response to a flip of the whip, leaving the two old ladies
upon the roadway, the unfinished appeal frozen upon their lips.  Elma turned round to wave
an abashed adieu, the long habit of servitude struggling with a delicious new sense of liberty
and adventure.

"Oh--oh, Cornelia, if you could only see them!  They are standing stock-still, staring after
us.  They look petrified! ...  It was naughty of you.  You frightened your aunt on purpose."

"That's so!" assented Cornelia, frankly.  "I meant to do it.  It's going to hurt me a lot more
than it does her, as the mommar said when she spanked the nipper, but she's got just as set
as a fossil, paddling along in this little backwater, and imagining it's the whole big ocean,
and there's no one on hand to rouse her but myself.  It's my mission. Wake up, England!" and
she flourished her whip dramatically as the mare trotted through the south gateway of the park.

Outside the gate lay a smooth wide road stretching uphill, and in response to a movement of
Elma's outstretched hand, Cornelia turned the mare in this direction, flashing a radiant smile
into the pink-and-white face.

"Well?"

"Well what?"

"How do you feel?"

"Excited!--As if something were going to happen!"

Cornelia nodded sagely.

"Perhaps it is; there's no saying.  I've seen horses I'd sooner trust in a scrimmage, but a
little spill would do you no harm.  You're skeery as a cat.  You want nerve, my dear, nerve!"
Cornelia flicked her whip round the horse's ears to give emphasis to her words, and chuckled
with mischievous amusement as Elma clutched the seat, and gasped in dismay.

"I call this crawling, not driving.  When we get out into the real country I'll make her go,
so we get some fresh air into our lungs, then you can hold on if you like, but don't pay before
the show begins.  Now, then--where are we bound?"

Elma cast down her eyes, faintly blushing beneath her hat.  Surely there was something infectiously
electric in the air this afternoon, or why should her thoughts fly as an arrow from the bow
to just that very spot which it should have been her maidenly duty to avoid?  She blushed at
her own audacity; telling herself sternly that she ought to be ashamed; held the temptation
afar off, looking at it, longing after it, regretfully deciding to cast it aside, then with
a sudden impetuous change of front, hugged it to her breast.  Yes, she would!  For one afternoon,
one golden, glorious afternoon, she would send prudence to the winds, and follow her own instincts.
After all, why not?  Because a certain person happened to be squire of a certain district it
did not follow that other people could not drive over his land without being suspected of personal
designs.  It was to the last degree unlikely that one would happen to meet anyone one knew,
but if one did--Elma acknowledged to herself that a lift of the hat, a glance of pleased recognition,
would remain in memory as the pleasantest episode of the afternoon.

As a palliative to her conscience, Elma suggested a farther village as the termination to the
drive, directing the course with a thrill of guilty triumph at each fresh turning.

"Ain't this dandy!" cried Cornelia, preening her little head, and showing her white teeth in
a smile of delight.  "This England of yours is just a 'cute little garden, with the roads rolled
out like gravel paths.  You'd stare to see the roads about my home.  Over here it's all grass
and roses.  You are a rose, too--a real, sweet garden rose, with the dewdrops on its leaves.
If I were an artist I'd paint a picture of you on one panel, and Aunt Soph on the other, as
two types of English life, and the people could look on, and learn a lesson.  It's kinder sweet
and touching to dream along so long as you're young, but if you go on keeping your eyes shut,
it don't pan out well in old age.  It's best to have 'em wide open, and realise that there
are two or three more people in the world beside yourself."

Elma smiled in vague, preoccupied fashion.  Her own thoughts were all engrossing, and at every
fresh winding of the road she held her breath in suspense, while the wild rose colour deepened
in her cheeks. Suppose--suppose they met him!  How would he look?  What would he do? What would
he think?  Even the compliment to herself faded into insignificance beside such questions as these.

The mare was trotting briskly along a high level road, on the right side of which lay the boundary
wall of a large estate--the estate, every inch of which was thrilling with interest to one
onlooker, at least; to the right a bank of grass sloped gradually to a lower road, beneath
which again could be seen a wide-stretched panorama of country. Cornelia slackened the reins,
and gave herself up to the enjoyment of the moment.

Up to now decorous toddles to and fro the outlying villas had been her only form of exercise,
and she was amazed and delighted with the verdant beauty of the scene.  As Elma did not seem
inclined for conversation she made no further remark, and for the next quarter of an hour the
two girls drove onward in silence, each happy in her own thoughts, in the sunshine, in the
sweet, balmy air, fragrant with the scent of the flowering trees.  Then of a sudden one of
the lodges of the park came into view, and on the roadside beside the door a dazzling golden
object, at sight of which Cornelia puckered puzzled brows.

"What in the land's name is that?  The sun dazzles so that I can't see."

"It's a--a cage, I think!  I see something like bars."

"What fool-trick are they up to, then, putting a gilt cage on the high road in the blazing
sunshine?  They might use the sense they were born with.  Steady, old lady, steady!" cried
Cornelia, soothingly, as the mare pricked up her ears and shied uneasily to the farther side
of the road.  "Yes, it's a cage right enough, and a poll parrot inside.  Guess I'll pull up
at that house, and tell the inmates that it looks for all the world like a blazing firework
on the side of the path; enough to scare any horse in creation.  This old lady is as nervous
as a cat!"

The fact was painfully apparent even to Elma's inexperience, for the mare, refusing to be soothed
by Cornelia's cajoling words and chuckles, shied still nearer the opposite hedge, her ears
cocked nervously erect. Seen nearer at hand, and out of the direct dazzle of sunlight, the
cage looked innocent enough with its grey inmate swinging solemnly to and fro on its perch,
but as the cart swung rapidly past, Mistress Poll evidently felt that it was time to assert
herself, and opened her mouth to emit a shrill, raucous cry, at the sound of which the mare
bounded forward in a headlong gallop.

"I knew it!" cried Cornelia, shortly.  "I just guessed that had to come next."  She sat bolt
upright, twisting the reins round her fingers, her lips pressed into a thin red line, her eyes
ashine with an excitement in which was more than a spice of enjoyment.  She shook herself impatiently
free from Elma's frenzied grasp.  "Now, then, none of that!  You leave my arms alone.  I'll
need all my strength before we're through with this trouble.  My stars and stripes, how she
does pull."

"Oh, oh, Cornelia!  What shall we do?  What shall we do?  Shall we be thrown?  What's going
to happen?  Cornelia?"

Not by a fraction of an inch did Cornelia turn her head in answer to this frenzied appeal.
Upright as a dart she sat in her seat, her slender wrists straining at the reins.

"Don't yelp!" she said shortly.  "Keep that till you're hurt.  Say! what happens to the road
after the next turn?"

"I don't know. ...  Oh, what shall we do?  Why did we ever come? ... Cornelia, can you hold
her back?" ...

"No!" snapped Cornelia, shortly.  "I can't!--Not for many minutes longer, at this rate.  My
wrists are about broken as it is.  What happens after this turning, I say?  You must know.
Use your brains, for goodness' sake--if you want any left to use another day.  Is it a good
road--better than this?  What's on the sides--hedgerows, walls, water? For the land's sake,
child, sort your ideas!"

Thus admonished, Elma made a violent effort to pull herself together. For reasons already mentioned,
this particular bit of country was clearly imprinted on her memory, and she had but to collect
her scattered wits to see a clear picture of the path ahead.

"The road is quite good.  There is a wall--two walls.  Some farm buildings on the right.  At
the end there is a hill; it leads down into the next village."

"Humph!"  Cornelia's nostrils dilated widely, and two spots of pink showed on her white cheeks.
"Then I guess this is the end of the volume.  A grass bank is better than a wall any day of
the week. ... Now then, young woman, if you've got any grit stowed away, get it out, and use
it.  It's coming!  Are you ready?"

"No, no!" shrieked Elma, wildly.  She clutched the seat with despairing hands, as with a sudden
convulsive movement Cornelia switched the mare violently to the right.  "Help, help!  Oh, help--"

The bank rose before her eyes in a sudden mountainous sweep; the mare, instead of being in
front, soared suddenly on the top of the trap; the hinges creaked and strained; and the seat
assumed a perpendicular position.  It was all over in a couple of minutes, but to Elma it seemed
as many hours.  She had time to hear the rush of approaching footsteps, to see over the top
of the hedge three startled masculine faces; to recognise the nearer of the three with a great
throb of relief, and to stretch out her arms towards him with a shrill cry of appeal--then
the crash came, and she was shot headlong into space.

Fireworks! that was the first impression.  Little dots of flame flitting about before her eyes,
forming into circles of light and whizzing rapidly round and round.  Then when her eyes were
open, a heavy confused stupor, in which she saw, but refused to understand.  Why was she lying
on the grass in the middle of the day?  Why did Cornelia look so queer, with her face stained
with soil, and her hat on one side?  Why did they offer her things to drink?  She wasn't thirsty;
the tea was bad; it stung her mouth.  It wasn't tea at all, but something hot and nasty.  It
was brandy out of a flask!  Elma lifted big, lovely eyes of a pansy blue, and stared vacantly
into the face by her side, but at the sight of it memory came back in a rush.  She sat up stiffly,
moving her limbs in nervous, tentative fashion--gasped, sighed, and quavered out a tremulous--

"What happened?  Is it all over?  Are we saved?"

Cornelia loomed above her, alert even in this moment of shock and dishevelment.  One cheek
was plastered with soil; patches of green stain discoloured her coat, her hair hung rakishly
askew, yet never had her manner been more composed nor complacently matter of fact.

"We've had a pretty lucky let-off.  You are alive all right, and I guess there's not much the
matter with you but nerves.  There's nothing wrong with your lungs, anyway.  You scared the
mare pretty near as much as the bird--yelping like a crazed thing, and hanging on to my arm.
The grass is soft enough.  It hasn't hurt you any.  You needn't worry feeling all over to see
if there's a break.  You'd know it fast enough if there were."

"Miss Ramsden is feeling stunned.  I think it would be wiser to allow her to recover gradually.
It is a shock to--er--to most systems, to be shot out of a cart, however short the distance!"

The masculine voice was thunderous with indignation, and the arm which supported Elma's back
tightened its hold, as if to protect her against the world.  Cornelia turned aside, her red
lips twisted into a smile, and walked along the bank to where the other two men were unharnessing
the mare, which lay on her side trembling with fright, the blood oozing from several ugly-looking
cuts and scratches.  As Cornelia walked she held her right wrist tightly with her left hand,
as if she still felt the strain of that wrestle with the reins, but there was no flinching
in voice or manner as she stood over the men, issuing instructions in brisk, incisive tones.
The nearer of the two was impressed to the extent of ceasing work to touch his cap; the second
darted one contemptuous glance in her direction, and placidly continued to disobey. Cornelia
promptly knelt on the grass by his side, with intent to demonstrate her own greater efficiency,
but the first movement of the strained wrist brought a flush of pain to her cheeks.  She sat
back, pursing her lips together to restrain an involuntary groan, while the stranger flashed
a second look in her direction.  He was a tall, lean, somewhat cadaverous--looking man, with
steel-like eyes shaded by haughty eyelids, perpetually adroop as though no object on earth
were worthy of his regard.  Cornelia took him in in a swift, comprehensive glance, and with
youthful ardour decided that she loathed the creature.

"Hurt yourself?"

"Not a bit, thanks.  I guess there's enough of you to do the work without me, but I'm used
to seeing things done in a hurry, and you seemed pretty deliberate--"

"A little caution is not thrown away sometimes.  What induced you to come out driving alone
if you could not manage a horse?"

There being no reply to this question, and the last buckle of the harness being unstrapped,
the speaker turned an inquiring glance over his shoulder, to behold a rigid figure and a face
ablaze with indignation.

There was something in the girl's face at that moment so vital, so bizarre and arresting, that
so long as Rupert Guest lived, it remained with him as one of the most striking pictures in
his mental picture- gallery.  He had but to pass a high green hedge in the June sunshine, to
catch the fragrance of the honeysuckle and roses, and it rose up before him again--the white,
furious face, with the red, roughened locks, and the gleam of white teeth through the scarlet
lips.  There was no admiration in his thoughts; this was not at all the type of girl whom he
admired, but she was a being by herself, different from anyone whom he had met.  He stared
at her with curious attention.

"Do you mean," said Cornelia, in the slow, even tones of intense anger, "that you think this
was my doing--that I upset the cart by my bad driving?  If that's so, you are a little out
in your reckoning.  If I hadn't been used to horses all my days we might have been in kingdom
come by this time.  I pulled her into the bank before worse things happened!"

"Then what sent her off in the first instance?"

"A poll parrot, screeching in its cage, set right out in the roadway by some fool owner, who
ought to be had up for murder."

The stranger pursed up his lips in an expressive whistle, then suddenly sprang upwards as the
mare, freed from her harness, rolled on her side and struggled to her feet, where she stood
shivering and tossing her head, displaying fresh cuts and bruises in her dusty coat.  The labourer
put his hand on her neck, soothing her with gentle words and touches, while his master surveyed
her with kindly concern.

"Poor brute!  Better take her to the stables, James, and send off for a vet.  Mrs Greville
can no doubt spare a carriage to take these ladies home."  He turned towards Cornelia with
an impulse of provocation which seemed to spring from some source outside himself.  As a rule
he was chivalrous where women were concerned, but there was something in the personality of
this girl which aroused his antagonism.  It seemed almost a personal offence that she should
be so alert and composed while the mare bled and trembled, and that pale, lovely thing lay
like a broken snowdrop on the bank.  He felt a growing desire to annoy, to wound, to break
down this armour of complacent vanity.

"So you could not hold her till she tired herself out?  Well! the experiment seems to have
answered less successfully from her point of view than your own.  She'll need a considerable
time to recover her nerves and give these scratches time to heal."

"Skin deep!" sneered Cornelia, with a curl of the lip.  "I'll drive her back in a day or two;
and up and down this road until she learns not to play that trick again. Elsli bring every night with a daily wage, which it certainly
could not earn, and to so many clothes of the sick child, that they the Elsli for a long time
had nothing to purchase. This news pleased the aunt very much and with a glad Heart she returned,
because it was all gone off so much easier than she had expected.

Already half-way came the Oscar went to meet her. He had noticed that Emma already for some
time at the corner of the house stood and waited for someone who had no doubt the His aunt,
but he had to dismiss such urgent business with her that he absolutely first had to see. He
secretly ran around behind the house and ran to the woods. As soon as he is the Aunt was in sight, he
rushed at her and poured his full story of the accident Song Festival on them: how he had forgotten
that was yet to be sung, and how terrible everyone would laugh at them, and especially that
of the father, if they came now and wanted the Attend festivals, which he saw quite clearly. But
he now had a new, very beautiful Thoughts: if you would now convert the song festival quickly
to another, that tomorrow but could be held, one on which you could use the flag and yet in
the Speech yes only a few words would have changed? My aunt knew certainly give good advice, to
put that hard to replace the unworkable was, and Oscar did not seem averse the thing to work in such
a way that would finally accept that he had actually deliberately the song festival in a different
transforms. But the aunt was not the same opinion. She explained him now, what is really the sense
of a feast, and that always put special must have done to celebrate after a hard about it. Because
now not happen is, it should wait for Oscar, until it was once the case, then the aunt wanted
him to brilliant festival celebration help.

Oscar was very toned down, but he saw that there was nothing new for once to set up, and followed
her aunt into the house quite downcast and he saw with concern the dinner contrary, as the father take
his questions about the festival from tomorrow and so the whole could bring about the glorious
unveiling of complimentary output. Emmi shot just at the sight of Aunt from her ambush forth
to hear what the crime, in which they participate as much was, could have consequences, but they
also had to remain in uncertain fear, for even was also the father into the house, and immediately
had to sit down for dinner. In their oppressive expectations Oscar and Emma sat bent low on their plates
at the table and none of them raised even a single time on its head, hoping in this Position
to remain unnoticed at the earliest. Fred had a couple of times inquiring gaze both sent over,
and now he said significant: "There is also a bird, it's called Strauss # # Struthio who sticks
his head forward into the sand as he thinks, so he sees the Hunter. These birds live in Africa with
us, they are rare and are nourished of potato salad. "

Oscar, the flat, busy with his thoughts, poked around in his portion
of potato salad, accepted the description of the bouquet, with unusual
calm, and his father, who is now under hinschaute he laughed a little
and said, "the press well down the hard pleasures"

When? but no further investigations were carried out and the dinner without all the demands passed
after the Fani, Oskar and Emma were very relieved hearts on the table, for though for Oskar
the risk of very sensitive and scorn for those Emmi a severe reprimand not vorüberwar, but
now it was time won, and there was always her aunt, where you could recently find help and
advice.

Chapter Eight.

At sunset.

Since the day that Elsli had entered for the first time when they are sick and Nora had soon understood
that the child had remained the daily company of the Nora. From Leakage and errands has never
been an issue, because every day there could hardly Nora Expect that appeared Elsli, and until
the last moment of his staying, they had it not on its side away. The mother, who knew no greater
joy than that her child to fulfill a wish, was pleased at the new interest of Nora and granted
like the Please, that would be quite Elsli only to their society there. Mrs. Stanhope saw with
great satisfaction, has become much more lively and cheerful that Nora was, since they this
daily playmate had come and was therefore also Elsli as often as it could, also on Sunday
and held it well in her home. So it happened that the child every hour of the day outside of
school and soon the whole of Sunday, from morning until night, inseparable spent with Nora. It
was a while before a big change with the Elsli. It was a Sames creature so graphically that it
involuntarily in his appearance, in the tone of his voice, sign in all it was, as his surroundings
were. Now, Nora, with such vividness and such joy on his susceptible nature, daily hours worked
with him and all she thought and hoped everything was going on inside them, the Elsli announced
and it filled entirely with her own life, it came so that the Elsli and externally had passed
by and by entirely the nature of the Nora. It had the tone of her voice, it said, in her words,
it made the movement of her hand, all Elsli was changed. Also for the school a big change with the
Elsli had taken place. If it is now directly came to the school, Nora, were equal to first
all the books and exercise books are unpacked and the Work of the school work done. The Nora had
learned a lot and well and it was a very help out a new interest for her, the attentive student and
explain everything to, what they did not understand. For Elsli it was an unprecedented joy,
at last his needs met, like the other children to be able to bring to school and then repeated
to hear from the teacher the words he said in such a friendly tone: "You did good, Elsli, with
you I am very satisfied. "

Were terminated and the school work in the evening over, then sat the children all close together and
began their discussions, that they were never tired.

Nora told of the beautiful land, where they were going, and with all thy delight each followed
Elsli Words, because the Nora told as if they see everything in front of him, so that even
before all Elsli stood alive and never get enough of the exhilarating entertainment. Recent
said Nora still their song, and could never hear enough Elsli. Then, when the evening Was over
and had to go Elsli, every time he came to the conclusion, a sad thought, and said anxiously:
"If you just do not even go alone, Nora, and I stay behind; I would then do what? "But Nora
is comforted every time and said the Lord call then it already, if it is in heaven rather ask,
what then Elsli again reassured so that it each evening with a happy heart, as it had never
known before, returned home.

So the sun golden days of September, the month had arrived.

The children were sitting together and looked through the open window where Nora stood arm-chair,
even after the evening sky, where did the sun go down. - Nora had been tired all day and had a
little talk. Very quiet even now, the children sat together and looked to the bright golden Heaven.
Now the flames of the setting sun shone once again glowing up, and like a golden stream, the
lights over the trees and hills poured down on the meadows.

"Look, look! Elsli, "exclaimed Nora and her eyes sparkled, as Elsli never seen before had, "Look,
there comes the crystal stream flowed over! Oh, I want to go there and far go across the river,
oh what will it be beautiful behind, where all the flowers and the happy People are and where they
go around so happy and never get tired! But now I am so tired Elsli, come a little closer
to me, will you? "Elsli moved up close and Nora put her head on his shoulder. "Oh, am I right,"
she added softly, "then see I am in the middle, right into. Oh look, it is as if the sky would
be completely open, and you see as it shines and shimmers and shines inside. Oh, how beautiful!
Oh, how "- Also Elsli had never seen such a light in the sky and such a gold shine on every hill.
In silent amazement, it looked out and motionless children lying there in long, until the evening
had gone through all the splendor and quiet, a white mist rising from the valley below and lay
on the lawn. Now Mrs. Stanhope came into the room they had, as now often happened presence Elslis
used to write their letters in a different room. You drew near the Nora, still rested quietly
on Elslis shoulder.

"God in heaven," cried the mother, Nora, my child! It is not possible! Wake up! Give Answer me!
"

Mrs. Stanhope had knelt down, she moved to Nora in itself, a moment
they looked at the pale, quiet face, then she threw herself over the
child and sobbed in despair.

Snow white with terror stood Elsli. What could be met with Nora that her Mother made her so unhappy?

"Get
the doctor, child! Run as much as you can, "came out now the sobbing mother. Elsli hurried away.
The doctor was not home, his wife gave the Elsli know. It had it all To tell what had happened.
Then she said sympathetically, "I think the sick Nora is always well,
which is certainly in heaven.

"

Elsli was taken as a stroke. "Is she gone now?"

He asked flatly. Then the tears fell down her cheeks and was unstoppable from excessive vibration
a shaking his whole body covered.

"You poor Elsli," the woman doctor, the child by the hand, said taking, "Come, sit a moment down here!
"But Elsli was so overwhelmed by his impression that could not sit. It held her apron to her
eyes and ran away again, quite miserably to himself, wailing: "Oh oh! Now she is already gone
without me, "When it at Mrs. Stanhope entered, it was still in the same position and bent
over her child in despair weeping and wailing. Elsli sat down on the stool, the same Nora still
needed had, and was crying still. Thus passed away about an hour, then came the doctor. After
had a short time the place of the woman taken Stanhope and bent over to Nora, he turned to the
mother.

"Mrs. Stanhope," he said in quick, but participatory manner, "I have nothing more to do here, looking
to take the inevitable, the child is dead I want to send my wife. "Then he left.

After a while the doctor's wife. But not a word of consolation, which they in their warm Participation
uttered, found its way in the impoverished mother. She had her back on Child and threw him
and did not hear what was going on around them. When the doctor's wife remarked, that it was
impossible for one to approach the desolate woman, she went to the Elsli approach, which was
still sitting on his stool and wept quietly away, she took the child gently by the hand and pulled
it on.

"Come with me, Elsli," she said kindly, "it is time for up to go home. We want you also remember
Elsli, and God forgets none of his children. You must seek to comfort you and think how good
it is now Nora, because they do will never be sick. "

"Oh, if only they would have taken," sobbed Elsli, because the idea had fixed as long and deep
with him, that they would then go together, and now the Hope there and it was left so alone
and now! Weeping quietly went on the side the doctor's wife there, and also when he said at
the rising meadow paths, "Now separate we, sleep well, Elsli, and
come again soon "to us, it did not draw his apron of the eyes away.

Softly she said, ascended "Good night, and walked the walk, and always audible! was his sobs, the
further it got away from the friendly companion and the lonely the way was that it had to
go.

The mother came in with a sad heart in the house where they all the children to the aunt was
mounted, quiet and thoughtful, as they usually were. The aunt had them told that Nora had died
and gone to heaven, giving them a deep impression had made, each in a special way. Fred had
a lot of the same questions and wanted exactly know how people die and live again. Emmi was very
depressed for she was now in the sense that it was never returned to Nora and her even more
had shown no kindness. Very quiet today withdrew the children back, and when late in the evening
mother and aunt were sitting alone together, had the first of the participating Sister still
pour out all the grief that made her heart so heavy. There was the poor Mother, her only child
had to put in the ground and not a word of consolation get at was. There was the delicate Elsli,
which now had to return to the hard work that perhaps so much of his strength was that it
could not last long. This was it twice now orphaned, and the close friend, by which it had entered
into a new life and who had lived all was gone forever, and the brother Fani, where it hung with
all the love was gone, and maybe even gone forever; who could know where would remain! This latter case
was the mother as a load on the heart, was Emmi anyway to blame and the whole enterprise so uncertain
that you can not even trust the could have, Fani learn something is actually right, that it be useful
for his future could. The aunt had written a friend to Basel and asked to go to the man must
have occurred during the Fani, and her message about the character of the man and the all the money
to give. It had already been a reply, it was not done, to raise high hopes for Fani. The decorator
had to Fani really in his Service used because he liked the open nature of the boy who had
run it so came and immediately told his whole story. The painter had only a boy sought rage the
night of his big brush and paint pots and help him clean everything and for him expiring.
But he got his living from the master, for his clothes, but it should take care. This was no
brilliant job for Fani, and advised the mother sadly to and fro, now what would be the best
thing you could do that. For once, had his Yes of course, parents agree that he stay away because
they exclude certain employment have, but they assumed he deserved at least as much, that they
in no way for it would ensure that he would on the contrary, soon to be a tutor for her. So
had to take the good with the old mother always new worries, and sometimes you would have this
great burden has become too heavy when the aunt and not always supported by their happy disposition
had any trouble like reclaimed from a positive side. So had it is still some comforting, exhilarating
word for the mother, so that even this last meet again with hope and optimism for the coming
days and all the worries Arousing God could leave that.

The following morning, Emmi asked somewhat depressed for permission
to bring the flowers Nora and to be able to put on her bed.

The mother allowed it willingly and to Fred's request there too, that he go with Emmi. Later,
she wanted to meet and visit Mrs. Stanhope. The children were let out and the girl in the room
where Nora on a snow-white Bette was, she herself as white and still, as nobody had seen.
Knelt by the bed the mother, she did not look up and remained motionless in her place, on the face
of the White bearing down. Emmi still put her flowers down on the bed, then she grasped the
hand Nora bye. Now the Emmi tears gushed from his eyes, for there was now Nora, cold and silent
for ever, and Emmi you could never do something friendly, and because it was still alive, it had
never done and Emmi was best not gone to her, but Nora was so sick and so much alone and had
had little joy. This was Emmi now very over the heart and wept softly as she left the room now
with Fred. Some time later came the doctor's wife in the quiet room. Mrs. Stanhope rose, they had
recognized the entrants. Now transformed the dull pain of the bereaved are in a tremendous shame.
"Oh, you can understand it as completely destitute I am?" She cried under a stream of tears. "Oh,
why did the Lord take me this only child? If he had my belongings, all wealth, all that I own,
and taken away from me my Child left, I would not have quarreled yes, I would have gladly dispensed
with everything and anything worn if only I had kept my child! This is the hardest thing that
can happen to me, the Hardest of all, o why must I suffer now more than any other? "

"Dear Mrs. Stanhope," said the woman doctor here by the soothing hands of the whining seized, "I
can well understand your big pain, but think also of her child! It is but not the greatest
suffering to think of his child who made the good Lord to him and
has forever freed of his pain, and introduced to eternal joy.

As the bitter Poverty does not you can measure and what the mothers have to go through suffering, the
need to stop at an early age the children to work hard on them no joy to offer, have only
hang deprivation, who know for themselves and their children otherwise, otherwise provide for
themselves, as heavy days and bitter cares, you do not know. Take Your pain from the hand of
God, and not measure. Everyone is indeed suffering the largest burning in his heart, but our
Father in heaven knows why He leads each on the way which it has to go. "

Mrs. Stanhope had become quieter, but the expression of a dreary pain was constant on her face.
After a while of silence, they then informed the doctor's wife with that she intended to take
away her child, so that in their area and near his previous brother rest. Making this sad journey
alone, plus she could not Who decide they have harsh call the faithful
nurse of her child, Clarissa, that they all External arrangements
for you and stay by her side.

This message was anxious for the doctor's wife a great relief, and now she knew that, what from
the outside of the poor mother to comfort and help could be provided to her soon and at the most
beneficial by this faithful old friend would be given. This was indeed the sole slumbering
Nora knew and loved like a second mother.

She comes Mrs. Keller with a little lightened heart back because there was now but the prospect
of a beneficial Environment for the lonely woman. She had to tell my aunt the same, because
these indeed had such a warm sympathy for the impoverished mother. But the aunt was nowhere
to . See Emmi, who all sat quietly in a corner against their habit, reported that Fred have long
sought the aunt, he had certainly necessary to show a beetle and had taken away. The mother also
thought it would be, and sat down to Emmi, who like more of the Nora wanted to hear tell. She
felt a need to hear from the mother that the Nora have been happy and contented and that she
was without her had not been lacking their society, for she now felt well enough that she
had thought only of themselves during the visit and even not by what they could do for the lonely,
sick Nora.

Fred was really gone after some time the aunt and was finally able to arrest them and then pulled
far down to the farthest house with garden, for he was very talk to her alone. Here he sat
down beside her on the bench and said earnestly: "Do you, aunt, I
must tell you something, but just you alone.

Today I saw Nora and they is completely dead and I can not understand that they can once again
live and in the wake Heaven. "

"Really? that can not understand you, Fred? You see, I do not either, "said the aunt," but God
has done many things that you do not understand well and I could no more, and yet they are
there.

If we are now but one which we can firmly believe promises that we will live again after the
death of this body, we want to believe, until we understand; and I feel confident about it, Fred. "

"But," began this with his usual tenacity to it again, "I have always thought so, being alive is
in man as in animals, and if a pet is no movement more power, it
is completely dead and begins to live no more, which I have observed.

"

Here the conversation between Fred and his aunt was interrupted because
of the returning father in the garden shed came by and asked the aunt,
with him to wander through the Äckerchen, to admire the magnificent
cabbages that had unfolded there.

Fred was still his able way, because he does not admire heads of cabbage, which made him the
contrary, many serious moments , Predicted he would see the green substance on his plate.

Chapter Nine.

A final and a first trip.

Just a big touring car was driven past the house of the doctor, in which only a very black woman was sitting.
That must be the Clarissa, who had come to bring back Nora. The Children's Doctor all four were
still in the garden and looked after the car because they felt, how sad must have been this trip.
The aunt was standing at the window and looked after them with the car. When he had gone down
to the corner, she beckoned to the Fred to come up, they stood in
his room.

He came running up instantly.
"Look, Fred, I'll tidy up a bit, you have quite a mess here, and
things have no value, we do not want to keep.  Oh, no! it was quite, quite impossible,
all the more so that she longed, longed intensely; longed from the very bottom of her heart,
to accept!

Elma straightened herself in her chair, protesting, explaining, thanking, and refusing in confused
broken sentences, to which none of her hearers paid the least attention.  Mrs Greville and
her son waived objections aside with the easy certainty of victory, while Cornelia cried briskly--

"You don't hev a choice!  I undertook to bring you out, but I won't take you back if I know
it, until you ken sit behind a horse without going off into hysterics every time he tosses
his mane.  Your mother'd be a heap more scared to see you coming back looking like a death's
head, than to hear that you were comfortably located with a friend till you pulled round. 
I guess there's nothing for you to do but to say `Thank you,' as prettily as you know how,
and settle down to be comfortable. Why make a fuss?"

That last exhortation was decisive!  Elma blushingly subsided into the silence which gives
consent, and was forthwith escorted to the room which was to be given over to her use, there
to rest quietly until it should be time to dress for dinner.

"Unless she would like to go to bed at once.  Do you think that would be the better plan?"
Madame asked Cornelia in a whispered aside, but that young lady was quick to veto a retirement
which would be so detrimental to the progress of the "cure" which she had at heart.

"Why, no, indeed!  To be left alone to worry herself ill, brooding over the whole affair, is
about the worst thing that could happen to her just now.  It was only a play-baby spill, but
it seems the worst accident that the world ever knew to her.  She's got to be roused!  I'll
sit up here and see that she rests quietly for an hour, and then I'll fix her up for the evening,
so she can lie on a sofa and listen while you talk. I must get home by seven o'clock to soothe
the old ladies.  It would be real sweet if you'd lend something to take me back!  I'm afraid
I ken't walk all the way."

Madame laughed pleasantly.

"I wish we could keep you, too, but it would not be kind to Mrs Ramsden to leave her with only
a message to-night.  I must hope to have the pleasure another time.  You American girls are
so bright and amusing, and I love to be amused.  My son wishes me to have a companion, but
a well-conducted young woman who knew her place would exasperate me to distraction, and I should
kill anyone who took liberties, so the situation is a little hard to fill.  Do tell me who
you are?  Where are you staying in Norton, and how long have you been in England?"

"Just over three weeks, and I like it pretty well, thank you," returned Cornelia, anticipating
the inevitable question, "though I guess I've not struck the liveliest spot in the land.  I'm
located with my aunt, Miss Briskett, in the Park, and my poppar's coming over to fetch me in
the fall."

Madame's interest waned with surprising suddenness.  Of an American girl, almost more than
any other, is that worldly adage true that it is wise to treat her politely, since there is
no knowing whom she may ultimately marry.

A girl of such striking appearance and obvious affluence might belong to anyone, or become
anything in these radical, topsy-turvy days.  The mother of a son with broad acres and small
income could not but remember that a large proportion of present-day duchesses hail from across
the water, but it was a very different matter when the young woman suddenly assumed the personality
of the niece of a middle-class spinster resident at the Manor gates.  To Mrs Greville, Miss
Briskett stood as a type of all that was narrow, conventional, and depressing.  As much as
she could trouble herself to dislike any woman outside her own world, she disliked the rigid,
strait-laced spinster, and was fully aware that the dislike was returned.  Miss Briskett invariably
declined the yearly invitations which were doled out to her in company with the other townsfolk,
satisfied that in so doing she proclaimed a dignified disapproval of the frivolities of the
Manor.  "Thank goodness, that old cat's not coming!" was Madame's invariable reception of the
refusals, but at the bottom of her heart she resented the fact that so insignificant a person
should dare to reject her hospitality.

"Miss Briskett's niece.  Really!  How ver-ry interesting!" she drawled, in a tone eloquent
of the most superlative indifference.  Her easy graciousness of manner became suddenly instinct
with patronage, her eyelids drooped with languid disdain.  She sauntered round the room, giving
a touch here and there, turned over the garments which her maid had laid on the bed ready for
Elma's use, and finally sailed towards the door.  "We will leave you to rest, then, as long
as you think fit.  Pray ring for anything you require!"

The door closed, leaving Elma to snoodle down on her pillows, with a sigh of relief, while
Cornelia lifted her skirt in both hands and danced a pas seul, bowing low towards the doorway,
blowing kisses from her finger-tips the while, after the manner of riders in a circus.

She pranced and pirouetted, while Elma protested in shocked surprise. It struck her that Cornelia's
anxiety as to her own condition had died a remarkably sudden death with the disappearance of
Mrs Greville from the room.  A pantomimic display was not the best way to ensure quiet and
repose, nor was there much sympathy to be read in the expression of the twinkling golden eyes.
Elma found herself blushing before their gaze, and guiltily drooping her lashes.

"Cornelia, what do you mean?"

"Columns, my dear, which sweet little buds like you ought to know nothing about!  You lie still,
and look pretty, and ask no questions; that's your part in the play!  You've got to remember
that you've had a shock, and your nervous system's all to pieces.  You don't have no pain,
nor suffering, and anyone to look at you might think you were quite robust; but just as soon
as you make the least exertion, you're all of a flop, and have to be waited on hand and foot!--That's
so, isn't it now!"

Elma's delicate brows were furrowed in her attempt to make out what Cornelia did mean, and
what she didn't!  There was a note in her voice which did not ring true--a good-naturedly mocking
note, which accorded ill with the words themselves.  She blushed still deeper, and put on an
air of wounded dignity.

"I certainly am very far from well.  My head feels so light and swimming.  I should be very
sorry to have to walk far at present. Coming upstairs just now tried me horribly."

Cornelia clapped her hands in approval.

"Capital! capital!  Keep it at that, and you can't do better.  Go slow, and don't try to mend
all of a sudden.  Even when you do begin to buck up, in a day or two's time, the very sight
of a horse will set you palpitating for all you're worth.  You'll kind-er feel as if you'd
rather crawl home on all fours than sit behind the steadiest old nag that was ever raised.
It's three or four miles from home, isn't it, or maybe more--much too far for an invalid to
attempt, for a week at least. Just a little saunter in the grounds will be all you're fit for
this side Sunday, with someone to support you carefully as you go! ... You'll be apt to turn
giddy if you go about alone. ...  Have you gotten that nicely off by heart now, so you won't
go forgetting at the wrong moments?"

"Why should I forget?  Surely my own feelings will be my best guide?"

"Yes, 'um!" said Cornelia, demurely.  She let her lids droop over her tell-tale eyes, and stood
beside the couch for a long, eloquent moment, during which the flickering colour deepened on
Elma's cheek; then turned aside, took down a book from a shelf, and settled herself comfortably
on a wicker chair.

"I guess we understand one another, and there's no more to be said.  Now for one hour by the
clock you've to shut your eyes and be quiet.  Go to sleep if you can!  I'll wake you up in
time for the prinking."

Elma buried her head in the cushions and shed a silent tear.  Cornelia was laughing at her,
and she could not bear it.  Her mind, trained to habits of introspection, began at once to
wonder if she were really pretending, as the other seemed to think; if the agitation which
she felt was not so much the result of the accident, as caused by the excitement of seeing
Geoffrey Greville, and meeting his ardent glances. The prospect of remaining in the same house
and of meeting him from hour to hour was incredible but delightful, yet Elma would give it
up a hundred times over, rather than accept hospitality under false pretences.  Was it her
duty to insist upon returning home?  Should she announce that she felt so much refreshed by
her rest that there was no longer any reason why she should be treated as an invalid?  The
sinking feeling of disappointment which followed this inspiration was easily mistaken for a
physical symptom.  Yes.  She was ill!  It was quite true that she felt faint.  Surreptitiously
she felt her own pulse, and was convinced that its beat had increased.  She thought of the
expression of Geoffrey's eyes as he lifted her from the ground--blushed, and felt certain that
she was feverish.  Yes, she would stay!  It would be foolish and ungrateful to refuse.  Mother
had always warned her not to run risks where health was concerned...

A soft little sigh of contentment sounded through the room.  If Elma had been fifteen years
younger this was the moment at which a warm, sticky little thumb would have crept into her
mouth, as a sign that earthly cares were swept aside, and that she had resigned herself to
slumber; being a young woman of sweet and twenty, she snoodled her head into the pillow, and
fell fast asleep.

For over an hour she slept, and woke to find Cornelia leaning back in her chair watching her,
while the book lay closed on her lap.  For a moment she hardly recognised the face which she
had always seen animated, self-confident, and defiant, but which was now softened into so sweet
a tenderness.  A lightning thought flashed through her mind that it was thus Cornelia would
look, if ever in the time to come she watched by the bedside of her own child.  She smiled
lazily, and stretched out a caressing hand.

"Why, Cornelia, have you been sitting there all the time?  How dull for you!  How long have
I been asleep?"

"It's half after five, so we must be lively, if I am to get back in time to settle the old
ladies, and get ready for dinner.  Hustle now!  I'll help you to shed your own duds, and then
pipe up for the transformation! That tea-gown's the limit!  I thought I knew the last thing
there was to learn about clothes, but I wouldn't be above going in for a course of too-ition
from the woman who fixed those frills!  This is going to be an historic occasion for you, my
friend.  Your sinful nature is kinder dead to the joys of frillies, but there's going to be
a big awakening!  The woman isn't born who could come out of that gown the same as she went
in!"  She lifted the blue serge skirt over Elma's head, and surveyed the plain hem with tragic
eyes.  "It's pretty hard luck to be born a woman instead of a man, but it softens it some to
have a swirl of frills round one's ankles!  If I'd to poke around with a hem, I'd give up altogether.--Now,
then, sit still where you are, while I fix your hair! I'm going to do it a way of my own, that
will be more comfy for leaning up against cushions.  If you don't like it you can say so, but
I guess you will."

She brushed the soft light tresses to the top of Elma's head, and arranged them skilfully in
massed-up curls and loops.  From time to time she retreated a step or two as if to study the
effect, returning to heighten a curl, or loosen the sweep over the forehead.  In reality she
was reproducing, as nearly as possible, the coiffure of one of the beauties in miniature hanging
on the drawing-room walls behind the couch on which Elma would probably pass the evening. 
It might chance that the eyes of mother or son would observe the likeness between the two girlish
faces, a fact which could not but score in Elma's favour!

When the dainty white robe was fastened, and each ribbon and lace patted into its place by
skilful fingers, then, and not till then, Elma was allowed to regard herself in the glass.
It was a startling revelation of her own beauty, but the predominant feeling was not elation,
but distress.  Accustomed as she was to a puritan-like simplicity, Elma felt almost shocked
at her own changed appearance.  The sweeping folds of the gown gave additional height to her
figure, her neck looked like a round white pillar above the square of lace; the quaintly arranged
tresses gave a touch of piquancy to her gentle features.  An involuntary and quite impersonal
admiration was followed by quick repentance.

"Cornelia, I can't!  I can't go down like this!  I daren't do it.  I look like an actress--so
dressed up!  Just as if I wanted to look nice!"

Cornelia sniffed eloquently.

"Well--don't you?"

"Yes, but--but I don't like to look as if I did!  Oh, Cornelia, couldn't I put on my own dress
again, and do my hair the old way?  I'd be so much happier!"

"The Grevilles wouldn't!  You've got to remember that they are used to finery, and not to having
young women sitting round in blue serge in the evening.  It seems gaudy to you, but it's just
dead, everyday-level to them, and won't raise a ripple.  You look a Daisy, and I'm proud of
you, and if you had a mite of feeling you'd say `Thank you,' instead of finding fault after
all my work!"

Elma wheeled round; surprised another glance of tender admiration, and held out impulsive hands.

"Cornelia, you are good!  I do thank you; I know quite well that you-- you are trying--I do
love you, Cornelia!"

"Oh, shucks!" cried Cornelia, hastily.  "Don't gush; I hate gush!  Take my arm, and come along
downstairs.  Lean on it pretty heavily, mind. Your spirit's too much for your strength, and
you are apt to forget that you are an invalid.  You've got to keep a check on yourself, my
dear, and remember that a nervous shock's a ticklish thing, and needs a lot of tending!"

Elma's head drooped; she twisted her fingers together, and glanced beneath the lashes at her
friend's face--glanced timidly, questioningly, as it were, in dread.

Cornelia deliberately--winked!

CHAPTER TEN.

Geoffrey was lounging about in the hall as the two girls descended the wide staircase.  His
attitude gave the impression that he had been impatiently awaiting their advent, and, as he
took in Elma's changed looks in one comprehensive sweep, his eyes brightened with an expression
before which her lids drooped in embarrassment.  He came forward eagerly to lead the way into
the drawing-room, where Madame sat reading by an open window, and a sofa had been pulled forward
and banked with cushions in readiness for the invalid.  She smiled a welcome as the little
procession entered the room, and looked on with an amused scrutiny while Cornelia shook out
the cushions, skilfully altering their position so that the blue brocade should form the background
for Elma's fair head. She did not attempt to rise, but her words were kindly enough, if a trifle
patronising.

"Well, dear, and how are you now after your rest?  We must take care of you, and not let you
get overtired.  Sure you are comfortable?  You look too sweet in that gown!  I shall never
have the heart to wear it after you.  Isn't it wicked that a woman is obliged to live on after
her complexion has faded?  I could bear any affliction better than watching myself growing
uglier every day. ...  I should have a little pillow tucked into your back. ...  Sure you won't
feel the draught?  That's right!  And you really must leave us, Miss Briskett?  Couldn't possibly
stay to dinner?  I suppose it would be unkind!  The dog-cart is waiting for you.  I told them
to have it round by seven.  Geoffrey will drive you home, of course.  After your adventure
this afternoon we should not be happy to leave you to a groom.  He'll see you safely to the
door, and report to us on your safe arrival."

Geoffrey's face clouded involuntarily.  He had mapped out a much more interesting programme
for himself, deciding to slip upstairs and dress for dinner so early that he should be able
to descend the moment that his mother was securely shut into her own room.  Madame's evening
toilette was a matter of three-quarters of an hour at least, during which time he would have
Elma all to himself--to speak to, to look at, to make her look at him.  Lovely creature!  He
had not realised how beautiful she was, and so sweet, and gentle, and shy.  What a marvel to
meet a shy girl in these days of loud-voiced, smoking, tailor-made women!  A man may appreciate
the society of a twentieth-century damsel whom he designates as a "rattling good sort," but
he wants a womanly woman for his wife.  Elma was womanliness personified--a sweet pink-and-
white, softly-curved creature, whose eyes regarded the masculine creature with an unspoken
tribute of homage.  "You are so big!" they seemed to say; "I am so little!  Oh, please be kind
to me!"  Inspired by that look, Geoffrey was capable of fighting dragons on her behalf!

And now he was consigned to drive home a tiresome American girl, who was remarkably well able
to take care of herself!  Mentally he fumed; outwardly, being a man of the world, he smiled,
and murmured "Delighted!" with an imitation of enthusiasm which won Cornelia's admiration.

"One to you, Mr Greville!  You played up real well," was the mental comment, as she dropped
a kiss on Elma's brow and listened to her anxious messages.

"Tell mother not to be anxious.  Tell her I'm not really ill--only silly and nervous.  Tell
her I shall soon be well--"

"That's all right, my dear.  I'll cool her fevered brow. ...  Your mother'll be a circumstance
compared with Aunt Soph!  I'll have to promise never to look at a horse again while I'm in
this country."  She turned towards Mrs Greville with easy self-possession.

"It's real good of you to send me back, and take such care of us both. Good-afternoon.  So
pleased to have met you!"

Madame extended her thin, ringed hand, laughing softly the while.  As she had said, she loved
to be amused, and this American girl was quite too ridiculously audacious!  Actually one might
have supposed that she believed herself to be speaking to an equal!

Cornelia and Geoffrey Greville passed along the hall, with its great oak fireplace filled in
with branches of spreading beech, its decorations of tapestry, of armour, of stags' heads,
of cases of stuffed birds.  The ceiling was beamed with oak, the floor was polished to a dangerous
brightness, and covered in the centre by an ancient Persian rug. Cornelia had never seen such
an interior except as it is imitated on the stage.  Her own tessellated, be-fountained entrance
hall in New York was as far removed from it on the one side, as on the other was the square
of oil-cloth, decorated with a hat-stand and two mahogany chairs, which at The Nook was dignified
by the same title.  She admired, but admired with reservations.  "Kinder mouldy!" summoned
up the ultimate verdict.

Geoffrey moved moodily towards the doorway.  Though bitterly annoyed at his mother's interference,
he was too much of a gentleman to wreak his vengeance on the innocent cause of his exile. 
As a mitigation of the penance, it occurred to him that he might occupy the time of absence
by talking of Elma since he might not talk to her; but Providence was merciful, and came to
his aid at the eleventh hour.  The inner door opened, and Captain Guest appeared upon the threshold,
cap in hand, evidently returning from a solitary ramble, and by no means overjoyed to have
arrived at such an inopportune moment.  He bowed, murmured some inarticulate greeting, and
would have passed by had not Geoffrey eagerly blocked the way.  For the moment the claims of
friendship were non- existent; he did not care whether Guest were pleased or annoyed; he was
simply a means of escape, to be seized on without compunction.

"Halloa, here you are!  Just the man I wanted," he cried genially.  "You shall have the privilege
of driving Miss Briskett home.  I was going to take her myself, but I've got some rather--er--pressing
business to attend to before dinner"--he chuckled mentally over the application of the words--"so
I'll stand aside in your favour.  We are not going to trust her out of our sight until she
is delivered safely into her aunt's keeping.  Awfully sorry, Miss Briskett, but we shall meet
again!  You'll come up to see Miss Ramsden, won't you?  Do come!  Come on Saturday--we could
make up a game of tennis if she is fit enough by that time."

He helped Cornelia to her seat courteously, yet with an underlying haste which could not be
concealed.  Captain Guest gave him one look--a murderous look--and murmured, "Delighted, I'm
shaw!" in tones of ice. Cornelia felt "ugly," and looked delightful; head erect, lips pursed,
eyes a-flash.

"Just as mad as he can be, to be obliged to be civil to `the girl' for a short half hour! 
Guess there's one or two, several sizes bigger than him, who would cross the ocean to-morrow
for the chance!  He's English-- real English!--the sort that's fixed up with liquid prejudice
for blood, and eye-glasses made to see nothing on earth but the British Empire. Rather skeery
at the present moment at being set down beside a bold American hussy, with only a groom as
chaperon! ...  Well!  I always was tender-hearted.  I'll pile it on all I know, to fix him
in his opinions. I'm made so's I ken't endoore to disappoint anyone in his expectations!"

She turned deliberately to stare at the silent figure by her side. Certainly he was a fine
figure of a man!  Her own countrymen who would have travelled so far as to take his place,
would have to be giants if the "several sizes" bigger were to be taken in literal earnest.
The lean cheek showed the square formation of the jaw, the lips were clean shaven, the eyes
dark, deep-set, thickly lashed and browed, the only handsome feature in the face.  Cornelia
mentally pulled herself together, as Guest turned his head, and cast a fleeting glance at her
beneath his drooping lids.

"I was sorry to hear that your friend is too ill to be moved.  I imagined at the time that
she was worse than you realised."

"She thinks she is, anyhow, and that's about as good as the real thing--perhaps better, where
health's concerned.  Some people don't need much to upset 'em--Elma's one!  I guess there's
never much snap to her!"

The dark brows arched expressively.  "Really!  I am afraid I hardly-- er--understand the expression!"

"You wouldn't!" returned Cornelia, calmly.  "It don't seem to flourish in this part of the
country.  At home we reckon no one is much use without it."

"So I have heard!"  Captain Guest's understanding of the term seemed to have been more complete
than he would acknowledge.  "Our standards differ, however.  `Snap' may be a useful commodity
in the business world, but one resents its intrusion into private life.  The very name is objectionable
in connection with a girl like Miss Ramsden--with any English girl!"

Cornelia curled her red lips.

"Yes, they flop; and you like 'em floppy!  Kind of ivy round a stalwart oak, or a sweet, wayside
rose.  A m-o-oss rose!"  No amount of description could convey the intonation which she threw
into that short word.  The "o" was lengthened indefinitely, giving a quaint, un-English effect
to the word, which sounded at the same time incredibly full of suggestion.  Guest flushed with
annoyed understanding, even before Cornelia proceeded to enlarge.  "The m-o-oss makes a nice,
soft wadding all round, to keep the little buds safe and hidden.  We use it quite a good deal
at home for packing curios.  Dried moss!  It's apt to get a bit stale with keeping, don't you
think?"

"No doubt; but even so it retains some of its fragrance.  In its worst state I should be sorry
to exchange it for"--it was now the Captain's turn to throw all his power of expression into
one short word--"snap!"

Cornelia's laugh held a curious mingling of irritation and pleasure.

It was poor fun having a quarrel all to herself, and it whetted her appetite to find a combatant
who was capable of "hitting back."  She sat up very straight in her seat, tossing her head
backward in quick, assertive little jerks, and clasping her bare hands on her lap.  Guest glanced
at her curiously from his point of vantage in the rear.  She was like no other girl whom he
had met, but somewhere, in pictured form, he must surely have seen such a face, for it struck
some sleeping chord of memory.  A fantasy perhaps of some Norse goddess or Flame Deity; a wild,
weird head, painted in reds and whites, with wonderful shaded locks, and small white face aglow
with the fire within.  His lips twisted in an involuntary smile.  Could anything be more aggressively
unlike "the sweet m-o-oss rose" of which she had spoken?

"I guess if you go to the root of things, a man's picture of a woman is cut out to fit into
his own niche!  If he's very big himself, there's only a little corner left for her--a nookey
little corner where the moss can grow, but the plant don't have much scope to spread.  If he
don't take much stock of himself, he kind-er stands back, and gives her the front place.  Then
she gets her chance, and shoots ahead!"

Guest laughed in his turn; an exasperating little laugh, eloquent of an immense superiority
and disdain.

"You speak in an allegory--an allegory of English and American life.  I am quite aware that
with you the sexes have reversed positions, that the man has sunk into a money-making machine,
who slaves so that his wife may spend, while the woman devotes her whole life to dress and
frivolity--"

"Have you ever been in my country?"

Cornelia was brought up short and sharp by an unexpected assent.  To disparage America was
an unforgivable offence, and she was prepared to denounce the judgment of ignorance in words
of flame.  Her anger was not abated, but merely turned in another direction, by the discovery
that it was not ignorance, but blindness which she had now to denounce--the blindness of the
obtuse Englishman who had been granted a privilege which he was incapable of appreciating.

"Some people travel about with such a heap of prejudice as baggage that they might as well
stay at home and be done with it.  Englishmen pride themselves on being conservative, and if
they've once gotten an idea into their heads, it takes more'n they'll ever see with their eyes
to get it out.  I guess you spent your time in my country seeing just exactly what you'd calculated
on from the start.  It's big enough to rear all sorts, and enlightened enough to hold 'em!"

"It is certainly very big," assented Guest, in a tone of colourless civility.  Cornelia hated
him for his indifference, his patronage, his thinly-veiled antagonism.  She was accustomed
to a surfeit of masculine attention, and cherished a complacent faith in her own fascinations.
It was a new and disagreeable experience to meet a man who, so far from exhibiting the well-known
symptoms of subjugation, was honestly anxious to avoid her society.  To feel herself disliked;
to be a bore to two men--the one eager to hand her over to his friend, the other furious at
being so trapped--can the world contain a deeper degradation for feminine three-and-twenty?
Cornelia's mood changed before it.  The excitement which had tided her over the events of the
afternoon died away, to be succeeded by a wave of sickening home-sickness.  She was lonesome--she
wanted her poppar!  She hated this pokey place, and everyone in it.  She guessed she'd take
a cabin in the first boat and sail away home. ...  Her lips quivered, and she blinked rapidly
to suppress a threatening tear.  She would rather shoot herself than cry before this patronising
Englishman, but it was almost past endurance to play second fiddle all the afternoon, be snubbed
on the way home, and look forward to an evening spent in propitiating two nervous old ladies!

"I don't get any bou-quets in this play!" soliloquised Cornelia, sadly. "'Far's I can see,
there isn't a soul in Great Britain that cares a dump about me at the present moment, except,
maybe, Aunt Soph, and she'd like me a heap better at a distance!"  She sighed involuntarily,
and Captain Guest, watching her from beneath his lowered lids, was visited by an uncomfortable
suspicion that while criticising another, his own behaviour had not been above reproach.  Now
that the girl had lost her aggressive air, and looked tired and sad, the feminine element made
its appeal. Among these messages The children
now arrived on the hill, which, to the beautiful old tree's, the Oak Ridge said. The reichbelaubte tree
stood on the slope of the hill and threw his shadow far over the short grass of the pasture soil.
Fani looked up in wonder at the rich foliage.

"Oh, how beautiful," he said, "I'm glad you have the know, Emmi, who is splendid for ! Draw I will
begin immediately, but a little further away, up there, here. "Fani had ascended the hill, step
by step a little further away from the tree to him for drawing fit. Here he sat on the floor
next to him immediately afterwards Emmi by started from herauszukramen
their large school bag quite a wealth of paper and pencils.

"Oh, because you can draw a lot with so much paper and pencils," said Fani, and looked with
yearning admiration to all the nice material.

"I give you then home to about it," promised Emmi, "I've thought about that you then have to change
again and maybe start again, but come on, even as search from a pencil! "

Fani did with delight as he was told. to have such rich material that IF THE ABOVE darauflos could draw
as you wanted, seemed to be the highest Fani.

After a few more times had looked at his new pencil and his white paper with pleasure, he sat their
way and began his work. Emmi was now very still and watched closely the development of the
tree.

"Oh, oh! Now the oak is quite recognizable! No, but what are you beautiful branches and cute
Papers can make Emmi cried out quite delighted, "hell no, so beautiful you have certainly
never made a tree! You'll see what the teacher will say, surely you have the most beautiful
Drawing of all. How do you do's only because, Fani? That was something I could never do at
all. "

"I'll do it only for"

Fani, whose eyes constantly said, went back and forth, now to the Tree up and are now back
on the paper back, and very flamed with zeal. "Look the beautiful branches that he has, and
the gorgeous leaves, no leaf is as beautiful as the oak leaf. Oh, and just look up how to do
it so splendidly all around, just as if to express the twig made so that there is a beautiful shape.
Oh, if only the whole I Day could sit there and constantly on the
tree stand, there is nothing more beautiful in the The world.

"

"Now I know something," cried Emma, ​​as she had done at once a great
discovery; "You must certainly be a painter, Fani.

It begins when one has to be a painter, the do I determine, otherwise you could not tell you would
be the most beautiful thing in the world, a to sit all day in front of a tree and draw, that
would be awful to each other boring. "

"Yes, you have to say well, I should be a painter," Fani said with a sigh, "in Next spring
I come home from school, and then I must in the factory and must all Coils days from morning to evening;
since you can then become a painter, I only knew like how? "

"But you did not like because to do everything to become a painter, Fani? Just think how wonderful!
If you say, but even it would be the most beautiful thing in the world because you wanted to
like everything Dare if you could only happen, or not? "

"Of course I wanted to, certainly, but yes there is nothing to risk, and what I could do because"?

"You just waiting now, Fani, I will now think even begin to do what
you could.

O just think if you had then would a very skilled painter and nothing else to do more, more than
just drawing and painting, but because you had nothing more than pleasure, your life long, Fani,
do not you think? "

Emmi was now so come into the fire through all the plans and prospects
that you now has hovered in that they had also set fire to the Fani.

His pen was out of his hand dropped and his eyes were not searching on the oak branches, but
rolled back and forth as they looked here and there, something that was not visible.

"Do you think's safe, Emmi, do you doubt that be?" He asked now in great excitement. "What do you mean,
I could do? I would like to do on the spot, but what? but what? "

"I do not know yet, but I will be back in the sense, you just have a little wait, maybe I can
give you tomorrow's say in the school. But come do, have your pet Baum finished, and the paper
and pencils you can then take that you have other Trees can make. You know, they are then shown
on the exam, and because you only as gray Paper but do have the most beautiful drawings, it would be
a shame for it. "

Fani was very pleased because he had often done at home like a drawing, but since was nothing
to find what you needed to, so it was the beautiful white paper, together with the two Pencils
a real treasure. He was now once more to his work, and Emmi watched and praised and admired. In the
meantime, but the sun had set, and quietly came the dawn approached and reminded the children
that the time had come to the homecoming.

Fred had finished his research for some time after the seed beetles. Now He was on his way out
of the hedge that bordered the garden, and looked eagerly after the sister of Emma, ​​which was
bound to come home at last and with it the settlement intended to keep. Within the hedge in the
garden, ran out with the same projects and Oskar ago, only in much greater excitement for
the whole evening he had vainly searched for around Fani. This was completely gone and no one
knew where, and there were so many important to discuss things before the song festival was held.
were those with the Feklitus Meetings impossible, he took too slow and never had a thought.
There was a Fani quite different and more inventive Enjoyed faster. Emmi had the back intercepted
him something to donate, because that it was known, but he wanted
to get behind her already, what they had done today, and restrict
their activities a little, because that was him no longer fit that
Emmi Fani should so take claim for themselves.

By these thoughts took the excitement of Oscar accessible, and in ever larger steps he walked
in the garden and down.

Fred saw the lurking out there now something coming up the path, but this was probably not be
Emmi, for it was a pretty broad masses, almost the way from one side
the other filled, in the middle it was a little higher than at both
ends.

Fred was amazed; he could not guess what approach was moving there,
it was but a natural history His curiosity, Fred quickly ran against
a little.

Nearby he saw Elsli, which hung on one side of the four year-old Rudi on skirts, on the other
of the three-year Heirli, sat him on the arm of the two-year Hanseli
with the big head and the fixed arms and legs.

Sun gasped Elsli approached with his three brother, for the weight of all three hung heavily
on him.

"Put it this thick Hans on the floor, you have indeed almost suffocated," said Fred, by he efforts
of the three brothers to turn tear Elsli, looked disapprovingly.

"I can not, he starts screaming and is equal to" angry, Elsli replied almost without breath
and carried forward, the way up.

"You want us?" Fred asked the following.

"Yes, bring something into it"; Elsli lifted his arm a little in the height at which it still
large bag hanging.

"You can take nothing more, but now even the vice-thickness on the floor, he presses up almost together,
"said Fred with anger.

They had now reached the top and stood at home.

"Yes, for a moment I must certainly put him down, only until my arm does not hurt so is doing.
"With these words, put down his Elsli Hanseli, the moment in such a pervasive Outcry broke out,
that rushed from the room mother and aunt, and from the kitchen,
Kathy.

"You wish I teach," remarked the latter with a swinging motion of
the flat Hand and retired again.

In great terror Elsli the boy had again taken for a ride, and he cried but still continued for
a while about the injustice that had happened to him.

"Mama say, but the loudmouth that he is to stand on the floor, he presses yes Elsli all "Together,
cried out angrily Fred.

At this remark out of Hanseli cried a lot worse now, and pressed his
head still Elslis shoulder down so hard on that it could hardly hold
himself upright.

"You can not really put him on the floor, Elsli" his mother said here,
he "will well satisfied, come help, "and the mother wanted to replace
the little Hans from the child and on the floor, but it was hard work:
he stayed with his arms and legs established and kicked and kicked
with his feet.

But at last he was still down, but now He got so angry cries so hard and tore away at the Elsli
that in his horror it quickly took on the arm, and with resignation to his fate, it said, "He
wants not, he is always angry, when I stand up only for a moment,
and when I come home from School, come home, I must take him on the
spot on your arm, or else he will like so to do to.

"

"But the heavy Hans is so long since two years old, he must go very well, are not only can,
"said his mother now a little angry with the little tyrant," and then yes the baby still there,
that you will also have to carry around. How do you do's for, Elsli? "

"Yes, because it is much evil when he sees that I take the baby, then he beats bargain and pushes
with his feet and cry so terrible that it is the mother listened to all the places where it
is, and it makes them angry when he doing so. It then calls the same, should I do that the
noise to stop, I will surely bring the little boy may have silenced; but he never stops crying,
the baby until I returned to the cradle and place it on the Poor guess, then I just shock the
cradle back and forth, until the little one again good or asleep. "

in.

"Come for a moment, Elsli, you look so so tired of" the mother said sympathetically; "And
you, Hanseli stand, now on your feet and wander into itself, which you can very well, and
inside is a nice piece of bread and an apple that you will earn "

"If you do not want to go," the aunt said here on, "we leave you here,
But Rudy and Heirli come with love and get bread and apples, right?

And that can they do very well without Elsli half turn break, come with me! "

The two ran right after her aunt, and little stubborn Hans had the sense of Prepared speech,
he was quiet, as Elsli him again let slip down the arm, without opposition
and hobbled by the hand of the sister next to the doctor's wife into
the house into it.

Fred came after them and brandished a Weidenrütchen in hand, as if he wanted to indicate that
there is a means to bring unruly boys to march. Inside Once in the room, locked the three boys very
much on the eyes, because immediately went the mother to the cupboard and brought out the big basket
of bread and cut for four enormous pieces down by the mighty loaf,
to each it presented a beautiful red apple, which she only could get
out of the closet, because they were probably ready for their own
children.

Now each of the boys and the Elsli his piece was served with the apple, and Fred said: "Well, recently,
bites happening again," all three, and instantly obeyed, and cracked
darauflos nibbling now that it would have made any desire to keep up.

Elsli said now why it had come, and showed his bag. The mother had sent it, the things which
the doctor's wife had promised her, bring back in the bag.

"No, child, of which there is no question," said they determined, "how could you have a bag
bear with clothes!

You tell your mother that she should even come once, I must also otherwise talk to her, then she
is handling things with. "

»Elsli, have you no desire to your apple? And you may not even bread
crumbs ?

Eat "here" asked the aunt, who had seen the child in the care his apple Bag was inserted,
while the bread untouched in his hand.

Elsli blushed a little, as it had done something that may not have been allowed, and said shyly:
"I would just like to share with the Fani, but today he gets 'nothing'.

"You can already tell Elsli that you want the Fani give it, that's all right," said the aunt
friendly; "but why get the Fani today 'nothing'?

"We have now been eaten at night, just ere we came, and again is not Fani come home, as I sometimes,
and then you eat the sour milk all on and the potatoes, otherwise have not so much, and the
father says, 'Who is not there, is not hungry'. But of course, Fani has hunger. I know, he forgets
that it is time "

"Where is he though? Does he not help you about, to guard the little boys in the evening, "asked
the aunt continued.

"No, no, he can not. The mother says they only do a lot worse when he is in the process he should only
run, so he comes so often to his supper, and I can not To keep and yet he is always so good
to me. If he then comes home, he always makes me my duties with his, because I can never, and
I have to do to the mother Light and I have to take to bed. "

"The Fani is only of levity to his supper, which he might otherwise have and the tasks that you
do not own, you will also not benefit much, Elsli " said the aunt.

Elsli was very red and his soft blue eyes filled with big tears.

"I know," she said timidly, "why I am so clumsy in the school, almost
the most awkward in the class.

"

"No, no, you're not far from the" Fred was a protective, "You can only yours Tasks never know what
we have to learn by heart and read, and now I know why; and if you have a laugh at a single time, I
will show him then, with whom he It has to do. "

On the Elsli was so much that made him hard and hurt him, that it almost never really happy
funny and looked like the other children. Even now, it probably looked grateful for his comfort at the Fred,
but there was no happiness on his narrow face, and when it got up now and his burden to itself
invited - for the Hanseli had long pulled him to to imply that he would return to the arm
- as the child looked so weak and tired from that in women went right
to the heart.

She looked to see how difficult it up the stairs down and the place went to Rudi and Heirli hanging style
on both sides of him, the heavy Hanseli him to prone.

"Oh God, if it wanted to" drop a ray of sunshine in this bleak lives of children, sighed the mother
and the aunt was about to agree compassionate when a noise was heard striking and louder came.
Emmi had just come up the road, and both brothers were immediately
entered and shouted at them now another go at them, always one of
the other screaming.

"Why have you caught the Fani" - "What have you started again with all the paper?" - "What did
you see him now aufgestiftet again," - "So no one can even make out
its tasks, and it's your fault!

"-" Tell me where thou hast attracted him to his promise not has to come to the meeting? "-"
Tell me, where the paper is, we can finally do something! "

The screaming, with Emma in their midst, had now arrived at the house stairs. The mother had just
been called up, and the aunt went up to the children.

"Hush! still! Not make such a noise, "she protested.

"Emmi you can not even account , If you constantly give each other both losschreit on them.
"

Emmi saved himself immediately to the aunt and whispered into her ear, including the Paper have
used everything, and implored, "Help me, aunt, please! please! You know yes, otherwise, the Oscar
is doing even worse! "

The aunt was the application of the paper is not so bad and said she
would like another Paper procured it, and now, all come in and go
to the tasks and it should Peace and tranquility prevail, and to give
their words emphasis, she added, "is equal also the daddy to come
home, you know that he will not hear any noise, "This had a soothing!.

All went into the house, and soon afterwards the children were four, silently and eagerly working,
around the table, because the aunt had hergeschafft new paper, also an Oscar stated that Fani
was gone to his school work's sake. Now appeared in the evening peace
and quiet go to the end to do.

But suddenly rose Rikli a piercing bone and marrow Cry, threw back his chair and rushed through
the whole room and far into the hall addition, no different than
would be a monster after him.

All heads raised, and everyone looked around in horror to discover
the cause of the woe screaming.

"Here! here, "said Emma, ​​pointing with her index finger on the table.

Since walking very grave towards a green shimmering gold beetle on the white paper, just the pocket
of the tireless Collector had emerged.

"But Fred, you carry in your pocket but not about living beetle,"
urged the mother, "for but have you tank.

Just think what all the inconvenience your neighbors, you too and the poor animals themselves,
are exposed! "

"Fred was always a wandering menagerie cage, which must be no ordinary
man come near," Oskar noticed out of his book.

      
    
    "Yes, but my fall collection
    because not every moment in anything together, as your Clubs, "threw
back Fred;" and you see, Mom, it's such a beautiful and useful animal,
I will read just like what it is, "and Fred arrived quickly bring
about his book, he was always nearby.

"The Gold Bug, # # auratus, with vaulted ceilings and large sash Freßzangen feeds from caterpillars,
grubs and other insects, making it very useful is.

Instead spared, as he deserves to be, he is widely persecuted by stupidity and trampled. -
Do not you know, Mom? "

"We do not even follow your beetle and not understand, but he belongs somewhere else, than in
your pocket and on the table, carry it away, "ordered the mother.

"And you, Riki" waved her aunt through the open door, "you come back in and gesture Do not
be, as if a little bug could kill you right. Look, if you constantly to Such trifles will lift
a terrible cry, and you will once punished be, because everyone will think when they hear you:
this does not mean anything, and you see not after you, if you should really meet something
you scream with all the basic could. "

Rikli Fred came in and was about to step out with his beetles, they came under the door together.
Fred said in passing: "To you I will even write a poem, because you such beautiful sounds you give,
you also have a brother in the art. "

"Yes, yes, Fred," inveighed that Rikli, "you can make a poem on how
the horrible Beetles come out of your pocket and crawl with as thin
and terrible legs on the table.

"

can "" That's one confirmed and Fred went einzulogieren his beetle in a box.

When the children were packing to retire, his mother said, "Tomorrow afternoon you have free, since
you may visit the sick Nora, Emmi, and so always in the afternoons and also on Sunday, she is
looking forward to your visit. "

"That's lucky that Emma finally gets a girlfriend, so she hears at once, on the other People
friends "to take claim for themselves, Oskar said with satisfaction.

Emmi said nothing, but went quietly her way, she was not in the slightest in mind, some of
her friendship with the Fani leave.

As the train take the stairs to the bedrooms, moving forward Oscar, then Emmi, Then the aunt,
and finally the two youngest next to each other, said Fred to his neighbor turned, "So, now pass
once on right, Rikli Then he sang in a loud voice to homemade! Melody:

"The Rikli and Hanseli Are just like two siblings; You sing with all the Amseli, Only unprecedented,
unrestrained. "

Just wanted to answer with plaintive cries Rikli
comparative seal, as the Aunt turned around and took her by the hand.

"No,
Rikli, but not anymore," she said firmly, "and would rather not again!
See you to Fred that he is absolutely wrong in his comparison. "

If
the mother does not, as so often happened, at this time the father
returned home or hospital beds or was accessed to other people in
need, so they made the hike to the top Rooms with, and the children
could then share in mother and aunt to the end of the day yet everything
that was on your mind, in one way or another to place. War, however,
as often, and even today, called his mother and aunt as sole companion,
she had to fight very much that there was no battle, because each
thought the other had longer aunt held at his bedside. Today it came
from the Fred really too bad, how long until the sisters over there,
and now Oscar's aunt kept for himself, and when she finally came up
to him, he said, instead of all messages: "I would love to, Aunt,
one could split up into two halves and then multiply by four, then
there would be for every two aunts; then one would come once to his
right. "My aunt wanted to be Fred the law nor be But leave the bottom
already called Kathy with such urgency for her, that they go had to
promise not without the Fred, come tomorrow evening, first of all
to his bed.

Chapter Five.

At the Oak Ridge.

When the doctor from
the Rhein written to his friends in Buchberg had, he would like for
the sick Nora an apartment on the healthy amount of his hometown find
to meet the could bring the summer to strengthen them there, these
things had to throw up his wife, which immediately began to consult
with her aunt. Her first thought was the great house of the Lord Bickel
was where so many unoccupied rooms were located, and immediately had
the doctor's wife gone, but they had arrived not good. Bickel said
the same woman had that was completely impossible that they could
give of their rooms, they needed themselves, and they had hardly able
to conceal their indignation over such demands, that in the room where
Never came a man, should now suddenly very strange people in and dwell
there. The woman doctor had said meekly, Mrs. Bickel it may not blame
her, it was Only one request was that it was just very difficult to
find an apartment with several rooms. Mrs. Bickel had but still not
able to calm and afterwards from time to Mr. Bickel have time to say:
"It takes me only wonder what the woman actually Doctor says, we will
probably not have our house built for other people, "Mr. Bickel! had
also been equal to their view and added to these comments always with:
"And then even for people whom we do not even know if they just also
have something or nothing. Then you could be in a fine "The doctor's
wife had then been at once a thought!: Rain in the oak stand ready
in the spring of a new house, the first floor of the Bauer had taken,
to which it belonged, the upper floor should move into his son, on
the wanted to found his own autumn budget, so the rooms were still
empty.
Geoffrey and Elma seemed constantly to be discovering fresh subjects on which they thought
alike, longed alike, hoped, grieved, joyed, failed and fought, in precisely the same interesting
fashion! Each discovery was a fresh joy, a fresh surprise.  "Do you really?" "Why, so do I!"
"How strange it seems!"  In the garden of Eden these surprises grow on every bush!

Elma's heart was hopelessly out of keeping, but conscience still fought feebly against temptation.
She had been trained to consider no man worthy of her regard who did not attend Saint Nathaniel's
Parish Church, eschew amusements, wear a blue ribbon in his coat, belong to the Anti- Tobacco
League, and vote with the Conservative Party!  In the watches of the night she had decided
that it was her duty to use her influence to lead this dear worldling into better ways, and,
to his credit be it said, the dear worldling appeared most eager to be reformed.  He besought
Miss Ramsden to "pitch into him"; declared that he knew, don't you know, that he was an "awful
rotter"; but represented himself as waiting eagerly to be guided in the way in which he should
go.  How was he to begin?

Elma puckered her delicate eyebrows.  She was wearing no hat, as it was more comfortable to
recline against the cushions with uncovered head, but a fluffy white parasol belonging to her
hostess was placed by her side, in case an obtrusive sunbeam penetrated the branches overhead.
"I never know where the sun is going to move next.  Men always do, don't they?  I think it
is so clever of them!"  Madame had declared in her charming, inconsequent fashion as she fluttered
away.  Elma did not need the parasol as a shade, but it came in very usefully as a plaything
in moments of embarrassment.  There was one all-important subject weighing on her mind; she
made a desperate plunge, and put it into words--

"You--you don't go to church!"

"Not very often, I admit.  I'm afraid it is not much in my line."

"Don't you--believe in it?"

The vague question was yet sufficiently explicit.  The Squire leant forward, his hands clasped
between his knees, his forehead knitted into thoughtful lines.

"Er--yes!  As a matter of fact, I do!  Didn't once!  At college, you know; got into a free-thinking
set, and chucked the whole thing aside. But I've been about a good bit.  I've seen countries
where they go on that tack and it doesn't pay.  The old way is the best.  I know I'm a bit
careless still.  Men are, Miss Ramsden, when they have only themselves to think of.  They get
into the way of leaving that sort of thing to their mothers and sisters, but when a fellow
starts for himself, it's different!  I'm the master here, in name, but virtually it's my mother
who runs the house.  I don't interfere with her ways, but when I--er--marry, it will be different!
Then I shall make a stand. Family prayers, and that sort of thing, don't you know.  A man ought
to set an example.  You are quite right; you are always right!  Bit shy at first, you know,
and that sort of thing, but I'd do it; I promise you, I would!  Turn up at church regularly
every Sunday!"

"It would be your duty," said Elma, primly.  She twirled the handle of the sunshade round and
round, and strove womanfully to keep her thoughts fixed on the subject on hand, and away from
that thrilling "when I marry."  "But it isn't only form, you know," she added anxiously! "It's
caring for it most of all, and putting it before everything else!"

Geoffrey gazed at her in a rapture of admiration.  He loved her simplicity; he adored her earnestness.
In his eyes she was a shining white angel sent down from heaven to be his guide through life.
It needed all his self-control to keep back the words which were struggling for utterance,
but the fear of frightening Elma by a premature declaration gave him strength to resist.

They turned instead into a prayer, a sincere yet bargain-making prayer, like that of Jacob of old.

"Give me this woman!" cried the inner voice: "this one woman out of all the world, and I will
vow in return my faith, my allegiance!"  The most earnest vows are often offered in the least
conventional language, and Geoffrey Greville was not a man to promise without intending to
perform. There was a long, pregnant silence.  Elma felt the presence of electricity in the
air, and forced herself to return to the attack.

"And there are other things! ...  You play bridge--"

"Certainly I do!"

"For money?"

"Shilling points."

"What are `points'?"

Geoffrey laughed happily.  This innocence sounded fascinating in his infatuated ears.

"That's a little difficult to explain, isn't it, if you don't know anything about the game?
Don't you play cards at all?"

"Mother won't have them in the house.  We have `Quartettes,' but they are different. ...  Can
you lose much at shilling points?"

"A fair amount, if you're unlucky, but you can win it, too!  I generally do win, as a matter
of fact!"

"What is the most you ever lost in a night?"

Geoffrey grimaced expressively.

"Sixty pounds; but I was a fool, and doubled no trumps on a risky hand, on the chance of making
the rubber.  That was quite an exceptional drop!"

"I should hope so, indeed!"  Elma's horror was genuinely unassumed. "Sixty pounds!  Why, it's
more than many a poor family has to live on all the year round!  Think of all the good you
could do with sixty pounds!  It seems awful to lose it on cards in one evening!"

"The next sixty pounds I win, I'll give to a workmen's charity!  Will that wipe away my offence?"

Elma was not at all sure that it would.  Money won in unworthy fashion could never bring with
it a blessing, according to Mrs Ramsden's theories.  She shook her head sadly, and ventured
another question.

"You go to races, too, don't you?"

"Whenever I get the chance."

"You like going?"

"Love it!  Why shouldn't I?  Finest thing in the world to see a good hard race!  Wish I could
keep a stud myself.  I would, if I had the money.  I must tell you the truth, you see, even
if you are shocked!"

"Racecourses are very wicked places."

"Ever seen one?"

"No."

"Oh!"

They looked at each other and simultaneously burst into a laugh.  They were young and in love;
it was delightful to brush aside problematical difficulties, and give themselves over to enjoyment
of the golden present.  Elma forgot her usual somewhat prim reserve, and her laughter was like
a chime of silver bells.  It is a rare thing to bear a musical laugh.  Geoffrey longed for
nothing so much as to make her laugh again.

"I'm a born sportsman, Miss Ramsden, and I'll never be anything else. I'd like to give up everything
you dislike, but it's no use swearing against one's convictions.  It's not honest, and it doesn't
last, but I can promise you always to play straight, and to keep down the stakes so that I
shall never run the risk of losing so much again."

"Why can't you play for nothing but just the fun of the game?"

"We call that playing for love!  It's rather dull--in cards!"

Elma twirled her parasol, and blushed to the eyes.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

Mrs Ramsden sent up a box to the Manor that same afternoon, containing a dark linen dress,
a blue blouse, and black skirt for evening wear; a supply of underclothing, a grey Shetland
shawl, and a flannel dressing- gown.  An hour later, conveyed by special messenger, came a
second box, accompanied by a note in Cornelia's handwriting.  Elma was resting in her bedroom
when it arrived.  She opened it, and read as follows:--

  "Dear Moss Rose,--I guess tight gowns are a bit worrying in hot
  weather, so I've gotten together a few waists and skirts that may aid
  your recovery, and send them along with my love, wishing you many
  happy returns of the day.  If it isn't the right day, it ought to be,
  anyway!  I always calculated to be here for your birthday, and I'm
  about tired waiting.  If you send them back, I'll burn them, as sure
  as taxes, but I reckon you're too sweet to hurt my feelings.  Put on
  the one with the ruckings!  It's the duty of every woman to look her
  best in the eyes of--.  What wonderful weather for the time of year!--
  Your friend, Cornelia.

  "PS--There's quite a gale blowing round this corner!..."

"It is sweet of her, but I mustn't, I can't, I really couldn't!" was Elma's comment as she
flushed with surprise and embarrassment.  It was quite certain that she could not accept the
gift, but there was no harm in just looking to see what the box contained!  She crossed the
room, cut the string, and unfolded the brown papers which covered the cardboard box; lifted
fold after fold of tissue papers, and gasped in admiration of each treasure as it was revealed.

The daintiest of white lawn morning blouses, with skirt to match; a skirt and bodice of cream
net marvellously rucked with ribbons; a blue muslin, afoam with flounces.  All were fresh from
the maker's hands, and, as Elma divined, had been selected from Cornelia's storehouse of garments,
with careful regard to her own requirements.  The "waists" would fit easily enough; the skirts--she
shook out the muslin and held it against her own dress.  Just a trifle short, perhaps, but
not sufficiently so to spoil the effect.  It was a lovely skirt!  Elma edged away from the
glass with a little jerk of the figure calculated to send the flounces in a swirl round her
feet.  For three-and-twenty years she had gone through life wearing plain hems, and as Cornelia
predicted, the flounces went to her brain.  After all, would it not be ungracious to reject
so kindly a gift?  Her real birthday fell in the middle of July, and Cornelia, being rich and
generous, would naturally offer a gift on the occasion.  To keep the blue muslin would be only
anticipating the remembrance.

Yes! she would keep it, and return the other dresses, explaining that she really could not
accept so much.  But on second thoughts Cornelia had specially desired her to wear the net
with the ruckings. ...  Elma dropped the muslin on the bed, lifted the net blouse carefully
from its wrappings, and held it before her to view the effect.  Had mortal hands fashioned
it, or had it dropped down ready-made from a fairyland where good spirits gathered pieces of
cloud and sea-foam, and blew them together for the benefit of happy girlhood!  Elma looked
at herself in the glass; looked back at the blue glace silk and black surah on the bed, and
thanked Heaven for Cornelia Briskett!  Indeed and indeed she would wear the "rucked net to-night,
and look her best in the eyes of..."  And she would send back the white lawn, and say--What
should she say?  Perhaps, after all, it would seem rather queer to keep the two more elaborate
gowns, and send back the simplest.  It might appear as if she did not consider it worthy of
acceptance.  She would keep them all; wear them all; enjoy them all; and oh, dear, sweet, kind,
and most understanding Cornelia, if ever, ever, the time arrived when the gift could be returned,
with what a full heart should it be offered!

Pen, ink, and paper lay ready on the writing-table.  Elma seated herself, and wrote her thanks:--

  "You dear Fairy-Godmother,--At first I thought I couldn't, but I've
  tried on all three, and I simply can't part from them.  I don't know
  what mother will say, but I'm living just for the hour.  I'm going to
  wear the net to-night, and if I look my best it will be your doing,
  and I'll never forget it!  It's just wonderful up here, but I feel
  wicked, for really and truly I'm not ill?  Captain Guest asked me a
  hundred questions about you last night, and I told him such nice
  things, Cornelia!  I wonder sometimes whether you are a witch, and
  upset the cart on purpose, but of course there was the parrot!
  Madame is most kind, but I don't really know her a scrap better than
  the moment we arrived.  She wears lovely clothes.  If it were not for
  you I should have to go downstairs to-night in an odd blouse and
  skirt, and feel a worm!  I hope you'll come up to inquire.  Come
  soon!  Everyone wants to see you again.  With a hundred thanks.--Your
  loving friend, Elma."

  "Why am I a `Moss Rose'?"

The note was slipped into the letter-box in the hall, as Elma went down to dinner that night,
lovely to behold in the "rucked gown," and the perusal of it next morning was one of the pleasantest
episodes which Cornelia had known since her arrival.  Truth to tell, she had felt many doubts
as to the reception of her fineries, but the mental vision of Elma's tasteless home-made garments,
against the background of the beautiful old Manor, had been distressing enough to overcome
her scruples.  She dimpled as she read, and laughed triumphantly.  Things were going well;
excellently well, and those dresses ought to exercise a distinctly hurrying effect.  Four or
five days--maybe a week.  "My!" soliloquised Cornelia, happily; "I recollect one little misery
who proposed to me at the end of an afternoon picnic.  They're slower over here, but Mr Greville
was pretty well started before this spell began, and if he's the man I take him for, he won't
last out a whole week with Elma among the roses.  Then the fun will begin!  Sakes alive, what
a flare-up!  And how will the `Moss Rose' stand pickling?  That's where I come to a full stop.
I can't surmise one mite which way she'll turn; but she's got to reckon with Cornelia E Briskett,
if she caves in."

Miss Briskett did not vouchsafe any inquiry as to the contents of the letter which had afforded
such obvious satisfaction.  She had probably recognised Elma's writing on the envelope, but
made no inquiries as to her progress.  Relationships between the aunt and niece were still
a trifle strained; that is to say, they were strained on Miss Briskett's side; Cornelia's knack
of relapsing into her natural manner on the very heels of a heated altercation seemed somehow
an additional offence, since it placed one under the imputation of being sulky, whereas, of
course, one was exhibiting only a dignified reserve!

Miss Briskett set forth on her morning's shopping expedition without requesting her niece to
accompany her, an omission which she fondly hoped would be taken to heart; but the hardened
criminal, regarding the retreating figure from behind the curtains, simply ejaculated, "Praise
the Fates!" swung her feet on to the sofa, and settled herself to the enjoyment of a novel
hired from the circulating library round the corner.

Cornelia tore open the envelope with the haste of one separated far from her dearest, took
in the contents in a lightning glance, sighed with relief, and slowly broke into a smile.

"Well--!" ... she drawled thoughtfully; "Well--! ...  Yes, there is an answer, Mason.  Give
me a pencil from that rack!"  She scribbled two or three words; copied an address, and handed
it back eagerly.

"There! give that to the boy--and see here, Mason, I shall want some lunch ready by half after
twelve.  Send Mury right along to my room. I'm going away!"

Mason's chin dropped in dismay, but she was too well-trained an automaton to put her feelings
into words.  She rustled starchily from the room, to give the dread message to Mary, who promptly
flew upstairs, voluble with distress.

"You never mean to say that you are going to leave us, Miss Cornelia? Why, you've only just
come!  I thought it was to be three months, at the least.  You're never going so soon?"

"Only for a few days.  I'll be back again, to plague you, by the end of next week.  Don't you
want me to go, Mury?"

Mary shook her head vigourously.

"I'd like to keep you for ever!  The house isn't the same place since you came.  I was saying
to my friend only last Sunday that I couldn't a bear to think of you leaving.  Couldn't you
find a nice young gentleman, and settle down in England for good?  I'd come and live with you!
I wouldn't ask anything better than to live with you all my days."

"Mury, Mury! what about the friend?  What would he say to such desertion?"

Mary's grimace expressed a lively disregard of the friend's sufferings.

"I don't know how it is, but I think a heap more of you nor I do of him," she confessed candidly.
"I'd come fast enough, if you gave me the chance.  There's lots of good-looking young gentlemen
in England, Miss Cornelia!"

"Is that so?  I hope I'll meet quite a number of them, then; but I couldn't settle down out
of my own country, Mury!  You'll hev to cross the ocean if you want to tend my house.  We'll
speak about that another day; just now we've got to hustle round and get my clothes packed
in the next hef hour.  Just the dandiest things I've got.  I'm going to have a real gay time
in a hotel in London, Mury, with some friends from home, so I must be as smart as I know how.
...  Get out the big dress basket, and we'll hold a Selection Committee right here on the bed."

Mary set to work, unable, despite depression, to restrain her interest in the work on hand.
The big boxes were dragged into the middle of the room; bed, chairs, and sofas were strewn
with garments, until the room presented the appearance of a general drapery establishment.
Cornelia selected and directed, Mary carefully folded up skirts, and laid them in the long
shallow shelves.  In the height of the confusion the door opened, and Miss Briskett entered
with hasty step.  Signs of agitation were visible on her features, an agitation which was increased
by the sight of the dishevelled room.  In a lightning glance she took in the half-filled trunks,
the trim travelling costume spread over the chair by the dressing-table, and a gleam of something
strangely like fear shone out of the cold grey eyes.  Cornelia had no difficulty in understanding
that look.  Aunt Soph was afraid she had pulled the rope just a trifle too tight, and that
it was snapping before her eyes; she was picturing a flight back to America, and envisaging
her brother's disappointment and wrath.  Out of the abundance of her own content the girl vouchsafed
a generous compassion.

"Yes, I'm off, Aunt Soph!  My friends, the Moffatts, are putting up at the Ritz for a week,
and want to have me come and fly round with them. They are going to meet me at four o'clock
this afternoon, to be ready for a theatre to-night.  I've got to be off at once.  Mason's getting
ready some lunch."

Miss Briskett stood severely erect, considering the situation.  Now that the great anxiety
was removed, the former irritation revived.

"And pray, who are the Moffatts?  I must know something more about them before I can give my
consent to this visit!"

Cornelia handed a pile of cardboard boxes into Mary's hands.

"Take that hat-box downstairs, and pack these on the tray.  Don't muss them about!  Then you
can come back to finish off."

She waited until the door was safely closed, then faced her aunt across the bed.  "I'm pleased
to answer your questions as well as I know how. The Moffatts are--the Moffatts!  I guess that's
about all their family history, so far as I'm concerned.  They came over with me, and Mrs Moffatt
was real kind looking after me when I first came on deck, and was feeling pretty cheap.  We
saw quite a good deal of each other after that, and she said she'd love to have me do the sights
with her sometime.  She was going straight through to Paris, to get fixed up with clothes.
Now it seems she's back in London.  I gave her my address, and she wires me to come."

"You spoke of `the Moffatts.'  Who are the other members of the party?"

"There's a husband, of course, but he's not much account, except to pay the bills.  He must
be pretty cashy, for she has everything she wants, but it gets on her nerves having him poking
round all the while.  That's one reason why she wants me.  I could always keep him quiet!"

The complacent gurgle, the jaunty tilt of the head were as fuel to the spinster's indignation.
She pressed her lips tightly together before putting the final question.

"And your father knows nothing--nothing whatever of these people?"

"Well, I guess I may have mentioned their names.  He didn't know anything about them before that."

"And you propose to stay at a London hotel with the casual acquaintances of a few days?  You
are mad!  I cannot possibly allow it.  You must wire at once to say that you are unable to accept."

Cornelia stood silently erect.  Her chief personal characteristic was that air of hot-house
fragility so often seen in American girls, but in that silence her chin squared, her lips set,
the delicate brows contracted in a beetling frown.  It was no longer the face of a girl of
two-and-twenty which confronted the spinster across the bed; it was the face of Edward B Briskett,
the financier who had twice over piled up great fortunes by sheer force and determination.

"Now see here, Aunt Soph," said Cornelia, clearly; "this is where you and I have got to come
to an understanding.  I've been used to going my own way ever since I was short-coated, and
it wasn't hankering to be put back into leading-strings that brought me across the ocean. 
Poppar trusts me, and that's enough for me.  You've got a right to boss your own home, but
where I'm concerned your authority don't spread one inch beyond the gate.  If I decide to accept
an invitation, it's on my own responsibility, and no matter what happens, you won't be blamed!
I've decided to leave this at one twenty-five, and I'm going to leave, if I have to jump out
of the window to get away!  Now, that's straight, and we know where we are!"

"I shall write to your father to-night, and tell him that you have gone in defiance of my wishes."

"I guess it's the best thing you can do.  Poppar'll cable back: `Give Corney her head; It's
screwed on pretty straight!' and you'll feel easier in your mind."  She paused a moment, her
features softened into a smile.  Despite the force of her words, there had throughout been
no trace of ill-nature in her voice.  Now she drew slowly nearer her aunt, holding out her
pretty, white hands in ingratiating appeal.

"See here, Aunt Soph, don't be mad!  I'm sorry you take it like this, for I've a feeling that
it's just about the best thing that could happen to both of us, for me to clear out for a spell
just now.  We've been a bit fratchetty this last week; gotten on each other's nerves somehow--
but when I come back we can make a fresh start.  In America, girls have more liberty than over
here; but there's not a mite of reason why we should quarrel over it.  You're my own Poppar's
sister, and I came quite a good way to see you.  It's a pity if we ken't pull it off for the
next few months.  Don't you want to kiss me, and wish me a real good time?"

Miss Briskett drew back coldly, but the little hands clasped her shoulder, the young face pressed
nearer and nearer.  Looking down from her superior stature, the girl's likeness to her father
was once more strikingly apparent; but it was not the man she recalled, but the dearer memory
of the Baby Edward of long ago, whose clear child's eyes had seen in "Sister" the most marvellous
of created things.  As on a former occasion, the remembrance was more powerful than words.
Long years of solitary confinement had hardened the spinster's heart beyond the possibility
of a gracious capitulation, but at least she submitted to the girl's embrace, and made no further
objections to the proposed journey.

On the whole, Cornelia felt that she had scored a victory.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

Cornelia booked a first-class return to town, scattered half-crowns broadcast among the astonished
porters, ensconced herself in a corner of an empty carriage, and prepared to enjoy the journey.
She did not purchase any magazines at the bookstall; the only child of a millionaire need not
trouble about insurance coupons, and at two-and-twenty life is more interesting than fiction.
Cornelia guessed she'd heaps more to think about than would occupy a pokey little journey of
from two or three hours.  Just to think how things changed from day to day! Yesterday she had
supposed herself dumped right-down in Norton Park for a solid three months, and to-day here
she was full chase for London, with the prospect of a week, crammed full of frivolity and amusement!

She gurgled to herself in much contentment.  Aunt Soph had kissed her, or, at least, submitted
to be kissed; Elma was engaged in playing the part of Eve in flounced blue muslin, to an Adam
in a flannel suit, in a particularly well-mown Garden of Eden.  She could therefore be happy
in her mind concerning those who were left behind, and she had never yet doubted her own ability
to take care of herself.  She smoothed the wrinkles on her long suede gloves, flicked the dust
off the ridiculous points of her "high shoes," and sighed impatiently.  She and her baggage
were safely aboard.  Why couldn't that old engine hustle up and start?

Cornelia rose to her feet, and thrust her head out of the open window. There was only one passenger
approaching along the deserted platform, and as fate would have it, he had reached a spot but
a couple of yards away, so that the sudden appearance of the girl's head through the window
was followed by simultaneous exclamations of astonishment. Exclamations of recognition, too,
for the new-comer was none other than Captain Guest himself, most obviously equipped for town.

"Miss Briskett--is that you?"

"Mussy, what a turn you gave me!  Who'd have dreamt of meeting you here?"

"Are you going up to town?"

"I am!  Are you?"

"I am!  Do you prefer to travel alone?  If not, may I come in?"

"Why, suttenly!"  Cornelia was not yet quite sure whether she were annoyed or pleased by the
encounter, but on the whole the agreeable element predominated.  She was of a gregarious nature,
and at any time preferred to talk, rather than remain silent.  After a month spent in a strictly
feminine household, the society of a male man was an agreeable novelty.  Moreover--sweet triumph
to a daughter of Eve!--half an hour's tete-a-tete on the drive home from the Manor had apparently
made short work of the Captain's preconceived dislike, since he was so anxious to repeat the
dose!  Cornelia smiled; the naughty, little smile of a spider who welcomes a fly into his net.

Another minute, and the train was movings lowly out of the station, while the two young people
continued their cross-examination, confronting each other from their separate corners.

"This is an unexpected visit, is it not?  I understood from Miss Ramsden that she expected
you to call at the Manor to-day or to-morrow."

(Cornelia scored a point against him, for his own desertion, in the face of so interesting
a prospect!)

"Vury unexpected!  I got a wire from a friend and came off within two hours.  I understood
from Mrs Greville that you were making quite a good stay?"

Guest grimaced eloquently.

"I was--but--circumstances alter cases!  To tell you the honest truth, Miss Briskett, I'm just
a bit fed up with playing gooseberry by day, and piquet (with Madame!) by night, and the idea
of spending a few days at the club presented itself as an agreeable novelty.  My friends are
almost all in town just now, and there is a good deal going on.  I generally put in a week
or so of the season, so I thought I might as well clear out at once.  They don't want me here!"

"I don't know about that," returned Cornelia, thoughtfully.  "What about Madame?  Someone's
got to keep her occupied!  What's to happen to her in the evenings now?  There'll be nothing
for it but a three-handed game, and that's the limit!  If you'd been a kind, self-sacrificing
friend, you'd have stayed on, and worked that piquet for all you were worth!"

"But I'm not self-sacrificing, you see!"  Captain Guest explained, and in truth he did not
look it.  Cornelia's glance took in the magnificent proportions of the man, the indefinable
air of birth and breeding, the faultless toilette; the strong, dark features.  To one and all
she paid a tribute of admiration, but the expression on the face was of concentrated self-sufficiency.
At this point admiration stopped dead, to be replaced by an uneasy dread.  Was Geoffrey Greville,
even as his friend, frankly indifferent to everything but his own amusement, and if so, what
of poor Elma and her dream?  It was an awful reflection that in such a case she herself would
be largely responsible for thrusting Elma into danger.  Her expression clouded, and she stared
through the window with unseeing eyes.  Captain Guest's words had been so exceedingly plain
that she had not affected to misunderstand their meaning, and the ice once broken, she was
glad of the opportunity of solving her doubts.

"You know Mr Greville very well.  Is he--a flirt?"

Captain Guest flashed a glance at her; a rapid, understanding glance.

"He has been," he replied quietly.  "A desperate flirt; but--he is not flirting now!"

"You think--"

"I'm sure!"

Cornelia clasped her hands with a sigh of relief.

"Then--?"

"The Deluge!"

"You mean--?"

"He can't marry her, of course!  She's a lovely girl, and everything that's nice, and good,
and that kind of thing, but--not at all the kind of girl he ought to marry."

"Ought he to marry someone hideous then, with an ugly temper?  Poor fellow!  Why?"

"There's no necessity to be hideous, that I know of, though as a matter of fact he probably
won't find a girl suitable as to means and position, who is anything like so attractive, personally,
as Miss Ramsden. Greville is hardly his own master, Miss Briskett.  He is not a rich man, and
he has the place to think of.  Besides, there's Madame to consider. Madame belongs to a noble
house, and has high ideas for her son."

"Is it the custom over here, for the mommas to choose wives for their sons?  I don't know much
about Mr Greville, but from the look of him I shouldn't suppose he was one of that sort.  He
has a kind of an air as if he'd want a lot of moving, once he got his head set!  If he really
cares--"

Captain Guest shrugged expressively.

"Oh, for the moment, of course, it's a case of `all for love, and the world well lost,' but
in a few days' time Miss Ramsden will return home; they will drop out of each other's lives,
and then prudence will come to the fore.  There's a girl whom he has known for years, who is
built for him all the way round.  I don't say he'll like it so much, but he'll end by marrying
her like a good boy."

"By marrying her money, you mean to say?  I see, we Americans aren't the only mercenary nation
in the world, though we get the credit for it sometimes.  Well!  I'll wait a while, before
I judge.  There comes a time in most men's lives when they forget their fine principles, and
see just one thing ahead, and they've got to have it!  Everything else goes down like ninepins,
even if it's a real stately old mother, with her hair fixed-up like Marie Antoinette.  We'll
wait and see if that time comes along for Mr Greville!"

Guest's lip twitched with amusement.

"You seem to be very experienced on the subject."

"I am so.  I've seen quite a good deal of life," said Cornelia, with the air of a female Methuselah.
She did not smirk nor giggle at the insinuation, but accepted it placidly as a matter of course,
an occurrence of everyday happening.

Guest studied her critically, as she gazed out of the window.  Was she plain, or beautiful?
It was difficult to say.  The colourless complexion, and sharply pointed nose were serious
blemishes, but the mouth was exquisite, and the hair a marvel.  How Rossetti would have gloried
in painting it, unbound, with the great red-gold waves floating over her shoulders!  The eyes
were good, too, despite their unusual colour--the colour of a tawny old sherry!

As though attracted by his scrutiny, Cornelia turned her head, and let the golden eyes dwell
thoughtfully upon his face.

"Does Mr Greville do anything?" she inquired.  "Has he any sort of occupation in life?"

"He has a certain amount of business in connection with the property, but the agent does most
of that.  He hunts, of course, and shoots--he's a capital shot--and fishes at odd times.  All
the ordinary things that a man does."

"Is that so?  They wouldn't be ordinary with us.  I like a man to work. You've got to work
hard, I suppose?  You're a soldier."

The quick pucker of lips and brows were almost startlingly eloquent of pain. The Marget is a hearty Good wife
and Gritli but I can not forget. "Heiri wiped his hand a few tears away.

The compassionate woman came the tears in his eyes. "I do not forget, Heirman; how much would
the poor Gritli still left in you, and his two young children. It was so unexpectedly fast with
it. Of course, it did indeed look to be thin and frail, and I may be a child, the small, good
Elsli see, never without it worries me whether it be not to be very hard, but it can not stand
much that is good to see. "

"Yes, it's" a narrow and lean, Heiri assented, "but it beats everything else after me, it is not
the most agile and more readily covered. The boy is' everything else as the Gritli blessed and
always has something in mind and do not like sitting still, and then it's not like when the
little boys are not particularly clean, and tells about, we must set all three of the tube wells,
because that is how the punktum Gritli happily, he can not see what is desolate and dirty. But
then the boys begin to call to cry, and, until the mother comes, and then there's more spectacle,
and so I come almost never home in the evening that I do not Marget says I need the big boys
slapping To give the kids because he always plage and do that they must move away from work.
But if the boy 'then stands before me and with his eyes looking at me accurately how the Gritli
did I can not give him any ear, which only makes the Marget angry, and there are harsh words,
and to me it is not right because she is a brave woman and schaffige otherwise. I have sometimes
thought that if you wanted to tell her about the slaps a word, Mrs. Keller, I would be happy, they
would rather listen to your words, and you have indeed raise boys and know what to do about them
has. You would certainly say it even a little word, when she comes around, you know, doctor's
wife? "

"Yes, I'll do that gladly, and how is it with the Elsli, the mother
may well with him?

"

"Yes, you can see, this is so," and came Heiri in order to make quite understandable, yet a little
closer to the hedge, "the child is more like me are gradually and has not so his own stuff
in my head, like the Gritli she had, and so his own will. It does accurate, what will the
Marget, and has no Widerwörtlein all day and never complains, and
if it also from that of the school comes up it must go to bed, to
always help has and keep the boys and need to carry the baby.

"

"Just not too much, Heirman," warned the troubled doctor's wife, "it is my right Concern with the
child.

Send me the Marget sometime soon over, I would also above a Word to talk to her, tell her I gave
her something for the kids leave, outgrown skirt from mine. "

"That I will do it willingly, and now I will, I think, back on.

To sleep well, Mrs. Doctor, and no offense and only wish that all thrive on the vegetable
garden. "

"Thank you! Good night, Heirman, "Once again, was over the hedge towards exchanged a handshake,
then moved further Heiri his street.

The doctor's wife was thoughtfully placed between the vegetable beds, but their thoughts were
not with the green herbs busy looking down on her eyes. Heiris Appearance and conversation had
awakened earlier days in her soul. She saw a happy Children face with big brown eyes beside
him and looked very surprised with how two hands facing forward to a forget-me skirts and now
another one stuck in her hair, and how good it looked. The child was the Gritli, who was sitting
next to her at the brook, where they both just the blue flowers were picked in abundance and they
now tied in a bunch. Gritli was Children of poor people, but it always looked good and extremely
clean and combed smooth, and It was always here and there a flower or a bow attached, and it always
looked from when it was decorated for a small party, if it ever so easy to dress themselves wore.
Many want the Gritli it and others derided it, but that changed nothing: it was a deep need in
the Gritli, something beautiful in themselves, and what the people said that the incessant Gritli
went hand in hand with a flower or ribbon and adorned looked, coming as it specified by the painter,
who is rightly cleaned to make a little picture of him. At eighteen years, married the good-Hiri,
who has always liked to have the Gritli and he had often said he would have worked for both,
if only his wife may. After five years, the delicate built Gritli faded of consumption there.
His two children, Stephen and four years of the three-year Elsli were of the young mother held from
the first moment in so neat and clean was that it impressed the children deep remained. The
Heiri had but for his two small children have a mother again, and the People told him that he must
take to wife Margaret, as they will help him well in all Work. Thus, the Margaret his wife and
was capable and determined in any work, but on jewelry flowers and
she did not and a special Clean saw as unnecessary and as a At wasting
time, and so got Heiris budget on a different character.

The three little boys and the little one saw in the cradle does not have looked like Fani and
Elsli as small children and looked now, for the first habit was left to them.

From this idea, so one had gone up by one in the pensive woman, she was startled by a terrible
cry which sounded from the house.

Now crashed constantly screaming with laughter, the eight-year Rikli,
coming to the corner, to let go, after her brother Fred, a big book
under his left arm, right stretching out with a closed fist.

"Riki, not so excessive," warned the mother, "Do come to you. What happened? "

Rikli away screaming and stuck her head into the dress of the mother.

"Now look, Mom, why the irrational nature" behaves so reported, the herzugerannte Fred, "Look
here, this cute little frog I caught the Rikli under the eyes held that there could admire the
little creature, and now I will read you the same, what a It is remarkable
specimen.

Look, look! "Fred held out his open hand, from which a Green Frog glared.

"Riki is now very quiet, it is enough," commanded the mother of the still continued crying Child,
"and you, Fred know well that the child is unreasonable, however before your animals fears, why you
have to just keep them under his eyes "?

"It was at first with me," said Fred, "and hear just how interesting is the description, ! Mama,
"Fred had opened his book and read:" The green frog or water, # # esculenta, is long, about three
inches, grass green with black spots. His eyes have a golden sheen;
the toes of the hind feet webbed one.

His voice, which he particularly on warm summer nights can hear is: Brekekekex! He spends the winter
in the mud. He feeds - "

At that moment a carriage drove.

"It is the lady with the sick girl, let me, Fred, let me," said the mother, hurried Fred pushing
aside the little that blocked her way.

He ran but after: "Mama, Now listen to just, you know not, which he feeds, he feeds on - "

The car was already there.

From the stable came the Hans, run out of the kitchen in a Kathy clean white apron, for she had
been told: if a car ancestor, they have to come out carry up the stairs to a sick girl. Fred and
Rikli had stepped back a little and now stood stock-still on the fence, with eager anticipation
to the addition, looking forward to. Only one lady came out of the car and beckoned to Kathy.
Then they raised a white, delicate, almost transparent figure out from the car and carried her
up the stairs into the house. The two women followed the same.

"The child is much greater than you, if the mom has already meant that it was only eight or nine
Years old, "now said his sister Fred Rikli.

"This is a girlfriend for Emmi and You can also view him that it would appreciate a shout, as you
make it. "

"Yes, yes, it has not always resisted frogs and spiders and worms in the bag, like you," Rikli
and just wanted to add even some that prove the validity of her cries had, as Fred opened his
hand to look after his frog, and this with a large Set against the Rikli sprang out. With a piercing
cry, the child ran into the House in, but where it could not penetrate
further than the Kathy shot him with a very overwhelming "Bsch!

Bsch, "contrary. "If a patient is inside, to do so!"

? "Where's the aunt asked Rikli, a question that answered the Kathy before they legally was
pronounced, because they knew the question of the day, many hundreds
of times in the house was heard.

"In the other room, in here is sick, do not go into it, her mother has forbidden it; and crying
like a punctured Spanferkelchen is not allowed in the house inside, "said Kathy added that
its own assessment.

Rikli hurried out into the other room to complain to her aunt the story of the frog, for she could
not get over that he had almost jumped in his face.

But the Aunt was taken up: Oscar, the eldest brother was sitting next to her in a serious Conversation
deepened.

"You know what, aunt? If the Feklitus not give in, we could put together both awards; but then we
would be there and the others had theirs also, do not you think? "

"Yes, you could do," the aunt assented, "and so helped all the verses are thoughtful, as it
should be on such occasions. "

"Help you brodie then the Emmi, aunt," asked Oscar, "you know, otherwise it makes the flag
never completed, it is certainly a hundred of them away, something
else after.

"

The aunt promised their assistance. Delighted jumped on Oscar and this, for he had his Friends
quickly or happily found notice of the way with the awards and the pleasing promise to make her
aunt. But before Riki was still too words for his Frog story was already the elder sister Emmi
burst in and shouted in great excitement: "Aunt! Aunt!

They are all in the strawberries, a whole troop, nor may I? Tell
me quickly so that I can not for mom and it's urgent.

"

"Once the violets and once in the strawberries and blueberries and
over again in the in something, so it is with you, Emmi.

So go, but do not come home late. "

Emmi was already outside.

"Me too! I, too, "cried Rikli and ran to the Fort hurrying. But Emma was in two sentences down
the stairs and shouted back: "Nothing! nothing! you can not come, in the forest's beetle has
and red worms. "Rikli turned hastily, but to replace it would have it unfortunate story to
tell. But now Fred ran in with his book under Arm. He sat down at once as close as possible
to the aunt's back and opened the book. "The is good that you are there, aunt, mom can not even
listen to an end, and it is a even strange animal, I had a magnificent specimen caught. But you
do not need to just come, aunt, tomorrow I'll search again one and bring it to you. "

! 'No, no, "cried the Rikli on," say no, aunt, he jumps in the face and an almost has yellow eyes,
like a dragon, and - "

Fred had turned his empty hand a fist, it was suddenly the front of the Rikli Face and she jumped
on, ran away screaming with the baby and the door. "So now you can still "read quietly," said
Fred, satisfied with the action, put his hand on the Book and began: "The green frog or water, # # esculenta
-"

At the moment over there, the door opened, we heard footsteps and voices.

"Come," said the aunt, "we need to see the sick child leave, we return to later Frog back. "She
went to the window. On the face of the aunt was a sad expression, when she saw the child was
lifted into the car.

"Oh, how pale and sickly looks the lovely little face! You poor child! No, you poor mother! "
corrected her when her eye fell on the lady who warmly pressed the hand of the housewife, while
her tears flowed down her cheeks wide. "Oh God," sighed her aunt again. The carriage rolled
away. Fred had taken his book again, but the story of the frog could not be included, for
now came the mother and was very excited from the very experienced. She had to make the same
statement of this aunt, but this had has always lived with her through everything that moved in
joy or sorrow it. The aunt was so entirely at their house that the kids all a house without actually
aunt could not even imagine, because this was so necessary because as a mom and dad. Fred quickly
took the aunt to promise, before the moment of the call for general Retreat to the night quarters
to want to listen to the life of the frog, then He followed the instructions
of the mother, hinauszubegeben a little.

The mother then told, which low participation the strange lady, Mrs Stanhope and her sick
daughter, she instilled have. She found the delicate little creature with big blue eyes and
fine, colorless Face look as if it belonged only half of the earth. The poor mother, but could
clearly does not bear the thought, for even the first word of heartfelt sympathy, she, the doctor's
wife, had expressed her she had broken out in painful tears and sought to deceive himself with
the consolation, the trip had attacked her Nora so much that they now do so pale and translucent
look.

Now in the fresh mountain air, it will certainly soon be changed, after she had placed all their
hopes.

Unless the mother had reported that when she heard the hoofs of a
horse, she knew It was her husband who returned home from his doctor's
visits.

Immediately she went to him counter and informed him that the expected lady arrived with a sick
child was. The doctor also went up after he dismounted, again on the way to make his first
visit to the new patient. He had found an apartment, which, if it even possible in this rural
area was in line with the wishes which his friend the doctor on the Rhine, had supported the
patient and her mother.

It was late the evening the doctor came back again when the kids were already gone, but not
without that Fred had achieved its purpose. The last half hour he was constantly followed up with his book under
his arm, his aunt at every turn to the appropriate perceive moment to notice that today, as has
often required a prolonged period of time, because the aunt was once again from all siblings
also claimed, during on the one hand, the mother and the other at the same time that Kathy still
a council of their coveted.

But Fred had a lot of perseverance and he was calm today, too, resign because he had an aunt, despite
all ancillary rights to them even with all the Living conditions of the water frog, made famous.

The
doctor had now set his dinner. Mother and aunt sat next to him and its highly anticipated releases
on the young patient: their condition as have found and whether he cherished the hope, the summer
residence, the desired recovery . Bring But the doctor shook his head. "There is little hope,"
he said, "it is not Vital force in the plants. This is not to run-down forces, but the complete
absence of the same from the beginning. Whether our mountain air can do wonders, we do see,
without such help is not. "

This message approved the women very sad, for they had already seen both how difficult the
poor mother would be the separation from her child. They both still held out hope firm, the
bracing air will exert their beneficial effect on the sick child the more likely, when she was
new and strange for the same.

"Emmi is to visit the child and cheer it entertaining and" the doctor
said again, "the has always too much stuff in my head, because they
can collect something and donates under which no their favorite things
to leak, it's all in any disaster.

This essence is they bring more than to the astonishment, but certainly
not tempted to participate, so it is for both good if it goes quite
often.

"

The mother agreed, Emmi should as often as possible to visit the sick Nora, the thought the mother
herself was very fond of, they do not doubt that a friendly relationship between the children
will arise, which would be very beneficial for both. The quiet, gentle Nora could be a soothing
effect on the rapid and tumultuous nature of their Emmi exercise, and this with their fresh
and lively manner should new, happy thoughts and amusement in the uniform Life of the young patients
get.

When later, the doctor in his room all sorts of preparations for the day, mother and aunt were
sitting as usual in the great flick basket together, discussed the events the day and told each
other all the experiences they had with the kids today, and any observations they had made to
them. This was for the sisters, the only Time of day that they came to a quiet utterance, giving
them a great need was, for there were so many matters in which they lived and acted jointly.
Especially the children, with all its joys and sorrows, their desires and needs, then the patients
who came from far and near to the house, and finally all those in need of consolation and the whole
neighborhood, and came with all their afflictions to where they participate in a warm and the support
and advice were always safe. So had Mother and aunt this as on every other night so many things
to negotiate and discuss that among their busy hands the crowd of healing need socks unnoticed in
the big basket Flick mother and aunt came together and finally a late but well deserved leisure
time were happy.

Chapter Three.

In the village and the school of
Buchberg. 

The village Buchberg consisted of many scattered farms
and large and small groups of houses and cottages which peeped here
and there behind the reichbelaubten fruit trees. Near the church stood
a few houses: the school house, the house clerk, the fixed old house
of the mayor and a few smaller farm buildings. On its own, in some
Distance, the wooded hill to stand, the doctor's house. The largest
building of Buchberg but stood down from the great highway, the enormous
factory next to the spacious House of the factory owner, who himself
had erected two buildings. Between the road and the house was a very
sunny garden, where there was no tree or planted in bush because it
would have been even able to see the beautiful house from the street,
not quite. The owner this beautiful house and the factory was exceptionally
rich Mr. Bickel, who with his Woman and the only son of the lower
rooms of the house inhabited, while the top - six large, beautiful
room - was completed firmly with green, glossy blinds store. As never
came into a person than Mrs. Bickel, when they went, the dust from
the take away this beautiful furniture and admired for the occasion
with quiet solemnity. At such moments the boy was allowed to occur
about once it from his shoes the door had been forced to move out,
and it was then in the semi-darkness with a kind of devotional Chill,
staring at the unprofaned chair and chest of drawers. Mr. Bickel was
a highly respected Man in the community, for in his factory were many
large and small people work, which Mr. Bickel hinwiederum knew how
to use well. He was so zealous in his work? that every person he saw
it, if he were to use in his factory or not, and it according to this
property or the lack thereof estimated.  Cornelia suffered qualm number two.
Even to her ears, the tone of her friend's voice sounded unduly loud and nasal, and looking
from her to her late travelling companion, it appeared that to be "English" need not be invariably
a disadvantage.  Of course, Mrs Moffatt was not a good type of American; she belonged to the
class who brought that honourable title into disrepute.  How was it that she herself had hitherto
been blind to peculiarities which now aroused an instant prejudice?

"Don't you want to introduce me to your friend, dear?  I never came across such a girl.  Someone
flying around after you wherever you go!" cried Mrs Moffatt, genially, and Cornelia mumbled
the necessary words, with an unusual display of embarrassment.  She dared not look at the expression
of Guest's face, and his cool, easy voice gave no hint of his real feelings.  She turned aside
to give instructions to a porter, while her ears strained to catch every word which passed
between her companions.  Mrs Moffatt was talking about her, gushing over her, in fulsome phrases.
Cornelia this!  Cornelia that!  What business had she to use that name, anyway?  She had never
received permission to do so. It was impertinent to assume such an air of familiarity!

The three made their way together towards the luggage van, where Cornelia claimed her two big
boxes, and saw them hoisted on the top of a four-wheeler.  The elation of ten minutes back
had died a sudden death, and she felt depressed and lonesome.  Among all the crowd no one seemed
a greater stranger than this woman by her side; in comparison with her, Captain Guest appeared
an old and proven friend.  She raised her eyes to his, as the cabman busily strapped the last
box to the roof, and found his eyes fixed on her face with a very grave scrutiny.  She did
not know how pale and dejected was her own appearance, how different from the jaunty self-confidence
of an hour before; but Guest had been keen to notice the quickly succeeding expressions, and
was saying to himself: "She is upset.  Something is different from what she expected.  It's
a bad lookout for her with that terrible woman, but she must have known her before." ...

Mrs Moffatt glanced from one to the other, giggled meaningly, and stepped into the cab.  They
were alone; as much alone in the midst of the noise and confusion, as in the quiet of the railway
carriage.

"Well," said Guest, regretfully; "I suppose I must say good-bye!  I'll come round soon to see
how you are getting along, and--Miss Briskett, here is my card.--It gives the address of my
club.  If you should need me for anything, at any time, ring me up!  You will promise, won't
you? I could be with you in a few minutes."

Cornelia smiled faintly.

"Oh, thanks; I don't know about needing.  Mr Moffatt will be round to look after us, but--Norton's
my only home over here, and you seem like a bit of it!  I'll be real glad to see you."

She held out her hand to him; he held it for a moment in a tight, protective grasp, then took
off his hat to Mrs Moffatt, and turned away.  Twenty yards farther on the cab passed him, and
he caught another glimpse of the two faces; one small and white, the other heavy in outline,
and suspiciously blue-pink as to cheeks.

"Thank heaven, I came up!" said Captain Guest to himself.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

Cornelia was surprised to find that her friends were not already housed at the Ritz, but had
been staying at a private hotel, in a dull side street, where the cab called on the way from
the station, to take up a pile of luggage lying ready packed in the hall.

"The fashionable hotels are all crowded out in the season," Mrs Moffatt explained.  "We've
had our names down for ages at the Ritz, but it was impossible to get in before to-day.  I
don't know as we should have managed even now, if it hadn't been for you, dear.  It worked
wonders when we said you would be one of the party.  You don't mind having your name mentioned,
do you?  You've just got to play up to these managers, if you don't want to be put off for
ever, or poked away in a back room."

"Oh, I don't mind," said Cornelia, easily.  "If my name is of any use, use it for all you're
worth.  I shouldn't have supposed anyone would know it over here.  They don't in Norton."

"My dear, the hotel is crammed full of Americans, and any one of them would say it was poor
business to refuse the daughter of Edward B Briskett.  The connection might be worth a heap,
if you went home and allowed you were satisfied.  Silas don't count for anything--he's no push!
We might have waited for ever if it had been left to him!"

To judge by the hangdog expression of the said Silas as he came forward to greet his guest
at the door of the Ritz, the success attending his wife's manoeuvres had not inspired him with
any particular joy. Cornelia thought he looked more henpecked than ever, but he received her
warmly, and hovered round to assist with the smaller impedimenta, while his wife hurried forward
into the hotel.  Inside all was brightness and gaiety; little parties of visitors grouped here
and there about the large, light hall; obsequious clerks bowing before one, hoping that the
rooms reserved might give satisfaction; begging to be informed if any comfort were lacking;
summoning waiters to show the way to the lift. Cornelia was annoyed to notice that most of
these attentions were directed towards herself, but as Mrs Moffatt did not appear to take umbrage,
it seemed wisest to make no protest.  The mistake was not likely to occur again, for with so
many guests in the house, individual attention could not extend beyond the arrival civilities.

Tea was served in the Empire suite, which had been reserved for the party, and Cornelia hated
herself for feeling so little in sympathy with a host and hostess whose one anxiety seemed
to be to provide for her enjoyment.  From a printed list of amusements, she was bidden to make
her choice for every evening in the week; for the afternoons, river- picnics were suggested,
coaching expeditions to outlying scenes of interest, drives in the Park.  For the mornings--well,
naturally, there was just one thing to be done in the morning, and that was shopping!

"I hope you've brought up heaps of money, my dear.  You'll need it.  The things are just heavenly
this season!"  Mrs Moffatt declared, but Cornelia remained unfired.

"I've a circular note; it's all right so far as that goes, but I shan't want any more clothes
for ages!  I brought over a whole trousseau, and so far as I can see, the half will go back
unpacked.  They don't dress down at Norton--they clothe!  You've got to be covered right up
to the chin, and to work in all the blue serge you can, and that's about all there is to it.
If you fixed-up like we do at home, you'd make as much stir as the fire-engine.  I'd like to
mail a few presents, if I saw anything really new and snappy, but I shan't go near a store
for myself."

"I shall, then!" cried Mrs Moffatt, laughing.  "I got next to nothing in Paris.  The shops
over there aren't a patch on London, in my opinion, and the language puts one off.  I can't
get the hang of it, and it gets on my nerves fitting on clothes, and not being able to find
fault. You'll have to come round with me, Cornelia.  I've been waiting till you came, to decide
on heaps of things.  You've got such lovely taste. Silas wants to give me some furs, and I've
seen an emerald necklace that I'm bound to have if I'm to know another happy moment.  I've
been in twice to see it, and I guess the man's beginning to weaken.  It would pay him to let
me have it at a reduction, rather than keep it lying idle.  You shall come with me, and say
what you think it's worth; but mind, I'm to have the first chance!  You mustn't try to snap
it up.  A few hundred dollars don't matter to you one way or the other, but I've got to worry
round to make the money go as far as it will.  It's not that Silas wants to stint me; he's
not that sort, but he hasn't the balance behind him your father has!"

Silas smiled in sickly acknowledgment of his wife's consideration, fidgeted in his seat, and
finally took himself downstairs, to see about securing theatre tickets, whereupon his wife
heaved a sigh of relief, and helped herself to a fresh cup of tea.

"Thank goodness!  I ken't stand men in the daytime.  They don't take any interest in clothes
or parcels, or trying-on, but kinder hang round, looking bored and superior!  It gets on my
nerves. ...  That was a real smart-looking man you had with you to-day, dear.  Guest? did you
say-- Captain Guest?  English, isn't he?  Acts as though he'd got the patent, and everybody
else was imitation.  I rather like it myself, I don't think anything of a man who takes a back
seat."  The short, impatient little sigh was evidently dedicated to the memory of the absent
Silas. ...  "Where did you pick him up, dear?  He seems very devoted.  Anything coming on between
you?"

Cornelia's "No!" made the listener start in her seat, so loud was it, so stern, so eloquent
of displeasure.  She herself was astonished at the white heat of anger which possessed her
as she listened to Mrs Moffatt's questionings.  "Picked him up," indeed!  What insolence; what
vulgarity!  What an indignity to speak of him in such words.  Her indignation seemed almost
as much on Guest's account as her own.  A vision of his face rose before her, she seemed to
see the curl of the lip, the droop of the eyelid with which he would have greeted such an expression.

"No!  Suttenly not!  He is the merest acquaintance.  There is not even an ordinary friendship
between us.  I may very probably never meet him again."

"Is that so?" queried Mrs Moffatt, calmly.  As the Captain had himself announced his intention
of calling at the hotel, the only effect of Cornelia's violence was to deepen the impression
that there was "something in it," but she was too diplomatic to pursue the subject. Instead,
she prattled on about a dozen inconsequent topics, and finally suggested a drive in the Park
before dinner.

"It will freshen you up after your journey, and there's nothing else to do for the next two
hours.  Just ring, will you, dear, and make arrangements, while I write a few notes in my room.
A victoria, or a motor, whichever you prefer, and in about half-an-hour.  That will give us
time to prink."  She rustled out of the room, and Cornelia rang and gave the order, only too
thankful to avoid a prolonged tete-a-tete indoors.  Once again she wondered how it had come
to pass that she had become on intimate terms with this woman, who now jarred upon her at every
turn.  On board the steamer her own friends had scarcely left their state-rooms during the
voyage, and Mrs Moffatt, in a neat tweed costume, and an enveloping blue veil, had played the
part of ministering angel with much devotion, during three dreary days, when she herself had
lain on a chair in a sheltered corner of the deck; had read aloud, repeated amusing little
anecdotes about the passengers, taken her for constitutionals up and down, and even helped
her to bed at night.  When Liverpool was reached, it seemed as if they had known one another
for years.  They had kissed at parting, and mutually agreed to meet, and have a good time.

"Shucks!" cried Cornelia, mentally.  "It's that old Norton!  I've gotten so used to dowds,
that the sight of a Paris gown scares me all into fits.  I've looked forward to coming to London
all my life, and now I'm here, I'm going to enjoy myself all I know.  Now then, for the Park!
I guess that grey crepe, and the hat with the white feathers, will be about the best I can
do for the honour of the flag.  You've got to strike a balance, my dear, and plump for neutral
colours as long as you run in harness with Mrs Silas P Moffatt!"

That first drive in Hyde Park was a pleasant experience, though the trees looked grey and dusty,
after the fresh green of the country. Cornelia, like most of her sisters, had, as a first object,
to see the people, not the Park itself, and certainly they were worth the seeing. There is
no place in the world where finer specimens of humanity can be seen than in Hyde Park on the
afternoon of a bright June day.  Cornelia admired the tall, immaculately-groomed men, the dainty,
high-bred looking women, with their air of indolent grace.  They did not look as if they were
enjoying themselves particularly, but she enjoyed, looking at them, and honestly acknowledged
the presence of a certain quality unowned by herself.  "They've got a far-off look, as if they
couldn't see anything nearer than a hundred miles, and were scared to laugh, in case they might
break! ...  I guess it's what they call `breed!' Captain Guest's got it, too.  We've not much
use for that kind of thing at home, but it--counts!  If you'd been used to it all your life,
it would be a jar to step down..."

Mrs Moffatt knew a great many people by sight, and pointed them out as they drove by.  Lady
this, the Countess of that, Mrs Blank, who wrote society novels, and was noted for her taste
in dress, the beautiful Miss Dash.--"Not that I can see much beauty in her myself.  She's not
a patch on you, when you're in form!"  Cornelia felt a girl's natural pleasure in the compliment,
in the truth of which she complacently agreed.  She did not envy Miss Dash her looks, but she
did emphatically envy her her friends, particularly her male friends, who clustered around
her carriage, eager for a word.  One felt decidedly out of it, driving through a crowd of strangers,
not one of whom turned a welcoming smile in your direction, nor cared whether you came or went.
At home, Cornelia was accustomed to be in the midst of all that was going on, a central figure,
round which all the rest revolved.  She did not at all appreciate being relegated to the position
of regarding the fray from the vantage of a hired vehicle!

Cornelia craned her head to right and to left, scanning the passing crowd for a familiar face.
It seemed impossible that among hundreds of people there should not be someone whom she recognised,
and her faith was justified, for just at the bend near the Marble Arch, she had a passing glimpse
of Guest's tall figure, standing talking to two ladies, one middle-aged, the other young, and
graceful, and smiling.  They were quietly, even simply, attired, but their whole air and carriage
breathed that indefinable something which she had just struggled to define: something diametrically
different from the ostentatious display of the woman by her side.  Theoretically, Cornelia
was thankful to escape observation; in reality she felt an absurd pang of loneliness and disappointment,
as the carriage bore her out of sight.

The evening was spent at a theatre, and by eleven o'clock next morning both ladies had started
forth on one of the shopping expeditions, which seemed to constitute Mrs Moffatt's chief pleasure
in life.  They drove first of all to the jeweller's, where Cornelia was shown the emerald necklace,
a wonderful collection of stones, in an antique setting, with which she herself promptly fell
in love.  The price was excessive, even for her own deep purse, and she concluded that Mr Moffatt's
means must be even larger than she had imagined, since his wife seriously contemplated such
a purchase.  There was a good deal of bargaining, half-serious, half-joking, between Mrs Moffatt
and the very imposing- looking personage behind the counter, but fortified by the advent of
another possible purchaser, the latter steadily refused to reduce his price, and once again
Mrs Moffatt retired discomfited from the struggle.

"I know just how it will be," she cried, "I'll have to give it up, and then you'll step in,
and carry it off before my eyes!  But you've got to wait a bit, till I see what I can do with
Silas.  I'm not going to give up yet awhile."

Cornelia laughed easily.  "Oh, I'll play fair.  If you give up the idea, I daresay Poppar'd
let me have it.  He says emeralds suit me better than any other stones; but I shan't break
my heart, one way or the other." ...  Then addressing the shopman: "Have you got anything really
new and tasty for little presents?  I might as well look round while I'm here."

Then followed a delightful hour, from the shopkeeper's point of view, at least, when Cornelia
examined the contents of tray after tray, and selected "little presents" to the value of a
cool hundred pounds: an old pearl and enamel solitaire stud for her father; a hat-pin composed
of a big turquoise, and a selection of dainty, jewelled brooches and bangles for special girl
friends.

"I'll give you the addresses, and you'd better mail them from here.  I don't know how you fix
up things to travel safely from this side, but you can do all that's necessary.  I'll give
you a cheque and you needn't send them out till you see that it's all right.  I'm a stranger
to you, and can't expect you to trust me right away, but you'll find the money's there!"

"Well, I should think your name's good enough!  No one need fear trusting your father's daughter
for a few hundred dollars!"  Mrs Moffatt protested, while the shopman waxed eloquent in protestation.
Cornelia continued to write addresses on the various boxes, without troubling to answer, for
the assiduous manner in which her friend advertised her parentage was already beginning to
jar.  First to the hotel officials; then to casual acquaintances during the evening, and now
to this tradesman!  It was a disagreeable change from Norton, where the subject of money was
never mentioned, and no one seemed to care whether you were rich or poor.

The whole morning was devoted to shopping; in the afternoon the two ladies went out driving,
and returned to the hotel, to find Captain Guest's card on the sitting-room table.

"He has lost no time, anyhow!" said Mrs Moffatt, meaningly.

"He has done the polite thing.  Now he need not trouble any more," Cornelia replied.  On the
whole, she was not sorry to have missed the call.  Conversation, with Mrs Moffatt as audience,
would have been somewhat of a strain!

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

The Moffatts appeared to have few private friends in London, and to show no anxiety to add
to their number.  Though they displayed an insatiable curiosity about everything which concerned
their guest, they volunteered very little information in return, and after three days spent
entirely in their society, Cornelia knew little more about them than on the first day of their
meeting on shipboard.  A mushroom city of the West figured as "home," in occasional references;
but the wife frankly declared a hatred of domesticity, while the husband regretted that constant
travel was a necessity in his business.

Evidently the present period was one of holiday-making, for Mr Moffatt seemed to do nothing
but hang about the hotel, playing odd games of bridge or billiards with stray loafers like
himself, and being correspondingly elated or depressed as he won or lost.  On the whole, Cornelia
preferred him when he was depressed.  Exuberance of spirits is apt to wax offensive when divorced
from good taste.  At times she frankly disliked both husband and wife, and meditated an immediate
return to Norton; but as a rule she was absorbed in the interest and charm of the grey old
city, which was so unlike anything she had yet visited.  It was like turning back a page of
history, to see with her own eyes those historical landmarks, of which she had read since childhood;
to drive about looking at the names of the streets, the monuments at the corners, the great,
inky buildings.  Visitors from sunnier lands often take away from our capital an impression
of gloom and ugliness, but Cornelia's artistic sense realised a picturesque element which rose
superior to smoke and grime.  She loved the narrow, irregular streets, the Turneresque haze
which hung over the sky, even in this fine summer weather.

The City was a solemn land of work, but the West End was a fairy realm of luxury and pleasure.
Flowers everywhere, stacked up in great piles at the corners of the streets; hanging from window-boxes;
massed together in the beds of the parks.  The carriages blocked one another in the narrow
roads; the balconies were draped with awnings; gorgeously- clad flunkeys stood upon the doorsteps,
ushering in long streams of visitors.  In the City men worked for money; in the West End they
threw it away, carelessly, heedlessly, as if it had been dross.  The great hotels sheltered
hives of strangers, who admired and criticised, envied and scoffed, and flitted industriously
about on the edge of the feast; on the edge, but never actually passing over the border!

On the fourth morning of her stay in town, a note, addressed in a strange handwriting, was
brought to Cornelia, with her morning tea.  She guessed at its authorship before opening the
envelope, and reading the name "Rupert Guest," at the end of the letter.  "Rupert!"  A good
name, an appropriate name!  Strong and manly, with an old-world echo of dignity in the sound.
One could not associate this man with abbreviations or nicknames.  At work and at play, at
home and abroad, he would remain plain, unabbreviated "Rupert."  One doubted if even his own
mother ventured on a familiarity!  Cornelia read the few lines with lively curiosity:--

  "Dear Miss Briskett,--I was disappointed to miss seeing you when I
  called at your hotel on Saturday.  My aunt, Lady Seymour, is giving a
  reception to-morrow afternoon, and would be delighted to see you and
  your friends, if you have nothing better on hand.  There ought to be
  some pretty good music.  I will call at three o'clock, on the chance
  that you may care to come.--Yours faithfully, Rupert Guest."

Enclosed was a formal card of invitation, dated from Grosvenor Gate, "Miss Briskett and party"
written on the corner.

Cornelia sat banked up against her pillows, her ruddy locks framing her little face in a glory
of rippling curls and waves, her lips pursed in slow reflection.

"No-o!  I guess Miss Briskett and party would rather not!  I don't see the fun of squeezing
in among a lot of grandees, who don't want anything of us but just to quiz and stare, and make
remarks.  If he'd asked me alone, I'd have risked it, just to see how they manage their shows
over here; but he's too proper to take me without a chaperon, and ...  Well, anyway, the Moffatts
are right-down good to me, and I'll have no hand in having them snubbed!  Miss Briskett will
politely refuse, and the party won't have a chance of accepting, for they won't be told anything
about it.  I hate a fuss."

Cornelia went downstairs, deciding to write a letter before going out, and post it to the club;
but during breakfast Mrs Moffatt announced with profuse apologies that she and her husband
were obliged to devote the afternoon to visiting a friend living at some distance from town,
and must therefore leave her to her own resources.  Perhaps she would like to do a little shopping
on her own account, take a drive, or visit a gallery!  Cornelia, with a sudden rising of spirits,
guessed she could find a dozen things to do, and bade her friends feel no anxiety on her score.
She wrote no letters that morning, but sallied forth on the inevitable shopping excursion,
with a particularly gay and jaunty air, and an inclination to bubble into laughter on the slightest
provocation, at which Mrs Moffatt exclaimed in envy--

"My, what spirits you do enjoy!  I wish I could laugh like that.  Some people have all the
luck!"  She sighed as she spoke, and Cornelia, glancing at her, caught a haggard look beneath
the white veil.  It occurred to her for the first time that her hostess was no longer young.
She wondered how she would look at night, denuded of powder and rouge, and luxuriant golden
locks?  An elderly woman, thin and worn, with the crow's feet deepening round her eyes.  A
woman whose life was spent in the pursuit of personal gain, and who reaped in return the inevitable
harvest of weariness and satiety.  Cornelia was too happy to judge her harshly.  She was sorry
for her and made a point of being unusually amiable during the long hours of trailing about
from shop to shop, which were beginning to be a severe tax on her patience.  Mrs Moffatt never
seemed to make a purchase outright, but preferred to pay half a dozen visits to a shop, trying
on garment or ornament, as the case might be, haggling over the price, and throwing small sops
to the vendor, in the shape of the purchase of insignificant trifles.

Cornelia herself was tempted to buy a number of articles which she neither needed nor knew
exactly how to use, partly from want of something to do while her companion was occupied, and
partly from a sense of shame, at giving so much trouble for nothing.  Every day, also, boxes
of fineries were sent "on approval," to the hotel, so that one seemed to live in a constant
atmosphere of milliner's shop.  Cornelia wondered to what purpose was this everlasting dressing
up.  The dejected Silas could hardly count as an audience, since he was the most indifferent
of husbands, and it seemed a poor reward for so much trouble to receive the passing glances
of strangers.

"I hope when I settle down, I'll have some real interest in life.  I'll take care that I have,
too!  I'd go crazed if there was nothing more to it than hanging round stores all the time,"
said Cornelia to herself, as she bade farewell to her friends after lunch, and settled herself
with a book in the corner of the lounge, to await Guest's arrival.  She was pleased at the
prospect of meeting him again; mischievously amused at the anticipation of his embarrassment
when he found that her chaperons had fled.  It would be a delightful change to chat with him
for half an hour, and when he departed to listen to the "pretty good music," she herself would
get into a hansom and drive to Saint Paul's to listen to the wonderful boys' voices chanting
the evening service.  Cathedrals were not included in the London known to Mrs Silas P Moffatt,
but Cornelia was determined not to leave the metropolis without visiting the great temple of
the East.  After four days of pure, undiluted Moffatt, she felt mentally and spiritually starved.
It would be good to leave the world and sit apart awhile beneath the great dome...

At five minutes past three by the clock, Guest appeared in the doorway of the hotel, made an
inquiry of the porter, and was directed to Cornelia's sheltered seat.  She saw him cast a glance
over her neat, walking costume, as he approached, and naughtily determined to prolong his uncertainty.
On her own side, she honestly admired his appearance; compared him to his advantage with the
other men in the hall, and was proud to welcome him as her friend.  Her little, white face
was sparkling with animation, as she held out her hand to greet him.

"How d'you do, Captain Guest?  It's real good of you to come again so soon.  I was sorry to
miss you Saturday afternoon."

"So was I."  Guest seated himself, and deposited his hat carefully by his side.  "I waited
half an hour, and then gave it up, and went to loaf in the Park.  It's the only thing to do
before dinner."

"I saw you there, standing on the sidewalk talking to two ladies, an old one, and a young one,
as pretty as--"

"A moss rose!" he suggested quickly, and they laughed together over the remembrance.  "Were
you driving?  I wish I had seen you!  Is--er--Mrs Moffatt quite well?"

"Puffectly, thank you," said Cornelia, calmly.  She noted the quick glance around, and wondered
if he felt it compromising to sit with her alone, even in the publicity of a hotel lounge.
"We drive most afternoons, and go to the theatre every evening.  I'm having a giddy time--just
about as different from Norton as it's possible to imagine! Have you heard anything from the
Manor?  That wretched girl has never sent me as much as a postal, and I'm dying to hear what's
going on."

"No.  I've heard nothing.  I never for a moment expected that I should. Greville is too much
engaged."  Guest knitted his brows, bitched his trousers at the knee, and cleared his throat
uncertainly.  Cornelia divined that he was waiting for her to refer to his aunt's invitation,
and feeling somewhat at a loss to account for the severity of her costume.  At last the question
came out suddenly.

"Er--you got my note?"

"I did!  I thank you for it.  It was real kind of good to take the trouble.  I suppose you
had to go and ask for those invitations?"

"I asked, of course, but my aunt was delighted to give them.  It will be quite worth going
to, I think--good music, and something of a function! You would enjoy seeing the people.  I
hope you are not going to say that you can't come!"

"What makes you think that, I wonder?  Don't I look smart enough?  I'm sorry you don't approve
of my costume!"  She sat up straight in her seat; a smart little hat perched on the top of
shaded locks; a neat little stock beneath the rolled-back collar of her coat; minute little
shoes, with ridiculous points, appearing beneath the hem of her skirt. Guest looked her over
deliberately, his dark face softening into a very charming smile.

"I do!  Very much indeed!"

"Maybe it's a trifle homely, but it's best to strike a balance.  Mrs Moffatt's apt to be a
bit gaudy on these occasions."

"It is very good of her to take so much trouble.  Is--er--is she nearly ready, do you know?"

Cornelia had been narrowly on the watch for the flicker of dismay on Guest's face; it came
surely enough, but was suppressed by such a gallant effort that, to use her own vernacular,
she "weakened" at the sight.  The impish light died out of her eyes, and she said frankly--

"I guess I've been jollying all the time!  Mrs Moffatt's gone with her husband to visit a friend
who lives quite a good way out, and she won't be back before seven.  I didn't tell her of your
invitation, as her plans were made, so it wasn't worth while.  I'm `alone in London' for the
afternoon.  Sounds kinder pathetic, don't it; but I'm enjoying it very well."

"Then--er--am I to have the pleasure of taking you alone?"

Cornelia threw him a glance of tragic reproach.

"Captain Guest!  I'm surpr-iz-ed!  How dare you take advantage of my unprotected position,
to make such a suggestion?  In England young girls--nice young girls, do not go about with
young gentlemen unchaperoned.  I'm shocked at you!  I should have believed you would have been
more considerate!"

"We could start early.  I could introduce you to my aunt.  She would find some ladies, with
whom you could sit during the concert."

Cornelia made a grimace, the reverse of appreciative.

"No, thank you; I guess not!  I'm not over-fond of sitting with ladies at any time, but strange
ones are the limit.  You tell your aunt that it's real kind of her, and I vury much regret
that I don't want to go. I've fixed-up just how I'm going to spend the afternoon.  First, I'm
going to give you some coffee--the waiter's bringing it along--then, when you go off to your
crush, I shall get into a hansom and drive away into the City, to Saint Paul's.  The service
is at four.  I'll sit right by myself, and listen till that's over, then I'll go round and
see the tombs.  Quite a number of big people are buried there, I'm told."

"Saint Paul's!"  Guest's tone was eloquent of amazement.  "But why Saint Paul's, of all places
on earth?  Why not hit on something livelier, while you are about it?  There's a splendid exhibition
of paintings in Bond Street, and the Academy, of course, and the Wallace Collection-- half
a dozen shows which are worth seeing.  Why go into the City on a day like this?"

"Because I want to!  I've had four days cram full of--" She hesitated, seeking for a word that
would not incriminate her hosts--"of fuss, and I want something else for a change.  From all
I hear, Saint Paul's is a kinder big, and soothing, and empty.  You can sit and think without
being jostled up against someone else all the time.  I don't suppose there's a more sociable
creature on earth than I am myself, but every now and then I've just got to get away and have
things out by myself."

Guest sipped his coffee in thoughtful silence, glancing at Cornelia from time to time, with
eyes full of a new diffidence.  An impulse gripped him, an impulse so extraordinary that he
hesitated to put it into words. He wanted to go to Saint Paul's too; to drive beside Cornelia
through the streets, to see her face as she sat in the dim old cathedral; that softened, tremulous
face, of which he had caught a glimpse once before, the memory of which lived with him still.
When the service was over, he wanted to be her guide, to climb with her the tortuous staircase,
and look down on the ant-like figures in the streets below; to descend with her to the subterranean
vaults. ...  He, Rupert Guest, wished to visit Saint Paul's on a grilling June afternoon, in
preference to attending a fashionable rendezvous--what madness was this which possessed him?
It was rank folly; he would be ashamed to put the request into words. Pshaw! it was only the
impulse of a moment--he would never think of it again.  Then he looked at Cornelia once more,
and heard himself say, in deliberate tones--

"May I come with you?  I should not interrupt.  If you prefer, I could sit in another place
during the service, but I'd like to come. Afterwards we could go round together.  It would
be good of you to give me the chance."

"But--the reception?"

"Oh, hang the reception!  I'm not sure that I should go in any ease.  Do let me come, Miss
Briskett.  I want to.  Badly!"

Cornelia hesitated, staring at him with puzzled eyes.

"You seemed to think Saint Paul's a pretty queer choice when I mentioned it a few minutes back!"

"I did; more shame to me, I suppose; but then you explained your reasons.--I don't pretend
that I should care to go by myself, but if you take me as your companion, it might be good
for me, too. ...  Would it disturb you to have me there?" This did,
however, not so very long and did not offer as many difficulties as Clarissa fears had, for it took
place at the Margaret a very sympathetic ear to their proposals, particularly as they heard that
Mrs. Stanhope was not the only sense Elsli entirely to themselves to and take care of the
child for ever, but that it also be the parents in mind may, by giving them the help that would
have the child they can afford, otherwise wanted to replace. The Margaret had an unconcealed
joy at this unexpected good fortune for Elsli and in the benefits it offered itself. She said
Elsli to have strict Work but no power and health, and since the long approach to the Nora
it be otherwise interfere with all thoughts and all the way out of his rut, that it is not go
in more. The notice is best at doing the little boys and especially the smallest, who now cry
all day loudly that you almost lose your hearing, and earlier had It still silenced him: as well
as you take back the cradle to the hand. Sun eliminated the Marget and Clarissa in great peace
and agreement, and the latter promised that perhaps once a year Elsli should be returned to
his homeland.

In the shortest time in the village was the news spread that Elsli range from Mrs. Stanhope had been
adopted and with it tomorrow after their beautiful farm on the Rhine going away. The message
has produced a tremendous impression. Where two encountered each other by the way, they stopped
to discuss the happiness that so unexpected given the Elsli was. The kids at school were so excited
no longer sit still, it was than they expected all of this stroke of luck something unheard
of. Even Mr. Bickel was caused by the event to another unusual step. He took his stick to
Hand and said: "Woman, it sends is that we now make a visit of Mrs. Stanhope and show her that
the child because it also has the right relatives. Maybe she needs also a council concerning
the child, because I'm her man can be, lady, that we a visit to relatives make when they are
at home then - as it is showing in their Large area mills - and perhaps the woman Stanhope
relations with such houses, because there would be something to do for the business. "But Mr.
Bickel had his stick again stand up, as soon as his wife was not reached in the state of perfection,
in which alone she made such a visit.

The greatest excitement and joy reigned over the event but in the
house of the doctor.

Mother and aunt were full of praise and thanks that the tender child to come in so friendly
and hands it should go to him twice as well. It was indeed now a whole new life ahead of him,
what could be made now from the malleable child! They had to constantly talk about it. The Children
had no other thoughts.

Oscar walked around all day in deep thought, he went to the point from where he new event for
his plans could exploit. There was the Oscar constantly heavy on the Mind that the beautiful
flag brodierte remain unused and are not fixed in any View should be, which required the application
of the glorious flag entirely.

In a similar state of reflecting and striving for the Emmi ran the day by going back and forth
and the wily Fred said a few times when she came near him: "She has something in mind." He
sat on the day some time in a working depth at the table. It was a long, long list of the names
of all those caterpillars, beetles and snails, which he described as residents the Rhineland
and their environments knew.

To the sake of clarity, he was always also the Latin name of the animal next to the German way.

That evening Elsli sat on the long bench in the room, you could not do it To see because the
middle of it sat on the solid Hanseli, and on either side sat the
Heirli and Rudi, everyone, no matter how far down the Elsli when he
found the place.

It was quite patient to almost overwhelm, so it was the last evening, for a long time the last
time that the three on he would sit.

Elsli now knew well what would happen to him, and he was delighted. The good Clarissa had in the
short time the child's heart so completely won, that it was her was how to keep a mother and
her could speak so full of confidence, as only with Nora, with no one else was able to talk.
It wanted to move away with her and stay with her, and when he and Mrs Stanhope still quite
inspired awe, it was indeed the mother of Nora and Elsli was why her very affectionate, even
they had always been good to him, just not as confidential as it was Clarissa. But be his future
life will, of which could Elsli feel remote, and quietly came to him already an anxious thought:
how will it then be, if it was so far away was, and whether it also could do everything right,
what does it have to do then. But it had the solid Believe that Nora would lead it there, and
that gave him hope and joy to the heart. But on the departure but it had a little grief and
those still in the very thought of Fani, from which it came off now so far and it might not see
for years should be.

How Elsli so in his mind sitting there and not even noticed that the already long Hanseli Time impatient
with hands and feet were thrashing about, suddenly the Emmi come
running into the room.

»Elsli she called out already at the door," tomorrow you are going,
I need you to say something important.

Parking but the Hanseli on the floor and come with me quickly! "

"He shouts, objected Elsli.

Already he had begun. But the Emmi inspired the a no terror.

It noted the Hanseli on the ground and pulled away Elsli, beyond around the house and behind the
big apple tree.

"Here, now Emmi said," you have to take, Elsli "and she held out a thick roll contrary, "and
now I want to tell you something.

You see, on your journey you will also Basel, which I heard - ".

"You think," she interrupted Elsli with shining eyes.

"Yes, yes, it is sure," continued Emma, ​​"and now, you know, the woman Stan Hope you have nothing
say it is now so sad that she is not listening, but the wife Clarissa, which is so good you
have to tell that there Fani in Basel, and that you like him wanted to say goodbye. Then she goes
with you some speed to it, and then you give him this from me and say, I will greet him, and
here's his address. "

"Oh, I'm so glad you've told me, Emmi said, Elsli, and a great pleasure shone in his eyes. "Do you
think also that I may say so?"

"Certainly you have to do it, for sure, think how it will please the Fani! Promise that you
do certainly want to do - ".

Elsli could promise nothing, just got the Oscar came running and took
it right at hand: "I've searched everywhere, Elsli," he said hurriedly,
"Now I find you at last!

Come with me, I have to tell you something, "He pulled the Elsli
readily gone, and again around the house and behind the Haselnußhecke,
where he stopped.

Emmi not followed, it was better not to irritate even the Oscar. Since they all just pencils
had gathered in the house and taken away for Fani, including all white paper, the her and the brothers
to their different purposes and pass always gone too fast was, she looked forward to an outburst
of anger in any case on the part of the brothers.

"Now listen, Elsli what I tell you," Oscar said urgently, "it is for
you very important.

You see, now you come to another country and there you are then first alien. But It then has
been even in the Swiss city, and since you can then set up a club, a father, country club,
because then you come along once every week and talk SE of all in his country - ".

"Yes, but I know then certainly nothing" to say Elsli threw something fearful in between.

is "the same, other then talk on," Oskar drove away eagerly, "but now listen to the Main thing.
Next summer, if you then allowed to come home because you have all the members, that will then also
arrange a place where you want to get together then, because then the Founder's Day celebration.
Then you get to partake of all sides, and I come with a beautiful flag, and there is a huge
celebration with a parade. Write me then; when the club is founded. "

"Yes, I will soon, said Elsli a little timidly, for it was still not
clear before him, who would establish the association.

However it could do no more questions, for just Fred came storming
so with a long sheet of paper in his hand, panting after him the Rikli.

Oskar went his way.

»Elsli, come on, read," cried the now Fred, "Look, all these beautiful
and rare tracks Beetle and the snail, which will see you all down
there, on the Rhine and in the neighborhood.

You just have to walk ever crawl into the bushes and everywhere a little aufscharren the ground,
then get the guys out already, and then you send me all the copies, you can begin, right? I'll
send you something nice back then.

You can just all stuck by each other in the bag until you are home
from a walk, and then so keep your hand on top of that they do not
crawl out in the meantime, you see, just as I always do, "and Fred
spread his hand, for example, far out of his pocket, as if it wanted
all crawl out underneath.

The Rikli shuddered over and over.

Elsli wanted so much to the Fred do you a favor, but the job he was not much clearer, than that
of Oscar, and said humbly: "I certainly like it was going to do, Fred, but what must I do it
because that I know the bugs and caterpillars, the so-called?

"

This was a completely clear objection. Fred realized the truth of this obstacle, but he was not the
man to retreat as soon obstacles.

He looked at his bow. If he hinzeichnen per name the animal would then paint? Right!

"Tomorrow morning, before you leave, I come again," he cried, and rushed away.

The Rikli, who had paid so dearly his teaching cried, really never to make sense when of Fred
with a little animal approached, but it is carefully guarded all
the movements of his brother, that not even unexpectedly from his
own pocket a green-eyed frog or jump towards him.

But without the Rikli Fred could not be, he ran everywhere. Now he is removed, it had quickly
stepped up to be Elsli and said emphatically: "But not alive, the
many terrible bugs and snails, have only to send you stuffed it, you
know, Elsli.

"

At that moment the Feklitus striding up in their Sunday best. At the same time rang mother's voice
from the room out where the Hanseli cries incessantly in his persisted:
"It takes me only wonder Elsli whether you today ', also once again
bring in the house are!

"

The Rikli ran away. The Feklitus but had already packed Elsli by the arm and held it firmly,
"I must make a visit to the Oak Ridge in the strange woman and say that I 'm your cousin and that
we then want to see you again down there on the Rhine, "growled he, "but I do not go alone,
which embarrasses me, you have to."

"Let me go, you hear it, yes, I have to enter the house, I can not
with you," said the Elsli sought and free himself.

"You must," cried the Feklitus, grasped more firmly, and pulled the Elsli with violence like
this, because something so unusual not only took the Feklitus.

Oscar, Emma, ​​Fred and Riki all received the same reception as it as one by one home run came.
On the steps of the house was the Kathy and called one by one with a wave of gesture to "Bsch! BSCH!
Do not make such a noise! The woman is inside Stanghopf and says goodbye. "

Elsli was from the contracts and impressions of the evening and the thought of the following
Tomorrow so full that his eyes could not sleep in this last night in their parents home, and
drove like a dream early in the morning following the baby in with
the two women the big car sitting by the still very quiet landscape
of the main road.

                                 At once flew a large folded paper, weighted
with a stone, in addition to not fall in the coach inside.

"Goodbye, Elsli, I wish I could with" tinted to it from the side. It was Fred, of his work had
not become more ready and in the morning or the last screw was painted and now has his bow
only in this way over to the Elsli.

This last brought the greeting Elsli the tears in his eyes. Now it clearly felt at once, that
from the home and away far, far away moved. The good Clarissa had seen everything, they took
Elsli friendly by the hand and held it so that it could feel, it took continued with a nut.
-

The next ten days were all the words and thoughts of four siblings with the events Last week,
employed by the arrival of Nora sick up to the journey of Elsli, and if all the related facts
looked at from all sides and were talked through thoroughly, then they started all over again.
On the tenth day, a large Letters to the Elsli, who brought a new movement in society. Mother
and aunt saw to request the message counter. The children put their heads on all four of the
letter together, each sought to know first what was in it. It was addressed to Emmi. You withdrew from
the ball, opened the letter and said, "I will read it! Eight Pages it is long, "Then she began
to read!:

»Linde dump on the Rhine, 28 Sept. 18 -. "My dear!

"I thank you a thousand times that you have given me good advice, because if you it to me had
not said so, I should never have to say a word of Fani.

"Now I want to start forward, to tell you all: When Fred told me not goodbye and had I left it
all I had to cry a little. But Aunt Clarissa - for now I will always say> Aunt Clarissa <- was
very good with me, saying, friendly to me and told me to always tell her just everything that
makes me sad, we do it then take another. Mrs. Stanhope had closed
my eyes and lay quite still in the corner, and I thought she was asleep
a little, and then I thought I was on anything like equal say with
the Fani, as you had told me, and I did. The aunt Clarissa knew nothing
of the Fani, nor that he was alive. As told I told her everything,
how it had gone with him and how long I had not seen him. Then she
said the same, of course I had to see my brother yet, we have time
in Basel, as we travel no further today. And she said she would then
have to go with me, the Fani visit, Mrs. Stanhope will allow us much.
When we arrived in Basel, we went in such a great pub, as I had seen
before. I could hardly eat anything with joy that I could now go to
the same Fani. Now it was three clock. Immediately after the Eating
said Aunt Clarissa to Mrs. Stanhope, if she was right, we go together
now, my brother to visit. She said she will not stay alone, they come
with us. We went over a long bridge over the Rhine and then yet a
long way. Finally we came to small Houses, because we asked the painter
Schulz. We stood just outside his house. Woman Stanhope went ahead
and opened the door and entered the shop and we came back her ago.
As did the Fani a loud cry of joy, and came to the woman Stanhope
been skipped and she clung with joy and her eyes full of tears all
over, because he had terrible had the homesickness, and now he saw
someone who came from home. Then he saw the first time that I was
also there, as he was still happy. But he was running with joy again
to Mrs. Stanhope back and not at all embarrassed in front of her,
but you know it already, Fani has never embarrassed, he could always
say everything. And he again embraced the woman and called Stanhope:
> Oh, thank God that I see someone from home! "'You can not imagine
how friendly Stanhope was the woman to him.

"That was one for him.  He looked kinder small when he saw your name on the cheque.  It's real
sweet of you, dear, and Silas will pay up like a lamb when you are the creditor.  He won't
show his temper to you, as he would to me.  You are a stranger, you see, and I'm only his wife."

There was an accent of bitterness in the speaker's voice, and she leant her head on her hands,
in an attitude of profound dejection.  Cornelia had never before been the witness of so abandoned
a mood, but her ideas of loyalty were too much outraged to permit of sympathy.  She held her
head erect, and her voice sounded cold and distant.

"I'd just as soon not hear any more about Mr Moffatt, if you don't mind.  He's been very kind
to me, and it's not my business how he behaves.  I guess a good many men get crusty when the
bills come in, and you're a pretty expensive wife.  I should think you'd get tired of prowling
about those stores!"

Mrs Moffatt flushed, and bit her lower lip, not attempting to defend herself, but staring before
her with weary, vacant eyes.  It was a welcome diversion when a waiter entered the room carrying
a tray with tea and refreshments, and Cornelia waited on her hostess with an attention which
was intended to mitigate her late severity.  Although a fuller acquaintance of Mrs Moffatt
had increased neither liking nor respect, it had developed a sincere pity for a woman whose
life was barren of purpose, of interest, apparently of love also.  It was not in Cornelia's
nature to see anyone suffer and not try to help, and if it had been her own mother on whom
she was waiting she could not have shown more care and consideration.  A table was placed by
Mrs Moffatt's side, tea was made with exact remembrance of her preferences; a cushion was brought
from a sofa to put behind her back, and a footstool placed ready for her feet.  It was while
she still knelt to put the stool in position that the elder woman at length broke silence.

"See here, Cornelia!" she cried suddenly, "I mayn't have another chance of talking to you quietly
before you go, and there's something I want to say. ...  You are young, and rich, and pretty,
and strong, and you've had a good time all the way through.  Your Poppar spoils you, and you've
got just to wish for a thing, and it's there right along.  I'm glad of it, for you're a real
sweet girl, but, don't come down too hard on other people! ...  It's a pretty queer world when
you compare one person's luck with another!  I'm not going to tell you all I've come through,
but it's not been too easy.  At times I've been to blame, and at times I haven't.  I don't
know as it makes much difference anyway-- the end's the same.  Seems to you I'm a pretty poor
thing, but you don't know how you'd have been yourself, Cornelia, if you'd come along the same
road.  You've got to remember that, before you judge!"

"That's so!" assented Cornelia, gravely.  She was too "straight" to deny an insinuation which
was all too true, but at the same time she felt an acute regret and embarrassment in the thought
that a woman so much older than herself should feel it necessary to make such a confession
of unworthiness.  "I ought to be a heap better than I am, for there isn't anyone living that's
had a better time.  We've had spells when Poppar's had bad luck, and the money's been short,
but we were as happy as grigs planning out how we'd spend the next pile.  So long as you can
get along, it doesn't matter much about the extras, when you're as happy together as we are,
Poppar and I."

Mrs Moffatt sighed once more.

"I never knew my parents.  They died when I was a baby, and I was raised among strangers, who
put up with me for the sake of the pay.  Love never came my way, somehow.  I suppose some folks
would say that was my own fault.  There was a man I could have cared for, but he didn't want
me, and I married Silas for a change; to get away from the dull old life. ...  You be careful
who you marry, Cornelia!  You're the sort of girl who does things pretty thoroughly either
way; there's no middle course for you.  You're bound to be either blissful or wretched.  You've
got enough money of your own, so you can afford to choose.  Lucky girl!--Is it going to be
that Captain Guest?"

"Suttenly not!"  Cornelia rose to her feet, and walked back to the tea- table, very stiff in
the back, and pink in the cheeks.  She was angry with herself for blushing, and the fact naturally
made her blush the more.  "I told you before that we have only met once or twice, and more'n
half the time has been taken up in quarrelling.  We are too different ever to run together
in double harness."

"Well--I'm sorry!  He's got lots of frills, but he looks the right sort all the same.  I'm
sorry.  You ought to have a good man, Cornelia."

Mrs Moffatt pushed aside her half-finished cup of tea, and rose wearily to her feet.

"Well, I guess I'll go and dress.  We'll have some champagne for dinner, and that will perk
us up for the theatre.  They say it's a real good play, and we shall only be together two more
nights, so I want you to have a good time.  It seems mean not to ask you to stay on, but our
plans are all uncertain.  We may be off ourselves any time now.  Silas never settles down for
more than a few days."

Cornelia gave the politely inaudible murmur usual on such occasions. Much as she had enjoyed
the stay in town, she could not pretend to regret the prospect of returning to Norton.  Later
on she would make a longer visit to town, in Poppar's company, but even if the invitation were
given she could not consent to remain any longer the guest of Mrs Silas P Moffatt.  She was
a woman whom it was impossible to respect, and to Cornelia, respect was a necessary foundation
to friendship.  Silas did not count!  He was "a little misery," to be regarded only as an adjunct
to his wife.  She was even surprised to hear that he was capable of exhibiting ill-temper.
In any case, it seemed to be short-lived, as dinner found him in his usual place, and then
and throughout the evening he was, if anything, a trifle more animated than usual, thanking
Cornelia warmly for helping his wife out of an awkward position, and regretting that in the
rush to the theatre there was not time to discharge the debt forthwith.  "But we must settle
up after breakfast to-morrow.  Short accounts make long friends!" he declared smilingly, as
he helped her to put on her cloak.

Cornelia had dressed with a vivid remembrance of the fact that Captain Guest had never seen
her in evening attire, and a determination to secure "a big moment," for his benefit.  When
an hour or two later he stood at the entrance to the stalls, and caught sight of her seated
in the centre of the front row, it seemed at first sight that she was clad entirely in black,
but even as he was applauding the choice for the display of ruddy locks and snowy shoulders,
she made a sudden movement, and lo! the black was transformed into vivid, glittering green.
Now she was conspicuous--too conspicuous, to please his fastidious taste.  He could see opera-glasses
levelled on her from the boxes overhead, and over the edge of the dress circle.  She sat well
forward in her stall, with head thrown back, and eyes fixed upon the stage, in absorbed attention.
There was no doubting the unconsciousness of the pose; she was as oblivious of the gaze of
others as of his own presence, but he felt an irritated longing to muffle her in veils and
wrappings; to lift her up and transplant her to the back seat in a box.  What business had
those idiots to stare at her, as if she were one of the actresses on the stage?  He branded
the idiots with even stronger titles, the while he continued to follow their example.  Surely
it was a forgivable sin to be conspicuously attractive; to stand out, vivid and dazzling, from
the surrounding throng, whose chief characteristics seemed to be a bleached inanity, and indifference...

Guest stood in the shadow, his deep-set eyes fixed on the girl with unblinking scrutiny.  He
remembered that such a gaze was said to demand a response where a certain amount of affinity
existed between the people involved, and put out his strength to try the truth of the statement
in his own case.  The proof came almost startlingly soon.  Cornelia's head turned over her
shoulder, and her eyes lightened with a flash of recognition.  She smiled at him, nodded her
head, and arched her brows, signalling a message, which he could easily divine to be an invitation
to come to speak to her between the acts.  When the curtain fell, Mr Moffatt made an immediate
rush for the door, and Guest took possession of his seat, devoutly thankful that it did not
happen to adjoin that of the other lady of the party.

"I'm very pleased to meet you again!  Seems quite a good time since we parted," said Cornelia,
gaily.  Her hair stood out round her head like a halo of gold, her eyes shone like stars, her
cheeks were softly pink. Guest was dazzled by the bizarre beauty of her.  She wore no jewels,
not so much as a chain round her neck, and the dress by some witchery was black once more,
a thin black gauze, heavily jetted.  He pointed at it with a curious finger.

"I could have sworn it was green over there!  What has happened to turn it into black?"

Cornelia laughed complacently.

"It's meant to change!  There are skirts and skirts: ever so many of them, on top of each other,
and each one is different.  They all get a chance at times.  It's the vury latest craze.  Mrs
Moffatt nearly killed me when she saw it."

"A chameleon effect.  I see!  Is it supposed to be symbolic?"

"Of me?  I guess not!  When I've made up my mind, I stick!  There's no chopping about for this
child!"

It was extraordinary how illusion vanished at the sound of the high- pitched, nasal voice.
The fairy princess vanished, and in her place sat a flesh-and-blood damsel, composed, complacent,
and matter-of-fact. Guest felt again the intrusion of a jarring note.  He would have liked
Cornelia to welcome him with a flutter of embarrassment, to have seen her eyes droop before
his, and hear a quiver in her voice.  He wanted to realise that he was the natural head and
protector, and she the woman, the weak, clinging creature, whose happy destiny it was to be
the helpmeet of man; but as Cornelia herself would have phrased it, there was "no cling to
her."  It seemed ridiculous to think of protection in connection with a creature so jauntily
self-satisfied and independent.

He sat by her side until the conclusion of the interval, but the conversation was forced and
uninteresting, and he rose to depart with the depressing consciousness that the interview had
been a failure, since it left him less in sympathy with Cornelia than he had been in the afternoon.

On his way to the door, Guest's eyes caught the signal of a warning fan, and he looked up to
see one of the boxes occupied by a party of his own friends.  He had been too much occupied
with Cornelia to look around the audience, but now it was impossible to leave the theatre without
going upstairs a few minutes.  After the ordinary greetings, complaints of the heat, and comparisons
of engagements, followed the inevitable question--

"Who is Miss Rossetti?"

"I beg your pardon?"

"Your friend in the stalls.  The girl with the wonderful hair?"

"She's an American--a Miss Briskett.  Over from the States on a short visit.  I met her lately
down in the country, and we happened to strike the same week for a visit to town."

"Lucky for you!  I've been admiring her all night.  That hair and skin, and the glittering
black-green frock!  Quite bewitching!  Where is she staying?"

"At the Ritz, with some people she met coming over.  She knows no one over here."

The good lady's interest appeased, she turned back to the stage, fluttering her fan to and
fro.  Attracted by its movement, or by the glances focussed upon her, Cornelia tilted her head
upwards, recognised Guest, and whispered to her companion.  Mr Moffatt's eyes travelled obediently
towards the box, to fasten, not on Guest but on the man by his side.  For a moment they widened
in unmistakable recognition, before, of set purpose, as it were, they grew blank and lifeless.
He bowed slightly to Guest, and turned back to the stage.

The man by Guest's side laughed drily, and followed him out into the corridor.

"Look here, Guest," he said shortly, "if that girl is a friend of yours, and is staying in
a hotel here with those people, you'd better advise her to get away as soon as possible!  That
man's a bad egg.  I ran up against him in Marienbad last year.  He and his wife made the hotel
too hot to hold them, and were politely requested to leave.  There was nothing definite proved,
but too many shady things to be pleasant.  He had an extraordinary facility for winning at
cards, and the fair Mrs Schuter--by the way her hair was brown at that time--"

"These people are called Moffatt!  Perhaps you are mistaking them for somebody else!"  Guest
interrupted eagerly: but he knew the futility of his hope before he heard the reply.

"No doubt they have half a dozen aliases!  What does it matter what they choose to call themselves.
You saw for yourself that the man recognised me just now.  Sorry to interfere, you know, and
all that, but I'd be nailing sorry to leave any girl I knew in such a caravansary.  Thought
I ought to tell you!"

"Thanks very much!  You are perfectly right.  I'll send her off to- morrow," said Guest, firmly.
As he walked down the steps again he was smouldering with fury, with an impulse to walk into
the theatre, denounce the adventurers to their faces, and bear Cornelia away to a place of
safety.  For all her assurance, events had proved that she was neither capable of taking care
of herself, nor of choosing her own companions.  She had been led away by impulse, like other
girls; he liked her the more, not the less, for the discovery, and his heart softened at the
thought of her disillusion.  No use to worry her to- night!  Let her have a good night's rest,
and to-morrow morning, bright and early, he would go round to the hotel, when Mr and Mrs Schuter,
or Moffatt, or whatever their name happened to be, would once more find their quarters too
hot to hold them!

CHAPTER TWENTY.

On returning to the hotel that evening, Mr Moffatt announced that he and his wife had business
on hand next morning, which would necessitate an early breakfast, and that once again they
would be obliged to leave Cornelia to her own resources.  He suggested, however, that they
should all meet at Paddington Station at two o'clock, whence they could take train to Maidenhead
for an afternoon on the river.

Cornelia hailed the prospect with delight, and mentally dedicated the morning to doing a picture-gallery,
and to choosing a suitable present for her aunt and Elma Ramsden.  Aunt Soph should have lace;
something soft, and smooth, and womanly, to take the place of the prickly steel trimmings which
seemed to constitute her one idea of adornment.  Elma, dear thing, what should be chosen for
her?  Not clothes; it would not be good taste to offer another gift of the kind; a piece of
jewellery would be best; something good and quiet, and unobtrusive, suitable for the wear of
"a nice young girl."

Cornelia chuckled to herself in prospective enjoyment next morning, as she repaired to the
private sitting-room of the suite, where breakfast was invariably served.  Her host and hostess
had already risen from the table and were dressed for walking.  Mrs Moffatt stood before the
window looking down into the street with a pale and worried expression. Her husband was scribbling
at a side table, but jumped up at Cornelia's entrance, as if he had been anxiously awaiting
her appearance.

"Ah, good-morning, Miss Briskett!  We are just off, but I wanted to settle up with you first.
Here's the cheque, with many thanks!  Perhaps you will kindly look over it, to see it is all
right."

"Oh, Mr Moffatt, you should not have troubled when you were so hustled. It's too good of you!"
cried Cornelia, eagerly, her heart warming to the little man for a promptitude in money matters
which reminded her of her own beloved Poppar.  "Of course it's all right!"  She cast a casual
glance over the cheque, and broke into a surprised laugh.  "It isn't, though!  You've paid
me too much!  I guess I'm not a usurer, to want interest for a single night. 

The hunter in him woke up. He was inebriated, excited, as soon come to the right track to have the
game to feel very close to fire now. His eyes were shining, the blood flew it easily through
the veins of the speech he gushed, he knew not how, from the lips. He was, as every strong man
erotic assessed twice as good, twice himself when he knew that he liked women, as some actors
are only ardent, if the Listeners feel the ground breathing before them under the spell. He
was always a good one, with sensual Images have been gifted storyteller, but today - he drank
a few glasses of champagne in between, he had ordered in honor of the new friendship - he surpassed
himself, he told by Indian hunting parties, which he joined as host of a high aristocratic English
friend attended, had wisely choosing this topic because it was indifferent, and he felt the other
hand, like all exotic and unattainable for them excited this woman. But he who so charmed this
was especially Edgar, whose eyes blazed with excitement. He forgot to eat, drink and stared at
the narrator's words off the lips. He never was hoping someone to really see who had experienced
this tremendous things of which he in his books las, the tiger hunts, the brown people, the
Hindus and the Dschaggernat, the terrible Wheel that buried thousands of people in his spokes.
So far he had never thought of that there are such people really exist, any more than he believed
the country of fairy tales, and this Seconds blew in it to any great feeling for the first
time. He was the view from not contact his friend, staring with molded breath on his hands as hard
in front of him, the a tiger had killed. As soon as he dared to ask something, and then his
voice was feverish excited. His quick imagination he always conjured up the image to the stories,
he saw the friend up on an elephant with purple saddle pad, brown men on the right and left with
precious turban and then suddenly the tiger with its teeth bared from the Jungle sprang forward
and struck the elephant's paw in the trunk. Now, tell the Baron even more interesting, how crafty
elephants were caught by by old domesticated animals young, wild and spirited persisted in the
crates: the child's eyes sparkled Fire. As said - it was, would fall as flashing a knife in front
of him - the mother suddenly with a view to the Clock "= Neuf heures! Au lit! = "

Edgar was pale with fright. For all children is sent to bed-to-be a terrible Word because it is
the most obvious humiliation before the adults for them, an admission
the stigma of childhood, the small one, the child's bedroom need.

But how terrible was such a disgrace in this most interesting moment when she such outrageous things
was missed.

"Just one more, Mom, and hear about the elephant, only let me!"

He wanted to remembered to start begging, but quickly to his new dignity
as an adult.

He ventured only a single attempt. But his mother was now remarkably strict. "No, It is already
late. Go up only! = Sois say, Edgar .= I'll tell all the stories already the Baron exactly.
"

Edgar hesitated. Otherwise, his mother always accompanied to bed. But he would not beg before
his friend. His childish pride wanted to finish this miserable still a semblance of Volunteer
rescuers.

"But really, Mom, are you telling me everything, everything!

That of the elephant and everything else!

"

"Yes, my child."

"And now! Today! "

"Yes, yes, but just go to
sleep now.  So long as she was there, it's all right," Cornelia
replied, turning over the tray of ornaments absently.  It seemed odd that Mrs Moffatt should
have returned to the hotel after representing that she was obliged to be absent all morning,
but no doubt some engagement had fallen through which she had intended to keep.  She had lifted
a brooch in her hands and turned towards the window to examine the colour of the pearls, when
the jeweller spoke again.

"We were delighted to receive your agreement to take the necklace, for, as Mrs Moffatt had
definitely decided that it was beyond her figure, we were on the point of sending it over to
our Paris house.  I am sure Mr Briskett will not regret this purchase when he sees the quality
of the stones."

Cornelia stood stock-still, staring hard at the little pearl brooch, a hundred vague doubts
and dreads which had previously been resolutely thrust aside, darting back into her mind with
a new and terrible significance.  She felt stunned and bewildered, but the predominant sensation
was the necessity for caution.  She must be certain of what had happened before she presumed
to judge.  She rallied all her self- possession, and was surprised at the natural sound of
her own voice as she replied--

"What makes you speak of my father, Mr Marchant?  Did I mention to you at any time that he
was fond of emeralds?"

"I believe you did on one occasion, but it was your reference this morning to which I alluded."
Mr Marchant drew out his pocket-book and selected one letter from the contents.  "This is it,
I think.  Yes!  You say--`I have just received a cable permission from my father, Mr Edward
B Briskett, to purchase the emerald necklace.'  I was referring to this quotation, rather than
any casual remark."

Cornelia leant over the counter and read the words with her own eyes; saw the signature of
her own name written below in Mrs Moffatt's handwriting.

"Why, of course!  I forgot.  I never do remember what I write," she said calmly.

She was sure now; there was no longer any reason for doubt!  The everlasting shopping expeditions;
the purchase of a succession of worthless trifles; the exploiting of her own wealth, had all
been designed to create a confidence which would prepare the way for such a coup as the present.
And this morning she had been deliberately decoyed out of the way, while the last scene of
the comedy was enacted. The messages were plainly a ruse, while the different rendezvous would
have provided a further detention, allowing the conspirators plenty of time to decamp.

Once opened, Cornelia's eyes were wonderfully keen.  She understood now why the goods which
it was inconvenient to harbour in a hotel had been constantly despatched to the keeping of
"a friend."  She realised that she had been cheated--doubly cheated--in first giving a cheque
for two hundred pounds, and afterwards in counting out change for a worthless return.

"I need never fancy myself again after this!  I'm just the greenest peach on the wall!" she
told herself furiously, but through all the anger and shock, the necessity for caution remained
predominant in her mind.  Mr Marchant must not suspect that anything was wrong.  Even now,
at the eleventh hour, the fraud might be prevented.  She must get back to the hotel at once;
see Mrs Moffatt and reason with her, argue with her, command her to hand over the jewels! 
The woman was not all bad, and life had gone hardly with her.  She should have another chance!
Cornelia waived aside all thought of responsibility toward the jeweller himself, by the easy
decision to pay for the necklace if necessary, but a sudden feeling of helplessness weighed
upon her at the prospect of the interview ahead.

Suppose Mr Moffatt were at the hotel with his wife!  Then there would be two to one, and once
the outer veneer was broken through, there was no saying to what extremes of abuse, of threatening,
even of violence itself, they might descend.  Cornelia recalled the two faces; the woman's
hard, sullen, coarse; the man's mean and crafty, and shuddered at the prospect.

All at once the thought of Guest occurred, to bring with it a wave of relief.  Guest had begged
her to summon him if at any time he should be needed; now the need had arisen, and he should
help her through.

She hastily selected a pearl bangle and laid it on one side on the counter.

"I will decide on that!  Let your man bring it round at five o'clock, and ask to see me personally.
He can bring a bill made out for all I owe, and I'll settle at once.  And, Mr Marchant, I want
to use your telephone!  Can you ring and have me switched on to the Army and Navy Club?"

While the preliminary operations were going on at the telephone, Cornelia racked her brain
to think of a suitable rendezvous, and failing a better suggestion, decided on a tea-shop exactly
across the road.  To her immense relief, Guest was found at his club, and announced that he
would be with her in ten minutes' time, so that there was nothing to do but to dismiss the
hansom, and secure a table in a quiet corner. He
has now forgotten a little, since he is a gentleman, but that is me no matter I do, as I'm used
to, and if I see him, I say:> Good day, cousin, 'And if He then reversed a little, as if he had
heard nothing, and after me so welcome, he hardly knew quite what my name, that's his thing.
All right, that he Fani knows so well and he has in mind, so you can soon hope for a chunk
of money, it is certainly necessary. "

Now the doctor's wife went and brought the bag, the Elsli left there and in the various Garments had
been placed, and handed him over to the woman.

"But it thinks it, Margaret," she said, as this was getting ready
to go out, "protects the child, where you can, I promise, I'll help,
too happy when I can.

"

"So much I remember it, I will do so," promised to Marget, but added was the same: "You have
to understand, but I suppose that I have my work to, and it must be reported with the Boys
are ready, as it can. Now we are all healthy, and yet it needs all hands that only one in his
bit of food every day that. What can I help a lot? If once again disease into the house, just
as it did, there must indeed every turn was very different. Can I change it? Me's first strikes.
It just no one knows how the poverty of not doing, gone through this,
and I have to sometimes think: Our Lord God are not his children all
equally dear.

"

"No, must not Marget that you" think the doctor's wife said in a gentle tone, for the was difficult
lives of poor people it much to heart. "There are many other diseases besides poverty, which
can hurt even more bitter.

The good Lord must know why they come to us need.

But I also know that poverty is bitter, and it is difficult for me enough that I everywhere
can not help, as I like. "

The Margaret was now working her bag and left.

With a heavy heart, the mother came back into the room, she felt that still Elsli lugging around
his burden and that had the baby with the slender bodies would not bear it long. She sat down
next to her aunt with a sigh to her at the to lay down suppressive
impression it from the words of Margaret, Elsli concerning had received.

The aunt had also always some comforting thoughts and an exhilarating
Views in all difficult situations in life.

But before Emmis still flowing Communications were subdued and could
begin his mother, Kathy, the head stuck to the Door and called in,
"Mrs. Keller, you have to come out, because it is yet another"!

"A! Who, Kathy, "asked the doctor's wife with a gentle reproach. "Who is it?"

"Yes, if a man could keep those names," returned the Kathy.

"Is it about Mrs. Stanhope, which you are so let out," asked the aunt.

"Especially, the's," confirmed Kathy and continued angrily: "If they would Hopfstange, we might
be still some are thinking, but so turned on its head, no man can a name. "From the moment
but keep the Kathy knew the name of the lady very precisely because
the image of the hop pole, standing on his head was, you now always
the same to mind.

The mother was gone, and Mrs. Stanhope had led to good rooms. This came to the woman doctor
to ask whether she could give her a young messenger, and her the many little things that we
always needed, to get a couple of times a day would come, as the
Maid impossible so much could be on the road.

It would be perhaps a child to find one that would have time between school hours to this activity.

At present the pale Elsli stood in front of the doctor's wife and she immediately thought, how
much better it would be for the child to be able to run around for a while easy and free, rather
than constantly to remain under its burden.

Also, she thought, if this day some lumps in the hands of Margaret arrived, they would look
well, the thing possible to make.

"I am a very nice, decent little girl that you'd like" know, now said
the doctor's wife, "only I'm not sure if the mother gives her consent
to they may even need the child is well at home.

"

like "Promise" her a good salary, "said Mrs. Stanhope pleased," all the more gladly I have such
a girl and there should repent the mother, she should just say what they will have. "

This prospect for Elsli just been so delighted the troubled heart of the doctor's wife Sun much that
they go to the same or even Margaret, and possibly the cause in order
wanted to.

She accompanied Mrs. Stanhope also because a good part of the way and then turned in a country lane
that led to the cottage of the laborer Heiri.

The Margaret was alone at home and stood at the washtub. Here, the doctor's wife is next to her
back and began to discuss the matter with her. It was not long before they were Women agreed, for
the Margaret soon found a little money that she lacked always, help in Manchester to her and
she could then see themselves more as to the children, is also yes, the Elsli thus not of
the world, she said. It was fixed the very next day should Elsli after school at eleven clock
to arrive at Mrs. Stanhope to his new position to compete.

Later at night, sat, as mother and aunt together and stuffed the stockings, inquired the mother,
which had been the fervent statements of Emmi, and knew then that failed to visit the sick Nora had all
that Emmi was quite convinced that the Nora do not desire that they come back, that you even
the slightest but nothing made but that she was glad, because they have something to say nothing
of the patients with known and that nothing had said more. This was a completely new case for
the mother and put them in great surprise, because until now, the Emmi never considered the word
in any society, and the matter was not quite the mother, because she was so in the idea is settled,
Emmi could present some of the poor patients happy hour, and in turn could use the sounds
of the fine on the Nora and somewhat restless nature of Emmi a very
salutary influence.

For once there was now nothing to be done, the thing to change, but
the mother said that it could indeed come of itself was very different,
the friendships among the children most often align themselves on
the spot, but other times need to this also only for a while to get
used to each other.

The aunt shook her head while on this Hope, because what Emma had
told her, she made quite the impression that these two were Beings
in all their facilities and aspirations, their joys and interests
so far apart that they could never come together.

Then discussed the sisters still Elslis new prospects and the mother was quite happy in the
thought that a few weeks they no longer would see the heavy Hanseli on the arm of nearly collapsing
child.

CHAPTER VI.

The aunt has recently been taken up.

The following day Elsli came after eleven clock softly into the house
on Oak Ridge.

The door of the living room was open, and Nora, who was sitting in her chair, looked just to the
Side of the open door back and saw at once Elsli; room there, they had not heard. Nora looked surprised
even after the child.

Elsli looked graceful, it had Today, his light brown hair carefully smoothed, curled around it
just to the end slightly. The mother had also allows a clean apron and a kerchief around his
neck, because it had to go to the rule. The narrow face was pale
and looked seriously so here watching the gentle blue eyes, to Nora.

She could see the child knew not sure if it was allowed to enter
the room or not.

"Come," Nora motioned to him, and when now Elsli had come before them, just as softly, as his Admission
was made into the house, she asked: "Are you making the child that
the outputs for us to do?

"

Elsli said yes. His voice had a soft, soft clay, and all had something Elsli Quiet, Tender itself,
which had fallen as Nora.

Suddenly she stretched out her hand counter and said, "Come, sit here to see me, we want a
little talk."

Elsli obeyed.

"Not true, your name Elsli?" Nora began again. "The mom can come up, that you bring silk and balls,
and pencils for me and a lot, but now you can could still be a little stay here with me, or
will you be around too tired, if you remember everything have to get before noon? "

"Oh no, I would like" not tired, "said Elsli," I would have otherwise
tired at home, because I would have to equal out with the boys and
take the Hanseli on the arm.

"

"Oh, then you certainly know well how it is when you are tired, really
tired, is not it?"

Asked Nora very excited.

"Oh yes, I know very well," assured Elsli. "I'm almost always tired, but sometimes so strong
that I would prefer to just lie down and not get up. The Hanseli is now so terribly hard that I almost
can not bear him, but he does not want on the floor, he wants to be on my arm, or he cries aloud
and will terribly angry. "

Oh Elsli, you know so well what it's like to be so terribly tired, "cried Nora very pleased
made on the understanding that they had found. "Oh I am so glad now I can do as well talk
to you of everything you now know quite how it is. Yes, you know, you want to just lie down and
get up no more, until something else came, something new that we do not might be more tired, you
know, Elsli? "

"It would be nothing new, last one would have to" get up, said Elsli.

"No, I do not mean, as you think, I mean, lie down and die, you do not want also like Elsli die?
"

"No, I mean, I would rather not, I have never thought of it. Why do you think? "

"Oh, you know not only how it will be then. The Clarissa told me it all so beautiful and we have
always talked to each other about it. But Mom, I can never talk about it cries the same as horrible
and sad for many days. But I will now tell you everything and you will see how you will look
up to go to heaven. And the beautiful song of of Clarissa I will teach you also, shall I tell
thee right now? "

Elsli was quite willing to listen to the song, but now, Ms. Stanhope in the room and the child
greeted with some surprise, because she could not explain how it happened that the two children
were sitting so close and so familiar with each other talking, as if they knew a long time.
Even more surprising, however, she must be, as Nora said the same:
"Oh Mama, you know, with the silk you can wait on, and the pencils
I need certain today, and after the eggs I have already tired, and
the other may indeed get well after the kitchen-maid, and I wanted
so much that Elsli would remain with me now.

"

"Certainly the child should stay with you when you pleasure," said the mother, even pleased, that the
usually apathetic Nora once again asked for something with animation. "Moreover, she added,"
so in the evening the child again, because there is still time to go out. "

This announcement made the eyes of the children light up at the same time. Nora saw the long and
anxious hours of the day of a new, revitalized heart desired traffic; the Elsli It seemed like a big
party sit, so in peace and quiet next to Nora to be allowed to was so kind to him. As the mother
dablieb but not Nora began their song to talk to, she knew so well
what the afflicted mother, and more carefully, it by this Things to
talk.

But that Nora was often silent when her mother wished, for in his thoughts moving the child
again and again all the good Clarissa for a long memorize time with
the most vivid colors in his heart was looking for.

Clarissa was experienced in many ways: she had the condition of the vanishing border Nora
well recognized and wanted the Child, the country where it was going to make so much, that it should
not be hard on the Earth to go away. And since the love and hope to the life of that country
itself Klarissa fulfilled, it was not her become heavy, they also in the susceptible heart of
Nora evoke.

Elsli should now tell of his life at home and by his siblings, and thus was it for, like his
brother Fani speak and did not hear back on it, as long as it had to tell all. For Fani Elsli had such
love and admiration, that there was never enough to describe how good and nice and how skillful
the Fani was, and how him in his school work and stand by as it does not know how to live without
the Fani could. It could then also certainly never be happy, but if it is still so tired and
sad Fani, and that the then come home so he could immediately make you feel glad, because he
himself always and so it should be seeing more beautiful things going
on in the future, and so full of joy and expectation talk about it,
could it be that same confidence to the heart get if it just meant
was that it could never, never be happy, and it must always have fear
and worry and be so tired.

Mrs. Stanhope stopped like how Elsli in his soft voice and gentle expression the deep blue eyes
told of his life.

Nora was very excited every word she spoke, she thought the words clearly much further, as did Elsli
even in the telling, and you could see that, with the largest Interest and pleasure Elslis listening
to messages.

When Mrs. Stanhope recently said, "You can go home now, child, after four clock we expect you
back, "said da Nora equal to: "Come, then soon, Elsli, and tell your mother that you get home
until eight clock."

Elsli promised to do everything obediently and went away with a glad heart, it had expected the
other patient would hardly talk to him and it would fetch only all
sorts of things.

Now was the sick child been so kind to him, and the lady in front of it a little afraid, also, so
it was a great feeling of gratitude in my heart. At four clock Elsli ran quickly home away from school
and not even said good-bye to Emma, ​​for fear it could still be stopped be, and it had promised
at once to come to the Oak Ridge. The fear was well worth it: it sounded like someone with him
all his might and his name nachrannte cried.

It was the Feklitus, Elsli knew his voice well.

"Wait! were! Will you wait when I want something with you, "he cried
imperiously behind him.

"No, no," I can not called back Elsli, "I
have promised," and it ran away like a deer. For a time ran the Feklitus,
obviously in great anger, who to continual threatening words urging
that he nachrief the Elsli, but its course only difficult; panting
and red-hot anger he stopped at last and now realized that he then
flying Elsli would not yet reach. Now he turned around angrily, he
obviously had a particularly had good reason to run after the child,
the more he was frustrated about the effort angry.

Elsli had first
to catch my breath long before it could enter the house on the Oak
Ridge; for it was then run without stopping as they could, for fear
of coming Feklitus nor after him and wanted to force it to do something
else.

Nora had long been looking at the window after him. As they
approached it and now run to stand still saw, she called him full
of desire to, "Come, Elsli, come, you'll have to rest up here you
must not leak more. "

Elsli obeyed. Nora was alone in his room, was
full of joy Elsli welcome. It had to immediately sit down at her,
and she told him then that it did not go out should they have the
mother asked that it might be with her all evening, and the Mother
was delighted to welcome and this is now even gone away a little of
what they otherwise would never do when Nora was alone.

"Now I have
to tell you so much, Elsli," Nora went on, "you have probably never
even thought about how it will be when we go away from Earth and go
to heaven? "

Elsli shook his head.

"You mean that?  Oh, God bless you, Cornelia Briskett!  If there are any blessings going, there's
no one on earth deserves them more than you. You've saved me this time.  Whatever happens in
the future, you've given me a chance."

"That's so, but the question is, are you going to take it?  See here! let's strike a bargain
over this before you go!  You are a clever woman, or you wouldn't have escaped so long, but
the game is played out.  It isn't safe to go on, when any moment you may be recognised by people
you have fooled before.  You're bound to make a fresh start--why shouldn't you try being straight
for a change?  You'd find it would pay better in the end.  You've got to think, when you leave
this to-day, that a girl's whim is all there is between you and a prison cell.  That ought
to be a pretty bracing remembrance, I should say. ...  Start away with the money you have in
hand, and see if you ken't make some more for yourself. There's another thing!  You can write
to me in a year from now, and tell me where you are, and what you have been about.  I'll ferret
into every single thing, and if it's straight, I'll help you again; I'll go on helping you!
You need never say after this that you cheat because you're obliged.  Live straight, and work
hard, and I'll see to it that you don't want.  You've got your chance! ...  I guess you'd better
scoot!"

Mrs Moffatt stood before her, trembling and abject; overcome with a pitiful emotion.

"I'm going!  Could you, could you kiss me, Cornelia, before I go?"

Cornelia drew herself up proudly.

"No, I guess not!  We'll leave that over for another time.  Some day, perhaps, when you're
straight. ...  You'd best not waste any more time..."

"I'm going.  I can't thank you.  I swear to you--"

"No, don't swear!  I don't want any promises.  Promise yourself; that's the best thing. ...
Good-bye."

"Good-bye, Cornelia Briskett!"

The door opened, and shut.  Cornelia listened with bated breath, but all was silent from the
corridor without.  She leant her head on the dressing-table, and burst into a passion of tears.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Captain Guest paced up and down the sitting-room for a quarter of an hour, casting impatient
glances at the clock, and pausing now and then to lift the emerald necklace from the table
and examine it with wondering curiosity.  It was a pretty enough plaything, but from his point
of view it seemed a preposterous waste of money to sink a cool thousand pounds on its purchase.
He mentally ran over the various necessary repairs on his own property, which could be completed
for the sum, and shrugged his shoulders expressively.  Still, women liked such playthings,
and if one were specially interested in a woman (a woman, say, to whom emeralds were specially
becoming!), there would be a certain satisfaction in seeing her wearing the pretty things.
It was conceivable that the pleasure so given might even be as keen as that derived from a
new chimney-stack or a barn!

A vision rose before him; a vision of a ruddy head and snowy shoulders, on which the green
light flashed and waned.  He saw Cornelia, as she had appeared, sitting in the front row of
the stalls at the theatre, and mentally clasped the necklace round her throat.

The door opened.  He thrust the vision aside, and wheeled round quickly, reassuming his sternest
expression.  A dejected little girl stood on the threshold, with dishevelled locks and tear-stained
eyes, and as he stared in amazement, she quietly closed the door, and collapsed in a limp little
heap on the corner of the sofa.

"I've--come back!"

"Where's Mrs Moffatt?"

"She's"--the voice broke in a strangled sob--"gone!"

"Gone where?"

"Gone away.  Ten minutes ago.  She's ever so far off by now!"

Guest stood still, transfixed with anger and astonishment.

"Do you mean to say that she escaped before your eyes?  What happened? Did you leave her alone
in your room?"

"No; I told her to go.  I sent her away.  It was my suggestion from the start."

"You--told--her--to go!"  Guest's face was a study of outraged wrath. "After all she has done;
after the deliberate way in which she has cheated and deceived you; after the lies she has
told; after her thefts,--hundreds of pounds still to pay up! after intending to desert you
in this hotel, you mean to tell me seriously that you sent her away!"

The tousled head nodded dumbly; two big tears trickled down the reddened cheeks.

"Are you aware that you have compounded a felony?  If Mr Marchant heard what you had done,
he could accuse you of being a partner in the crime. Do you know that you have broken the law
of the country, and that I could give you in charge at this moment, if I wished to do so?"

"I guess that's so.--Are you going to do it?"

"That's ridiculous!  You know it is, but--"

"Then you're another!" cried Cornelia, laughing through her tears. "You're as bad as I am,
so you can't preach!  She's gone anyway, and I'm--glad!  We got the necklace, and for the rest,
I'll just have to pay up, and look pleasant.  Poppar says you've got to pay for experience
in this world.  I'll tell him I concluded I'd better learn it pretty thoroughly, once I'd started.
He won't mind."

"Your father must be a wealthy man if he can afford to lose four or five hundred pounds without
feeling annoyed!"

Cornelia looked at him quickly, and replied in a tone of studied indifference.

"Oh, he's flush enough at the moment.  Likely enough we shall be paupers next year.  Don't
be angry with me, Captain Guest.  I simply had to give her a chance!  I can afford to pay up,
and if I'd sent her to prison it would have killed the last little mite of self-respect.  I
trusted her instead, and I believe that's going to help more than any punishment.  It would
me!  She's had a good old fright, and maybe this will be the turning-point in her life."

Guest's lips curled in eloquent disbelief.  He paced slowly up and down the room, then stationed
himself once more in front of the sofa.

"Did you look over your things to see that they were all right?"

"No! ...  She said she hadn't touched them."

"Did you make her return the notes?"

"No, I--I guessed she'd need them herself!"

"How extremely considerate!  Didn't you feel it necessary to offer her a little more, while
you were about it?  To give her another twenty pounds, say, to make up the full change for
the cheque?"

The face that peered up at him was at once so abashed, so discomfited, so childlike in its
humility, that his anger melted before it, and gave place to a wave of tenderness.

"You ridiculous, high-flown, little girl!  Who would have believed that all your shrewd commonsense
would collapse like this!  No!  I'm not angry, I shan't scold any more.  The thing's done now,
and you've had enough worry.  I'm going to ring the bell, and order some luncheon.  We will
have it here together, and comfort ourselves after all this excitement.  I'm hungry enough,
whatever you are!  What shall it be? You are going to treat me, you know, so it must be something
good. Roast chicken!  That's what ladies generally prefer, and some sweets, and fruit.  Claret
for me, and what for you?  Is it to be--`corfee'-- once more?"

He went to the door to give the order to the waiter, accompanied by a tip which had the effect
of producing the meal in an extraordinarily short space of time.  Cornelia's appearance being
still distinctly dishevelled, Guest dismissed the waiter and himself took the head of the table,
carving the chicken, handing the vegetable dishes, and even pouring out the coffee.  If they
had been a honeymoon couple the intimacy of the scene could not have been greater, but in that
case he would have taken his wife in his arms and kissed away her tears.  Poor, little, red-eyed
girl!  There was precious little beauty about her at the moment, yet she had never appeared
more attractive.

"I ken't eat a bite!" was Cornelia's first melancholy statement, but when one wing of the chicken
had disappeared from her plate--"It's mighty good!" she said, and promptly set to work on a
second.  She drank copious draughts of coffee, began to revive in spirits, and experience qualms
concerning her appearance.  "Say! do I look a perfect freak?"

"You look much better than you did ten minutes since.  In another ten minutes you will look
quite like yourself, if you obey my orders, and eat a good meal."

Cornelia shrugged expressively.

"I know what that means!  I guess I'm ugly enough to kill.  That's why I hate to cry--it musses
one up so for hours after. ...  Captain Guest, what am I going to do next?  Can I settle up,
and get away to Norton this afternoon, do you suppose?"

"I am afraid not.  The last train leaves at three o'clock, and that does not give enough time
for all that has to be done.  I was wondering whether my aunt--whether you would consent to
sleep at her house to- night."

"Suttenly not!  Why should I?  It won't be the first time by a good many that I've stayed a
night by myself in a hotel, and there's no reason why I should move.  I'll have my meals up
in this room, if it will ease you any, but I won't leave this place till to-morrow morning.
Then I'll go back," she laughed feebly, "to The Nook, and humble pie!"

"You need not tell your aunt what has happened, if you don't choose to do so!"

"Oh, yes; I'll own up!  Aunt Soph will be pleased to feel she was right. Maybe she'll like
me better when I'm down on my luck. ...  What must I set about first?"

"I shall interview the hotel manager, and tell him the whole story-- that's due to him, you
know, or there might be a repetition of the offence.  Then there's the jeweller--he must be
warned in the same way, and the necklace returned.  I presume you don't want to keep it."

Cornelia shuddered.

"Oh, no.  I could never wear it.  But when Poppar comes over I'll make him buy me something
else instead.  Mr Marchant shan't lose!  I guess I'd better drive there straight away, and
then to the bank.  I'll have to arrange for a pretty big draft. ...  You never know how things
are going to pan out in this world, do you?  I thought I was going to spend this afternoon
on the river, gliding about so sweet and peaceful!"

Guest flushed, hesitated, and--plunged!

"Why shouldn't we go all the same?  We can finish our business and still have time.  If you
will allow me, I'll take great care of you and bring you home before it's dark.  It would be
too dreary sitting up here by yourself, all the evening."

Cornelia sprang to her feet, clapping her hands with delight.

"How lovely!  How lovely!  You're just the nicest thing!  It's sweet of you to think of it!
Go right away now, and get through with your interview, and I'll join you in the lounge as
soon as I've prinked, and gotten my face into order.  I'll hang my head out of the window,
and massage my nose. ...  Let's go and be happy, and forget all our woes!"

She ran to the door, waved her hand gaily over her shoulder, and disappeared from sight.

CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

When Guest drove round to the hotel next morning to escort Cornelia to the station, she was
surprised to see his own bag on the roof, and to hear that he intended to accompany her all
the way to Norton.

"I want to make sure that you are safely housed once more," he explained as they drove off.
"I feel a certain responsibility for you, and I think perhaps your aunt would like to see me,
and hear from a second person that everything is satisfactorily settled here."

"My aunt," said Cornelia, demurely, "my aunt isn't a mite disposed to acknowledge your responsibility.
She thinks you're `dashing'!  She don't approve of dashing young men.  She warned me specially
to avoid you."

"Humph! dashing, am I?  The word has an Early Victorian sound that suggests side-whiskers and
leg-of-mutton trousers.  I'm not at all sure that I'm flattered!" returned Guest, as he alternately
stared out of the window, and busied himself in arranging the bags on the front seat of the cab.

There was an air of embarrassment in his manner this morning, and he talked against time, as
if anxious not to let the conversation come to a pause.  The afternoon on the river had been
a delightful experience, abundantly proving the truth of his prophecy that it would be impossible
to be bored in Cornelia's society.  She had looked very sweet in her softened mood, and as
they drifted down the stream together, had prattled away in simple, confiding fashion, telling
him the story of her life; of the ups and downs which she and her Poppar had known together;
of her own individual adventures.  He learnt that she was not engaged, and had never been in
love, though there were always heaps of admirers "prancing" round.  She intended to marry some
day, however.  Why, suttenly!  Just as soon as ever the right man hove along.  What was the
good of being a woman, if you didn't have your own home, and your own husband and children!
Then she looked at him with her clear, golden eyes, and inquired how it was with himself. 
Was he in love?

"No!" answered Guest, but, even as he spoke, he knew in his heart that he lied.  In the guise
of a Yankee stranger, who embodied in herself all the traits which he most condemned, the one
woman of his life had appeared.  He loved--and the woman whom he loved was Cornelia Briskett!

After that, conversation languished.  Guest was too much bewildered by the sudden realisation
of his position to wish to talk, and Cornelia had developed a headache as a result of the morning's
emotion.  She was glad to be quiet; to allow herself to be led about, and cared for, and told
what she must do.

"Just like a `nice young girl'!" she said, laughingly as they parted in the lounge of the hotel.
"If I lived over here long enough--there's no telling--I might grow into a Moss Rose myself!"

"I wish you would!  I wish you would!  Won't you try?"  Guest cried eagerly.  He, himself,
did not know what he really meant by the inquiry, for the words had sprung to his lips almost
without thought.  He was as much startled by the sound of them as was Cornelia herself.  He
saw the dismay in her eyes, the dawning comprehension; he saw something else also--the first
flicker of self-consciousness, the first tell-tale droop of the lids.  She put him off with
a light answer, and he went out to pace the streets until the night closed around him. ...
What was this that had happened, and what was it going to mean?  One week--a week to the day
since he had first met this girl and conceived a violent dislike to her on the spot.  Voice,
accent, and manner had alike jarred on his nerves: she had appeared in every respect the opposite
to the decorous, soft-voiced, highly-bred, if somewhat inane, damsel who represented his ideal
of feminine charm.  One week ago!  What magic did she possess, this little red-haired, white-faced
girl, to make such short work of the scruples of a lifetime?  What was this mysterious feminine
charm which blinded his senses to everything but just herself, and the dearness of her, and
the longing to have her for his own?  The jarring element had not disappeared, the difference
of thought still existed, but for the moment he was oblivious of their existence.  For the
first time in his three-and-thirty years he was in love, and had room for no other thought.

The morning brought colder reflections.  When--supposing he ever married, it would be wormwood
and gall to see his wife condemned by his friends!  He had looked forward to espousing the
daughter of some irreproachable county family, and returning to his old home to live in frugal
state for the rest of his life; driving to church in the old barouche, attending a succession
of dull, country-house dinners; taking the chair at village meetings.  He tried to imagine
Cornelia spending long, peaceful years as the squire's wife, contentedly pottering about the
village, superintending Dorcas meetings, and finding recreation in occasional garden parties,
where the same people met the same people, attired in the same frocks, and sat meekly in rows,
drinking claret cup and sour lemonade, but the effort failed.  Cornelia obstinately refused
to fit into the niche.  He could summon up a vision of her, indeed, but it was a disconcerting
vision, in which she "pranced round," while the neighbourhood turned its back, and pursed disapproving
lips.

He was attracted by the girl--seriously attracted, but-- It was a great big but, and he promised
himself to be cautious, to think long and well before taking the plunge.  All the same, it
seemed imperative that he should return to Norton.  His aunt was always delighted to put him
up, and he could not be happy until he had satisfied himself that all was well with Cornelia
once more.  Incidentally also, he was interested to know what was happening at the Manor.

On the journey to Norton the presence of fellow-travellers kept the conversation necessarily
impersonal, and at the station Cornelia dismissed her escort, refusing point blank to drive
with him to the Park.

"I'm going back as a sorrowing penitent, and it don't suit the part to drive up with a dashing
young man.  There are only two players in this act, and they are Aunt Soph and myself.  You
come round in the evening, when I've paved the way."

"Till to-night, then!" said Guest, raising his hat.  Once again, as he looked at her through
the window of the cab, the clear eyes wavered before his own; once again his scruples vanished.
He loved, and the world held nothing but that glad fact.

Cornelia exhibited much diplomacy in her interview with her aunt. Seated at the good lady's
feet in an attitude of childlike humility, she related the story of her adventures in simple,
unexaggerated language, without any attempt at self-justification.

"I ought to have guessed from the start; but it seems I'm not as smart as I thought.  They
had me, the whole way through.  You were right, you see, and I was wrong.  I should have taken
your advice.  Guess it will be a lesson to me!"

"I trust it may prove so, my dear! a dearly-bought, but invaluable lesson!" quoth Miss Briskett,
blandly.  So far from being incensed, she actually purred with satisfaction, for had not the
truant returned home in a humble and tractable spirit, ready to acknowledge and apologise for
her error?  Her good humour was such that she bore the shock of hearing of Guest's role in
the drama with comparative composure.

"He seems," she declared, "to have comported himself with considerable judgment, but, my dear
Cornelia, if anything more were needed to demonstrate the necessity for caution and restraint
in the future, it must surely be the remembrance that you were driven into such intimate relationship
with a man whose acquaintance you had made but a few short days before!  It seems to me that
the recollection must be painfully embarrassing to any nice young girl."

"Yes, 'um!" said Cornelia, meekly.  She lowered her eyelids, and her cheeks flushed to a vivid
pink.  Such a typical picture did she make of a modest and abashed young girl, that the spinster's
stern face relaxed into a smile, and she laid her hand affectionately upon the ruddy locks.

"There! there!  We will say no more about it--

  "`Repentance is to leave
  The sins we loved before;
  And show that we in earnest grieve
  By doing so no more!'

"Another time you will be guided by wiser counsels!"

"...Have you missed me, Aunt Soph, while I've been away?"

"Er--the house has seemed very quiet," replied Miss Briskett, truthfully.  "I am sorry that
I am obliged to leave you this afternoon, my dear, but I have promised to attend a committee
meeting at four o'clock.  You will be glad to rest after your journey, and to unpack and get
your things put neatly away."

"Has Elma come home?"

"She returned yesterday morning.  I saw the dog-cart from the Manor waiting outside the gate
this morning.  Mrs Ramsden told me the other day that Elma's health was completely restored."

Cornelia pondered over these scanty items of news as she sat at her solitary tea an hour later.
Elma was well; Elma had returned home.  A dog-cart from the Manor had been observed waiting
outside the gate of The Holt that morning.  A dog-cart!  Imagination failed to picture the
picturesque figure of Madame perched on the high seat of that undignified vehicle.  If the
cart had not conveyed the mother, it must, in all probability, have conveyed the son.  The
dog-cart had been waiting!  The deduction was obvious to the meanest intellect. Geoffrey Greville
had driven down to see Elma the morning after her departure, and had spent a considerable time
in her society!

Suddenly Cornelia realised that her anxiety could brook no delay, and that it would be impossible
to spend another night without discovering how the Moss Rose had fared during her absence.
She despatched Mary to The Holt with a verbal message to the effect that she had returned from
town, and, if convenient, would much like to see Miss Ramsden for a few minutes before six
o'clock, and while she was still at tea the answer was received; a note this time, written
in pencil, and bearing marks of haste and agitation.

  "Dearest Cornelia,--Yes, of course!  I am thankful you are back.
  Come right up to my room.  It's perfectly wretched here, but I'm so
  happy!  Elma."

Cornelia rolled her eyes to the ceiling, and indulged in an expressive whistle.  Contradictory
as Elma's epistle might have appeared to an ordinary reader, she understood it readily enough.
It was Mrs Ramsden who was wretched, Elma who was happy--"so happy," despite the atmosphere
of disapproval.  The crisis had arrived!

In five minutes' time, Cornelia was in her friend's room, holding her hands, gazing into her
face, kissing her flaming cheeks.

"Elma, is it?  It is!  I can see it in your face!  Oh, you dear thing! When?  How?  I'm crazy
to know.  Tell me every single thing."

Elma laughed; a delicious little laugh of conscious happiness.

"Yes, yes, it is!  Oh, Cornelia, isn't it wonderful?  I can't believe it!  It's partly your
doing, you know, and I love you for that, but doesn't it seem impossible that he can really
care for--me!"  She turned her exquisite, flower-like face towards her friend, with an expression
of humility as sweet as it was sincere.  "He might have had anybody, and he chooses--me!  Oh,
Cornelia, I never knew that one could live, and be so happy!  It seems like a dream."

"Wake up, then, and get down to facts!  I'm crazy to hear all about it. When was it settled?"

"This morning."

"Only this morning!  I calculated it would come off Monday at latest."

"No, it didn't.  Of course he was very--I mean, I knew--we both understood, but Geoffrey says
he couldn't possibly have spoken plainly while I was a guest under his own roof.  It wouldn't
have been the right thing.  He was obliged to wait till I got home!"

"My! how mediaeval.  I should have thought Geoffrey Greville had more snap to him, than to
hang on to such worn-out notions.  Fancy letting you go away, and driving down in cold blood
next morning!  It's the dullest thing!"

"It's not dull at all!" contradicted Elma, hotly.  "It's noble, and manly, and self-sacrificing.
I love him for it--

  "`I could not love thee, dear, so much
  Loved I not honour more!'"

"Shucks!" sniffed Cornelia, scornfully.  "I'd as lief have a little less high-falutin', and
a lot more push.  I wouldn't mind if it was his house ten times over, I'd want him to feel
he couldn't wait another five minutes, and settle it off, so's we could have a good time together.
If he let me come away, not knowing if he were in fun or earnest, I'd have led him a pretty
dance for his pains.  But you're so meek; I bet you dropped into his mouth like a ripe plum!"

Elma drew herself up with a charming dignity.

"I told him the truth without any pretences, if that is what you mean," she said quietly. 
"I am perfectly satisfied with Geoffrey's behaviour, and I'd rather not discuss it, Cornelia,
please.  We may seem old- fashioned to you, but we understand each other, and there is not
a thing--not a single thing--I would wish altered.  I am perfectly, utterly happy!"

"Bless you, you sweet thing, I see you are, and I'm happy for you! Never mind how it happened;
it has happened, and that's good enough. ...  How's Mrs Ramsden bearing up?"

Elma's face fell.  For a person who had just proclaimed herself completely happy, she looked
astonishingly worried and perturbed.

"Oh, my dear, such a scene!  I took Geoffrey in to see her, and she couldn't have been more
horrified if he had been the most desperate character in the world.  She refused to listen
to a word.  You would not have recognised mother, she was so haughty and distant, and--rude!
Some things she said were horribly rude.  After he went, she cried!  That was the worst of
all.  She cried, and said she had given her whole life for me for twenty-three years, and was
I going to break her heart as a reward?  I cried, too, and said, No, I should love her more,
not less, but she wouldn't listen.  She said if I married Geoffrey it would be as bad as a
public refutation of all the principles which I had professed since childhood.  Then she called
him names, and I got angry.  We didn't speak a word all through lunch, and as soon as it was
over she sent for a fly to drive to the Manor.  She's there still!"

"Shut up with Madame, hatching the plan of campaign!  Madame won't like it any better, I suppose!"

Elma flushed miserably.

"No; she's against us, too!  Geoffrey told her what he was coming for, and--isn't it curious?--she
was quite surprised!  She had not suspected a bit, and I'm afraid she was pretty cross.  Geoffrey
wouldn't let me say it, but I know she doesn't think me good enough.  I'm not; that's quite
true.  No one knows it better than I."

"If you say that again, I'll shake you!  You're a heap too good for the best man that ever
lived.  Mind now, Elma, don't start out on this business by eating humble pie!  You've got
to hold up your end of the stick for all you're worth, and let them see you won't be sat upon.
When you feel redooced, go and sit in front of the glass for a spell, and ask yourself if he
won't be a lucky man to have that vista across the table all the rest of his life.  Don't be
humble with him, whatever happens!  Make him believe he's got the pick of the bundle!"

"He--he does!" said Elma, and blushed again.  "It makes me ashamed to hear him talk about me,
for I know I am really so different.  He would not have thought me so sweet if he had heard
me scolding mother this morning.  Poor mother!  I'm so terribly sorry for her.  It must be
hard to care for a child for twenty-three years, as she says, and then have to step aside for
a stranger.  I sympathised with every word she said, and knew that I should have felt the same.
My head was with her all the time, but my heart"--she clasped her hands to her side with the
prettiest of gestures--"my heart was with Geoffrey!  Reason's not a bit of use, Cornelia, when
you're in love."

"Well!" said Cornelia, firmly, "my heart's got to wait and behave itself, until my head goes
along at the same pace.  I've not kept it in order for twenty-three years to have it weaken
at the last moment.  I'll stick to my guns, whatever it may cost."

Elma looked at her with surprised curiosity.

"Why, you talk as if, as if you were in love, too!  I wish you were! We could sympathise with
each other so beautifully.  Are you in love, Cornelia?  You never said so before."

Cornelia turned to the window and gazed out on the forbidden grass of the Park.  Her face was
hidden from view, and she answered by another question, put in slow, thoughtful tones.--"What
is love?  You seem to feel pretty certain that yours is the genuine article.  Define it for
me!  How do you feel when you are in dear Geoffrey's society?"

"Happy! so wonderfully happy that I seem to walk on air.  Everything seems beautiful, and I
love everybody, and long to make them as happy as myself.  Nothing troubles me any more.  It
seems as if nothing could ever trouble me.  Geoffrey's there!  He is like a great big rock,
which will shelter me all my life."

"Do you feel one moment that it's the cutest thing in the world to sit right there in the shade
and be fussed over, and the next as if you wanted to knock the rock down flat, and march away
down your own road? Do you feel blissful one moment and the next all worked up, and fit to
scratch?  When he's kinder big and superior, and the natural protector, do you feel ugly; or
inclined to cave in, and honour and obey?"

Elma stared at her with shocked blue eyes.

"Of course I'll obey!  Geoffrey is so wise and clever.  He knows so much better than I.  I'm
only too thankful to let him decide for us both.  You talk so strangely, Cornelia; I don't
understand--"

Cornelia swung round quickly, and kissed her upon the cheek.

"Never mind, sweetling!" she said fondly, "don't try to understand! You are better off as you
are.  It is women like you who have the best time in the world, and are the most loved.  I
wish I were like you, but I'm not, so what's the use of repining.  I am as I wor' created!"

She laughed, but the laugh had a forced, unnatural sound.  Elma saw with dismay a glimmer of
tears in the golden eyes.

CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

For a whole week the battle raged; the battle between youth and age, love and the world.  Elma
pleaded for patience and self-restraint, Geoffrey urged defiance and independence; Mrs Ramsden
quoted Scripture, and made constant reference to serpents' teeth, while Madame remained charmingly
satirical, refusing to treat the matter otherwise than as a joke, laughing at Geoffrey's rhapsodies,
and assuring him that he was suffering from an attack of sun, from which recovery would be
swift and certain.  Rupert Guest and Cornelia hurried to and fro on the outskirts of the fray,
in the character of aides-de-camp carrying messages, and administering encouragement and consolation.
Every morning Cornelia sat in conclave with her friend in the prosaic Victorian drawing-room
which took the place of the turret chamber of romance. It should but
surely become a painter, aunt, you know, Fani was to be a painter, as soon as possible that
he does not have to enter the factory and then never comes out and everything late? "

"That's not so easy, Emmi, a painter and performer. One actually knows at all, whether the Fani
really had enough talent to do so, because then it takes something quite different from in the
school properly be able to draw. "

"Yes but, aunt, I just wanted to love that you told me that you still think so, that the Fani
much prefer to be a painter when he can, but that he should go to the factory. Is not it,
that's certainly your opinion, aunt?

"Emma was so urgent, as if the aunt, the question to decide right now.

She said soothingly: "If Fani would really chance to be a painter, I would already for it and
want to treat him cordially, but it is after all no question, Emma.

"

"Can I go on at length, aunt?

Emmi chatter yes "only useless stuff that Fred was here one. Emmi
But it has raised it yet.

"Aunt, tell me" just a word, she asked urgently, "what does that mean: decoration"?

"That means decorating, Emmi. What have you to do with decorations, "asked the aunt.

"It is also theater wall," added Fred.

"Oh, that's right," said Emmi pleased and ran away very enterprising.

Fred sat pensively for a moment because, he said inquiringly: "Auntie, have you not noticed that
Emmi has something in mind? Do you think they wanted to leave with a theater group? "

"No, Fred think, I do not really," said the aunt, without concern about this View, "kind of
stuff has he Emmi but not in the head."

"Aunt, believe" you told me that Fred seriously, as one who has had
experience; "Emmi has something in mind, for it is their means no
matter what the words if they does not want anything to do with it,
because Emma is not inquisitive.

Do you see how it is, aunt? "

The aunt could not answer anymore because rang out from the stairs is not a unknown, but terrible
cry: "A snake! A snake! A snake!

"Moment Fred reached into his pocket, he rushed out. The aunt was relieved. Finally she was able complete
with open arms and gathered her thoughts pudding, and it was the
highest Time.

But no! The cry on the steps adopted such a terrifying character, pool and that they are met
by trowel and hurried out. Outside, in the middle of the stairs, stood looking at one stage the
Rikli, with hue and cry to the next stage, where a petite, green lizard at high speed to and
fro wound.

Still one step up the Fred sat quiet and waited to see what would be the end of the cry.

"But how silly, Rikli," the aunt said meekly, "if you but such terror against this pest, looking
for traffic but to so on and running. "

"It is up to me, it works for me, it's a snake," shouted the Rikli
and struggling fear way around on the same spot.

"Fred, take away the lizard, you can see how the child is upset," said the aunt, "originally they
will probably come from any of you. "

"Certainly, Aunt, operated Fred," I had put in my pocket, they must then while I have read, just quietly.
But this should Rikli but at a reasonable Beings are brought up,
so I wanted to wait until the nightmare into a friendship for the
Lizard would have passed.

"

The aunt agreed that Riki had to be brought up really still, but the attempt Fred made the
lead, only bring endless screaming. It was necessary to cure a serious Think through which the
Rikli could be cured, but now it should go up the stairs Fred and down with his lizard that
the noise stop. Then the aunt went into the kitchen back and was finally able to complete the pudding.

Chapter
Seven.

What founds the Oscar and incites the Emmi.

The Feklitus had accepted with satisfaction the speech and from home the message to the upcoming
event made. This announcement made a big impression on Mr. Bickel and his wife, and they both
decided to attend the celebrations, all they wanted was the Feklitus
listening, if he would speak publicly for the first time.

It was also immediately for the speaker is a brand new suit arranged which should match the occasion,
and yet at the same Evening was charged the shoemaker and new boots were appropriate.

The Feklitus was seen since the day walking around in silence and profound, and you could probably
To recognize that he was busy with extraordinary thoughts.

He had just come out of the school, with a large, involuntary movement,
for those behind pushed so violently that an air jump made of the
Middle had, there was no time, the staircase step by step to go down.

But it was good To see that the Feklitus was not voted to make joyful leaps, for he came with
great Wrinkles on the forehead to the bottom and did not run with
the victory cry of proven warriors like the others of it, but slowly
and silently, he walked around the corner of the school and stood
there in wait.

Now when all the boys were over ran, the girls came running up, once again two and two and
then a whole group, and then came alone and in a hurry Elsli approach. It had been a bit late
because it had its very accurate Homework for tomorrow written.

Suddenly it was caught on the back and on the site pulled.

"Let me go, Feklitus, I must fast for Nora, she expected me," it said as it now saw that it was
the Feklitus, who grabbed it and with a strong jerk behind the school building had encountered.

"I
want to ask you something first, then you can" go, "he replied peremptorily, holding Elsli
Jüppchen at its fixed.

"Do so quickly, I must certainly go."

"So tell me, now the hub Feklitus inquiringly," if you ever in a song
festivals ought to give a speech, how would you begin?

"

"Oh, that's something stupid that I must not my life," cried Elsli and tore at the Skirt in
order to continue to.

But the Feklitus had a solid fist, to no avail.

"I have not said that you once it" must, "he continued," I was just
told when, when - and if it can be said for anything.

Now answer: How would you start if you on Song Festival ought to give a speech? "

"I do not know that I know nothing, I've never thought of something," Elsli and tore again.

"So
now thinking about it! You should say, how would you start, or I will not let go, until dark
night, "and Feklitus held the skirt more firmly. "I want thee now even easier to make and you
start, but then go away, or then just waiting!

How it starts to:> Esteemed ladies and brothers <now moving away "!

"Let me go, look, I must certainly go, asked Elsli," but I can not right . Say "

"You stiff-necked Elsi you" - now broke loose Feklitus angry -, "Just wait, you have your Wages
have been! You just wait until you come to the factory, it's not
long now ', then you will know it, just wait!

"

Indefinite terror rose in Elslis imagination, it no longer broke,
very docile was and because it reflected.

After a little while, it said, "So I would then start like this:>
Esteemed Men and Brothers Now that we've sung so beautiful, so let
us now rejoice and a large, long celebrate - '"

Like an arrow shot here Elsli it, because it was perceived that in
the heat of listening had opened the Feklitus his fist.

He looked grim after the Elsli, but it was already too far away to be pursued. So he finally went
thoughtfully on his way.

Should take place on Sunday the big song festival, because until then
the aunt had promised the flag to finish.

But first make a preliminary test run, to hear how the speech would be held, and also arrange
the movement of the train.

Instead of the flag For once, could be a table cloth are attached to the rod, the aunt would
have a . Provide On Saturday afternoon, the sample should be held, it was with his Oscar Company
fixed.

On Saturday was hardly because the necessary food swallowed at lunch, when Oskar already looked
around uneasily, if he could probably get up soon and move away. Still restless behaved Emmi, who from
the beginning of their thoughts are elsewhere than at its current Employment was, for all she
swallowed down with fever, looked every moment to the wall clock time after time and gave
wrong answers. When the last bite of Teller was the father disappeared,
she asked urgently: "Can I go, Mama?"

      
    

"Me too, Mama?" Oskar was a lightning-fast. It was allowed.

"What must establish both the cause and again that it's so hurry? Asked" the Father.

Emmi was out the door.

"Tomorrow you will see's it," Papa, Oscar said with a bright face, "still the speaker's platform built and
arranged the procession. You will certainly surprise. Want you may hear a speech by Feklitus,
Dad? "

"Thank you very much! In the evening, I will appear with her mother
and aunt at the fairground.

Belong do you go on the festival revelers, Fred, "asked the father.

"No, I have" to do more useful, the said Fred seriously.

"It is more useful to the to find lowest marsh frog and get to know when to celebrate festivals
thousand singers. "

      The Rikli quickly moved slightly
    away from Fred, maybe he wanted
    to part of the Frogs show
    a pattern.

Oskar's brother threw a pitying look and went.

Sat peacefully in the afternoon mother and aunt in the garden in front of them stood on the table of
Flick large basket and during the busy hands of the damage all the large and small stockings
, Make up for they discussed the events of the day and the life and character of the children
for they had the same love and the same interest.

"It's strange how things repeat themselves in this life," said his mother now. "If the kids tell
it like Feklitus so often running after the Elsli if none understands why, I always long past
time to everyone. You remember how Elslis Mother, the cheerful Gritli, resistant to the short,
thick Fekli tracked so easily and ran away cheerfully and always turning back from time to
time, he shouted with laughter:

> Touch me off! Sat me down, Fekli with the bear busy! '"

The aunt remembered these scenes very well, she had to laugh to see her again so clearly before
his eyes were. "It certainly had its Gritli Sang" is not even sealed, she added in, "our brother
had blown it to him, you remember yet how he in these fruitless hunts amused? "

The mother could not answer further, because at that moment there arose such a Mark and leg
piercing cry that the two women zusammenschraken altogether.

"It is again the Rikli, which is" quite sure, "said the mother, who jumped first, together with
the aunt was, but now sat down again and also to the aunt asked. "We really need to stay there,
"she continued," not the child is to believe that for every bug, which he comes close, must
strike such a noise and can induce force us as to his aid; it must know that his cries brought
no entry for anything more. "

"Certainly it holds back any large-eyed Fred the frog under the eyes, it mercilessly frightened, "said
the aunt compassionately," but you're right, the hue and cry, it must overcome. Search "

In that moment there was nothing of the other side, a song that at large noise competed with
the continued screaming. It was unmistakable Fred's voice, the screech answering, sang:

"The Rikli and Hanseli Are just like two siblings; You sing with all
the Amseli, Only unprecedented, unrestrained.

"

"Fred, it can not be frightened of the child, so he sings in a completely different side," Mother
said, visibly shaken a little in their intent, Rikli cry once To leave without help him. Now the
screams but did such a distinctive character the despair that his mother and aunt both jumped and
rushed the place. Only they saw nothing, though the cry was heard close to them. But now that before
them, down in the ditch, desperate screaming Rikli was in a really miserable State. Almost to
the neck up it was stuck in the mud green water, his arms stretched it frantically upward, as
if to protect it from contact with the little green frogs, here and there, splashed merrily
about in the swamp water. The aunt was the next in Ditch. Rapidly increased her down some steps,
seized the child by the arms and pulled it with out some effort.

As is now felt surrounded by the tender concern Rikli and looked back on the terror survived,
she began to cry even more miserable and to lament, and time after time it groaned: "O ye,
why do not come," But? there has not been much response, the state required a rapid response. Mother
and aunt conceived the child, depending on one hand and ran with him the house where the mud-covered
Rikli without delay has been inserted into the bath. The mother had been retrieved, the But
aunt sat down next to the swimming children and said, "So, now I want you on your Question to
answer. "And now he said the aunt, and told him the thing that so often the same terrible cry
had been expelled, when the Fred with a harmless little bug or little frog had only approached him
that neither she nor the mother of this behavior and support him more wanted to come to their
aid. Only Fred's voice would have saved it, the proved that he was not at the Rikli, otherwise no
one would come to his aid and had a long, long time to put in the sludge water. Then the aunt admonished
the Rikli seriously to think of this experience, because otherwise it could go on much longer
time Time and a worrying way, added with the frogs.

The Rikli heard the Attention to words, and this time they made more impression than made similar
exhortations Had before it had experienced something so horrible,
as was quite deserted and unheard stuck in the middle among the frogs
in the swamp.

During this time Oscar had assembled his band and moved with her to the fairground. Here first, the
speech will be held as a sample, then should the big move and afterwards follow the final festivities
of meeting today only as a sample, but tomorrow with the correct Currant juice and gingerbread,
and he had promised to deliver the aunt, the flag. The platform was made up of four wooden poles
stuck in the ground and four boards laid over artfully constructed.

"Get away from him," he cried to the next listener.

"The speech is ready, after you come with the glasses on," said Feklitus, satisfied its performance
and that they vorüberwar. But at the meeting arose a great noise, because most of the speech
were too short and wanted to continue the Feklitus again pushing up the stage. Only Oscar, who
reigned but otherwise everything was so stupid and perplexed because,
as he would have heard something very special.

The words had him a big impression HOWTO: How could even the Feklitus have come to a thought
which he himself did not occurred and it was of such importance for the party that they had
to celebrate. It had to be sung after all, remember that you saw
it was a song festival.

After Oskar the first had trouble swallowing that he was not the originator of the idea, he
rushed with a time in the noisy crowd and proclaimed full might, "Silence! Now it is time
especially knowing who can sing;. we have to rehearse a beautiful song "

But since it was found, then, that none of them could sing, and the
Feklitus not, the but claimed it was not even necessary.

Oskar himself could sing a note correctly, he well knew, but he recognized that there had to
be sung, and he cried with vehemence now according to the Fani and
the others cried, because it was the most in the sense that the Fani
could sing.

He was found not to be however, that he had decided not at the crowd, and Oskar once ran at
full gallop them, all by one, and everyone ran to his Side, so that was empty in an instant
the whole hard and lonely place on the rostrum peaked. Oscar rushed
home, and he was full of excitement, what should now be out of his
be loudly proclaimed festivals! Because that it was now clear, had
to be sung, especially at the Song Festival, and he had to bring about!
As the dad would scoff at his foundation! As the taunting and Fred
would be arrogant with its always covered actions! - No, could not
be, Fani had on the court, who could sing, then sang the by one already.
Once home, he ran to the room where he saw just enter the Emmi.

?
"Where's the Fani, Emmi," he called to her excitedly, "you have him
back aufgestiftet us unfaithful and take off to be with you? "

Emmi
was a little red, but said nothing and pretended she did not really
know what he wanted. At that moment stretched out Kathy's head through
the door. "The Margaret's outside, she asks if anyone knows where
is the Fani, they seek him everywhere, it hurry, " she cried, beginning
in the same breath and disappeared. Emmi was now dark red with the
hair up and began anxiously to pluck from the aunt. This also noticed
at once that Incorrect something had happened, she took Emma by the
hand and walked out the door. The mother followed to see what had
brought the Marget hurry. This story was told in great Excitement
that the Fekli cousin had come to tell her that he had in mind, the
same Fani to make in the factory for a particular task, which could
make the good and the Knave give it to the afternoons and school holidays
in some other hour, a employment going to earn him a nice piece of
money. Now he had the same wish to speak to the Fani but they have
now searched around and can not find anywhere, and the cousin could
they can no longer wait, which will now certainly very angry when
not even the Fani come with him after she had stayed away so long
now, just look about him.

The mother immediately called and told
him to bring the Oscar run in all directions to the Fani search, he
would probably best placed to find him, she said, and Marget could
then quietly go home, the Oscar would Fani then send home the same.
Meanwhile, Aunt Emma had done in her bedroom, and once they were
inside, Emmi convulsively clutched the arm of the aunt and anxiously
pleaded: "Help me, aunt, help me that there is nothing worse, and
that the dad is not evil, but most, Fanis mother that it understands
how good it will now go to him and that he will be a great painter
could. Today he is away to Basle. "

"What you say, Emma? What do
you say? It is so, God willing, not be true, "cried the aunt in great
terror of.

"Yes, it is certainly true, aunt, but to go and make Fanis
mother that she is right and "That she does not complain when Papa,
pleaded Emmi. "I'll tell you everything, you can learn to do already
see and tell Margaret how well it can go the Fani now.  She had put down her cup, and now sat with her fingers clasped
tightly together on her lap.  The two elder ladies faced her from the opposite side of the
room; Geoffrey fidgeted about, and finally seated himself--not by her side, as had obviously
been his first impulse--but some little distance away, where he could watch the expression
of her face.  Mrs Ramsden pushed the tea-table aside, and fidgeted with the jet trimming on
her cuff.

"I--er, I think we should get on better if Mr Greville would--would kindly leave us alone!"
she said awkwardly.  "We are well acquainted with his arguments, and as Elma is to decide,
there seems no object in his staying on.  Elma will, no doubt, feel quieter and less restrained
without his presence."

Madame's murmur of agreement was interrupted by a sharp exclamation from her son.  He looked
flushed and angry, but Elma checked him in his turn, and answered herself, in clear, decided
accents!  "No, mother!  I shall feel much better if Geoffrey is here.  I don't want him to
go.  If I am persuaded to give him up, it is only right that he should know my reasons.  He
will promise to listen quietly to what you have to say, as I am going to do, and not to interrupt
until you have done."  She turned towards her lover with a flickering smile.  "Won't you, Geoffrey?"

Geoffrey bit his moustache, and scowled heavily.

"I'll--do my best!" he said slowly.  "I'm not going away in any case. It's preposterous to
suppose that I could be absent while such a discussion was going on.  Elma knows that this
is a matter of life and death to me.  If you persuade her to give me up, it will be sending
me straight to the devil!"

Mrs Ramsden's eyes flashed with anger.

"If an earthly love is the only incentive you have to follow the paths of righteousness, Mr
Greville, that is a poor inducement to me to give my child into your care!  I have brought
her up to put principle first of all.  It is my chief objection to yourself that your character
is not worthy of the trust!"

"My dear lady, he is not a pickpocket!  You speak as if he were a hardened criminal," cried
Madame, with an irritated laugh.  "Geoffrey may not be a saint, but I assure you that, considered
as a young man of the world, he is quite a model specimen!  He has been an excellent son. There
have been no debts; no troubles of any kind.  Absolutely, at times I have accused him of being
almost too staid. ...  One can only be young once!..."

"I think you and Mrs Ramsden have somewhat different standards, mother," put in Geoffrey quietly.
He turned towards the last-mentioned lady, bending forward and speaking with deliberate emphasis.
"I quite agree with you, Mrs Ramsden, that I am unworthy of your daughter.  I wish I had been
a better man for her sake.  With her to help me I hope I might become a man more after your
own heart.  As my mother says, I have so far been a respectable member of society, for the
things which you condemn in me are after all matters of opinion, but at this moment I stand
at the parting of the ways.  If you give me Elma, I shall look upon her as a sacred trust,
and shall be a better man for her sake.  I must be a better man with her beside me! ...  If
you refuse; if she refuses"--he shrugged expressively--"you empty my life of all I value. The
responsibility will be upon your shoulders!"

"That is not true!  You can depute to nobody the responsibility of your own soul," Mrs Ramsden
began solemnly, but Madame interrupted with an impatient gesture.

"I thought Geoffrey was not to interfere!  For pity's sake don't let us waste time talking
sentiment!  We are here to discuss this matter in a sensible, business manner.  Let us begin
at once, and not waste time!"

To her surprise Elma met her glance with a smile.  A happy, composed little smile, which brought
the dimples into her soft cheeks.  Really the child was wonderful!  Her quietness and self-possession
were in delightful contrast with her mother's flustered solemnity.  Madame returned the smile,
with restored equanimity, and felt a thrill of artistic satisfaction.

"I am afraid Geoffrey and I hardly look at our engagement from a business point of view!" said
Elma, slowly.  "It is a matter of sentiment with us, and we are not a bit ashamed of it, but
I must answer mother first. ...  Mother, dear, you are shocked because Geoffrey says he would
not be good without me, but when you were young, when you were careless, and enjoyed things
which you disapprove of now, was there no good influence in your life which helped you to be
strong?  It may have been a companion, or a book, or a sermon--one of a hundred things-- but
when it came, weren't you thankful for it?  Didn't you hold close to it and fear lest it should
go?  I am Geoffrey's influence!  I'm glad and proud that it is so.  If I can help him in one
little way, I'd rather do it than anything else in all the world!  When he feels like that
about me, I should think it very, very wrong to give him up."

"Elma, my dear, these are specious arguments!  You are deceiving yourself, and preparing a
bitter awakening!  Mr Greville does not even understand what he is promising.  His ideas and
yours are different as night from day; the same words convey different meanings to you and
him. You would find as you talked together that there was a gulf between you on every serious
subject."

"No, mother, dear, there is no gulf.  We agree--we always agree!  I am amazed to find how marvellously
we agree," said Elma, simply. Geoffrey's eyes flashed a look at her; a look of adoring triumph.
Madame screwed her lips on one side, and stared markedly at a corner of the ceiling.  Mrs Ramsden
wrung her hands in despair.

"Elma, you pray every night to be delivered from temptation--consider what your position would
be if you married Mr Greville!  Ask yourself if you are strong enough to resist pride and selfishness,
and absorption in the things of this world.  Many would say that it was a great match for you,
but I would rather see you settled in a cottage with enough money for your daily needs.  It
is easier for a camel--"

Elma interrupted quickly.

"I don't think you need be afraid, mother.  I love beautiful things, but truly and honestly
I believe they are good for me!  It is a little difficult to explain, but ugly things--inartistic
things, jar!  They make me feel cross and discontented, while beauty is a joy!  I need not
become proud and self-engrossed because the things around me are beautiful and rich with associations.
On the contrary, they ought to do me good.  I'd love them so, and be so thankful, that I should
want other people to enjoy them, too.  It isn't riches themselves that one cares for--it is
the things that riches can give!"

Madame had been watching the girl's face as she spoke, her own expression kindling in sympathy
with views so entirely in accordance with her own, but at the last sentence her brows knitted.

"It's not a case of riches, my dear!" she said quickly.  "I don't think you understand the
position.  Geoffrey is a poor man.  The estate brings in little more than half what it did
in his father's time, and the expense of keeping it up increases rather than diminishes, as
the buildings grow older.  He ought to marry money.  All these years we have lived in the expectation
of a marriage which would pay up old scores, and put things on a better basis for the future.
If he marries a girl without money he will have to face constant anxiety and trouble."

Elma turned to her mother, her delicate brow puckered in anxiety.

"I shall have some money, shan't I, mother?  You told me that father left some provision for
me on my marriage!"

"You are to have three thousand pounds paid down if you marry with my consent.  My income is
largely derived from an annuity, Mrs Greville, but there will be about another five thousand
to come to Elma after death."

Madame bowed her head in gracious patronage.

"Very nice, I'm sure!  A very nice little sum for pin money, but quite useless for our purposes.
Don't hate me, Elma--I am the most unmercenary of women--Geoffrey will tell you that I am always
getting into debt!--but when a man is the owner of a property--which has descended to him from
generations of ancestors, his first duty is to it. Noblesse oblige!  It is not right to allow
it to fall into disrepair for a matter of sentiment!"

Elma sat with downcast looks considering the point, while Geoffrey devoured her face with hungry
eyes.  Mrs Ramsden's face had flushed to a painful red, and she passed her handkerchief nervously
round her lips. She could bear to torture her child herself, but not to sit by and hear another
woman follow in her own footsteps.

The silence lasted for a long minute before Elma replied by asking a question on her own behalf.

"Can it be right for a man to marry one woman for money, when he has given his heart to another?"

Mrs Greville tossed her head with another impatient little laugh.

"His heart!  Ah, my dear, a man's heart is an adaptable commodity!  He `gives it,' as you say,
many times over in the course of his life.  He is far more likely to love a wife whose money
brings him ease and comfort, than one for whose pretty face he has sacrificed his peace!"

Elma turned to her lover and looked deep into his eyes.  With a strong effort he had resisted
breaking into the conversation before now, but his face was more eloquent than words.  She
smiled at him, a tender little smile of encouragement.

"I am very economical.  I would help Geoffrey to save.  I have not been accustomed to luxuries,
so it would cost me nothing to do without them, and he says he doesn't care.  Don't think I
am selfish, Mrs Greville, please!  I am thinking of Geoffrey first, but I believe he would
be happier living quietly with me, and looking after the estate himself, instead of paying
an agent to do it, than if he sold himself for money and ease.  We love each other very much.
We need nothing more than just to be together."

Geoffrey turned aside and stared out of the window.  The two mothers exchanged helpless glances.

"Elma!" said Mrs Ramsden, sharply, "have you no pride?  It is hard enough for me to sit by
and listen.  Are you not ashamed to force yourself upon a family where you are not wanted?
When I have looked forward to your marriage, I have always imagined that you would be welcomed
with open arms.  For your own position you are well dowered.  I have been proud of you all
your life--too proud, perhaps--it would be a bitter blow to me to see you married on sufferance.
If you have no other feeling in the matter, does not your pride come to your aid?"

"Mother, I'm going to marry Geoffrey, not his family!  He can take care of his wife!"

"The child is right!" said Madame, quickly.  "Geoffrey's wife, whoever she may be, will be
treated with every respect.  It is not the judgment of others which she need dread, but the
judgment of her own heart. Listen to me, child!  You are a sweet thing, and I love you for
your devotion to my boy.  As I told you before, I should be in love with you in his place,
but I'm an old woman, and I know the world!  Geoffrey is not used to work and economy; for
a little time, while the first glamour lasted, he might be contented enough, but he would weary
in the end.  He would surely weary, and then--how would you feel?  When you saw him restless
and discontented; longing to leave you and fly back to his old life, would you feel no remorse?
Love's young dream does not last for ever, my pretty child."

"No," said Elma, quietly; "dreams don't last, but sometimes the awakening is better!  You have
known Geoffrey all his life, Mrs Greville, and it seems presumptuous to pretend that I know
him even better, but I can--feel!  You believe he would tire of me, and long to get back to
his old luxurious life.  You think he would love me very much for a little time and then be
indifferent and careless, and that I should feel it was my own fault; but you are wrong.  Indeed,
indeed, you are wrong!  He is your son--has he ever failed you?  You say yourself that he has
been good and true.  You would trust him for your own future.  Do you think he would be less
loyal to his own wife?  I am not at all afraid.  I am like you--I trust Geoffrey!"

As she finished speaking she turned towards her lover and held out her hand towards him, and
in two strides Geoffrey was by her side; was on his knees beside her, holding that little hand
pressed between both his own, turning to look at his mother with triumphant eyes; with eyes
ashine with something deeper than triumph.

Geoffrey on his knees!  Tears in Geoffrey's eyes!  Madame stared in amaze, then broke into
a sudden excited laugh.

"Bravo, Elma!  Bravo, Geoffrey!  Congratulations, my dears.  Thank heaven you have a mother
who knows when she is well beaten!"

She rose from her seat and crossed the room to where the girl sat. "Bravo, little Elma!  I
like to see a good fighting spirit.  You will make Geoffrey a charming wife, and I shall be
proud of my daughter." She took Elma's disengaged hand and pressed it between her own, and
the girl smiled a happy response, but Geoffrey was oblivious of her presence, his eyes fixed
upon his love's face, with the rapt, adoring gaze with which a knight of old may have gazed
upon the vision of the grail.  His mother looked at him, and her lips quivered.  Artificial
and frivolous though she was, her only son was dear to her heart.  Since the hour of his birth
he had been to her as a pivot round which the world revolved.  Her son--the last of the Grevilles
who had owned the Manor since the days of the Tudors.  To be alienated from him would be the
bitterest grief which life could bring.

Her grip tightened on the girl's hand.

"Elma!" she cried urgently.  "I am Geoffrey's mother.  He is yours now, and will be swayed
by you, but he has been mine for thirty-three years. If I have taken part against you, it has
been because I believed it was best for him.  I have lost, and you have won.  You will be his
wife, the mistress of the Manor.  I don't grudge you your success, but don't-- don't bear me
a grudge!  Don't turn my boy against me!"

"Mrs Greville!" gasped Elma, breathlessly.  "Mrs Greville!"  She pulled her hand from Geoffrey's
grasp, and rose swiftly to her feet. "Oh, please don't think that I could be so mean!  I want
him to love you more, not less.  I want to be a real daughter!  You must not think that I am
going to drive you from your place.  You must stay on at the Manor, and let me learn from you.
There is so much that I shall have to learn.  I shall be quite satisfied to be allowed to help!"

"Silly child!" said Madame, smiling.  She lifted her delicate, ringed hand and stroked the
girl's cheeks with kindly patronage.  "You don't know what you are talking about, my dear,
but I do--fortunately for us all!  Geoffrey's wife must have no divided rule.  You need not
trouble your pretty head about me.  Norton palls at times even to a Greville, and I shall enjoy
my liberty.  I'll go out and spend a cold weather with Carol; I'll have a cosy little flat
in town, and do the theatres.  I'll enjoy myself gadding about, and come down upon you now
and then when I want a rest, but I'll never live with you, my dear; be sure of that!"

"It's rather early to make plans, mater.  Things will arrange themselves.  Elma and I will
always try to make you happy," said Geoffrey, bluntly.

He, too, had risen, and stood by his mother's side; flushed, triumphant, a little shamefaced
at the remembrance of his late emotion; but transparently and most radiantly happy.  "I'll
do all in my power to be a good son to you, and to Mrs Ramsden also if she will allow me!"

He was the first of the three to remember the existence of the little woman in the background;
the little woman who was sobbing into her handkerchief, shedding bitter tears because, forsooth,
her daughter had secured the biggest match in the country-side, and was about to become a Greville
of Norton Manor!

CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

The parental summons arrived ten days after the date of Elma's formal engagement, and at the
expiration of the seventh week of Cornelia's sojourn in England.  There it was for all the
world to see;--short, authoritative, and to the point.  Circumstances had altered Poppar's
plan.  His visit to Europe must be postponed, he desired his daughter to return home by the
first possible boat.  Useless to exclaim, to argue, to condemn.  The command had gone forth;
implicit obedience must ensue.

"Will you feel badly when I'm gone, Aunt Soph?"  Cornelia asked after the news had been broken.
She looked wistfully into the spinster's face, and felt herself answered as she noted the involuntary
momentary hesitation which preceded the reply.

"It will naturally be a disappointment to me to miss seeing my brother, but I hope the pleasure
is only deferred.  I am glad to have had an opportunity of making your acquaintance, my dear,
though the time is so curtailed."

"Yes, I guess we've fixed-up an acquaintance right enough!" said Cornelia, quietly.  Seven
weeks, or seven years--what did it matter? She and this woman could never become friends. 
Time counts for nothing in the intercourse of souls.  An hour may reveal a kindred spirit;
no years can bridge some gaps.  Elma would remain a life-long friend, Guest a life-long memory,
but her kinswoman, the nearest on earth with the one exception of her father, must for ever
be a stranger.

Cornelia was sad at heart that day, and Elma was sad, too; opening wide, startled eyes, and
clasping her friend in jealous arms.

"Cornelia, it isn't true!  It can't be true!  I can't spare you, dear. Is it really impossible
to stay on a little longer?  Geoffrey and I counted on you for our wedding.  It is fixed for
October, and I wanted you for a bridesmaid.  I wanted you to pay me a visit in my own house!
You have been such a friend to us both, that we need you, Cornelia!  I shall miss you badly!"

"Shucks!" returned Cornelia, lightly.  "You'll forget there is such a creature in existence.
I should, in your place, and I don't mind if you do, for I know you'll remember again another
day.  This is Geoffrey's hour, and I won't interfere.  If I live, I'll pay you that visit right
enough, and maybe you'll come over to see me.  I'd give you a roaring time.  Tell Geoffrey
he is bound to bring you over to see America.  I'll think about you on your marriage-day, but
I don't know as I'm sorry to do the thinking at a distance.  Wedding-days aren't the liveliest
occasions in the world for the looker-on.  I guess I'd feel pretty `left,' when you drove off
from the gates, and I found myself all by my lonesome with the two old girls. ...  I've wired
to Liverpool about berths, and may have to start off at a day's notice, so we've got to make
the most of the time.  Aunt Soph don't care!  She's polite, of course, but right at the back
of her mind I can see she's planning to clean out my room, and thinking how good it will be
to have the mats laid aside, and the shroudings over the tables!  If it wasn't for you, Moss
Rose, I should feel I'd done a fool-trick coming over at all!  When all's said and done it
amounts to nothing but disappointment and heart- break."

"You mean," began Elma, "you mean--" and then suddenly paused.  Why should Cornelia's heart
break?  Disappointment and disillusion would be natural enough in one who had experienced both
coldness and deception within the last few weeks, but heart-break was too strong a term.  To
Elma, with her mind full to overflowing of that beloved Geoffrey, it seemed as if nothing but
love could count so seriously in life.  Her thoughts flew to Guest, recalling all she had heard
of his knight- errantry in London; of the long hours which the two had spent alone together;
and later on, of the daily meetings in the Park, planned for her own benefit, but none the
less opportunities for fuller knowledge. She fixed her blue eyes on Cornelia's face, and asked
a sudden question--

"Does Captain Guest know that you are going?"

"How should he?" returned Cornelia, lightly.  Eyes and lips were unflinching, but all the will
in the world could not keep the blood from her cheeks.  "He's visiting somewhere at the other
end of the country, with old friends who belong to his own world, and feel the same way about
the same things.  Let him stay and be happy!  I don't want him to come worrying down here for
the fun of saying good-bye.  Guess he's had trouble enough about my affairs.  Mind now, Elma,
you are not to tell him!  This is my affair, and I won't have you interfere."

Elma meekly disavowed any intention of communicating with Captain Guest, but like many other
meek people she harboured a quiet reservation which annulled the promise.  She would not write,
but--Geoffrey could! Geoffrey should!  That flame in Cornelia's cheek satisfied her that the
girl's interest was deeper than she would admit, and if Guest returned the feeling, what joy,
what rapture to have Cornelia settled in England; to look forward to a life of constant intercourse!
Cornelia had helped her; according to her lights Elma was determined to help Cornelia also.

With disconcerting swiftness a return telegram arrived from Liverpool stating that owing to
illness a passenger had been suddenly obliged to resign a state-room on the boat sailing on
the following Saturday, and that the accommodation would be reserved pending Miss Briskett's
confirmation.  An immediate reply was requested.

Cornelia gasped and hesitated.  Four days!  Only four days, and then farewell to England and
English friends.  She had not expected anything so speedy as this.  During these summer months
berths were engaged so long ahead that it was generally a most difficult thing to arrange for
a speedy passage.  She had been told of this over and over again; had known of her friends'
difficulties in such matters; in the background of her mind had counted on a similar delay
in her own case.  In a week or a fortnight much might happen, but in four days!  She stood
battling with temptation, while Mary watched her with anxious eyes.  No one but herself knew
the purport of the message; no one need know if the answer were a refusal.  Two or three scribbled
words would give her a reprieve. ...  Poor Cornelia!  She realised afresh how easy it was to
be brave in anticipation, how bitterly hard in actual fact.  She was silent so long that Mary
summoned up courage to ask a question--

"Is it bad news, miss?"

Cornelia stared at her blankly for a moment, and valiantly forced a smile.

"I guess there's two sides to it, as there are to most things in this world.  My Poppar'll
think it splendid, but you'll hate it badly enough. I'm going pretty quick, Mury!  You won't
have me but four days more!"

The truth was out.  She had burned her boats, and made retreat impossible.  While Mary wept
and lamented, Cornelia wrote the confirmatory wire, and sent it out to the waiting messenger.
Then Mary returned to continue her lamentations.

"I wish I could marry him, and be done with it!  I can't seem to face staying on here with
no one but her in the house, nagging at us all the day.  I'll have to make another move!" she
proclaimed dismally.  In Mary's converse the singular pronoun, when masculine, always applied
to her friend; when feminine, to her mistress.  Cornelia had grasped this fact, and had therefore
no difficulty in understanding her meaning.  She sat down in a chair by the window, and stared
at the maid with serious eyes.

"Do you love him, Mury?  Enough to marry him, and live beside him every one day to the end
of your life?  You think you would not get--tired?"

Mary hesitated, unwilling to commit herself.  "I wouldn't like to go so far as that," she announced
judicially.  "He aggravates me at times something cruel, but I'd sooner be aggravated by him
nor anyone else. They talk a lot of rubbish about love, Miss Cornelia, but that's about the
size of it when all's said and done.  Some people suit you and others don't, and all the lovey-doveying
in the world won't make 'em--"

"Why, Mury, you are a philosopher!  It's the dead truth, Mury, but I guess you needn't rub
it in.--If you've made up your mind, why need you wait?"

"Furniture, miss!  I've told him I won't marry to go into rooms, not if it's ever so.  I'll
wait till I get a 'ome of me own.  He'd put by a goodish bit, and so had I, but things have
been agen us.  He was out of work four months last winter, and mother's legs are a awful drain--
liniments, and bandages, and what-not.  You can't see your own mother suffer, and not pay out.
We've got to wait till we save up again."

"How much money does it take to furnish a cottage over here, Mury?"

"That depends on how it's done.  You can do it 'an'some for forty pounds.  I lived with a girl
who did hers for twenty, but I wouldn't like to be as close as that.  I reckon about thirty."

"Thirty pounds!  One hundred and fifty dollars!"  Cornelia gasped in astonishment at the smallness
of the sum.  "You can't mean that that includes everything--chairs and tables, and carpets,
and dishes, and beds, and bureaus, and brooms, and tins, and curtains, and fire-irons-- and
all the fixing to put 'em up!  It isn't possible you can get them all for a hundred and fifty
dollars!"

"You can, miss.  There's a shop in the Fore Street where they do you everything complete for
three rooms for thirty pounds, with a velvet suite for the parlour.  Lady's chair, gent's chair,
sofa, and four uprights, with chiffonnier, and overmantel, and all.  You couldn't wish for
anything better.  The girl I lived with had only a few odd bits--I'd be ashamed to have such
a poor sort of parlour.--In the kitchen they give you a dresser, and a flap-table, and linoleum
on the floor.  Jim and me went to the shop one day to have a look round. ...  That was when
he had a bit put by!"  Mary sighed, and flicked away a tear.  "And now you're going next! 
I'm getting a bit sick of bad luck, I am!"

Cornelia was bending forward in her seat, her chin supported in the palms of her hands.  Her
expression was very grave and wistful, but in her eyes shone the light of awakened interest.

"Mury!--you've been real good and attentive to me.  I guess I've given you quite a heap of
trouble.  I want to make you a present before I go. Would you like it if I fixed-up that house
so's you could get married right away?  If you say so, you can go to that store and make your
own bargains, and I'll leave thirty pounds with Miss Ramsden to pay the bills.  I'd like to
feel I'd helped you to a home of your own, Mury!"

Mary clutched the back of a chair near to which she was standing; her eyes protruded, her chin
dropped, speech failed her in the excess of emotion.  She could only stare, and gasp, and stare
again.

"Poor Mury!" said Cornelia, softly.  "Are you so pleased?  I want you should be pleased.  If
I ken make someone happy to-day--right-down, tearing happy, it's going to help me more'n you
know. ...  Won't you enjoy going shopping with your friend, Mury, bossing round in that store,
choosing the things you want, and putting on airs as if you owned the bank?  Mind you put on
airs, Mury!  Make 'em hop round, and get things to your taste.  They'll think the more of you,
and it's not every day one furnishes a house. ...  I'll send you my picture to stand on the
mantelpiece in that parlour, and when you dust it in the mornings, you can send me a kind thought
'way over all those miles of ocean, and I'll think of you sitting in the lady's chair. ...
For the land's sake, girl, don't have a fit!  You don't need to have a thing unless you say so!"

"Oh, Miss Cornelia!" sobbed Mary, brokenly.  "You're too--I'm so--you're an angel, Miss Cornelia,
that's what you are! ...  Jim will go off his head when he hears this.--It's a sort of thing
you can't seem to believe.--I loved to wait on you, miss; if you'd never given me a thing I'd
have loved it all the same--you talked so kind, and took such an interest, and was always so
lively and laughing.  It wasn't for what I could get--but the house! ...  To have a house thrown
at you, as you may say, at a moment's notice--it--takes away my breath!  I can't seem to take
it in."

"But you are happy, Mury?  You feel happy to think of it?"

"I should think I do just.  Clean dazed with happiness!"

"Poor Mury!" said Cornelia, again.  She looked across the room at the flushed, ecstatic face
of the prospective bride, and smiled with tender sympathy.

"I'm real glad you're pleased.  To-night, just as soon as dinner's over, you must go out and
tell your friend.  I'll fix it up with Aunt Soph. You'll have a fine time, won't you?  He won't
believe it's true, but you'll make him believe, and be as happy as grigs walking round and
planning out that parlour.  Come into my room when you get back and tell me what he says. 
I shan't be asleep!"

There seemed no time for sleep during the next few days. - Emmi is a continuous joy fever. Well, the Fani really on the way, after
they had striven so long for him on the road, a large Become a painter. For as Mrs. Stanhope
has taken such a liking for him, he will certainly all of it can ask for, even his job. Emmi
but the coming together with the Fani almost expect not, because every day you come for a new
proposal in the sense that they it certainly has to make for his future career. - Fred has
his hands full of work. He looks forward to such an enormous enrichment of his collections
of insects and amphibians, that he is now only concerned about how he would accommodate for
all its riches. He The aunt has taken the firm promise that every large and small box of the
house; that is not being used, is in his room, where already piled up a considerable pile stands.
He would also like to send out, like Oscar, a request in the world, that to him all 'd like to send expendable
boxes from everywhere, but the mother does not agree thus, for the kind contributions could be
great for the available space. - The Rikli but, for the first time in his life without secret terror
of joy give a great pleasure. Since so far all he delights in company with his brother Fred
had been bestowed, then had his feelings behind each of them a bit scary lurked, the creep at
once or do a tremendous jump could. Now Rikli knows that it will come under the protection of
the good Aunt Clarissa, and from there can safely join in everything that runs in the beautiful house
and garden on the Rhine should be.

Fani and Elsli but be happier day by day and domestic in their new Life and have no desire more
than just that soon come a time when their good friends can arrive
and all the beauty that surrounds them to know, learn and share it
with them.

The good Klarissa but ensures that Fani and Elsli not forget the love
God has led them to such friends.

She likes the children to the place where Philo and Nora are buried, and reminds them here of how
quickly and unexpectedly life can the people from suffering to joy transformed how both of them,
and Fani Elsli it out had, but that it also quickly run out of joy and sorrow in the midst
of his sunshine can fall into the shadow of death, and that only those who remain safe and happy
who love to trust God that keeps everything in his hand, and for good leads.

Print by Friedrich Andreas Perthes, a public company, Gotha.

Friedrich Andreas Perthes A.-G. Gotha.

Johanna Spyri.

have stories for children and for those who love the children.
16 volumes. 8 °. Illustrated. Eleg. a bound M 3 - Each volume is
complete in itself.

Homeless. From near and far. Heidi's teaching
and years of travel. From our country. Heidi may need what has been
taught. Uncle Titus. Short stories I Gritli I. Gritli II Short stories
Artur II and Squirrel. From the Swiss mountains.  With Cornelia America was a passion; life away from her native land was
only half a life.

Aboard the great steamer the passengers were rushing to and fro, searching for their state-rooms,
and, when found, depositing their impedimenta on the tops of the narrow white bunks.

Cornelia walked to the quietest corner of the deck, dropped her bag on a seat, and leant idly
over the rail.  She was in no hurry to go below, and held instinctively aloof from the groups
of fellow-passengers and their friends.  She was alone, and her heart was sad.

Someone walking quickly along the deck caught sight of the solitary figure in the trim, dark-blue
dress, and recognised its outline before a turn of the head revealed the glorious, flaming
hair.  Someone with a grim face, pale beneath his tan, with haggard lines about the eyes and
mouth; a man whose looks betrayed the fact that he had been awake all night, face to face with
calamity.  He walked straight to the girl's side, and laid his hand upon her arm.

"Cornelia!"

Cornelia turned swiftly, and a light leapt into her eyes; a light of joy, so pure and involuntary
that, at sight of it, the man's face lost something of its grim tension.  He turned his back
so as to screen the girl from the passers-by, and his hand tightened on her arm.

"Cornelia, are you running away from me?"

She did not answer, but her silence gave assent--her silence, and a quiet bend of the head.

"Why?"

"I was--afraid!" breathed Cornelia, low.

Beneath the close-fitting cap Guest could see her lips tremble.  The little face looked white
and tense.  She twisted her fingers nervously.

"Afraid of me, and my love?  Afraid that I should come back to trouble you?  Afraid of my selfishness,
Cornelia?"

The curling lips breathed a faint dissent.

"Of what, then?  We have only a few minutes left. The
female lays four large eggs - do you listen to too, aunt? Do you know what I read last have? "

"Yes,
I suppose: The female lays four large eggs, two tablespoons of flour
and lemon rind," said his aunt, suddenly pursuing their thoughts.

Fred looked very frightened up with wide eyes to his aunt, for she had quite dry and without any
fun as talking.

"Oh," interrupted the aunt again, who had so much to deal with at
once and now aware of their mistake was, I'm into it only came in
the recipe, just driving away.

"

"Yes, so this is something else," remarked Fred reassured, "because
you will not but my aunt, Birds that lay lemon peel. Now on: The meat
tastes like - "

Here, the lecture was interrupted.

The words came in quick, gasping breaths, as a child might speak who tried to justify himself
to his taskmaster.  Guest's face softened at the sound, and his grasp of the girl's arm turned
into a caress.

"Darling, don't you see what that means?  You love me, or you would not be afraid.  Geoffrey
wrote to me giving me warning, but the letter only reached me late yesterday night.  I have
been travelling ever since.  I just managed to be here in time.  If I had missed the boat I
should have come after you.  Do you think a few thousand miles are going to keep us apart,
Cornelia?"

She shook her head sadly.  "No!--no distance in space, just the distance between our two selves;
the distance that can't be bridged!  We belong to different worlds, you and I; we could never
be happy together.  You love forms and ceremonies, and conventions; all the things that worry
me most, and make me feel ugly.  It's the height of your ambition to settle down in your old
home, and to keep things rolling along in the same old ruts that they've run in for centuries.
I want change and excitement, and the newest there is.  Your quiet English life would get on
my nerves. The afternoon he
remained in his room with the pleasant consciousness, to be searched for and missed. But this
absence was not noticed so much from her, against which they actually targeted , but was designed
for the poor boys to torment  I don't say that the advantage is all on
our side.  I used to laugh at English girls, but I don't any longer, since I've known Elma
Ramsden. But he did not revolt. In him was all truncated
by the fatigue, and then he was very annoyed, asleep up here to be, instead of waiting awake.
"Just like a little child, he said indignantly to himself, before he fell asleep again.


"You don't love me, or you would not think of anything else.  Whatever may be the differences
between us, you are the one woman I have ever wanted for my wife.  I can't bear to let you
go. ...  Don't trifle with me for the few minutes that are left.  Tell me honestly how we stand.
...  Do you love me, Cornelia?"

"I--could!" answered Cornelia, slowly.  Her cheeks flushed beneath his gaze, and the white
lids drooped over the honest eyes.  "It was just finding out how easy it would be, that sent
me running home.  The people at Norton think it was Poppar's doing, but I'll tell you straight
that I asked him to send for me. Or rather, she felt anger against himself, a faint murmur
of guilt and shame that she wanted to scream. "Go straight to bed, you naughty brat, "she shouted
at him. Edgar was surprised to meet her. Why was she so angry with him, he had done nothing?
  You went away to think it out; perhaps, if the truth's known, you were
still undecided when the news of my sailing brought you up with a run.  When I am gone and
you have had time to cool down, you'll be glad!"

Guest repeated the word with bitter emphasis.

"Glad! In the unrest his
imagination, he dreamed of an accident or unconsciously inflicted insult and was close to cry
because of impatience and anxiety.

When the Baron came to dinner in the evening, he was received shiny.  Can you bear
to go away like this and leave me for ever?  Is it nothing to you how I suffer?  Don't you
care, Cornelia?"

