

The whale makes us more trouble; it certainly looks remarkably like a fish. But the fin of
its tail is horizontal, not vertical. Its front flippers differ altogether from the corresponding
fins of fish; their bones are the same as those occurring in the forelegs of mammals, only
shorter and more crowded together. Later we find that it has lungs, and a heart with four chambers
instead of only two, as in fish. The vertebræ of its backbone are not biconcave, but flat in
front and behind. And, finally, we discover that it suckles its young. It, too, is in all its
deep-seated characteristics a mammal. It is fish-like only in characteristics which it might
easily have acquired in adaptation to its aquatic life. And there are other aquatic mammals,
like the seals, in which these characteristics are much less marked. Their adaptation has evidently
not gone so far.

Now the first attempts resulted in artificial classifications, much like our grouping of bats
with birds and whales with fish. All animals, like coral animals and starfishes, whose similar
parts were arranged in lines radiating from a centre, were united as radiates, however much
they might differ in internal structure and grade of organization. But this radiate structure
proved again to be largely a matter of adaptation.

Practically all animals having a heavy calcareous shell were grouped with the snails and oysters
as mollusks. But the barnacle did not fit well with other mollusks. Its shell was entirely
different. It had several pairs of legs; and no mollusk has legs. The barnacle is evidently
a sessile crab or better crustacean. Its molluscan characteristics were only skin-deep, evidently
an adaptation to a mode of life like that of mollusks. The old artificial systems were based
too much on merely external characteristics, the results of adaptation. When the internal anatomy
had been thoroughly studied their groups had to be rearranged.

Reptiles and amphibia were at first united in one class because of their resemblance in external
form. Our common salamanders look so much like lizards that they generally pass by this name.
But the young salamander, like all amphibia, breathes by gills, its skeleton differs greatly
from, and is far weaker than, that of the lizard, and there are important differences in the
circulatory and other systems. Moreover, practically all amphibia differ from all reptiles
in these respects. Evidently the fact that the alligator and many snakes and turtles (of which
neither the young nor the embryos ever breathe by gills) live almost entirely in the water,
is no better reason for classifying these with amphibia than to call a whale a fish, and not
a mammal, because of its form and aquatic life.

When the comparative anatomy of fish, amphibia, and reptiles had been carefully studied it
was evident that the amphibia stood far nearer the fish in general structure, while the higher
reptiles closely approached birds. Then it was noticed that our common fish formed a fairly
well-defined group, but that the ganoids, including the sturgeons, gar-pikes, and some others,
had at least traces of amphibian characteristics. Such generalized forms, with the characteristics
of the class less sharply marked, were usually by common consent placed at the bottom of the
class. And this suited well their general structure, while in particular characteristics they
were often more highly organized than higher groups of the same class.

The palæontologist found that the oldest fossil forms belonged to these generalized groups,
and that more highly specialized forms--that is, those in which the special class distinctions
were more sharply and universally marked--were of later geological origin. Thus the oldest
fish were most like our present ganoids and sharks, though differing much from both. Our common
teleost fish, like perch and cod, appeared much later. The oldest bird, the archæopteryx, had
a long tail like that of a lizard, and teeth; and thus stood in many respects almost midway
between birds and reptiles. And most of the earliest forms were "comprehensive," uniting the
characteristics of two or more later groups. Thus as the classification became more natural,
based on a careful comparison of the whole anatomy of the animals, its order was found to coincide
in general with that of geological succession.

Then the zoölogist began to ask and investigate how the animal grew in the egg and attained
its definite form. And this study of embryology brought to light many new and interesting facts.
Agassiz especially emphasized and maintained the universality of the fact that there was a
remarkable parallelism between embryos of later forms and adults of old or fossil groups. The
embryos of higher forms, he said, pass through and beyond certain stages of structure, which
are permanent in lower and older members of the same group.

You remember that the fin on the tail of a fish is as a rule bilobed. Now the backbone of a
perch or cod ends at a point in the end of the tail opposite the angle between the two lobes,
without extending out into either of them. In the shark it extends almost to the end of the
upper lobe. Now we have seen that sharks and ganoids are older than cod. In the embryo of the
cod or perch the backbone has, at an early stage, the same position as in the shark or ganoid;
only at a later stage does it attain its definite position.

So Agassiz says the young lepidosteus (a ganoid fish), long after it is hatched, exhibits in
the form of its tail characters thus far known only among the fossil fishes of the Devonian
period. The embryology of turtles throws light upon the fossil chelonians. It is already known
that the embryonic changes of frogs and toads coincide with what is known of their succession
in past ages. The characteristics of extinct genera of mammals exhibit everywhere indications
that their living representatives in early life resemble them more than they do their own parents.
A minute comparison of a young elephant with any mastodon will show this most fully, not only
in the peculiarities of their teeth, but even in the proportion of their limbs, their toes,
etc. It may therefore be considered as a general fact that the phases of development of all
living animals correspond to the order of succession of their extinct representatives in past
geological times. The above statements are quoted almost word for word from Professor Agassiz's
"Essay on Classification." The larvæ of barnacles and other more degraded parasitic crustacea
are almost exactly like those of Crustacea in general. The embryos of birds have a long tail
containing almost or quite as many vertebræ as that of archæopteryx. But most of these never
reach their full development but are absorbed into the pelvis, or into the "ploughshare" bone
supporting the tail feathers. Thus older forms may be said to have retained throughout life
a condition only embryonic in their higher relatives. And the natural classification gave the
order not only of geological succession but also of stages of embryonic development. Thus the
system of classification improved continually, although more and more intermediate forms, like
archæopteryx, were discovered, and certain aberrant groups could find no permanent resting-place.

But why should the generalized comprehensive forms stand at the bottom rather than the top
of the systematic arrangement of their classes? Why should the system of classification coincide
with the order of geologic occurrence, and this with the series of embryonic stages? Above
all, why should the embryos of bird and perch form their tails by such a roundabout method?
Why should the embryo of the bird have the tail of a lizard? No one could give any satisfactory
explanation, although the facts were undoubted.

Mr. Darwin's theory was the one impulse needed to crystallize these disconnected facts into
one comprehensible whole. The connecting link was everywhere common descent, difference was
due to the continual variation and divergence of their ancestors. The classification, which
all were seeking, was really the ancestral tree of the animal kingdom. Forms more generalized
should be placed lower down on the ancestral tree, and must have had an earlier geological
occurrence because they represented more nearly the ancestors of the higher. But this explains
also the facts of embryonic development.

According to Mr. Darwin's theory all the species of higher animals have developed from unicellular
ancestors. It had long been known that all higher forms start in life as single cells, egg
and spermatozoon. And these, fused in the process of fertilization, form still a single cell.
And when this single cell proceeds through successive embryonic stages to develop into an adult
individual it naturally, through force of hereditary habit, so to speak, treads the same path
which its ancestors followed from the unicellular condition to their present point of development.
Thus higher forms should be expected to show traces of their early ancestry in their embryonic
life. Older and lower adult forms should represent persistent embryonic stages of higher. It
could not well be otherwise.

But the path which the embryo has to follow from the egg to the adult form is continually lengthening
as life advances ever higher. From egg to sponge is, comparatively speaking, but a step; it
is a long march from the egg to the earthworm; and the vertebrate embryo makes a vast journey.
But embryonic life is and must remain short. What, so you don't believe in me either, REBECCA--you
never did! [Sits listlessly on chair.

Reb. Not much, dear, when you are left to yourself--but I've another confession to make.

Rosmer. What, another? I really can't stand any more confessions just now!

Reb. (sitting close to him).

It is only a little one. I bullied BEATA into the mill-race--because of a wild uncontrollable--
(ROSMER moves uneasily.) Sit still, dear--uncontrollable fancy--for you!

Rosmer (goes and sits on sofa). Oh, my goodness, REBECCA--you mustn't, you know!

[He jumps up and down as if embarrassed.

Reb. Don't be alarmed, dear, it is all over now. After living alone with you in solitude, when
you showed me all your thoughts without reserve,--little by little,
somehow the fancy passed off.

I caught the ROSMER view of life badly, and dulness descended on my soul as an extinguisher
upon one of our Northern dips. The ROSMER view of life is ennobling, very--but hardly lively. And
I've more yet to tell you.

Rosmer (turning it off). Isn't that enough for one evening P

Reb. (almost voiceless). No, dear. I have a Past--behind me!

Rosmer.
Behind you? How strange. I had an idea of that sort already. (Starts,
as if in fear.) A joke! (Sadly.) Ah, no--no, I must not give way to
that! Never mind the Past, REBECCA; I once thought that I had made
the grand discovery that, if one is only virtuous, one will be happy.
I see now it was too daring, too original--an immature dream. What
bothers me is that I can't--somehow I can't--believe entirely in you--I
am not even sure that I have ennobled you so very much--isn't it terrible?

Reb.
(wringing her hands). Oh, this killing doubt! (Looks darkly at him.)
Is there anything I can do to convince you?

Rosmer (as if impelled
to speak against his will). Yes, one thing--only I'm afraid you wouldn't
see it in the same light. And yet I must mention it. It is like this.
I want to recover faith in my mission, in my power to ennoble human
souls. Each source has its difficulties or defects. But taken all together
they give us a genealogical tree which is in the main points correct, though here and there
very defective and doubtful in detail. The points in which we are left most in doubt in regard
to each ancestor are its modes of life and locomotion, and body form. But these may temporarily
vary considerably without affecting to any great extent the general plan of structure and the
line of development of the most important deep-seated organs.

I have chosen a line composed of forms taken from the comparative anatomical series. All such
present existing forms have probably been modified during the lapse of ages. But I shall try
to tell you when they have diverged noticeably from the structure of the primitive ancestor
of the corresponding stage. It is much safer for us to study concrete, actual forms than imaginary
ones, however real may have been the former existence of the latter. And, after all, their
lateral divergence is of small account compared with the great upward and onward march of life,
to the right and left of which they have remained stationary or retrograded somewhat, like
the tribes which remained on the other side of Jordan and never entered the Promised Land.

To recapitulate: Our question is the Whence and the Whither of man. To this question the Bible
gives a clear and definite answer. Can Science also give an answer, and is this in the main
in accord with the answer of Scripture? Science can answer the question only by the historical
method of tracing the history of life in the past and observing the goal toward which it tends.
If the evolution theory be true, the record of human achievement and progress forms only one
short chapter in the history of the ages. If from the records of man's little span of life
on the globe we can deduce laws of history on whose truth we can rely, with how much greater
confidence and certainty may we rely on laws which have governed all life since its earliest
appearance?--always provided that such can be found.

Our first effort must therefore be to trace the great line of development through a few of
its most characteristic stages from the simplest living beings up to man. This will be our
work in the three succeeding lectures. And to these I must ask you to bring a large store of
patience. Anatomical details are at best dry and uninteresting. But these dry facts of anatomy
form the foundation on which all our arguments and hopes must rest.

But if you will think long and carefully even of anatomical facts, you will see in and behind
them something more and grander than they. You will catch glimpses of the divinity of Nature.
Most of us travel threescore years and ten stone-blind in a world of marvellous beauty. Why
does the artist see so much more in every fence-corner and on every hill-side than we, set
face to face with the grandest landscapes? Primarily, I believe, because he is sympathetic,
and looks on Nature as a comrade as near and dear as any human sister and companion. As Professor
Huxley has said, "they get on rarely together." She speaks to the artist; to us she is dumb,
and ought to be, for we are boorishly careless of her and her teachings.

Nature, to be known, must be loved. And though you have all the knowledge of a von Humboldt,
and do not love her, you will never understand her or her teachings. You will go through life
with her, and yet parted from her as by an adamantine wall.

I do not suppose that the author of the book of Job had ever studied geology, or mineralogy,
or biology, but read him, and see whether this old prince of scientific heroes had loved, and
understood, and caught the spirit of Nature. And what a grand, free spirit it was, and what
a giant it made of him. I do not believe that Paul ever had a special course of anatomy or
botany. But if he had not pondered long and lovingly on the structure of his body, and the
germination of the seed, he never could have written the twelfth and fifteenth chapters of
the first letter to the Corinthians. And time fails to speak of David and all the writers of
the Psalms, and of those heroic souls misnamed the "Minor" Prophets.

Study the teachings of our Lord. How he must have considered the lilies of the field, and that
such a tiny seed as that of the mustard could have produced so great an herb, and noticed and
thought on the thorns and the tares and the wheat, and watched the sparrows, and pondered and
wondered how the birds were fed. All his teaching was drawn from Nature. And all the study
in the world could never have taught him what he knew, if it had not been a loving and appreciative
study.

There is one strange and interesting passage in John's Gospel, xv. 1: "I am the true vine."
My father used to tell us that the Greek word [Greek: alêthinê], rendered true, is usually
employed of the genuine in distinction from the counterfeit, the reality in distinction from
the shadow and image. Is not this perhaps the clew to our Lord's use of natural imagery? Nature
was always the presentation to his senses of the divine thought and purpose. He studied the
words of the ancient Scripture, he found the same words and teachings clearly and concretely
embodied in the processes of Nature. The interpretation of the Parable of the Sower was no
mere play of fancy to him; it was the genuine and fundamental truth, deeper and more real than
the existence of the sower, the soil, and the seed. The spiritual truth was the substance;
the tangible soil and seed really only the shadow. And thus all Nature was to him divine.

We all of us need to offer the prayer of the blind man, "Lord, that our eyes may be opened."
Let us learn, too, from the old heathen giant, Antæus, who, after every defeat and fall, rose
strengthened and vivified from contact with his mother Earth. You will experience in life many
a desperate struggle, many a hard fall. There is at such times nothing in the world so strengthening,
healing, and life-giving as the thoughts and encouragements which Nature pours into the hearts
and minds of her loving disciples. She will set you on your feet again, infused with new life,
filled with an unconquerable spirit, with unfaltering courage, and an iron will to fight once
more and win. In every battle her inspiring words will ring in your ears, and she will never
fail you. We may not see her deepest realities, her rarest treasures of thought and wisdom;
but if we will listen lovingly for her voice, we may be assured that she will speak to us many
a word of cheer and encouragement, of warning and exhortation. For, to paraphrase the language
of the nineteenth Psalm, "She has no speech nor language, her voice is not heard. But her rule
is gone out throughout all the earth, and her words to the end of the world."

CHAPTER II

PROTOZOA TO WORMS: CELLS, TISSUES, AND ORGANS

The first and lowest form in our ancestral series is the amoeba, a little fresh-water animal
from 1/500 to 1/1000 of an inch in diameter. Under the microscope it looks like a little drop
of mucilage. This semifluid, mucilaginous substance is the Protoplasm. Its outer portion is
clear and transparent, its inner more granular. In the inner portion is a little spheroidal
body, the nucleus. This is certainly of great importance in the life of the animal; but just
what it does, or what is its relation to the surrounding protoplasm we do not yet know. There
is also a little cavity around which the protoplasm has drawn back, and on which it will soon
close in again, so that it pulsates like a heart. It is continually taking in water from the
body, or the outside, and driving it out again, and thus aids in respiration and excretion.
The animal has no organs in the proper sense of the word, and yet it has the rudiments of all
the functions which we possess.

A little projection of the outer, clearer layer of protoplasm, a pseudopodium, appears; into
this the whole animal may flow and thus advance a step, or the projection may be withdrawn.
And this power of change of form is a lower grade of the contractility of our muscular cells.
Prick it with a needle and it contracts. It recognizes its food even at a microscopic distance;
it appears therefore to feel and perceive. Perhaps we might say that it has a mind and will
of its own. It is safer to say that it is irritable, that is, it reacts to stimuli too feeble
to be regarded as the cause of its reaction. It engulfs microscopic plants, and digests them
in the internal protoplasm by the aid of an acid secretion. It breathes oxygen, and excretes
carbonic acid and urea, through its whole body surface. Its mode of gaining the energy which
it manifests is therefore apparently like our own, by combustion of food material.

It grows and reaches a certain size, then constricts itself in the middle and divides into
two. The old amoeba has divided into two young ones, and there is no parent left to die, and
death, except by violence, does not occur. But this absence of death in other rather distant
relatives of the amoeba, and probably in the amoeba itself, holds true only provided that,
after a series of self-divisions, reproduction takes place after another mode. Two rather small
and weak individuals fuse together in one animal of renewed vigor, which soon divides into
two larger and stronger descendants. We have here evidently a process corresponding to the
fertilization of the egg in higher animals; yet there is no egg, spermatozoon, or sex.

It is a little mass of protoplasm containing a nucleus, and corresponds, therefore, to one
of the cells, most closely to the egg-cell or spermatozoon of higher animals. If every living
being is descended from a single cell, the fertilized egg, it is not hard to believe that all
higher animals are descended from an ancestor having the general structure or lack of structure
of the amoeba.

But is the amoeba really structureless? Probably it has an exceedingly complex structure, but
our microscopes and technique are still too imperfect to show more than traces of it. Says
Hertwig: "Protoplasm is not a single chemical substance, however complicated, but a mixture
of many substances, which we must picture to ourselves as finest particles united in a wonderfully
complicated structure." Truly protoplasm is, to borrow Mephistopheles' expression concerning
blood, a "quite peculiar juice." And the complexity of the nucleus is far more evident than
that of the protoplasm. Is protoplasm itself the result of a long development? If so, out of
what and how did it develop? We cannot even guess. But the beginning of life may, apparently
must, have been indefinitely farther back than the simplest now existing form. The study of
the amoeba cannot fail to raise a host of questions in the mind of any thoughtful man.

As we have here the animal reduced, so to speak, to lowest terms, it may be well to examine
a little more closely into its physiology and compare it briefly with our own.

The amoeba eats food as we do, but the food is digested directly in the internal protoplasm
instead of in a stomach; and once digested it diffuses to all parts of the cell; here it is
built up into compounds of a more complex structure, and forms an integral part of the animal
body. The dead food particle has been transformed into living protoplasm, the continually repeated
miracle of life. But it does not remain long in this condition. In contact with the oxygen
from the air it is soon oxidized, burned up to furnish the energy necessary for the motion
and irritability of the body. We are all of us low-temperature engines. The digestive function
exists in all animals merely to bring the food into a soluble, diffusible form, so that it
can pass to all parts of the body and be used for fuel or growth. In our body a circulatory
system is necessary to carry food and oxygen to the cells and to remove their waste. For most
of our cells lie at a distance from the stomach, lungs, and kidney. But in a small animal the
circulatory system is often unnecessary and fails. Breathing and excretion take place through
the whole surface of the body. The body of the frog is devoid of scales, so that the blood
is separated from the surrounding water only by a thin membrane, and it breathes and excretes
to a certain extent in the same way.

But another factor has to be considered. If we double each dimension of our amoeba, we shall
increase its surface four times, its mass eight-fold. Now the power of absorbing oxygen and
excreting waste is evidently proportional to the excretory and respiratory surface, and much
the same is true of digestion. But the amount of oxygen required, and of waste to be removed
is proportional to the mass; for every particle of protoplasm requires food and oxygen, and
produces waste. The particles of protoplasm in our new, larger amoeba can therefore receive
only half as much oxygen as before, and rid themselves of their waste only half as fast. There
is danger of what in our bodies would be called suffocation and blood-poisoning. The amoeba
having attained a certain size meets this emergency by dividing into two small individuals,
the division is a physical adaptation. But the many-celled animal cannot do this; it must keep
its cells together. It gains the additional surface by folding and plaiting. And the complicated
internal structure of higher animals is in its last analysis such a folding and plaiting in
order to maintain the proper ratio between the exposed surface of the cells and their mass.
And each cell in our bodies lives in one sense its own individual life, only bathed in the
lymph and receiving from it its food and oxygen instead of taking it from the water.

But in another sense the cells of our body live an entirely different life, for they form a
community. Division of labor has taken place between them, they are interdependent, correlated
with one another, subject therefore to the laws of the whole community or organism. There are
many respects in which it is impossible to compare Robinson Crusoe with a workman in a huge
watch factory; yet they are both men.

Both the amoeba and we live in the closest relation to our environment, and conformity to it
is evidently necessary: life has been defined as the adjustment of internal relations to external
conditions. We continually take food, use it for energy and growth, and return the simpler
waste compounds. We are all of us, as Professor Huxley has said, "whirlpools on the surface
of Nature;" when the whirl of exchange of particles ceases we die. We have seen that the fusion
of two amoebæ results in a new rejuvenated individual. Why is a mixture of two protoplasms
better than one? We can frame hypotheses; we know nothing about it. What of the mind of the
amoeba? A host of questions throng upon us and we can answer no one of them. All the great
questions concerning life confront us here in the lowest term of the animal series, and appear
as insoluble as in the highest.

Our second ancestral form is also a fresh-water animal, the hydra. This is a little, vase-shaped
animal, which usually lives attached to grass-stems or sticks, but has the power to free itself
and hang on the surface of the water or to slowly creep on the bottom. The mouth is at the
top of the vase, and the simple, undivided cavity within the vase is the digestive cavity.
Around the mouth is a ring of from four to ten hollow tentacles, whose cavities communicate
freely underneath with the digestive cavity. Not only is food taken in at the mouth, but indigestible
material is thrown out here. The animal may thus be compared to a nearly cylindrical sack with
a circle of tubes attached to it above. The body consists of two layers of cells, the ectoderm
on the outside and the entoderm lining the digestive cavity. Between these two is a structureless,
elastic membrane, which tends to keep the body moderately expanded.

The food is captured by the tentacles; but digestion takes place only partially in the digestive
cavity, for each surrounding cell engulfs small particles of food and digests them within itself.
The entodermal cells behave in this respect much like a colony of amoebæ. The cells of both
layers have at their bases long muscular fibrils, those of the ectodermal cells running longitudinally,
those of the entoderm transversely. The animal can thus contract its body in both directions,
or, if the body contain water and the transverse muscles are contracted, the pressure of the
water lengthens the body and tends to extend the tentacles.

On the outside of the elastic membrane, just beneath the ectoderm, is a plexus or cobweb of
nervous cells and fibrils. As in every nervous system, three elements are here to be found.
1. An afferent or sensory nerve-fibril, which under adequate stimulus is set in vibration by
some cell of the epidermis or ectoderm, which is therefore called a sensory cell. 2. A central
or ganglion cell, which receives the sensory impulse, translates it into consciousness, and
is the seat of whatever powers of perception, thought, or will the animal possesses. This also
gives rise to the efferent or motor impulses, which are conveyed by (3) a motor fibril to the
corresponding muscle, exciting its contraction. But there are also nerve-fibrils connecting
the different ganglion cells, so that they may act in unison. In the higher animals we shall
find these central or ganglion cells condensed in one or a few masses or ganglia. But here
they are scattered over the whole surface of the elastic supporting membrane.

The reproductive organs for the production of eggs and spermatozoa form little protuberances
on the outside of the body below the tentacles. But hydra reproduces mostly by budding; new
individuals growing out of the side of the old one, like branches from the trunk of a tree,
but afterward breaking free and leading an independent life. There are special forms of cells
besides those described; nettle cells for capturing food, interstitial cells, etc., but these
do not concern us.

The distance from the single-celled amoeba to hydra is vast, probably really greater than that
between any other successive terms of our series. It may therefore be useful to consider one
or two intermediate forms and the parallel embryonic stages of higher animals, and to see how
the higher many-celled animal originates from the unicellular stage.

The amoeba is an illustration of a great kingdom of similar, practically unicellular forms,
which have played no unimportant part in the geological history of the globe. These are the
protozoa. They include, first of all, the foraminifera, which usually have shells composed
of carbonate of lime. These shells, settling to the bottom of the ocean, have accumulated in
vast beds, and when compacted and raised above the surface, form chalk, limestone, or marble,
according to the degree and mode of their hardening.

The protozoa include also the flagellata, a great, very poorly defined mass of forms occupying
the boundary between the plant and animal kingdoms. They are usually unicellular, and their
protoplasm is surrounded by a thin, structureless membrane. This prevents their putting out
pseudopodia as organs of motion. Instead of these they have at one end of the ovoid or pear-shaped
body a long, whiplash-like process or thread, a flagellum, and by swinging this they propel
themselves through the water. These flagellata seem to have a rather marked tendency to form
colonies. The first individual gives rise to others by division. But the division is not complete;
the new individuals remain connected by the undivided rear end of the body. And such a colony
may come to contain a large number of individuals.

Such a colony is represented by magosphæra. This is a microscopic globular form, discovered
by Professor Haeckel on the coast of Norway. It consists of a large number of conical or pear-shaped
individual cells, whose apices are turned toward the centre of the sphere. The cells are cemented
together by a mucilaginous substance. Around their exposed larger ends, which form the surface
of the sphere, are rows of flagella, by whose united action the colony rolls through the water.
After a time each individual absorbs its flagella, the colony is broken up, the different individuals
settle to the bottom, and each gives rise by division to a new colony. This group of cells
may be considered as a colony or as an individual. Each term is defensible.

Volvox is also a spheroidal organism, composed often of a very large number of flagellated
cells. But it differs from magosphæra in certain important respects. In the first place its
cells have chlorophyl, the green coloring matter of plants. It lives therefore on unorganized
fluid nourishment, carbon dioxide, nitrates, etc. It is a plant. But certain characteristics
render it probable that it once lived on solid food and was therefore an animal. For where
almost the sole difference between plants and animals is in the fluid or solid character of
their food, a change from the one form into the other is not as difficult or improbable as
one might naturally think. And plants and animals are here so near together, and travelling
by roads so nearly parallel, that, even if volvox never was an animal, it might still serve
very well to illustrate a stage through which animals must have passed.

The cells of volvox do not form a solid mass, but have arranged themselves in a single layer
on the outer surface of the sphere. For a time, under favorable circumstances, volvox reproduces
very much like magosphæra, and each cell can give rise to a new, many-celled individual. But
after a time, especially under unfavorable circumstances, a new mode of reproduction appears.
Certain cells withdraw from the outer layer into the interior of the colony. Here they are
nourished by the other cells and develop into true reproductive elements, eggs and spermatozoa.
Fertilization, that is, the union of egg and spermatozoon, or mainly of their nuclei, takes
place; and the fertilized egg develops into a new organism. But the other cells, which have
been all the time nourishing these, seem now to lack nutriment, strength, or vitality to give
rise to a new colony. They die.

We find thus in volvox division of labor and corresponding difference of structure or differentiation;
certain cells retain the power of fusing with other corresponding cells, and thus of rejuvenescence
and of giving rise to a new organism. And these cells, forming a series through all generations,
are evidently immortal like the protozoa. Natural death cannot touch them. These are the reproductive
cells. The other cells nourish and transport them and carry on the work of excretion and respiration.
These latter correspond practically to our whole body. We call them somatic cells. In volvox
they are entirely subservient to, and exist for, the reproductive cells, and die when they
have completed their service of these. The body is here only a vehicle for ova. Furthermore,
in volvox there has arisen such an interdependence of cells that we can no longer speak of
it as a colony. The colony has become an individual by division of labor and the resulting
differentiation in structure.

But hydra gives us but a poor idea of the coelenterata, to which kingdom it belongs. The higher
coelenterata have nearly or quite all the tissues of higher animals--muscular, connective,
glandular, etc. And by tissues we mean groups of cells modified in form and structure for the
performance of a special work or function. The protozoa developed the cell for all time to
come, the coelenterata developed the tissues which still compose our bodies. But they had them
mainly in a diffuse form. A sort of digestive and reproductive system they did possess. But
the work of arranging these tissues and condensing them into compact organs was to be done
by the next higher group, the worms.

Let us now take a glance at certain stages of embryonic development which correspond to these
earliest ancestral forms. We should expect some such correspondence from the fact already stated
that the embryonic development of the individual is a brief recapitulation of the ancestral
development of the species or larger group. The egg of the lowest vertebrate, amphioxus, shows
these changes in a simple and apparently primitive form.

The fertilized egg of any animal consists of a single cell, a little mass of protoplasm containing
a nucleus and surrounded by a structureless membrane. The egg is globular. The nucleus undergoes
certain very peculiar, still but little understood, changes and divides into two. The protoplasm
also soon divides into two masses clustering each around its own nucleus. The plane of division
will be marked around the outside by a circular furrow, but the cells will still remain united
by a large part of the membrane which bounds their adjacent, newly formed, internal faces.

Let us suppose that the egg lay so that the first plane of division was vertical and extending
north and south. Each cell or half of the egg will divide into two precisely as before. The
new plane of division will be vertical, but extending east and west. Each plane passes through
the centre of the egg, and the four cells are of the same form and size, like much-rounded
quarters of an orange. The third plane will lie horizontal or equatorial, and will divide each
of these quarters into an upper and lower octant. The cells keep on dividing rapidly, the eight
form sixteen, then thirty-two, etc. The sharp angle by which the cells met at the centre has
become rounded off, and has left a little space, the segmentation cavity, filled with fluid
in the middle of the embryo. The cells continue to press or be crowded away from the centre
and form a layer one cell deep on the surface of the sphere.

This embryo, resembling a hollow rubber ball filled with fluid, is called a blastosphere. It
corresponds in structure with the fully developed volvox, except, of course, in lacking reproductive
cells.

If the rubber ball has a hole in it so that I can squeeze out the water, I can thrust the one-half
into the other, and change the ball into a double-walled cup. A similar change takes place
in the embryo. The cells of the lower half of the blastosphere are slightly larger than those
of the upper half. This lower hemisphere flattens and then thrusts itself, or is invaginated,
into the upper hemisphere of smaller cells and forms its lining. This cup-shaped embryo is
called the gastrula. The cup deepens somewhat and becomes ovoid. Take a boiled egg, make a
hole in the smaller end and remove the yolk, and you have a passable model of a gastrula. The
shell corresponds to the ectoderm or outer layer of smaller cells; the layer of "white" represents
the entoderm or lining of larger cells. The space occupied by the yolk corresponds to the archenteron
or primitive digestive cavity; and the opening at the end to the primitive mouth or blastopore.
Ectoderm and entoderm unite around the mouth. Both the blastosphere and gastrula often swim
freely by flagella.

You can hardly have failed to notice how closely the gastrula corresponds to a hydra, and many
facts lead us to believe that the still earlier ancestor of the hydra was free swimming, and
that the tentacles are a later development correlated with its adult sessile life. Yet we must
not forget that the hydra is even now not quite sessile, it moves somewhat. And our ancestor
was almost certainly a free swimming gastræa, or hypothetical form corresponding in form and
structure to the gastrula. The ancestor of man never settled down lazily into a sessile life.

But how is an adult worm or vertebrate formed out of such a gastrula? To answer this would
require a course of lectures on embryology. But certain changes interest us. Between the ectoderm
and entoderm of the gastrula, in the space occupied by the supporting membrane of hydra, a
new layer of cells, the mesoderm, appears. This has been produced by the rapid growth and reproduction
of certain cells of the entoderm which have migrated, so to speak, into this new position.
In higher forms it becomes of continually greater importance, until finally nearly all the
organs of the body develop from it. In our bodies only the lining of the mid-intestine and
of its glands has arisen from the entoderm. And only the epidermis, or outer layer of our skin,
and the nervous system and parts of our sense-organs have arisen from the ectoderm. But our
mid-intestine is still the greatly elongated archenteron of the gastrula.

We may therefore compare the hydra or gastrula to a little portion of the lining of the human
mid-intestine covered with a little flake of epidermis. This much the hydra has attained. But
our bones and muscles and blood-vessels all come from the mesoderm by folding, plaiting, and
channelling, and division of labor resulting in differentiation of structure. Of all true mesodermal
structures the hydra has actually none, but in the ectodermal and entodermal cells he has the
potentiality of them all. We must now try to discover how these potentialities became actualities
in higher forms.

The third stage in our ancestral series is the turbellarian. This is a little, flat, oval worm,
varying greatly in size in different species, and found both in fresh and salt water. Some
would deny that this worm belonged in our series at all. But, while doubtless considerably
modified, it has still retained many characteristics almost certainly possessed by our primitive
bilateral ancestor. The different parts of hydra were arranged like those of most flowers,
around one main vertical axis; it was thus radiate in structure, having neither front nor rear,
right nor left side. But our little turbellaria, while still without a head, has one end which
goes first and can be called the front end. The upper or dorsal surface is usually more colored
with pigment cells than the lower or ventral surface, on which is the mouth. It has also a
right and left side. It is thus bilateral.

The gastræa swam by cilia, little eyelash-like processes which urge the animal forward like
a myriad of microscopic oars. In our bodies they are sometimes used to keep up a current, e.g.,
to remove foreign particles from the lungs. The turbellaria is still covered with cilia, probably
an inheritance from the gastræa; for, while in smaller forms they may still be the principal
means of locomotion, in larger ones the muscles are beginning to assume this function and the
animal moves by writhing. The bilateral symmetry has arisen in connection with this mode of
locomotion and is thus a mark of important progress.

In the turbellaria we find for the first time a true body-wall distinct from underlying organs.
The outer layer of this is a ciliated epithelium or layer of cells. Under this an elastic membrane
may occur. Then come true body muscles, running transversely, longitudinally and dorso-ventrally.
Between the external transverse and the internal longitudinal layers we often find two muscular
layers whose fibres run diagonally. The body is well provided with muscles, but their arrangement
is still far from economical or effective.

Within the body-wall is the parenchym. This is a spongy mass of connectile tissue in which
the other organs are embedded. The mouth lies in the middle, or near the front of the ventral
surface. The intestine varies in form, but is provided with its own layers of longitudinal
and transverse muscles, and usually has paired pouches extending out from it into the body
parenchym. These seem to distribute the dissolved nutriment; hence the whole cavity is still
often called a gastro-vascular cavity as serving both digestion and circulation. There is no
anal opening, but indigestible material is still cast out through the mouth.

The animal can gain sufficient oxygen to supply its muscles and nerves, which are the principal
seats of combustion, through the external surface. It has, therefore, no special respiratory
organs. But the waste matter of the muscles cannot escape so easily, for these are becoming
deeper seated. Hence we find an excretory system consisting of two tubes with many branches
in the parenchym, and discharging at the rear end of the body. This again is a sign that the
muscles are becoming more important, for the excretory system is needed mainly to remove their
waste. These tubes maybe only greatly enlarged glands of the skin.

The nervous system consists of a plexus of fibres and cells, the cells originating impulses
and the fibres conveying them. But this much was present in hydra also. Here the front end
of the body goes foremost and is continually coming in contact with new conditions. Here the
lookout for food and danger must be kept. Hence, as a result of constant exercise, or selection,
or both, the nerve-plexus has thickened at this point into a little compact mass of cells and
fibres called a ganglion. And because this ganglion throughout higher forms usually lies over
the oesophagus, it is called the supra-oesophogeal ganglion. This is the first faint and dim
prophecy of a brain, and it sends its nerves to the front end of the body. But there run from
it to the rear end of the body four to eight nerve-cords, consisting of bundles of nerve-threads
like our nerves, but overlaid with a coating of ganglion cells capable of originating impulses.
These cords are, therefore, like the plexus from which they have condensed, both nerves and
centres; differentiation has not gone so far as at the front of the body. Sense organs are
still very rudimentary. Special cells of the skin have been modified into neuro-epithelial
cells, having sensory hairs protruding from them and nerve-fibrils running from their bases.

In a very few turbellaria we find otolith vesicles. These are little sacks in the skin, lined
with neuro-epithelial cells and having in the middle a little concretion of carbonate of lime
hung on rather a stiffer hair, like a clapper in a bell. Such organs serve in higher animals
as organs of hearing, for the sensory hairs are set in vibration by the sound-waves. It is
quite as probable that they here serve as organs for feeling the slightest vibrations in the
surrounding water, and thus giving warning of approaching food or danger. The animal has also
eyes, and these may be very numerous. They are not able to form images of external objects,
but only of perceiving light and the direction of its source. A little group of these eyes
lies directly over the brain, near the front end of the body; the others are distributed around
the front or nearly the whole margin of the body.

The turbellaria, doubtless, have the sense of smell, although we can discover no special olfactory
organ. This sense would seem to be as old as protoplasm itself.

This distribution of the eyes around a large portion of the margin, and certain other characteristics
of the adult structure and of the embryonic development, are very interesting, as giving hints
of the development of the turbellaria from some radiate ancestor. The mouth is in a most unfavorable
position, in or near the middle of the body, rarely at the front end, as the animal has to
swim over its food before it can grasp it. The animal only slowly rids itself of old disadvantageous
form and structure and adapts itself completely to a higher mode of life.

By far the most highly developed system in the body is the reproductive. It is doubtful whether
any animal, except, perhaps, the mollusk, has as complicated and highly developed reproductive
organs. By markedly higher forms they certainly grow simpler.

And here we must notice certain general considerations. We found that reproduction in the amoeba
could be defined as growth beyond the limit normal to the individual. This form of growth benefits
especially the species. The needs and expenses of the individual will therefore first be met
and then the balance be devoted to reproduction. Now the income of the animal is proportional
to its surface, its expense to its mass, and activity. And the ratio of surface to mass is
most favorable in the smallest animals.[A] Hence, smaller animals, as a rule, increase faster
than larger ones; and this is only one illustration of the fact that great size in an animal
is anything but an unmixed advantage to its possessor. But muscles and nerves are the most
expensive systems; here most of the food is burned up. Hence energetic animals have a small
balance remaining. Now the turbellarian is small and sluggish, with a fair digestive system.
With a great amount of nutriment at its disposal the reproductive system came rapidly to a
high development, and relatively to other organs stands higher than it almost ever will again.

  [Footnote A: Cf. p. 35.]

It is only fair to state that good authorities hold that so primitive an animal could not originally
have had so highly developed a system, and that this characteristic must be acquired, not ancestral. 

The cage, as it is called, had just been let down, with its number of sixteen men; when it came
up again, Hudson Brownlee, Charlie, and some other men and boys got in. If Charlie felt "queer"
before, he felt still "queerer" now, and when the cage began to descend, he felt almost sick
with the motion; it seemed to him as if they were never going to reach the bottom. Down, down,
down they went; the clatter of the engine above, and the creaking of the cage, making Charlie
fancy every now and then that the rope was giving way, and that in
another second they would all be dashed to atoms.

Whenever he looked up, and remembered that all their weight was bearing upon that rope, he screwed
himself up into the smallest possible compass, as if that would make him lighter.


It was probably rather long and cylindrical, resembling a small and short earthworm in shape.
The skin may have been much like that of turbellaria. Within this the muscles run in only two-directions--longitudinally
and transversely. Between these and the intestine is a cavity--the perivisceral cavity--like
that of our own bodies, but filled with a nutritive fluid like our lymph. This cavity seems
to have developed by the expansion and cutting off of the paired lateral outgrowths of the
digestive system of some old flat worm. But other modes of development are quite possible.
The intestine has now an anal opening at or near the rear end of the body. The food moves only
from front to rear, and reaches each part always in a certain condition. Digestion proper and
absorption have been distributed to different cells, and the work is better done. Three portions
can be readily distinguished: fore-intestine with the mouth, mid-intestine, as the seat of
digestion and absorption, and hind-intestine, or rectum, with the anal opening. The front and
hind-intestine are lined with infolded outer skin.

The nervous system consists of a supra-oesophageal ganglion with four posterior nerve-cords--one
dorsal, two lateral, and one (or perhaps two) ventral. There were probably also remains of
the old plexus, but this is fast disappearing. The excretory system consists of a pair of tubes
discharging through the sides of the body-wall, and having each a ciliated, funnel-shaped opening
in the perivisceral cavity. These have received the name of nephridia. Through these also the
eggs and spermatozoa are discharged. The reproductive organs are modified patches of the peritoneum,
or lining of the perivisceral cavity.

The number of muscles or muscular layers has been reduced in this animal. But such a reduction
in the number of like parts in any animal is a sign of progress. And the longitudinal muscles
have increased in size and strength, and the animal moves by writhing. Such a worm has the
general plan of the body of the higher forms fairly well, though rudely, sketched. Many improvements
will come, and details be added. But the rudiments of the trunk of even our own bodies are
already visible. Head, in any proper sense of the term, and skeleton are still lacking; they
remain to be developed.

And yet, taking the most hopeful view possible concerning the animal kingdom, its prospects
of attaining anything very lofty seem at this point poor. Its highest representative is a headless
trunk, without skeleton or legs. It has no brain in any proper sense of the word, its sense-organs
are feeble; it moves by writhing. Its life is devoted to digestion and reproduction. Whatever
higher organs it has are subsidiary to these lower functions. And yet it has taken ages on
ages to develop this much. If this is the highest visible result of ages on ages of development,
what hope is there for the future? Can such a thing be the ancestor of a thinking, moral, religious
person, like man? "That is not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural (animal,
sensuous); and afterward that which is spiritual." First, in order of time, must come the body,
and then the mind and spirit shall be enthroned in it. The little knot of nervous material
which forms the supra-oesophageal ganglion is so small that it might easily escape our notice;
but it is the promise of an infinite future. The atom of nervous power shall increase until
it subdues and dominates the whole mass.

CHAPTER III

WORMS TO VERTEBRATES: SKELETON AND HEAD

In tracing the genealogy of any American family it is often difficult or impossible to say
whether a certain branch is descended from John Oldworthy or his cousin or second cousin. In
the latter cases to find the common ancestor we must go back to the grandfather or great-grandfather.
The same difficulty, but greatly enhanced, meets us when we try to make a genealogical tree
of the animal kingdom. Thus it seems altogether probable that all higher forms are descended
from an ancestor of the same general structure and grade of organization as the turbellaria,
although probably free swimming, and hence with somewhat different form and development, especially
of the muscular system. It seems to me altogether probable that all, except possibly Mollusca,
are descended from a common ancestor closely resembling the schematic worm last described.
Some would, however, maintain that they diverged rather earlier than even the turbellaria;
others after the schematic worm, if such ever existed. As far as our argument is concerned
it makes little difference which of these views we adopt.

From our turbellaria, or possibly from some even more primitive ancestor, many lines diverged.
And this was to be expected. The coelenterata, as we saw in hydra, had developed rude digestive
and reproductive systems. The higher groups of this kingdom had developed all, or nearly all,
the tissues used in building the bodies of higher animals--muscular, reproductive, connectile,
glandular, nervous, etc. But these are mostly very diffuse. The muscular fibrils of a jelly-fish
are mostly isolated or parallel in bands, rarely in compact well-defined bundles. The tissues
have generally not yet been moulded into compact masses of definite form. There are as yet
very few structures to which we can give the name of organs. To form organs and group them
in a body of compact definite form was the work pre-eminently of worms. The material for the
building was ready, but the architecture of the bilateral animal was not even sketched. And
different worms were their own architects, untrammelled by convention or heredity, hence they
built very different, sometimes almost fantastic, structures.

We must remember, too, the great age of this group. They are present in highly modified forms
in the very oldest palæozoic strata, and probably therefore came into existence as the first
traces of continental areas were beginning to rise above the primeval ocean. They are literally
"older than the hills." They were exposed to a host of rapidly changing conditions, very different
in different areas. This prepares us for the fact that the worms represent a stage in animal
life corresponding fairly well to the Tower of Babel in biblical history. The animal kingdom
seems almost to explode into a host of fragments. Our genealogical tree fairly bristles with
branches, but the branches do not seem to form any regular whorls or spirals. Few of them have
developed into more than feeble growths. They now contain generally but few species. Many of
them are largely or entirely parasitic, and in connection with this mode of life have undergone
modifications and degeneration which make it exceedingly difficult to decipher their descent
or relationships.

Four of these branches have reached great prominence in numbers and importance. One or two
others were formerly equally numerous and have since become almost extinct; so the brachiopoda,
which have been almost entirely replaced by mollusks. The same may very possibly be true of
others. For of the amount of extinction of larger groups we have generally but an exceedingly
faint conception. Indeed in this respect the worms have been well compared to the relics which
fill the shelves of one of our grandmother's china-closets.

The four great branches are the echinoderms, mollusks, articulates, and vertebrates. The echinoderms,
including starfishes, sea-urchins, and others straggled early from the great army. We know
as yet almost nothing of their history; when deciphered it will be as strange as any romance.
The vertebrates are of course the most important line, as including the ancestors of man. But
we must take a little glance at mollusks, including our clams, snails, and cuttle-fishes; and
at the articulates, including annelids and culminating in insects. The molluscan and articulate
lines, though divergent, are of great importance to us as throwing a certain amount of light
on vertebrate development; and still more as showing how a certain line of development may
seem, and at first really be, advantageous, and still lead to degeneration, or at best to but
partial success.

When we compare the forms which represent fairly well the direction of development of these
three lines, a snail or a clam with an insect and a fish, we find clearly, I think, that the
fundamental anatomical difference lies in the skeleton; and that this resulted from, and almost
irrevocably fixed, certain habits of life.

We may picture to ourselves the primitive ancestor of mollusks as a worm having the short and
broad form of the turbellaria, but much thicker or deeper vertically. A fuller description
can be found in the "Encyclopædia Britannica," Art., Mollusca. It was hemi-ovoid in form. It
had apparently the perivisceral cavity and nephridia of the schematic worm, and a circulatory
system. In this latter respect it stood higher than any form which we have yet studied. Its
nervous system also was rather more advanced. It had apparently already taken to a creeping
mode of life and the muscles of its ventral surface were strongly developed, while its exposed
and far less muscular dorsal surface was protected by a cap-like shell covering the most important
internal organs. But the integument of the whole dorsal surface was, as is not uncommon in
invertebrates, hardening by the deposition of carbonate of lime in the integument. And this
in time increased to such an extent as to replace the primitive, probably horny, shell.

Into the anatomy of this animal or of its descendants we have no time to enter, for here we
must be very brief. We have already noticed that the most important viscera were lodged safely
under the shell. And as these increased in size or were crowded upward by the muscles of the
creeping disk, their portion of the body grew upward in the form of a "visceral hump." Apparently
the animal could not increase much in length and retain the advantage of the protection of
the shell; and the shell was the dominating structure. It had entered upon a defensive campaign.
Motion, slow at the outset, became more difficult, and the protection of the shell therefore
all the more necessary. The shell increased in size and weight and motion became almost impossible.
The snail represents the average result of the experiment. It can crawl, but that is about
all; it is neither swift nor energetic. Even the earthworm can outcrawl it. It has feelers
and eyes, and is thus better provided with sense-organs than almost any worm. It has a supra-oesophageal
ganglion of fair size.

The clams and oysters show even more clearly what we might call the logical results of molluscan
structure. They increased the shell until it formed two heavy "valves" hanging down on each
side of the body and completely enclosing it. They became almost sessile, living generally
buried in the mud and gaining their food, consisting mostly of minute particles of organic
matter, by means of currents created by cilia covering the large curtain-like gills. Their
muscular system disappeared except in the ploughshare-shaped "foot" used mostly for burrowing,
and in the muscles for closing the shell. That portion of the body which corresponds to the
head of the snail practically aborted with nearly all the sense-organs. The nervous system
degenerated and became reduced to a rudiment. They had given up locomotion, had withdrawn,
so to speak, from the world; all the sense they needed was just enough to distinguish the particles
of food as they swept past the mouth in the current of water. They have an abundance of food,
and "wax fat." The clam is so completely protected by his shell and the mud that he has little
to fear from enemies. They have increased and multiplied and filled the mud. "Requiescat in pace."

But zoölogy has its tragedies as well as human history. Let us turn to the development of a
third molluscan line terminating in the cuttle-fishes. The ancestors of these cephalopods,
although still possessed of a shell and a high visceral hump, regained the swimming life. First,
apparently, by means of fins, and then by a simple but very effective use of a current of water,
they acquired an often rapid locomotion. The highest forms gave up the purely defensive campaign,
developed a powerful beak, led a life like that of the old Norse pirates, and were for a time
the rulers and terrors of the sea. With their more rapid locomotion the supra-oesophageal ganglion
reached a higher degree of development, and it was served by sense-organs of great efficiency.
They reduced the external shell, and succeeded, in the highest forms, of almost ridding themselves
of this burden and encumbrance. Traces of it remain in the squids, but transformed into an
internal quill-like, supporting, not defensive, skeleton. They have retraced the downward steps
of their ancestors as far as they could. And the high development of their supra-oesophageal
ganglion and sense-organs, and their powerful jaws and arms, or tentacles, show to what good
purpose they have struggled. But the struggle was in vain, as far as the supremacy of the animal
kingdom was concerned. Their ancestors had taken a course which rendered it impossible for
their descendants to reach the goal. Their progress became ever slower. They were entirely
and hopelessly beaten by the vertebrates. They struggled hard, but too late.

The history of mollusks is full of interest. They show clearly how intimately nervous development
is connected with the use of the locomotive organs. The snail crept, and slightly increased
its nervous system and sense-organs. The clam almost lost them in connection with its stationary
life. The cephalopods were exceedingly active, developed, therefore, keen sense-organs and
a very large and complicated supra-oesophagal ganglion, which we might almost call a brain.

The articulate series consists of two groups of animals. The higher group includes the crabs,
spiders, thousand-legs, and finally the insects, and forms the kingdom of arthropoda. The lower
members are still usually reckoned as worms, and are included under the annelids. Of these
our common earthworm is a good example, and near them belong the leeches. But the marine annelids,
of which nereis, or a clam-worm, is a good example, are more typical. They are often quite
large, a foot or even more in length. They are composed of many, often several hundred, rings
or segments. Between these the body-wall is thin, so that the segments move easily upon each
other, and thus the animal can creep or writhe.

These segments are very much alike except the first two and the last. If we examine one from
the middle of the body we shall find its structure very much like that of our schematic worm.
Outside we find a very thin, horny cuticle, secreted by the layer of cells just beneath it,
the hypodermis. Beneath the skin we find a thin layer of transverse muscles, and then four
heavy bands of longitudinal muscles. These latter have been grouped in the four quadrants,
a much more effective arrangement than the cylindrical layer of the schematic worm. Furthermore,
the animal has on each segment a pair of fin-like projections, stiffened with bristles, the
parapodia. These are moved by special muscles and form effective organs of creeping.

Within the muscles is the perivisceral cavity, and in its central axis the intestine, segmented
like the body-wall. The reproductive organs are formed from patches of the lining of the perivisceral
cavity, and the reproductive elements, when fully developed, fall into the perivisceral fluid
and are carried out by nephridia, just such as we found in the schematic worm. Beside the perivisceral
cavity and its fluid there is a special circulatory system. This consists mainly of one long
tube above the intestine and a second below, with often several smaller parallel tubes. Transverse
vessels run from these to all parts of the body. The dorsal tube pulsates and thus acts as
a heart. The surface of the body no longer suffices to gather oxygen, hence we find special
feathery gills on the parapodia. But these gills are merely expanded portions of the body wall,
arranged so as to offer the greatest possible amount of surface where the capillaries of the
blood system can be almost immediately in contact with the surrounding water.

The nervous system consists of a large supra-oesophageal ganglion in the first segment; then
of a chain of ganglia, one to each segment, on the ventral side of the body. With one ganglion
in each segment there is far more controlling, perceptive, ganglionic material than in lower
worms. Furthermore the supra-oesophageal ganglion is relieved of a large part of the direct
control of the muscles of each segment, and is becoming more a centre of control and perception
for the body as a whole. It is more like our brain, commander-in-chief, the other ganglia constituting
its staff. The sense-organs have improved greatly. There are tentacles and otolith vesicles
as very delicate organs of feeling, or possibly of hearing also.

But the annelids were probably the first animals to develop an eye capable of forming an image
of external objects. The importance of this organ in the pursuit of food or the escape from
enemies can scarcely be over-estimated. The lining of the mouth and pharynx can be protruded
as a proboscis, and drawn back by powerful muscles, and is armed with two or more horny claws.
Eyes and claws gave them a great advantage over their not quite blind but really visionless
and comparatively defenceless neighbors, and they must have wrought terrible extinction of
lower and older forms. But while we cannot over-estimate the importance of these eyes, we can
easily exaggerate their perfectness. They were of short range, fitted for seeing objects only
a few inches distant, and the image was very imperfect in detail. But the plan or fundamental
scheme of these eyes is correct and capable of indefinitely greater development than the organs
of touch or smell, perhaps greater even than the otolith vesicle.

And the reflex influence of the eye on the brain was the greatest advantage of all. Hitherto
with feeble muscles and sense-organs it has hardly paid the animal to devote more material
to building a larger brain. It was better to build more muscle. But now with stronger muscles
at its command, and better sense-organs to report to it, every grain of added brain material
is beginning to be worth ten devoted to muscle. The muscular system will still continue to
develop, but the brain has begun an almost endless march of progress. The eye becomes of continually
increasing advantage and importance because it has a capable brain to use it; and brain is
a more and more profitable investment, because it is served by an ever-improving eye.

The annelid had hit upon a most advantageous line of development, which led ultimately to the
insect. The study of the insect will show us clearly the advantages and defects of the annelid
plan. First of all, the insect, like the mollusk, has an external skeleton. But the skeleton
of the mollusk was purely protective, a hindrance to locomotion. That of the insect is still
somewhat protective, but is mainly, almost purely, locomotive. It is never allowed to become
so heavy as to interfere with locomotion. In the second place, the insect has three body regions,
having each its own special functions or work. And one of these is a head. The annelid had
two anterior segments differing from those of the rest of the body; these may, perhaps, be
considered as the foreshadowings of a structure not yet realized; they can only by courtesy
be called a head. Thirdly, the insect has legs. The annelid had fin-like parapodia, approaching
the legs of insects about as closely as the fins of a fish approach the legs of a mammal. The
reproductive and digestive systems, while somewhat improved, are not very markedly higher than
those of annelids. The excretory system has more work to perform and reaches a rather higher
development.

But in these organs there is no great or striking change; the time for marked and rapid development
of the digestive and reproductive systems has gone by. Material can be more profitably invested
in brain or muscle. Air is carried to all parts of the body by a special system of air-sacks
and tubes. This is a very advantageous structure for small animals with an external skeleton.
In very large animals, or where the skeleton is internal, it would hardly be practicable; the
risk of compression of the tubes at some point, and of thus cutting off the air-supply of some
portion of the body, would be altogether too great.

The circulatory system is very poor. It consists practically only of a heart, which drives
the blood in an irregular circulation between the other organs of the body much as with a syringe
you might keep up a system of currents in a bowl of water. But the rapidity of the flow of
the blood in our bodies is mainly to furnish a supply of oxygen to the organs. A tea-spoonful
of blood can carry a fair amount of dissolved solid nutriment like sugar, it can carry at each
round but a very little gas like oxygen. Hence the blood must make its rounds rapidly, carrying
but a little oxygen at each circuit. But in the insect the blood conveys only the dissolved
solid nutriment, the food; hence a comparatively irregular circulation answers all purposes.

The skeleton is a thickening of the horny cuticle of the annelid on the surface of each segment.
The horny cylinder surrounding each segment is composed of several pieces, and on the abdomen
these are united by flexible, infolded membranes. This allows the increase in the size of the
segment corresponding to the varying size of the digestive and reproductive systems. In this
part of the body the skeletal ring of each segment is joined to that of the segments before
and behind it in the same manner. But in other parts of the body we shall find the skeletal
pieces of each segment and the rings of successive segments fused in one plate of mail. The
legs are the parapodia of annelids carried to a vastly higher development. They are slender
and jointed, and yet often very powerful. A large portion of the muscular system of the body
is attached to these appendages.

But the insect has also jaws. The annelid had teeth or claws attached to the proboscis. But
true jaws are something quite different. They always develop by modifying some other organ.
In the insect they are modified legs. This is shown first by their embryonic development. But
the king- or horseshoe-crab has still no true jaws, but uses the upper joints of its legs for
chewing. There are primitively three pairs of jaws of various forms for the different kinds
of food of different species or higher groups. But some of them may disappear and the others
be greatly modified into awls for piercing, or a tube for sucking honey. Into the wonderful
transformations of these modified legs we cannot enter.

The muscles are no longer arranged to form a sack as in annelids. Transverse muscles, running
parallel to the unyielding plates of chitin or horn could accomplish nothing. They have largely
disappeared. The work of locomotion has been transferred from the trunk to the legs.

The abdomen of the insect is as clearly composed of distinct segments as the body of the annelid.
Of these there are perhaps typically eleven. The thorax is composed of three segments, distinct
in the lowest forms, fused in the highest. This fusion of segments in the thorax of the highest
forms furnishes a very firm framework for the attachment of wings and muscles. These wings
are a new development, and how they arose is still a question. But they give the insect the
capability of exceedingly rapid locomotion.

The three pairs of jaws, modified legs, in the rear half of the head show that this portion
is composed of three segments. For only one pair of legs is ever developed on a single segment.
Embryology has shown that the portion of the head in front of the mouth is also composed of
three segments. Possibly between the præ- and post-oral portions still another segment should
be included, making a total of seven in the head. The head has thus been formed by drawing
forward segments from the trunk, and fusing them successively with the first or primitive head
segment. This is difficult to conceive of in the fully developed insect, where the boundary
between head and thorax is very sharp. But the ancestors of insects looked more like thousand-legs
or centipedes, and here head and thorax are much less distinct. But in the annelid the mouth
is on the second segment; here it is on the fourth. It has evidently travelled backward. That
the mouth of an animal can migrate seems at first impossible, but if we had time to examine
the embryology of annelids and insects, it would no longer appear inconceivable or improbable.
And its backward migration brought it among the legs which were grasping and chewing the food.
And in vertebrates the mouth has changed its position, though not in exactly the same way.
Our present mouth is probably not at all the mouth of the primitive ancestor of vertebrates.
Thus in the insect three segments have fused around the mouth, and three, possibly four, in
front of it. This makes a head worthy of the name. The ganglia of the three post-oral segments,
which bear the jaws, have fused in one compound ganglion innervating the mouth and jaws. Those
of the three præ-oral segments have fused to form a brain. Eyes are well developed, giving
images sometimes accurate in detail, sometimes very rude. Ears are not uncommon. The sense
of smell is often keen.

Perhaps the greatest advance of the insect is its adaptation to land life. This gives it a
larger supply of oxygen than any aquatic animal could ever obtain. This itself stimulates every
function, and all the work of the body goes on more energetically. Then the heat produced is
conducted off far less rapidly than in aquatic forms. Water is a good conductor of heat, and
nearly all aquatic animals are cold-blooded. The few which are warm-blooded are protected by
a thick layer of non-conducting fat. In all land animals, even when cold-blooded, the work
of the different systems is aided by the longer retention of the heat in the body.

Let us recapitulate. The schematic worm had a body composed of two concentric tubes. The outer
was composed of the muscles of the body covered by the protective integument. The inner tube
was the alimentary canal with its special muscles. Between these two was the perivisceral cavity,
filled with nutritive fluid, lymph, and furnishing a safe lodging-place for the more delicate
viscera. It represented fairly the trunk of higher animals.

The annelid added segmentation, and thus greater freedom of motion by the parapodia. But the
segments were still practically alike. In the insect division of labor took place, that is,
each group of segments was allotted its own special work; and these groups of segments were
modified in structure to best suit the performance of this part of the work of the body. The
abdomen was least modified and its eleven segments were devoted to digestion, reproduction,
and excretion--the old vegetative functions. Three segments were united in the thorax; all
their energy was turned to locomotion, and the insect became thus an exceedingly active, swift
animal. The third body-region, the head, includes six segments, of which three surrounded the
mouth and furnished the jaws, while two more were crowded or drawn forward in order that their
ganglia might be added to the old supraoesophageal ganglion and form a brain. It is interesting
to note that a form, peripatus, still exists which stands almost midway between annelids and
insects and has only four segments in the head. The formation of the head was thus a gradual
process, one segment being added after another.

In the turbellaria the dominant functions were digestion and reproduction, and their organs
composed almost the whole body. Here only eleven segments at most are devoted to these functions,
and nine in head and thorax to locomotion and brain. Head and thorax have increased steadily
in importance, while the abdomen has decreased as steadily in number of segments. And the brain
is increasing thus rapidly because there are now muscles and sense-organs of sufficient power
to make such a brain of value. And this brain perceives not only objects and qualities, but
invisible relations between these, and this is an advance amounting to a revolution. It remembers,
and uses its recollections. It is capable of learning a little by experience and observation.
The A, B, C of thinking was probably learned long before the insect's time, and the bee shows
a fair amount of intelligence.

The line of development which the insect followed was comparatively easy and its course probably
rapid. Sun shining outside in the Garden. Inside REBECCA WEST is watering a geranium with a small
watering-pot. Her crochet antimacassar lies in the arm-chair. Madam HELSETH is rubbing the chairs
with furniture-polish from a large bottle. Enter ROSMER, with his hat and stick in his hand.
Madam HELSETH corks the bottle and goes out to the right.

Rebecca. Good morning, dear. (A moment after--crocheting.) Have you seen Rector KROLL's paper this morning?
There's something about you in it.

Rosmer. Oh, indeed? (Puts down hat and stick, and takes up paper.) H'm! (Reads--then walks
about the room.) KROLL has made it hot for me. (Reads some more.) Oh, this is too bad! REBECCA, they
do say such nasty spiteful things! They actually call me a renegade--and I can't think why!
They mustn't go on like this. All that is good in human nature will go to ruin if they're allowed
to attack an excellent man like me! Only think, if I can make them see how unkind they have been!

Reb.
Yes, dear, in that you have a great and glorious object to attain--and
I wish you may get it!

Rosmer. Thanks. I think I shall. (Happens to look through window, and jumps.) Ah, no, I shan't--never
now. I have just seen--

Reb. Not the White Horse, dear? We must really not overdo that White Horse!

Rosmer. No--the mill-race, where BEATA--(Puts on his hat--takes it off again.) I'm beginning to
be haunted by--no, I don't mean the horse--by a terrible suspicion that BEATA may have been
right after all! Yes, I do believe, now I come to think of it, that I must really have been in
love with you from the first. Tell me your opinion.

Reb. (struggling with herself, and still crocheting.) Oh--I can't exactly say--such an odd question
to ask me!

Rosmer (shakes his head). Perhaps; I have no sense of humour--no respectable Norwegian has--and
I do want to know--because, you see, if I was in love with you, it was a sin, and if I once convinced
myself of that--

[Wanders across the room.

Reb. (breaking out). Oh, these old ancestral prejudices! Here is your hat, and your stick, too;
go and take a walk.

[ROSMER takes hat and stick, first, then goes out and takes a walk; presently Madam HELSETH appears,
and tells REBECCA something. REBECCA tells her something. They whisper together. Madam H. nods,
and shows in Rector KROLL, who keeps his hat in his hand, and sits on a chair.

Kroll. I merely called for the purpose of informing you that I consider you an artful and designing
person, but that, on the whole, considering your birth and moral
antecedents, you know--(nods at her)--it is not surprising.

(REBECCA walks about, wringing her hands) Why, what is the matter? Did you really not know that you
had no right to your father's name? I'd no idea you would mind my mentioning such a trifle!

Reb. (breaking out). I do mind. I am an emancipated enigma, but I
retain a few little prejudices still. I don't like owning to my real
age, and I do prefer to be legitimate. And, after your information--of
which I was quite ignorant, as my mother, the late Mrs. GAMVIK, never
once alluded to it--I feel I must confess everything. Strong-minded
advanced women are like that. Here is ROSMER. (ROSMER enters with
his hat and stick.) ROSMER, I want to tell you and Rector KROLL a
little story. Let us sit down, dear, all three of us. (They sit down,
mechanically, on chairs.) A long time ago, before the play began--(in
a voice scarcely audible)--in Ibsenite dramas, all the interesting
things somehow do happen before the play begins--

Rosmer. But, REBECCA,
I know all this. KROLL--(looks hard at her). Perhaps I had better
go?

Reb. No--I will be short--this was it. I wanted to take my share
in the life of the New Era, and march onward with ROSMER. There was
one dismal, insurmountable barrier--(to ROSMER, who nods gravely)--BEATA!
I understood where your deliverance lay--and I acted. I drove BEATA
into the mill-race ... There!

Rosmer (after a short silence). H'm!
Well, KROLL--(takes up his hat)--if you're thinking of walking home,
I'll go too. I'm going to be orthodox once more--after this!

Kroll
(severely and impressively, to REB.). A nice sort of young woman you
are! [Both go out hastily, without looking at REB. This is an elastic rod of cartilage, lying just beneath the spinal marrow or
nerve-cord, which runs backward from the brain. The nerve-centres are therefore here all dorsal,
and the notochord or skeleton lies between these and the digestive or alimentary canal. The
skeleton of the clam or snail is purely protective and a hindrance to locomotion. That of the
insect is almost purely locomotive, but external, that of the vertebrate purely locomotive
and internal. It does not lie outside even of the nervous system, although this system especially
required, and was worthy of, protection. It does not protect even the brain; the skull of vertebrates
is an after-thought. It is almost the deepest seated of all organs. But lying in the central
axis of the body it furnishes the very best possible attachment for muscles. Around this primitive
notochord was a layer of connectile tissue which later gave rise to the vertebræ forming our
backbone.

The nervous system on the dorsal surface of the notochord consists of the brain in the head
and the spinal marrow running down the back. The brain of all except the very lowest vertebrates
consists of four portions: 1. The cerebrum, or cerebral lobes, or simply "forebrain," the seat
of consciousness, thought, and will, and from which no nerves proceed. Whether the primitive
vertebrate had any cerebrum is still uncertain. 2. The mid-brain, which sends nerves to the
eyes, and in this respect reminds us of the brain of insects. Its anterior portion appears
from embryology to be very primitive. 3. The small brain, or cerebellum, which in all higher
forms is the centre for co-ordination of the motions of the body. 4. The medulla, which controls
especially the internal organs. The spinal marrow, or that portion of the nervous system which
lies outside of the head, is at the same time a great nerve-trunk and a centre for reflex action
of the muscles of the body. But the development of these distinct portions and the division
of labor between them must have been a long and gradual process.

We have every reason to believe that here, as in insects, the head has been formed by annexation
of segments from the rump and the fusion of their nervous matter with that of the brain. But
here, instead of only three segments, from nine to fourteen have been fused in the head to
furnish the material for the brain. Notochord and backbone may be the most striking and apparent
characteristic of vertebrates, but their predominant characteristic is brain. On this system
they lavished material, giving it from three to four times as much as any lower or earlier
group had done. They very early set apart the cerebral lobes to be the commander-in-chief and
centre of control for all other nerve-centres. To this all report, and from it all directly
or indirectly receive orders. It can say to every other organ in the body, "Starve that I may
live." It is the seat of thought and will. The other portions of the brain report to it what
they have gathered of vision or sound; it explains the vision or song or parable. It is relieved
as far as possible from all lower and routine work that it may think and remember and govern.
The vertebrate built for mind, not neglecting the body.

Every trait of vertebrates is a promise of a great future. Its internal skeleton gives it the
possibility of large size. This gave it in time the victory in the struggle with its competitors,
as to whether it should eat or be eaten. It is vigorous and powerful, for all its organs are
at the best. It gives the possibility of later, on land, becoming warm-blooded, i.e., of maintaining
a constant high temperature. It is thus resistant to climate and hardship. In time its descendants
will face the arctic winter as well as the heat of the tropics.

But it has started on the road which leads to mind. The greater size is correlated with longer
life. The lessons of experience come to it over and over again, and it can and must learn them.
It is the intelligent, remembering, thinking type. The insect had begun to peer into the world
of invisible and intangible relations, the vertebrate will some day see them. This much is
prophecied in his very structure. He must be heir to an indefinite future.

       *       *       *       *       *

You have probably noticed that the vertebrate differs greatly from all his predecessors. The
gulf between him and them is indeed wide and deep. His origin and ancestry are yet far from
certain. But an attempt to decipher his past history, though it may lead to no sure conclusions,
will yet be of use to us. Practically all aquatic vertebrates lead a swimming life, neither
sessile nor creeping. The embryonic development of our appendages leads to the same conclusion.
We must never forget that the embryonic development of the individual recapitulates briefly
the history of the development of the race. Now the legs and arms, or fore- and hind-legs,
of higher vertebrates and the corresponding paired fins of fish develop in the embryo as portions
of a long ridge extending from front to rear of the side of the body.

This justifies the inference that the primitive vertebrate ancestor had a pair of long fins
running along the sides of the body, but bending slightly downward toward the rear so as to
meet one another and continue as a single caudal fin behind the anal opening. Such fins, like
the feathers of an arrow, could be useful only to keep the animal "on an even keel" as it was
forced through the water by the lateral sweeps of the tail. They would have been useless for
creeping.

But there is another piece of evidence that he was a free swimming form. All vertebrates breathe
by gills or lungs, and these are modified portions of the digestive system, of the walls of
the oesophagus, from which even the lung is an embryonic outgrowth. Now practically all invertebrates
breathe through modified portions of the integument or outer surface of the body, and their
gills are merely expansions of this. In the annelid they are projections of the parapodia,
in the mollusk expansions of the skin, where the foot or creeping sole joins the body. Why
did the vertebrate take a new and strange, and, at first sight, disadvantageous mode of breathing?
There must have been some good reason for this. The most natural explanation would seem to
be that he had no projections on his outer surface which could develop into gills, and farther,
that he could not afford to have any. Now projections on the lower portion of the sides of
the body would be an advantage in creeping, but a hindrance in any such mode of swimming as
we have described, or indeed in any mode of writhing through the water.

Furthermore, if he lived, not a creeping life on the bottom, but swimming in the water above,
he would have to live almost entirely on microscopic animals and embryos; and these would be
most easily captured by a current of water brought in at the mouth. The whole branchial apparatus
in its simplest forms would seem to be an apparatus for sifting out the microscopic particles
of food and only later a purely respiratory apparatus. Moreover, we have seen that the parapodia
of annelids naturally point to the development of an external skeleton, for their muscles are
already a part of the external body-wall and attached to the already existing horny cuticle.
The logical goal of their development was the insect.

Now I do not wish to conceal from you that many good zoölogists believe that the vertebrate
is descended from annelids; but for this and other reasons such a descent appears to me very
improbable. It would seem far more natural to derive the vertebrate from some free swimming
form like the schematic worm, whose largest nerve-cord lay on the dorsal surface because its
branches ran to heavy muscles much used in swimming. Later the other nerve-cords degenerated,
for such a degeneration of nerve-cords is not at all impossible or improbable. "No thoroughfare"
is often written across paths previously followed by blood or nervous impulses, when other
paths have been found more economical or effective.

But where did the notochord come from? I do not know. It always forms in the embryo out of
the entoderm or layer which becomes the lining of the intestine. Now this is a very peculiar
origin for cartilage, and the notochord is a very strange cartilage even if we have not made
a mistake in calling it cartilage at all. My best guess would be that it is simply a thickened
portion of the upper median surface of the intestine to keep the "balls" of digesting nutriment
or other hard particles in the intestine from "grinding" against the nerve-cord as they are
crowded along in the process of digestion. Once started its elasticity would be a great aid
in swimming.

Professor Brooks has called attention to the fact that the higher a group stands in development,
the longer its ancestors have maintained a swimming life. Thus we have noticed that the sponges
were the first to settle; then a little later the mass of the coelenterates followed their
example. But the etenophora, the nearest relatives of bilateral animals, have remained free
swimming. Then the flat worms and mollusks took to a creeping mode of life, while the annelids
and vertebrates still swam. Then the annelids settled to the bottom and crept, and all their
descendants remained creeping forms. The vertebrates alone remained swimming, and probably
neither they nor their descendants ever crept until they emerged on the land, or as amphibia
were preparing for land life. If this be true, it is a fact worthy of our most careful consideration.
The swimming life would appear to be neither as easy nor as economical as the creeping. It
is certainly hard to believe that food would not have been obtained with less effort and in
greater abundance at the bottom than in the water above. The swimming life gave rise to higher
and stronger forms; but did its maintenance give immediate advantage in the struggle for existence?
This is an exceedingly interesting and important question, and demands most careful consideration.
But we shall be better prepared to answer it in a future lecture.

The period of development of mollusks, articulates, and vertebrates, is really one. They developed
to a certain extent contemporaneously. The development of vertebrates was slow, and they were
the last to appear on the stage of geological history.

You must all have noticed that development, during this period, takes on a much more hopeful
form than during that described in the last chapter. Then digestion and reproduction were dominant.
Now muscle is of the greatest importance. If this fails of development, as in mollusks, the
group is doomed to degeneration or at best stagnation. But we have seen the dawn of a still
higher function. In insects and vertebrates the brain is becoming of importance, and absorbing
more and more material. This is the promise of something vastly higher and better. Better sense-organs
are appearing, fitted to aid in a wider perception of more distant objects. The vertebrate
has discovered the right path; though a long journey still lies before it. The night is far
spent, the day is at hand.

CHAPTER IV

VERTEBRATES: BACKBONE AND BRAIN

In tracing man's ancestry from fish upward we ought properly to describe three or four fish,
an amphibian, a reptile, and then take up the series of mammalian ancestors. But we have not
sufficient time for so extended a study, and a simpler method may answer our purpose fairly
well. Let us fix our attention on the few organs which still show the capacity of marked development,
and follow each one of these rapidly in its upward course.

We must remember that there are changes in the vegetative organs. The digestive and excretory
systems improve. But this improvement is not for the sake of these vegetative functions. Brain
and muscle demand vastly more fuel, and produce vastly more waste which must be removed. At
almost the close of the series the reproductive system undergoes a modification which is almost
revolutionary in its results. But we shall find that this modification is necessitated by the
smaller amount of material which can be spared for this function; not by its increasing importance,
still less its dominance for its own worth. The vertebrate is like an old Roman; everything
is subordinated to mental and physical power. He is the world conqueror.

The important changes from fish upward affect the following organs: 1. The skeleton. A light,
solid framework must be developed for the body. 2. The appendages start as fins, and end as
the legs and arms of man. 3. The circulatory and respiratory systems developed so as to carry
with the utmost rapidity and certainty fuel and oxygen to the muscular and nervous high-pressure
engines. Or, to change the figure, they are the roads along which supplies and munitions can
be carried to the army suddenly mobilized at any point on the frontier. 4. Above all, the brain,
especially the cerebrum, the crown and goal of vertebrate structure. The improvement is now
practically altogether in the animal organs of locomotion and thought. Still, among these animal
organs, the lower systems will lead in point of time. The brain must to a certain extent wait
for the skeleton.

1. The skeleton. The axial skeleton consists, in the lowest fish, of the notochord, a cylindrical
unsegmented rod of cartilage running nearly the length of the body. This is surrounded by a
sheath of connective tissue, at first merely membranous, later becoming cartilaginous or gristly.
Pieces of cartilage extend upward over the spinal marrow, and downward around the great aortic
artery, forming the neural and hæmal arches. These unite with the masses of cartilage surrounding
the notochord to form cartilaginous vertebræ, which may be stiffened by an infiltration of
carbonate of lime. The vertebral column of sharks has reached this stage. Then the cartilaginous
vertebræ ossify and form a true backbone. I have described the process as if it were very simple.
But only the student of comparative osteology can have any conception of the number of experiments
which were tried in different groups before the definite mode of forming a bony vertebra was
attained. At the same time the skull was developing in a somewhat similar manner. But the skull
is far more complex in origin and undergoes far more numerous and important changes than the
simpler vertebral column. Into its history we have no time to enter.

And what shall we say of bone itself as a mere material or tissue, with its admirable lightness,
compactness, and flawlessness. And every bone in our body is a triumph of engineering architecture.
No engineer could better recognize the direction of strain and stress, and arrange his rods
and columns, arches and buttresses, to suitably meet them, than these problems are solved in
the long bone of our thigh. And they must be lengthened while the child is leaping upon them.
An engineer is justly proud if he can rebuild or lengthen a bridge without delaying the passage
of a single train. But what would he say if you asked him to rebuild a locomotive, while it
was running even twenty miles an hour? And yet a similar problem had to be solved in our bodies.

But the vertebral column is not perfected by fish. The vertebræ with few exceptions are hollow
in front and behind, biconcave; and between each two vertebræ there is a large cavity still
occupied by the notochord. Thus these vertebræ join one another by their edges, like two shallow
wine-glasses placed rim to rim. Only gradually is the notochord crowded out so that the vertebræ
join by their whole adjacent surfaces. Even in highest forms, for the sake of mobility, they
are united by washer-like disks of cartilage. Biconcave vertebræ persisted through the oldest
amphibia, reptiles, and birds. But finally a firm backbone and skull were attained.

2. The appendages. Of these we can say but little. The fish has oar-like fins, attached to
the body by a joint, but themselves unjointed. By the amphibia legs, with the same regions
as our own and with five toes, have already appeared. The development of the leg out of the
fin is one of the most difficult and least understood problems of vertebrate comparative anatomy.
The legs are at first weak and scarcely capable of supporting the body. Only gradually do they
strengthen into the fore- and hind-legs of mammals, or into the legs and wings of birds and
old flying reptiles.

3. Changes in the circulatory and respiratory systems. The fish lives altogether in the water
and breathes by gills, but the dipnoi among fishes breathes by lungs as well as gills. As long
as respiration takes place by gills alone, the circulation is simple; the blood flows from
the heart to the gills, and thence directly all over the body; the oxygenated blood from the
gills does not return directly to the heart. But the blood from the lungs does return to the
heart; and there at first mixes in the ventricle with the impure blood which has returned from
the rest of the body. Gradually a partition arises in the ventricle, dividing it into a right
and left half. Thus the two circulations of the venous blood to the lungs, and of the oxygenated
blood over the body, are more and more separated until, in higher reptiles, they become entirely
distinct.

As the animal came on land and breathed the air, more completely oxygenated blood was carried
to the organs, and their activity was greatly heightened. As more and more heat was produced
by the combustion in muscular and nervous tissues, and less was lost by conduction, the temperature
of the body rose, and in birds and mammals becomes constant several degrees above the highest
summer temperature of the surrounding air.

The changes in the brain affect mainly the large and small brain. The cerebellum increases
with the greater locomotive powers of the animal. But its development is evidently limited.
The large brain, or cerebrum, is in fish hardly as heavy as the mid-brain; in amphibia the
reverse is true. In higher recent reptiles the cerebrum would somewhat outweigh all the other
portions of the brain put together. In mammals it extends upward and backward, has already
in lower forms overspread the mid-brain, and is beginning to cover the small brain. But this
was not so in the earliest mammals. Here the cerebrum was small, more like that of reptiles.
But during the tertiary period the large brain began to increase with marvellous rapidity.
It was very late in arriving at the period of rapid development, but it kept on after all the
other organs of the body had settled down into comparative rest, perhaps retrogression.

We have given thus a rapid sketch in outline of the changes in the most characteristic systems
between fish and mammals. Some of the changes which took place in mammals were along the same
lines, but one at least is so new and unexpected that this highest class demands more careful
and detailed examination.

The mammal is a vertebrate. Hence all its organs are at their best. But mammals stand, all
things considered, at the head of vertebrates. The skeleton is firm and compact. The muscles
are beautifully moulded and fitted to the skeleton so as to produce the greatest effect with
the least mass and weight of tissue. The sense-organs are keen, and the eye and ear especially
delicate, and fitted for perception at long range. Yet in all these respects they are surpassed
by birds. As a mere anatomical machine the bird always seems to me superior to the mammal.
It is not easy to see why it failed, as it has, to reach the goal of possibility of indefinite
development and dominance in the animal world. Why he stopped short of the higher brain development
I cannot tell. The fact remains that the mammal is pre-eminent in brain power, and that this
gave him the supremacy.

But mammals came very late to the throne, and the probability of their ever gaining it must
for ages have appeared very doubtful. They seem to have been a fairly old group with a very
slow early development. Reptiles especially, and even birds, were far more precocious than
these slower and weaker forms which crept along the earth. But reptiles and birds, like many
other precocious children, soon reached the limit of their development. They had muscle, the
mammal brain and nerve; the mammal had the staying power and the future. Bitter and discouraging
must have been the struggle of these feeble early mammals with their larger, swifter, and more
powerful, reptilian relatives. And yet, perhaps, by this very struggle the mammal was trained
to shrewdness and endurance.

The primitive mammals laid eggs like reptiles or birds. Only two genera, echidna and platypus,
survive to bear witness of these old oviparous groups, and these only in New Zealand. These
retain several old reptilian characteristics. Their lower position is shown also by the fact
that the temperature of their bodies is, at least, ten degrees Fahrenheit below that of higher
mammals. One of these carries the egg in a pouch on the ventral surface; the other, living
largely in water, deposits its eggs in a nest in a burrow in the side of the bank of the stream.

After these came the marsupials. In these the eggs develop in a sort of uterus; but there is
no placenta, in the sense of an organic connection between the embryo and the uterus of the
mother. The young are at birth exceedingly small and feeble. The adult giant Kangaroo weighs
over one hundred pounds; the young are at birth not as large as your thumb. They are placed
by the mother in a marsupial pouch on her ventral surface, and here nourished till able to
care for themselves.

Pardon a moment's digression. The marsupials, except the opossum, are confined to Australia,
and the oviparous mammals, or monotremes, to New Zealand. Formerly the marsupials, at least,
ranged all over Europe and Asia, for we have indisputable evidence in their fossil remains.
But they have survived only in this isolated area, and here apparently only because their isolation
preserved them from the competition with higher forms. If the Australian continent had not
been thus early cut off from all the rest of the world, the only trace of both these lower
groups would have been the opossum in America and certain peculiarities in the development
of the egg in higher mammals. This shows us how much weight should be assigned to the formerly
popular argument of the "missing links." The wonder is not that so many links are missing,
but that any of these primitive forms have come down to us. For we see here another proof of
the fearful extermination of lower forms during the progress of life on the globe. It seems
as if the intermediate forms were less common among these most recent animals than among the
older types. This may not be true, for it is not easy to compare the gap between two mammals
with that between two worms or insects, and mistakes are very easily made. But it seems as
if extermination had done its work more ruthlessly among these highest forms than among their
humbler and lower ancestors. I would not lay much weight on such an opinion; but, if true,
it has a meaning and is worthy of study.

In higher, true, placental mammals the period of pregnancy is much longer, and the young are
born in a far higher stage of development, or rather, growth. The stage of growth at which
the young are born differs markedly in different groups. A new-born kitten is a much feebler,
less developed being than a new-born calf. An embryonic appendage, the allantois, used in reptiles
and birds for respiration, has here been turned to another purpose. It lays itself against
the walls of the uterus, uterine projections interlock with those which it puts forth, and
the blood of the mother circulates through a host of capillaries separated from those of the
blood system of the embryo only by the thinnest membrane. This is the placenta, developed,
in part from the allantois of the embryo, in part from the uterus of the mother. It is not
a new organ, but an old one turned to better and fuller use. In these closely associated systems
of blood-vessels, nutriment and oxygen diffuse from the blood of the mother into that of the
embryo, and thus rapid growth is assured. The importance and far-reaching effect of this new
modification in the old reproductive system cannot be over-estimated. The internal intra-uterine
development of the young, and the mammalian habit of suckling them, far more than any other
factors, have made man what he is. Some explanation must be sought for such a fact.

We have already seen that any animal devotes to reproduction the balance between income and
expenditure of nutriment. Now, the digestive system is here well developed, and the income
is large. But we have already noticed that, as animals grow larger, the ratio between the digestive
surface and the mass to be supported grows continually smaller. On account of size alone the
mammal has but a small balance. But the amount of expenditure is proportional to the mass and
activity of the muscular and nervous systems. And the mammal is, and from the beginning had
to be, an exceedingly active, energetic, and nervous animal. The income has increased, but
the expenses have far outrun the increase. The mammal can devote but little to reproduction.

Moreover, it requires a large amount of material to form a mammalian egg, such as that of the
monotreme. It requires indefinitely more nutriment to build a mammal than a worm, for the former
is not only larger and more perfect at birth; it is also vastly more complicated. The embryonic
journey has, so to speak, lengthened out immensely. One monotreme egg represents more economy
and saving than a thousand eggs of a worm. Moreover, where the individuals are longer lived
and the generations follow one another at longer intervals, the number of favorable variations
and the possibility of conformity to environment through these is greatly lessened. In such
a group it is of the utmost importance that every egg should develop; the destruction of a
single one is a real and important loss to the species. It is not enough to produce such an
egg; it must be most scrupulously guarded. Even the egg of the platypus is deposited in a nest
in a hole in the bank, and the female Echidna carries the egg in a marsupial pouch until it
develops.

Notice further that among certain species of fish, amphibia, and reptiles, the females carry
the eggs in the body until the embryos or young are fairly developed. Viviparous forms are
unknown by birds, probably because this mode of development is incompatible with flight, their
dominant characteristic. Putting these facts together, what more probable than that certain
primitive egg-laying mammals should have carried the eggs as long as possible in the uterus.
The embryo under these conditions would be better nourished by a secretion of the uterine glands
than by a very large amount of yolk. The yolk would diminish and the egg decrease in size,
and thus the marsupial mode of development would have resulted. And, given the marsupial mode
of development and an embryo possessing an allantois, it is almost a physiological necessity
that in some forms at least a placenta should develop. That the placenta has resulted from
some such process of evolution is proven by its different stages of development in different
orders of mammals. And even the feeblest attachment of the allantois of the embryo to the wall
of the uterus would be of the greatest advantage to the species.

This is not the whole explanation; other factors still undiscovered were undoubtedly concerned.
But even this shows us that the internal development of the young and the habit of suckling
them was a logical result of mammalian structure and position. The grand results of this change
we shall trace farther on.

The changes from the lower true mammals to the apes are of great interest, but we can notice
only one or two of the more important. The prosimii, or "half apes," including the lemurs,
are nearly all arboreal forms. Perhaps they were driven to this life by their more powerful
competitors. The arboreal life developed the fingers and toes, and most of these end, not with
a claw, but with a nail. The little group has much diversity of structure, and at present finds
its home mainly in Madagascar; though in earlier times apparently occurring all over the globe.
The brain is more highly developed than in the average mammal, but far inferior to that of
the apes. They have a fairly opposable thumb.

The highest mammals are the primates. Their characteristics are the following: Fingers and
toes all armed with nails, the eyes comparatively near together and fully enclosed in a bony
case. The cerebrum with well-developed furrows covers the other portions of the brain. There
is but one pair of milk-glands, and these on the breast. The differences between hand and foot
become most strongly marked by the "anthropoid" apes. These have become accustomed to an upright
gait in their climbing; hence the feet are used for supporting the body and the hands for grasping.
Both thumb and great toe are opposable; but the foot is a true foot, and the hand a true hand,
in anatomical structure. The face, hands, and feet have mainly lost the covering of hair. They
have no tail, or rather its rudiments are concealed beneath the skin. These include the gibbon,
the orang, the gorilla, and the chimpanzee.

We can sum up the few attainments of mammals in a line. The lower forms attained the placental
mode of embryonic development; the higher attained upright gait, hands and feet, and a great
increase of brain. Anatomically considered these were but trifles, but the addition of these
trifles revolutionized life on the globe. The principal anatomical differences between man
and the anthropoid ape are the following: Man is a strictly erect animal. The foot of the ape
is less fitted for walking on the ground, where he usually "goes on all fours." The skull is
almost balanced on the condyles by which it articulates with the neck, and has but slight tendency
to tip forward. The facial portion, nose and jaws, is less developed and retracted beneath
the larger cranium or brain-case. This has greatly changed the appearance of the head. Protruding
jaws and chin, even when combined with large cranium and brain, always give man the appearance
of brutality and low intelligence.

The pelvis is broad and comparatively shallow. The legs, especially the thighs, are long. The
foot is long and strong, and rests its lower surface, not merely the outer margin as in apes,
on the ground. The elastic arch of the instep must be excepted in the above description, and
adds lightness and swiftness to his otherwise slow gait. The great toe is short and generally
not opposable. The muscles of the leg are heavy and the knee-joint has a very broad articulating
surface. But the great result of man's erect posture is that the hand is set free from the
work of locomotion, and has become a delicate tactile and tool-using organ. The importance
of this change we cannot over-estimate. The hand was the servant of the brain for trying all
experiments. Had not our arboreal ancestors developed the hand for us we could never have invented
tools nor used them if invented. And its reflex influence in developing the brain has been
enormous. The arm is shorter and the hand smaller. The brain is absolutely and relatively large,
and its surface greatly convoluted. This gives place for a large amount of "gray matter," whose
functions are perception, thought, and will. For this gray matter forms a layer on the outside
of the brain.

Thus, even anatomically, man differs from the anthropoid apes. His whole structure is moulded
to and by the higher mental powers, so that he is the "Anthropos" of the old Greek philosophers,
the being who "turns his face upward." Yet in all these anatomical respects some of the apes
differ less from him than from the lower apes or "half apes." And every one of these can easily
be explained as the result of progressive development and modification. Whoever will deny the
possibility or probability of man's development from some lower form must argue on psychological,
not on anatomical, grounds; and it grows clearer every day that even the former but poorly
justify such a denial.

But it is interesting to note that no one ape most closely approaches man in all anatomical
respects. Thus among the anthropoids the orang is perhaps most similar to man in cerebral structure,
the chimpanzee in form of skull, the gorilla in feet and hands. No evolutionist would claim
that any existing ape represents the ancestor of man. The anthropoids represent very probably
the culmination of at least three distinct lines of development. But we must remember that
in early tertiary times apes occurred all over Europe, and probably Asia, many degrees farther
north than now. In those days, as later, the fauna and flora of northern climates were superior
in vigor and height of development to that of Africa or Australia. It is thus, to say the least,
not at all improbable that there existed in those times apes considerably, if not far, superior
to any surviving forms. Whether the palæontologist will find for us remains of such anthropoids
is still to be seen.

But you will naturally ask, "Is there not, after all, a vast difference between the brain of
man and that of the ape?" Let us examine this question as fully as our very brief time will
allow. Considerable emphasis used to be laid on the facial angle between a line drawn parallel
to the base of the skull and one obliquely vertical touching the teeth and most prominent portion
of the forehead. Now this angle is in man very large--from seventy-five to eighty-five degrees,
or even more, and rarely falling below sixty-five degrees. But this angle depends largely on
the protrusion of the jaws, and varies greatly in species of animals showing much the same
grade of intelligence. In some not especially intelligent South American monkeys the facial
angle amounts to about sixty-five degrees. In this respect the skull of a chimpanzee reminds
us of a human skull of small cranial capacity and large jaws, in which the cranium has been
pressed back and the jaws crowded forward and slightly upward.

The weight of the brain in proportion to that of the body has been considered as of great importance,
and within certain limits this is undoubtedly correct. Thus, according to Leuret, the weight
of the brain is to that of the whole body: In fish, 1:5,668; in reptiles, 1:1,320; in birds,
1:212; in mammals, 1:186. These figures give the averages of large numbers of observations
and have a certain amount of value. But within the same class the ratio varies extraordinarily.
Thus the weight of the brain is to that of the whole body: In the elephant, 1:500; in the largest
dogs, 1:305; in the cat, 1:156; in the rat, 1:76; in the chimpanzee, 1:50; in man, 1:36; in
the field-mouse, 1:31; in the goldfinch, 1:24.

From this series it is evident that the relative weight of the brain is no index of the intelligence
of the animal. Indeed if the brain were purely an organ of mind, there is no reason that it
should be any larger in an elephant than in a mouse, provided they had the same mental capacity.
As animals grow larger the weight of the brain, relatively to that of the body, decreases,
and considering the size of man it is remarkable that it should form so large a fraction of
his weight. Still the fraction in the chimpanzee is not so much smaller. It is still possible
that this fraction is above the normal for the chimpanzee, for some of the observations may
have been taken on animals which had died of consumption or some other wasting disease. I have
not been able to find whether this possibility of error has been scrupulously avoided.

A fair idea of the size of the brain may be obtained by measuring the cranial capacity. This
varies in man from almost one-hundred cubic inches to less than seventy. In the gorilla its
average is perhaps thirty, in the orang and chimpanzee rather less, about twenty-eight. This
is certainly a vast difference, especially when we remember that the gorilla far exceeds man
in weight.

Le Bon tells us that of a series of skulls forty-five per cent, of the Australian had a cranial
capacity of 1,200 to 1,300 c.c., while 46.7 per cent. of modern Parisian skulls showed a capacity
of between 1,500 and 1,600 c.c. The skull of the gorilla contains about five hundred and seventy
cubic centimetres. Broca found that the cranial capacity of 115 Parisian skulls, of probably
the higher classes from the twelfth century, averaged about 1,426 cubic centimetres, while
ninety of those of the poorer classes of the nineteenth century averaged about 1,484. His observations
seemed to prove that there has been a steady increase in Parisian cranial capacity from the
twelfth to the nineteenth century.

Turning to the actual weight of the brain, that of Cuvier weighed 64.5 ounces, and a few cases
of weights exceeding 65 ounces have been recorded. The lowest limit of weight in a normal human
brain has not yet been accurately determined. From 34 to 31 ounces have been assigned by different
writers. The brain of a Bush woman was computed by Marshall at 31.5 ounces, and weights of
even 31 ounces have been recorded without any note to show that the possessors were especially
lacking in intelligence.

But there is another characteristic of the brain which seems to bear a close relation to the
degree of intelligence. The surface of the human brain is not smooth but covered with convolutions,
with alternating grooves or sulci, which vastly increase its surface and thus make room for
more gray matter. Says Gratiolett: "On comparing a series of human and simian brains we are
immediately struck with the analogy exhibited in the cerebral forms in all these creatures.
There is a cerebral form peculiar to man and the apes; and so in the cerebral convolutions,
wherever they appear, there is a general unity of arrangement, a plan, the type of which is
common to all these creatures."

The facts of anatomy, at least, are all against us. Struggle as we may, be as snobbish as we
will, we cannot shake off these poor relations of ours. Our adult anatomy at once betrays our
ancestry, if we attempt to deny it. Read the first chapter of that remarkable book by Professor
Drummond on the "Ascent of Man," the chapter on the ascent of the body, and the second chapter
on the scaffolding left in the body. The tips of our ears and our rudimentary ear muscles,
the hair on hand and arm, and the little plica semilunaris, or rudimentary third eyelid in
the inner angle of our eyes, the vermiform appendage of the intestine, the coracoid process
on our shoulder-blades, the atlas vertebra of our necks--to say nothing of the coccyx at the
other end of the backbone--many malformations, and a host of minor characteristics all refute
our denial.

If we appeal from adult anatomy to embryology the case becomes all the worse for us. Our ear
is lodged in the gill-slit of a fish, our jaws are branchial arches, our hyoid bone the rudiment
of this system of bones supporting the gills. Our circulation begins as a veritable fish circulation;
our earliest skeleton is a notochord; Meckel's cartilage, from which our lower jaw and the
bones of our middle ear develop, is a whole genealogical tree of disagreeable ancestors. Our
glandula thyreoidea has, according to good authorities, an origin so slimy that it should never
be mentioned in polite society. The origin of our kidneys appears decidedly vermian. Time fails
me to read merely the name of the witnesses which could be summoned from our own bodies to
witness against us.

Even if the testimony of some of these witnesses is not as strong as many think, and we have
misunderstood several of them, they are too numerous and their stories hang too well together
not to impress an intelligent and impartial jury. But what if it is all true? What if, as some
think, our millionth cousin, the tiger or cat, is anatomically a better mammal than I? His
teeth and claws and magnificent muscles are of small value compared with man's mental power.

What a comedy that man should work so hard to prove that his chief glory is his opposable thumb,
or a few ounces of brain matter! Man's glory is his mind and will, his reason and moral powers,
his vision of, and communion with, God. And supposing it be true, as I believe it is true,
that the animal has the germ of these also, does that cloud my mind or obscure my vision or
weaken my action? It bids me only strive the harder to be worthy of the noble ancestors who
have raised me to my higher level and on whose buried shoulders I stand. Whatever may have
been our origin, whoever our ancestors, we are men. Then let us play the man. If we will but
play our part as well as our old ancestors played theirs, if we will but walk and act according
to our light one-half as heroically and well as they groped in the darkness, we need not worry
about the future. That will be assured.

We have sketched hastily and in rude outline the anatomical structure of the successive stages
of man's ancestry; let us now, in a very brief recapitulation, condense this chronicle into
a historical record of progress.

We began with the amoeba. This could not have been the beginning. In all its structure it tells
us of something earlier and far simpler, but what this earlier ancestor was we do not know.
Rather more highly organized relatives of the amoeba, the flagellata, have produced a membrane,
and swim by means of vibratile, whiplash-like flagella. We must emphasize that these little
animals correspond in all essential respects to the cells of our bodies; they are unicellular
animals. And the cell once developed remains essentially the same structure, modified only
in details, throughout higher animals. And these unicellular animals have the rudiments of
all our functions. Their protoplasm and functions seem to differ from those of higher animals
only in degree, not in kind. And the more we consider both these facts the more remarkable
and suggestive do they become.

Cells with membranes can unite in colonies capable of division of labor and differentiation.
And magosphæra is just such a little spheroidal colony. But the cells are still all alike,
each one performs all functions equally well. But in volvox division of labor and differentiation
of structure have taken place. Certain cells have become purely reproductive, while the rest
gather nutriment for these, but are at the same time sensitive and locomotive, excretory and
respiratory. The first function to have cells specially devoted to it is the reproductive;
this is a function absolutely necessary for the maintenance of the species. For the nutritive
cells die when they have brought the reproductive cells to their full development. These few
nutritive cells represent the body of all higher animals in contrast with the reproductive
elements. And with the development of a body, death, as a normal process, enters the world.
The dominant function is here evidently the reproductive, and the whole body is subservient
to this.

In hydra the union and differentiation of cells is carried further. But the cells are still
much alike and only slowly lose their own individuality in that of the whole animal. This is
shown in the fact that each entodermal cell digests its own particles of food, although the
nutriment once digested diffuses to all parts of the body. Also almost any part of the animal
containing both ectoderm and entoderm can be cut off and will develop into a new animal.

But beside the reproductive cells and tissues hydra has developed a very simple digestive system,
in which the newly caught food at least macerates and begins to be dissolved. This is the second
essential function. The animal can, and the plant as a rule does, exist with only the lowest
rudiments of anything like nervous or muscular power; but no species can exist without good
powers of digestion and reproduction. These essential organs must first develop and the higher
must wait. And the inner, digestive, layer of cells persists in our bodies as the lining of
the mid-intestine. We compared hydra therefore to a little patch of the lining of our intestine
covered with a flake of epidermis; only these layers in hydra possess powers lost to the corresponding
cells of our bodies in the process of differentiation. Notice, please, that when cell or organ
has once been developed it persists, as a rule, modified, but not lost. Nature's experiments
are not in vain; her progress is very slow but sure. But hydra has also the promise of better
things, traces of muscular and nervous tissue. There are still no compact muscles, like our
own, much less ganglion or brain or nerve-centre of individuality. The tissues are diffuse,
but they are the materials out of which the organs of higher animals will crystallize, so to
speak. Notice also that these higher muscles and nerves are here entirely subservient to, and
exist for, digestion and reproduction.

In the turbellaria the reproductive system has reached a very high grade of development. It
is a complex and beautifully constructed organ. The digestive system has also vastly improved;
it has its own muscular layers, and often some means of grasping food. But it is slower in
reaching its full development than the reproductive system. But all the muscles are no longer
attached to the stomach; they are beginning to assert their independence, and, in a rude way,
to build a body-wall. But they are in many layers, and run in almost all directions. Some of
these layers will disappear, but the most important ones, consisting of longitudinal and transverse
fibres, will persist in higher forms. Locomotion by means of these muscles is slowly coming
into prominence. They are no longer merely slaves of digestion.

But a muscular fibril contracts only under the stimulus of a nervous impulse. More nerve-cells
are necessary to control these more numerous muscular fibrils. The animal now moves with one
end foremost, and that end first comes in contact with food, hindrances, or injurious surroundings.
Here the sensory cells of feeling and their nerve fibrils multiply. Remember that these neuro-epithelial
sensory cells are suited to respond not merely to pressure, but to a variety of the stimuli,
chemical, molecular, and of vibration, which excite our organs of smell, taste, and hearing.
Such organs and the directive eyes appear mainly at this anterior end. But a ganglion cell
sends an impulse to a muscle because it has received one along a sensory nerve from one or
more of these sensory cells. Hence the ganglion cells will increase in number. The old cobweb-like
plexus condenses into a little knot, the supra-oesophageal ganglion. This ganglion cannot do
much, if any, thinking; it is rather a steering organ to control the muscles and guide the
animal. It is the servant of the locomotive system. Yet it is the beginning of the brain of
higher animals, and probably still persists as an infinitesimal portion of our human brain.
And all this is the prophecy of a head soon to be developed. An excretory system has appeared
to carry off the waste of the muscles and nerves.

In the schematic worm and annelid the reproductive system is simpler, though perhaps equally
effective. It takes the excess of nutriment of the body. The muscular system has taken the
form of a sack composed of longitudinal and transverse fibres. The perivisceral cavity, formed
perhaps by cutting off and enlarging the lateral pouches of the turbellarian digestive system,
serves as a very simple but serviceable circulatory system. But in the annelid and all higher
forms a special system of tubes has developed to carry the nutriment, and usually oxygen also,
needed to keep up the combustion required to furnish the energy in these active organs. The
digestive system has attained its definite form with the appearance of an anal opening and
the accompanying division of labor and differentiation into fore-, mid-, and hind-intestine.

The digestive and reproductive systems have thus nearly attained their final form. From the
higher worms upward the digestive system will improve greatly. Its lining will fold and flex
and vastly increase the digestive and absorptive surfaces. The layer of cells which now secrete
the digestive fluids will in part be replaced by massive glands. Far better means of grasping
food than the horny teeth of annelids will yet appear. But all these changes are inconsiderable
compared with the vast advance made by the muscular and nervous systems. Reproduction and digestion
are losing their supremacy in the animal body. Their advance and improvement will require but
little further attention.

In the annelid especially, and to some extent in the schematic worm, the supra-oesophageal
ganglion is relieved in part of the direct control of the muscular fibrils and has become an
organ of perception and the seat of government of lower nervous centres. In all higher forms
it innervates directly only the principal sense-organs of the head. And at this stage the light-perceiving
directive eye has developed into a form-perceiving, eidoscopic organ. The eye was short of
range and its images were perhaps rude and imperfect, but it was a visual eye and had vast
possibilities. The animal is taking cognizance of ever more subtle elements in its environment.
Perhaps it is not too much to say that the eidoscopic eye first awakened the slumbering animal
mind, for its reflex effect upon the supra-oesophageal ganglion cannot be over-estimated. The
animal will very soon begin to think.

Between the turbellarian and the annelid many aberrant lines diverged. Some of these attained
a comparatively high level and then seemed to meet insuperable obstacles, while others came
to an end or turned downward very early. Three of these demanded attention, those leading to
mollusks, insects, and vertebrates. And it is interesting to notice that the fundamental difference
between these three lines was the skeleton, or perhaps we ought to say it was the habit of
life which led to the development of such a skeleton.

The mollusk took to a sluggish, creeping mode of life, under an external purely protective
skeleton; the insect to a creeping mode of life, with an external but almost purely locomotive
skeleton; the vertebrate kept on swimming and developed an internal locomotive skeleton. And
it must already have become clear to you that the destiny of these different lines was fixed
not so much directly by the skeleton itself as by its reflex effect in moulding the muscular,
and ultimately the nervous, system.

The insects formed their skeleton by thickening the horny cuticle of the annelid. They transformed
the annelid parapodia into legs and developed wings. They attained life in the air. They devoted
the muscles of the body largely to the extremities and gained swift locomotion. They have a
fair circulatory and an excellent respiratory system. Best of all, they developed a head and
a brain by fusing the three anterior ganglia of the body. The insect could and does think.
Such a structure ought to lead to great and high results. But actually their possibilities
were very limited. They have not progressed markedly during the last geological period. Their
external skeleton was easily attained and brought speedy advantages, which for a time placed
them far above all competitors. But it limited their size and length of life and opportunities,
and finally their intelligence. They remained largely the slaves of instinct. They followed
an attractive and exceedingly promising path, but it led to the bottom of a cliff, not to the
summit.

The mollusks, clams, and snails took an easier, down-hill road. They formed a shell, and it
developed large enough to cover them. It hampered and almost destroyed locomotion and reduced
nerve to a minimum. But nerves are nothing but a nuisance anyhow. And why should they move?
Food was plenty down in the mud, and if danger threatened, they withdrew into the shell. They
stayed down in the mud and let the world go its way. If grievously afflicted by a parasite
they produced a pearl--to save themselves from further discomfort. They developed just enough
muscle and nervous system to close the shell or drag it a little way; that was all. Digestion
and reproduction retained the supremacy. They were fruitful and multiplied, and produced hosts
of other clams and snails. The present was enough for them and they had that.

For if the winner in the struggle for existence is the one who gains the most food, the most
entire protection against discomfort, danger from enemies or unfavorable surroundings, and
the most fruitful and rapid reproduction--and these are all good--then the clam is the highest
product of evolution. It never has been surpassed--I venture to say it never can be--except
possibly by the tape-worms. I can never help thinking with what contempt these primitive oysters,
if they had had brains enough, would have looked down upon the toiling, struggling, discontented,
fighting, aspiring primitive vertebrates. How they would have wondered why God allowed such
disagreeable, disturbing, unconventional creatures to exist, and thanked him that he had made
the world for them, and heaven too, if there be such a place for mollusks. Their road led to
the Slough of Contentment.

But even in molluscan history there was a tragic chapter. The squids and cuttle-fishes regained
the swimming life, and in their latest forms gave up the protective shell. But its former presence
had so modified their structure that any great advance was impossible. It was too late. The
sins of the fathers were visited upon the children in the thousandth generation.

The vertebrate developed an internal skeleton. This was necessarily a slow growth, and the
type came late to supremacy. The longitudinal muscles are arranged in heavy bands on each side
of the back, and the animal swims rapidly. The sense-organs are keen. The brain contains the
ganglia of several or many segments and is highly differentiated. It has a special centre of
perception, thought, and will; it is an organ of mind. The vertebrate has the physical and
mental advantages of large size.

First the definite form and mode of developing a vertebra is attained. Then the vertebral column
is perfected. The fins are modified into legs. The lungs increase in size and the heart becomes
double. The animal emerges on land; and, with a better supply of oxygen and less loss of heat,
all the functions are performed with the highest possible efficiency. First, apparently, amphibia,
then reptiles, and finally mammals of enormous size and strength appeared. It looked as if
the earth were to be an arena where gigantic beasts fought a never-ending battle of brute force.
But these great brutes reproduced slowly, had therefore little power of adaptation, were fitted
to special conditions, and when the conditions changed they disappeared. The bird tried once
more the experiment of developing the locomotive powers to the highest possible extent. It
became a flying machine, and every organ was moulded to suit this life. Every ounce of spare
weight was thrown aside, the muscles were wonderfully arranged and of the highest possible
efficiency. The body temperature is higher than that of mammals. The whole organization is
a physiological high-pressure engine. The sense-organs are perhaps the finest and keenest in
the whole animal kingdom. The brain is inferior only to that of mammals. The experiment could
not have been tried under more favorable conditions; it was not a failure, it certainly was
not a success when compared with that of mammals.

The possibilities of every system except one had been practically exhausted. Only brain development
remained as the last hope of success. Here was an untried line, and the mammals followed it.
During the short tertiary period the brain in many of their genera seems to have increased
tenfold. By the arboreal life of the highest forms the hand is developed as the instrument
of the thinking brain. The battle is beginning to become one of wits, and the crown will soon
pass from the strongest to the shrewdest. Mind, not muscle, much less digestion or reproduction,
is the goal of the animal kingdom. And we shall see later that the mammalian mode of reproduction
and of care of the young led to an almost purely mental and moral advance. For these could
have but one logical outcome, family life. And the family is the foundation of society. And
family and social life have been the school in which man has been compelled to learn the moral
lessons, the application of which has made him what he is.

You must all, I think, have noticed that the different systems of organs succeed one another
in a certain definite order; and that each stage from the lowest to the highest is characterized
by the predominance of a certain function or group of functions. This sequence of functions
is not a deduction but a fact. Place side by side all possible genealogical trees of the animal
kingdom, whether founded on comparative anatomy, embryology, palæontology, or all combined.
They will all disclose this sequence of functions arranged in the same order. Let me call your
attention to the fact that this order is not due to chance, but rests upon a physiological
basis. We might almost claim that if the evolution of man from the single cell be granted,
no other order of their occurrence is possible.

The protozoa are mostly, though not purely, nutritive and reproductive. These functions are
essential to the existence of the species. Naturally in the early protozoan colonies, and in
forms like hydra, these functions predominated. But mere digestive tissue is not enough for
digestion. Muscles are needed to draw the food to the mouth, to keep the digestive sack in
contact with it, and for other purposes. A little higher they are used to enable the animal
to go in search of its food. They are still, however, more or less entirely subservient to
digestion. But in the highest worms we are beginning to see signs that muscles are predominating
in the body; and we feel that, while mutually helpful, the digestive system exists for the
muscles, and these latter are becoming the aim of development. From worms upward there is a
marked advance in physical activity and strength. The muscles thicken and are arranged in heavier
bands. Skeleton and locomotive appendages and jaws follow in insects and vertebrates. The direct
battle of animal against animal, and of strength opposed to strength or activity, becomes ever
sharper. The strongest and most active are selected and survive.

And yet this is not the whole truth. Some power of perception is possessed by every animal.
But until muscles had developed the nervous system could be of but little practical value.
Knowledge of even a great emergency is of little use, if I can do nothing about it. But when
the muscles appeared, nerves and ganglion cells were necessary to stimulate and control them.
And this highest system holds for a long time a position subordinate to that of the lower muscular
organ. Its development seems at first sight extraordinarily slow. Only in insects and vertebrates
has it become a centre of instinct and thought. Through the sense-organs it is gaining an ever
clearer, deeper, and wider knowledge of its environment. First it is affected only by the lower
stimuli of touch, taste, and smell. Then with the development of ear and eye it takes cognizance
of ever subtler forces and movements. Memory comes into activity very early. The animal begins
to learn by experience. The brain is becoming not merely a steering but a thinking organ. More
and more nervous material is crowded into it and detailed for its work. Wits and shrewdness
are beginning to count for something in the battle. Not only the animal with the strongest
muscles, but the one with the best brain survives. And thus at last the brain began to develop
with a rapidity as remarkable as its long delay. Thus each higher function is called into activity
by the next lower, serves this at first, and only later attains its supremacy.

And yet the advance of the different functions is not altogether successive. Muscle and nerve
do not wait for digestion and reproduction to show signs of halting before they begin to advance.
They all advance at once. But the progress of reproduction and digestion is most rapid at first,
and it appears as if they would outrun the others. But in the ascending series the others follow
after, and soon overtake and pass by them. And these lower functions, when out-marched, do
not lag behind, but keep in touch with the others, forming the rear-guard and supply-train
of the army. And notice that each organ holds the predominance about as long as it shows the
power of rapid improvement. The length of its reign is pretty closely proportional to its capacity
of development. The digestive system reaches that limit early, the muscular system is capable
of indefinitely higher complexity, as we see in our hand. But the muscular system has nearly
or quite reached its limit. The body had seen its day of dominance before man arrived on the globe.

But where is the limit to man's mental or moral powers? Every upward step in knowledge, wisdom,
and righteousness only opens our eyes to greater heights, before unperceived and still to be
attained. These capacities, even to our dim vision, are evidently capable of an indefinite,
perhaps infinite, development. What, as yet only partially developed, faculty remains to supersede
them? As being capable of an endless development and without a rival, may we not, must we not,
consider them as ends in themselves? They are evidently what we are here for. Everything points
to a spiritual end in animal evolution. The line of development is from the predominantly material
to the predominance of the non-material. Not that the material is to be crowded out. It is
to reach its highest development in the service of the mind. The body must be sustained and
perfected, but it is not the end. The goal is mind, the body is of subordinate importance.

But if this is true, we must study carefully the development of mind in the animal. The question
presses upon us; if there is a sequence of physical functions in animal development, is there
not perhaps also a sequence in the development of the mental faculties? What is the crowning
faculty of the human mind and how is its fuller development to be attained? Let us pass therefore
to the question of mind in the animal kingdom.

CHAPTER V

THE HISTORY OF MENTAL DEVELOPMENT AND ITS SEQUENCE OF FUNCTIONS

We have sketched hastily the development of the human body. This portion of our history is
marked by the successive dominance of higher and higher functions. It is a history treating
of successive eras. There is first the period of the dominance of reproduction and digestion,
purely vegetative functions, characteristics of the plant just as truly as of the animal. This
period extends from the beginning of life up to the time when the annelid was the highest living
form yet developed. But in insects and lower vertebrates another system has risen to dominance.
This is muscle. The vertebrate no longer devotes all, or the larger part, of its income to
digestion and reproduction. If it did, it would degenerate or disappear. The stomach and intestine
are improved, but only that they may furnish more abundant nutriment for building and supporting
more powerful muscles better arranged. The history of vertebrates is a record of the struggle
for supremacy between successive groups of continually greater and better applied muscular
power. Here strength and activity seem to be the goal of animal development, and the prize
falls to the strongest or most agile. The earth is peopled by huge reptiles, or mammals of
enormous strength, and by birds of exceeding swiftness. This portion of our history covers
the era of muscular activity.

But these huge brutes are mostly doomed to extinction, and the bird fails of supremacy in the
animal kingdom. "The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong." All the time
another system has been slowly developing. The complicated nervous system has required ages
for its construction and arrangement. Only in the highest mammals does the brain assert its
right to supremacy. But once established on its throne the brain reigns supreme; its right
is challenged by no other organ. The possibilities of all the other organs, as supreme rulers,
have been exhausted. Each one has been thoroughly tested, and its inadequacy proven beyond
doubt by actual experiment. These formerly supreme lower organs must serve the higher. The
age of man's existence on the globe is, and must remain, the era of mind. For the mind alone
has an inexhaustible store of possibilities.

The development of all these systems is simultaneous. From the very beginning all the functions
have been represented, all the systems have been gradually advancing. Hydra has a nervous system
just as really as man. It has no brain, but it has the potentiality and promise of one, and
is taking the necessary steps toward its attainment. But while the development of all is simultaneous,
their culmination and supremacy is successive, first stomach and muscle, then brain and mind.
That was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and afterward that which
is spiritual. But now that the mind has once become supreme, man must live and work chiefly
for its higher development. Thus alone is progress possible.

But the word mind calls up before us a long list of powers. And the questions arise, Is one
mode and line of mental action just as much the goal of man's development as another? Is man
to cultivate the appetite for food and sense gratification just as much as the hunger for righteousness?
Or is appetite in the mind like digestion in the body, a function, necessary indeed and once
dominant, but no longer fitted for supreme control? Is there in the development of the mental
powers or functions just as really a sequence of dominance as in that of the bodily functions?
Are there older and lower powers and modes of action, which, though once supreme, must now
be rigidly kept down in their proper lower place? Are there lower motives, for which the very
laws of evolution forbid us to live, just as truly as they forbid a man's living for stomach
or brute strength instead of brain and mind? Are these lower powers merely the foundation on
which the higher motives and powers are to rise in their transcendent glory? This is the question
which we now must face, and it is of vital importance.

We have come to one of the most important and difficult subjects of zoölogy. Let us distinctly
recognize that it is not our task to explain the origin of mind, or even of a single mental
faculty. I shall take for granted what many of you will not admit, that the germs of all man's
highest mental powers are present undeveloped in the mind, if you will call it so, of the amoeba.
The limits of this course of lectures have required us to choose between alternatives, either
to attempt to prove the truth of the theory of evolution, or taking this for granted, to attempt
to find its bearings on our moral and religious beliefs. I have chosen the latter course, and
here, as elsewhere, will abide by it. I should not have followed such a course if I did not
thoroughly believe that man also, in mind as well as body, is the product of evolution. But
this is no reason for your accepting these views. You are asked only to judge impartially of
the tendencies of the theory. We take for granted, I repeat, that all man's mental faculties
are germinally, potentially, present in protoplasm; we seek the history of their development.

We must remember, further, that the science of animal or comparative psychology is yet in its
infancy. Even reliable facts are only slowly being sifted and recorded in sufficient numbers
to make deductions at all safe. And even of these facts different writers give very different
explanations. As Mr. Romanes has well said, "All our knowledge of mental faculties, other than
our own, really consists of an inferential interpretation of bodily activities--this interpretation
being founded on our subjective knowledge of our own mental activities. By inference we project,
as it were, the human pattern of our own mental chromograph on what is to us the otherwise
blank screen of another mind." The value and clearness of our inferences will be proportional
to the similarity of the animal to ourselves. Thus we can educate many of our higher mammals
by a system of rewards and punishments, and we seem therefore to have good reason to believe
that fear and joy, anger and desire, certain powers of perception and inference, are in their
minds similar to our own. But fear in a fish is certainly a much dimmer apprehension of danger
than in us, even if it deserves the name of apprehension. And the mental state which we call
"alarm" in a fly or any lower animal is very difficult to clearly imagine or at all express
in terms of our own mind.

Some investigators have made the mistake of projecting into the animal mind all our emotions
and complicated trains of thought. Thus Schwammerdam apparently credits the snail with remorse
for the commission of excesses. Others go to the other extreme and make animals hardly more
than mindless automata. We are warned, therefore, by our very mode of study, to be cautious,
not too absolutely sure of our results, nor indignant at others who may take a very different
view. And yet by moving cautiously and accepting only what seems fairly clear and evident we
may arrive at very valuable and tolerably sure results.

The human mind, and the animal mind apparently, manifests itself in three states or functions.
These are intelligence, the realm of knowledge; susceptibility, the realm or state of feelings
or emotions; will, the power or state of choice. Let us trace first the development of intelligence
or the intellect in the animal. Let us try to discover what kinds of knowledge are successively
attained and the mode and sequence of their attainment. Hydra appears to be conscious of its
food. It recognizes it partially by touch, perhaps also by feeling the waves caused by its
approach. It seems also to recognize food at a little distance by a power comparable to our
sense of smell. Stronger impacts cause it to contract. It neither sees nor hears; it probably
does little or no thinking. Its knowledge is therefore limited to the recognition of objects
either in contact with, or but slightly removed from, itself. And its recognition of the objects
is very dim and incomplete, obtained through the sense of touch and smell.

A little higher in the animal world a rude ear has developed, first as a very delicate organ
for feeling the waves caused by approaching food or enemies; only later as an organ of hearing.
Meanwhile the eye has been developing, to perceive the subtle ether vibrations. The eye of
the turbellaria distinguishes only light from darkness, that of the annelid is a true visual
organ. Now the brain can begin to perceive the shape of objects at a little distance. Touch
and smell, hearing, sight; such is sequence of sense perceptions. The sense-organs respond
to continually more delicate and subtle impacts, and cover an ever-widening range of more and
more distant objects. Up to this point intelligence has hardly included more than sense-perceptions.

But these sense-perceptions have been all the time spurring the mind to begin a higher work.
At first it is conscious merely of objects, and its main effort is to gain a clearer and clearer
perception of these.

Now it is led to undertake, so to speak, the work of a sense-organ of a higher grade. It begins
to directly see invisible relations just as truly as through the eye it has perceived light.
First perhaps it perceives that certain perceptions and experiences, agreeable or disagreeable,
occur in a certain sequence. It begins to associate these. It learns thus to recognize the
premonitory symptoms of nature's favor or disfavor, and thus gains food or avoids dangers.
The bee learns to associate accessible nectar with a certain spot on the flower marked by bright
dots or lines, "honey-guides," and the chimpanzee that when a hen cackles there is an egg in
the nest. But association is only the first lesson; inference and understanding follow.

The child at kindergarten receives a few blocks. It admires and plays with them. Then it is
taught to notice their form. After a time it arranges them in groups and learns the first elements
of number. But when it has advanced to higher mathematics, the blocks, or figures on the blackboard,
become only symbols or means of illustrating the great theorems and propositions of that science.
Thus the animal has begun in the kindergarten way to dimly perceive that there are real, though
intangible and invisible, relations between objects. But what is all human science but the
clearer vision, and farther search into, and tracing of these same relations? And what is all
advance of knowledge but a perception of ever subtler relations? What is even the knowledge
of right but the perception of the subtlest and deepest and widest relations of man to his
environment? The animal seems to be steadily advancing along the path toward the perception
of abstract truth, though man alone really attains it.

And the higher power of association and inference which we call understanding, aided by memory,
results in the power of learning by experience, so characteristic of higher vertebrates. The
hunted bird or mammal very quickly becomes wary. A new trap catches more than a better old
one until the animals have learned to understand it, and young animals are trapped more easily
than old. Cases showing the limitations of mammalian intelligence are interesting in this connection.
A cat which wished to look out and find the cause of a noise outside, when all the windows
were closed by wooden blinds, jumped upon a stand and looked into a mirror. Her inference as
to the general use of glass was correct; all its uses had not yet come within the range of
her experience. A monkey used to stop a hole in the side of a cage with straw. The keeper,
to tease him, used to pull this out. But one day the monkey tugged at a nail in the side of
his cage until he had pulled it out, and thrust it into the hole. But when it was pushed back
he fell into a rage. His inference that the nail-head could not be pulled through was entirely
correct; he had failed to foresee that it could be pushed back. Many such instances have probably
come within the range of your observation, if you have noticed them. But many of the facts
which Mr. Romanes gives us concerning the intelligence of monkeys, apes, and baboons would
not disgrace the intelligence of children or men.

Mr. Romanes relates the following account of a little capuchin monkey from Brazil:

   "To-day he obtained possession of a hearth-brush, one of the kind
   which has the handle screwed into the brush. He soon found the
   way to unscrew the handle, and having done that he immediately
   began to try to find out the way to screw it in again. This he in
   time accomplished. At first he put the wrong end of the handle
   into the hole, but turned it round and round the right way for
   screwing. Finding it did not hold he turned the other end of the
   handle and carefully stuck it into the hole, and began again to
   turn it the right way. It was of course a difficult feat for him
   to perform, for he required both his hands in order to screw it
   in, and the long bristles of the brush prevented it from
   remaining steady or with the right side up. He held the brush
   with his hind hand, but even so it was very difficult for him to
   get the first turn of the screw to fit into the thread; he worked
   at it, however, with the most unwearying perseverance until he
   got the first turn of the screw to catch, and he then quickly
   turned it round and round until it was screwed up to the end. The
   most remarkable thing was, that however often he was disappointed
   in the beginning, he never was induced to try turning the handle
   the wrong way; he always screwed it from right to left. As soon
   as he had accomplished his wish he unscrewed it again, and then
   screwed it in again the second time rather more easily than the
   first, and so on many times. When he had become by practice
   tolerably perfect in screwing and unscrewing, he gave it up and
   took to some other amusement. One remarkable thing is that he
   should take so much trouble to do that which is no material
   benefit to him. The desire to accomplish a chosen task seems a
   sufficient inducement to lead him to take any amount of trouble.
   This seems a very human feeling, such as is not shown, I believe,
   by any other animal. It is not the desire of praise, as he never
   notices people looking on; it is simply the desire to achieve an
   object for the sake of achieving an object, and he never rests
   nor allows his attention to be distracted until it is done....

   "As my sister once observed while we were watching him conducting
   some of his researches, in oblivion to his food and all his other
   surroundings--'When a monkey behaves like this it is no wonder
   that man is a scientific animal!'"[A]

  [Footnote A: Romanes: Animal Intelligence, pp. 490, 498.]

In the highest mammals we find also different degrees of attention and concentration of thought
and observation. This difference can easily be noticed in young hunting dogs. A trainer of
monkeys said that he could easily select those which could most easily be taught, by noticing
in the first lesson whether he could easily gain and hold their attention. This was easy with
some, while others were diverted by every passing fly; and the latter, like heedless students,
made but slow progress.

It is interesting to notice that one of the perceptions which we class among the highest is
apparently developed comparatively early. I refer to the æsthetic perception of the beautiful.
Now, the perception of beauty is generally considered as not very far below or removed from
the perception of truth and right. But some insects and birds apparently possess this perception
and the corresponding emotion in no low degree. The colors of flowers seem to exist mainly
for the attraction of insects to insure cross-fertilization, and certain insects seem to prefer
certain colors. But you may say that these afford merely sense gratification like that which
green affords to our eyes or sugar to our tastes.

But does not the grouping of colors in the flower appeal to some æsthetic standard in the mind
of the insect? What of the tail of the peacock? Its iridescent rings and eyes evidently appeal
to something in the mind of the female. Do form and grouping minister to pure sense gratification?
What of the song of the thrush? Does not the orderly and harmonious arrangement of notes and
cadences appeal to some standard of order of arrangement, and hence idea of harmony, in the
mind of the bird's mate?

Now, I grant you readily that the A B C of this training is mere sense gratification at the
sight of bright colors. Most insects and birds have probably not advanced much beyond this
first lesson. Savages have generally stopped there or reverted to it. But any appreciation
of form and harmonious arrangement of cadence and colors seems to me at least to demand some
perception which we must call æsthetic, or dangerously near it. But here you must judge carefully
for yourselves lest you be misled. For remember, please, that those schemes of psychology farthest
removed from, and least readily reconcilable to, the theory of evolution maintain that perception
of beauty is the work of the rational faculty, which also perceives truth and right in much
the same way that it perceives and recognizes beauty. If the animal has the æsthetic perception,
it has the faculty which, at the next higher stage of development, will perceive, and recognize
as such, both truth and right. We are considering no unimportant question; for on our answer
to this depends our answer to questions of far greater importance.

Does it look as if the animal had begun to learn the first rudiments of the great science of
rights, of his own rights and those of others? This is an exceedingly difficult question, though
often answered unhesitatingly in the negative. But what of the division of territory by the
dogs in oriental cities, a division evidently depending upon something outside of mere brute
strength and power to maintain, and their respect of boundaries? The female is allowed, I am
told by an eye-witness long resident in Constantinople, to distribute her puppies in unoccupied
spots through the city without interference. But when she has once located them, she is not
allowed to return and visit them, or pass that way again. So the account by Dr. Washburn of
platoons of dogs coming in turn, and peaceably, to feed on a dead donkey in the streets of
Constantinople, would seem to be most naturally explained by some dim recognition of rights.
Rook communities have not received the attention and investigation which they deserve, but
their actions are certainly worthy of attention. Concerning the sense of ownership in dogs
and other mammals opinions differ, and yet many facts are most naturally explained on such
a supposition.

Just one more question in this connection, for we are in the borderland or twilightland where
it is much safer to ask questions than to attempt to answer them. How do you explain the "instinctive"
fear of man on the part of wild and fierce animals? They certainly do not quail before his
brute strength, for a blow at such a time breaks the charm and insures an attack. They quail
before his eye and look. Is not this the answering of a personality in the animal to the personality
in man; a recognition of something deeper than bone and muscle? And may not, as Mr. Darwin
has urged, this fear in the presence of a higher personality be the dim foreshadowing of an
awe which promises indefinitely better things? Is, after all, the attachment of a dog to his
master something far deeper than an appetite for bones or pats, or a fear of kicks?

A host of other and similar questions throng upon us here, to no one of which we can give a
definite answer. We need more investigation, more light. We must not rest contented with old
prejudices or accept with too great certainty new explanations. The questions are worthy of
careful and patient investigation. The study of comparative anatomy has thrown a flood of light
on the structure and working of the human body in health and disease. We shall never fully
understand the mind of man until we know more of the working of the mind of the animal.

It would seem to be clear that there is a sequence of dominance in the faculties of the intellect.
First, the only means of acquiring knowledge is through sense-perception. But memory dawns
far down in the animal kingdom. And thus the animal begins to associate past experience with
present objects. The bee remembers the gaining of honey in the past, associated with the color
of the flower which she now sees, and knows that honey is to be attained again. Thus in time
association leads to inference, and understanding has dawned. But the highest faculty of the
intellect is the rational intelligence, which perceives beauty, truth, and goodness. This is
the last to develop. Traces of its working may be perhaps discovered below man, but only in
man does it become dominant. Through it I perceive my rights and duties, and come to the consciousness
of my own personality as a moral agent. This tells me of the relation of my own personality
to other persons and things. And these are evidently the most important objects of human study.
The attainment of this knowledge and the development of this faculty are evidently the goal
of human intellectual development. This it is which has insured progress and raised man ever
higher above the brutes.

Before we can proceed to the study of the will we must clearly recognize and define certain
modes of mental and nervous action, which sooner or later manifest themselves in muscular activity.
For, while certain of our bodily activities are clearly voluntary, others take place wholly,
or in part independently, of the individual will. Between these different modes of bodily action
we must distinguish as clearly as may be possible.

1. Reflex Action. I touch something cold or hot in the dark, suddenly and unexpectedly. I draw
back my hand involuntarily and before I have perceived the sensation of cold or heat. You tell
me to keep my eyes open while you make a sudden pass at them with your hand. I try hard to
do so, but my eyes shut for all that. I shut them unconsciously and against my own will. I
say, "They shut of themselves." Now, this is not true, but the explanation is not difficult.
These and similar actions are entirely possible, although the continuity between spinal marrow
and brain may have been so interrupted by some accident that sensation in the reflexly active
part fails altogether. A bird flaps its wings after its head is cut off, and yet the seat of
consciousness and will is certainly in the brain. A patient with a "broken back," and paralyzed
in his legs, will draw up his feet if they are tickled, although he is entirely unable to move
them by any effort of his will and has no consciousness of the irritation.

The physiological action is in this case clear. The vibration of the nerve caused by the tickling
travels from the foot to the appropriate centre in the spinal marrow, and here gives rise to,
or is switched off as, a motor impulse travelling back to the muscles of the leg, causing them
to contract. In the injured patient the nervous impulse cannot reach the brain, the seat of
consciousness, and hence this is not awakened. Normally consciousness does result in a majority
of such cases, but only after the beginning or completion of the appropriate action. Yet the
movements of our internal organs, intestine and heart, go on continually, and in health we
remain entirely unconscious of their action.

But reflex actions may be anything but simple. We walk and talk, and write or play the piano
without ever thinking of a single muscle or organ. Yet we had once to learn with much effort
to take each step or frame each letter. Thus actions, originally conscious and intended, easily
become reflex; often repeated the brain leaves their control to the lower centres. We often
say, "I did not intend to do that; I could not help it." We forget that this excuse is our
worst condemnation. It is a confession that we have allowed or encouraged a habit to wear a
groove from which the wheels of our life cannot escape. The essential characteristic of reflex
action is therefore that from beginning to completion it goes on independently of consciousness.

2. Instinct. This is a much-abused word. It is frequently applied to all the mental actions
of animals without much thought or care as to its meaning. Let us gain a definition from the
study of a typical case lest we use the word as a cloak for ignorance or negligent thoughtlessness.
Watch a spider building its wonderful geometrical web. The web is a work of art, and every
motion of the spider beautifully adapted to its purpose. But the spider is not therefore necessarily
an artist. Let us see of how much the spider is probably conscious, remembering that our best
judgment is but an inference. We have good reason to believe that she is conscious of the stimulus
to action, hunger. She may be, probably is, conscious of the end to be attained--to catch a
fly for her dinner. She seems conscious of what she is doing. In all these respects this differs
from reflex action. But she is probably unconscious of the exact fitness of the means to the
end. We do not believe that she has adopted the geometrical pattern, because she has discovered
or calculated that this will make the closest and largest net for the smallest outlay of labor
and material. Furthermore the young spider builds practically as good a web as the old one.
She has inherited the power, not developed or gained it by experience or observation. And all
the members of the species have inherited it in much the same degree of perfection.

Concerning the origin of instincts there are several theories. Some instincts would seem to
be the result of non-intelligent, perhaps unconscious, habits becoming fixed by heredity and
improved by natural selection; others would appear to be modifications of actions originally
due to intelligence. Instinct is therefore characterized by consciousness of the stimulus to
act, of the means and end, without the knowledge of the exact adaptation of means to end. It
is hereditary and characterizes species or large groups.

3. Intelligent Action. You come in cold and sit down before an open fire. You push the brands
together to make the fire burn. Applying once more the criterion of consciousness to this action
we notice that you are conscious of the stimulus to act, of the steps of the action, and of
the end to be attained, exactly as in instinctive action. But finally, and this is the essential
characteristic of intelligent action, you are aware to a certain extent of the fitness of the
means to the attainment of the end. This piece of knowledge you had to acquire for yourself.
Erasmus Darwin defined a fool as a man who had never tried an experiment. Experience and observation,
not heredity, are the sources of intelligence. Intelligence is power to think, and a man may
be very learned--for do we not have learned pigs?--and yet have very little real intelligence.
Hence this is possessed by different individuals in very varying degrees.

We may now briefly compare these three kinds of nervous action.

Reflex action is involuntary and unconscious. The actor may, and usually does, become conscious
of the action after it has been commenced or completed, but this is not at all necessary or
universal.

Instinctive action is to a certain extent voluntary and conscious. The actor is conscious of
the stimulus, the means and mode, and the end or purpose of the action. Of the exact fitness
or adaptation of the means to the end the actor is unconscious.

Intelligent action is conscious and voluntary. The actor is conscious of the stimulus to act,
of the means and mode, and to a certain extent of the adaptation of the means to the end. This
last item of knowledge, lacking in instinctive action, is acquired by experience or observation.

Reflex action may be regarded as a comparatively mechanical, though often very complex, process;
the reflex ganglia appear to be hardly more than switch-boards. There is stimulus of the sense-organs,
and thus what Mr. Romanes has called "unfelt sensation," unfelt as far as the completion of
the action is concerned. But in instinct the sensation no longer remains unfelt; perception
is necessary, consciousness plays a part. And this consciousness is a vastly more subtle element,
differing as much apparently from the vibration of brain, or nervous, molecules as the Geni
from the rubbing of Aladdin's lamp, to borrow an illustration.

But this element of consciousness is one which it is exceedingly difficult to detect in our
analysis, and yet upon it our classification and the psychic position of an animal must to
a great extent depend. The amoeba contracts when pricked, jelly-fishes swim toward the light,
the earthworm, "alarmed" by the tread of your foot, withdraws into its hole. Are these and
similar actions reflex or instinctive? A grain of consciousness preceding an action which before
has been reflex changes it into instinct. Mr. Romanes, probably correctly, regards them as
purely reflex. We must, I think, believe that these actions result in consciousness even in
the lowest forms. The selection and attainment of food certainly looks like conscious action.
Probably all nerve-cells or nervous material were originally, even in the lowest forms, dimly
conscious; then by division of labor some became purely conductive, others more highly perceptive.
The important thing for us to remember in our present ignorance is not to be dogmatic.

Furthermore, the gain of a grain of consciousness of the adaptation of certain means to special
ends changes instinctive action into intelligent, and its loss may reverse the process. Fortunately
we have found that in so far as actions, even instinctive, are modified by experience, they
are becoming to that extent intelligent. This criterion of intelligence seems easily applied.
But this profiting by experience must manifest itself within the lifetime of the individual,
or in lines outside of circumstances to which its ordinary instincts are adapted, or we may
give to individual intelligence the credit due really to natural selection. The portly man's rollicking
laughter rang out through the thin walls of canvas to such effect
that some savage caged beast within reach of the elastic buoyant sound
was roused to anger and supplemented it with a rancorous snarl.

Valeria listened apprehensively, with dilated eyes. She thought of the lion, the ferocious creature
that she had never seen. She thought of the massive strong woman
who knew and feared him.

Then she remembered the desolate old grandparents and their hopeless, helpless poverty. "I'll
resk the lion," she said with a tremulous bated voice.

"That's a brave girl," cried the manager.

"I hev read 'bout Daniel's lions an' him in the den," she explained. "An' Daniel hed consid'ble
trust an' warn't afeard--an' mebbe I won't be afeard nuther."

"Daniel's Lions? Daniel's Lions?" the portly manager repeated attentively. "I don't know the
show--perhaps in some combination now." For if he had ever heard of that signal leonine incident
recorded in Scripture he had forgotten it. "Yes, yes," as Valeria eagerly appealed to him in behalf
of Brent, "we must try to give Hubby some little stunt to do in the performance--but you are
the ticket--a sure winner."

Of course the public knew, if it chose to reflect, that though apparently free the lion was
muzzled with a strong steel ring, and every ponderous paw was chained down securely to the exhibition
car; it may even have suspected that the savage proclivities of the great beast were dulled
by drags. But there is always the imminent chance of some failure of precaution, and the multitude
must needs thrill to the spectacle of intrepidity and danger. Naught could exceed the enthusiasm
that greeted this slim, graceful Una a few days later in the streets of a distant city, as clad
in long draperies of fleecy white she reclined against a splendid leonine specimen, her shining
golden hair hanging on her shoulders, or mingling with his tawny mane as now and again she let
her soft cheek rest on his head, her luminous dark gray eyes smiling down at the cheering crowds.
This speedily became the favorite feature of the pageant, and the billboards flamed with her portrait,
leaning against the lion, hundreds of miles in advance of her triumphal progress.

All this unexpected success presently awoke Brent's emulation--so
far he had not even "barked a few."

A liberal advance on his wife's salary had quieted him for a time, but when the wonders of this
new life began to grow stale--the steam-cars, the great cities, the vast country the Company traversed--he
became importunate for the opportunity of display. He "barked a few" so cleverly at a concert
after the performance one evening that the manager gave him a chance to throw the very considerable
volume of sound he could command into the jaws of one of the lions. "Let Emperor speak to the people,"
he said. Forthwith he wrote a bit of rodomontade which he bade Brent memorize and had the
satisfaction soon to hear from the lion-trainer, to whom was intrusted all that pertained to
the exhibition of these kings of beasts, that the rehearsal was altogether satisfactory.

An immense audience was assembled in the great tent. The soaring dome of white canvas reflected
the electric light with a moony lustre. The display of the three rings was in full swing.
That magic atmosphere of the circus, the sense of simple festivity,
the crises of thrilling expectancy, the revelation of successive wonders,
the diffusive delight of a multitude not difficult to entertain--all
were in evidence.

  Suddenly a ponderous cage was rolled in; the band was playing
  liltingly; the largest of the lions within the bars, a tawny monster,
  roused up and with head depressed and switching tail paced back and
forth within the restricted limits of the cage, while the others looked
out with motionless curiosity at the tiers of people.

Presently with a long supple stride the gigantic, blond Norwegian trainer came lightly across
the arena--a Hercules, with broad bare chest and arms, arrayed in spangled blue satin and
white tights that forbade all suspicion of protective armor. At a single bound he sprang into
the cage, while Brent, garbed in carnation and white, stood unheralded and unremarked close
by outside among the armed attendants. There seemed no need of precaution, however, so lightly
the trainer frolicked with the savage creatures.

He performed wonderful acrobatic feats with them in which one hardly knew which most to admire,
the agility and intrepidity of the man or the supple strength and curious intelligence of the beasts.
He wrestled with them; he leaped and rolled among them; he put his
head into their terrible full-fanged jaws--but before springing forth
he fired his pistols loaded with blank cartridges full in their faces;
for the instant the coercion of his eye was pretermitted every one
treacherously bounded toward him, seeking to seize him before he could
reach the door. But the outcome is evident; intelligence prevails, instinct wanes. The actions
of the young may be purely instinctive; it is better that they should be. But instinct in the
adult is more and more modified by intelligence gained by experience. There is perhaps no more
characteristic instinct than the habit of nest-building in birds. And yet there are numerous
instances where the structure and position of nests have been completely changed to suit new
circumstances. And the view that this habit is a pure instinct, unmodified by intelligence,
has been disproved by Mr. Wallace. But while size of brain, keenness of sense-organs, and length
of life may be rightly emphasized as the most important elements in the development of vertebrate
intelligence, the importance of the appendages should never be forgotten. Cats seem to have
acquired certain accomplishments--opening doors, ringing door-bells, etc.--never attained by
the more intelligent dog, mainly because of the greater mobility and better powers of grasping
of the forepaws. The elephant has its trunk and the ape its hand. The power of handling and
the increased size of the brain aided each other in a common advance.

The teachableness of mammals is also a sign of high intelligence. The young are often taught
by the parent, a dim foreshadowing of the human family relation. And we notice this capacity
in domestic animals because of its practical value to man. And here, too, we notice the difference
between individuals, which fails in instinct. All spiders of the same species build and hunt
alike, although differences caused by the moulding influence of intelligence will probably
be here discovered. But among individual dogs and horses we find all degrees of intelligence
from absolute stupidity to high intelligence. And many mammals are slandered grievously by
man. The pig is not stupid, far from it.

Still only in man does intelligence reign supreme and clearly show its innate powers. But even
in man certain realms, like those of the internal organs, are rarely invaded by consciousness,
but are normally left to the control of reflex action. These actions go on better without the
interference of consciousness.

But other lines of action are relegated as rapidly as possible to the same control. We learn
to walk by a conscious effort to take each step; afterward we take each step automatically,
and think only whither we wish to go. We learn by conscious effort to talk and write, to sing,
or play the piano. Afterward we frame each letter or note automatically, and think only of
the idea and its expression.

So also in our moral and spiritual nature.[A]

  [Footnote A: Mr. James Freeman Clarke has stated this better than I
  can. "We may state the law thus: 'Any habitual course of conduct
  changes voluntary actions into automatic or involuntary (i.e.,
  reflex) actions.' By practice man forms habits, and habitual action
  is automatic action, requiring no exercise of will except at the
  beginning of the series of acts. The law of association does the
  rest. As voluntary acts are transformed into automatic, the will is
  set free to devote itself to higher efforts and larger attainments.
  After telling the truth a while by an effort, we tell the truth
  naturally, necessarily, automatically. After giving to good objects
  for a while from principle, we give as a matter of course. Honesty
  becomes automatic; self-control becomes automatic. We rule over our
  spirit, repress ill-temper, keep down bad feelings, first by an
  effort, afterwards as a matter of course.

  "Possibly these virtues really become incarnate in the bodily
  organization. Possibly goodness is made flesh and becomes
  consolidate in the fibres of the brain. Vices, beginning in the
  soul, seem to become at last bodily diseases; why may not virtues
  follow the same law? If it were not for some such law of
  accumulation as this, the work of life would have to be begun
  forever anew. Formation of character would be impossible. We should
  be incapable of progress, our whole strength being always employed
  in battling with our first enemies, learning evermore anew our
  earliest lessons. But by our present constitution he who has taken
  one step can take another, and life may become a perpetual advance
  from good to better. And the highest graces of all--Faith, Hope, and
  Love--obey the same law." See James Freeman Clarke, Every-Day
  Religion, p. 122.]

There has been therefore in the successive forms and stages of animal life a clear sequence
of dominant nervous actions. The actions of all animals below the annelid are mainly reflex
or automatic, unconscious and involuntary. But in insects and lower vertebrates the highest
actions at least are instinctive. Consciousness plays a continually more important part. Still
the actions are controlled by hereditary tendency far more than by the will of the individual.
But in man instinct has been almost entirely replaced by conscious, voluntary, intelligent
action. And yet in man, as rapidly as possible, actions which at first require conscious effort
become, through repetition and habit, reflex and automatic. All our conscious effort and the
energy of the will, being no longer required for these oft-repeated actions, are set free for
higher attainments. The territory which had to be conquered by hard battles has become an integral
part of the realm. It now hardly requires even a garrison, but has become a source of supplies
for a new advance and march of conquest.

But all this time we have been talking about action and have not given a thought to the will.
And we have spoken as if conscious perception and intelligence directly controlled will and
action. But this is of course incorrect. Will is practically power of choice. You ask me whether
I prefer this or that, and I answer perhaps that I do not care. Until I "care" I shall never
choose. The perception must arouse some feeling, if it is to result in choice. I see a diamond
in the road and think it is merely a piece of glass. I do not stop. But as I am passing on;
I remember that there was a remarkable brilliancy in its flash. It must have been, after all,
a gem. My feelings are aroused. How proud I shall feel to wear it. Or how much money I can
get for it. Or how glad the owner will be when it is returned to her. I turn back and search
eagerly. Perception is necessary, but it is only the first step. The perception must excite
some feeling, if choice or exertion of the will is to follow. This is a truism.

Now reflex action takes place independently of consciousness or will. Instinctive action may
be voluntary, but it is, after all, not so much the result of individual purpose as of hereditary
tendency. Is there then no will in the animal until it has become intelligent? I think there
has been a sort of voluntary action all the time. Even the amoeba selects or chooses, if I
may use the word, its food among the sand grains. And the will is stimulated to act by the
appetite. Hunger is the first teacher. And how did appetite develop? Why does the animal hunger
for just the food suited to its digestion and needs? We do not know. And the reproductive appetite
soon follows. One of these results from the condition of the digestive, the other from that
of the reproductive, cells or protoplasm. These appetites are due to some condition in a part
of the organism and can be felt. They are in a sense not of the mind but of the body. And the
response to them on the part of the mind is in some respects almost comparable to reflex action.
But the mode of the response is, to a certain extent at least, within the control of consciousness.
They train and spur the will as pure reflex action never could. But the will is as yet hardly
more than the expression of these appetites. It expresses not so much its own decision as that
of the stomach. It is the body's slave and mouthpiece. And once again it is best and safest
for the animal that it should be so.

And these appetites are at first comparatively feeble. There is but little muscle or nerve
and but little food is required. But these continually strengthen and spur the will harder
and more frequently. And the will stirs up the weary and flagging muscles. The will may be
a poor slave and the appetites hard taskmasters. But under their stern discipline it is growing
stronger and more completely subjugating the body. Better slavery to hard taskmasters than
rottenness from inertia. The first requirement is power, activity, and then this power can
be directed to ever higher ends. You cannot steer the vessel until she has sails or an engine;
with no "way on" she will not mind the helm, she only drifts. But the condition of the animal
at this stage certainly looks very unpromising. Can the will emancipate itself from appetite
and control it? Or is it to remain the slave of the body?

In time an emotion appears which marks the influence not directly of the body but of the individual
consciousness. This is fear; it is for the body, but not, like hunger, directly of it. It arises
in the mind. It results from experience and memory. The first animal which feared took a long
step upward. But when and where was the dawn of fear? I touch a sea-anemone and it contracts.
Has it felt fear? I think not. The action certainly may be purely reflex. Natural selection,
not mind, deserves the credit of that action. But I am sure that the cat fears the dog, or
the dog the cat, as the case may be. I have little or no doubt that the bird fears the cat.
I am inclined to believe that the insect fears the bird and the spider the wasp. But does the
highest worm fear? I do not know. I do not see how there can have been any fear until there
was a nerve-centre highly enough developed to remember past experiences of danger and fair
sense-organs to report the present risk.

Other emotions soon follow. Anger appears early. The order of appearance of these emotions
or motives I shall not attempt to give to you. Indeed this is to us of relatively slight importance.
The important point to notice is that a host of these have appeared in mammals and birds, and
that each one of these is a new spur to the will. And the will of a horse or dog, to say nothing
of a pig, is by no means feeble. And these are slowly emancipating the animal from the tyranny
of appetite. But how slow the progress is! Has the emancipation yet become complete in man?
I need not answer.

The will has in part, at least, escaped from abject slavery to appetite; it sometimes rises
superior to fear. But it is evidently self-centred. The animal may have forgotten the claims
of his dead ancestors, he is certainly fully alive to his own interests. Can he even partially
rise superior to prudential considerations, as he has to some extent to the claims of appetite?
Is it possible to develop the unselfish out of the purely selfish? And if so, how is this to
be accomplished? It is not accomplished in the animal; it is but very incompletely accomplished
in man. It will be accomplished one day.

In action, at least, the animal is not purely selfish. As Mr. Drummond has shown, reproduction,
that old function and first to gain an organ, is not primarily for the benefit of self, but
for the species. And not only the storing up of material in the egg, but care for the young
after birth, is found in some fish and insects, and increases from fish upward. I readily grant
you that this in its beginnings may be purely instinctive, and that not a particle of genuine
affection for the young may as yet be present in the mind of the parent. But beneficial habits
may, under the fostering care of selection, develop into instincts. The animal may at first
be unconscious of these, and yet they may grow continually stronger. But one day the animal
awakens to its actions, and from that time on what had been done blindly and unconsciously
is continued consciously, intelligently, and from set purpose. This story is repeated over
and over again in the history of the animal-kingdom. The care for the young once started as
an instinct, affection will follow from the very association of parent with young. Certainly
in birds and mammals there seems to be a very genuine love of the parents for their young.
This is at first short lived, and the young are and have to be driven away, often by harsh
treatment, to shift for themselves. But while it lasts it certainly seems entirely real and
genuine. And how strong it is. "A bear robbed of her whelps" is no meaningless expression.
And even the weak and timid bird or mammal becomes strong and fierce in defence of her young.
In the presence of this emotion appetite and fear are alike forgotten.

But this affection or love once started does not remain limited to parent and offspring. Mammals,
especially the higher forms, are social. They frequently go in herds and troops, and appear
to have a genuine affection for each other. You all know how in herds of cattle or wild horses
the males form a circle around the females and young at the approach of wolves. A troop of
orangs were surprised by dogs at a little distance from their shelter. The old male orangs
formed a ring and beat off the dogs until the females and young could escape, and then retreated.
But as they were now in comparative safety a cry came from one young one, who had been unable
to keep up in the scramble over the rocks, and was left on a bowlder surrounded by the dogs.
Then one old orang turned back, fought his way through the dogs, tucked the little fellow under
one arm, fought his way out with the other, and brought the young one to safety. I call that
old orang a hero, but I am prejudiced and may easily be mistaken.

In a cage in a European zoölogical garden there were kept together a little American monkey
and a large baboon of which the former was greatly afraid. The keeper, to whom the little monkey
was strongly attached, was one day attacked and thrown down by the baboon and in danger of
being killed. Then the little monkey ran to his help, and bit and beat his tyrant companion
until he allowed the keeper to escape. We are all proud that the little monkey was an American.

Instances of disinterested actions are so common among dogs and horses that farther illustrations
are entirely unnecessary. And disinterested action is limited to fewer cases because the environment
is rarely suited to its development in the animal world. But do you answer that the affection
of the dog is never really disinterested, but a very refined form of selfishness. Possibly.
But it were to be greatly desired that selfishness would more frequently take that same refined
form among men. But I cannot see how selfishness can ever become so refined as to lead an animal
to die of grief over its master's grave.

And if refined selfishness were all, I for one cannot help believing that the dog would long
ago have been asleep on a full stomach before the kitchen fire. Has no attempt been made to
prove that all human actions are due to selfishness more or less refined? It is very unwise
to apply tests and use arguments concerning animals which, if applied with equal strictness
to human conduct, would prove human society irrational and purely selfish.

Mammals may be self-centred. But the highest forms have set their faces away from self and
toward the non-self; some have at least started on the road which leads to unselfishness.

And man is governed to a certain extent by prudential considerations. If he entirely disregarded
these he would not be wise. But the development of the rational faculty has brought before
his mind a series of motives higher than these, which are slowly but surely superseding them.
Truth, right, and duty are motives of a different order. With regard to these there can be
no question of profit or loss. Here the mind cannot stop to ask, Will it pay? Self must be
left out of account.

        "When duty whispers low, Thou must,
         The soul replies, I can."

And thus man rises above appetite, above prudential considerations, and becomes a free and
moral agent. And family and social life bring him into new relations, press home upon him new
duties and responsibilities, every one of which is a new motive compelling him to rise above
self. And thus the unselfish, altruistic emotions have made man what he is, and are in him,
ever advancing toward their future supremacy. But some one will say, This is a very pretty
theory; it is not history. But the perception of truth and right is certainly a fact, the result
of ages of development. And the very highest which the intellect can perceive is bound to become
the controlling motive of the will. It always has been so. It must be so, if evolution is not
to be purely degeneration. Thus only has man become what he is. And the voice of the people
demanding truth and justice, whenever and wherever they see them, is the voice of God promising
the future triumph of righteousness. For it is proof positive that man's face is resolutely
set toward these, as his ancestors have always marched steadily toward that which was the highest
possible attainment.

We find thus that there is a sequence in the motives which control the will. The first and
lowest motives are the appetites, and here the will is the mouthpiece of the bodily organs.
Then fear and a host of other prudential considerations appear. The lowest of these tend purely
to the gratification of the senses or to the avoidance of bodily discomfort. But they originate
in the mind, and that is a great gain. But the higher prudential considerations take into account
something higher than mere bodily comfort or discomfort. Approbation and disapprobation are
motives which weigh heavily with the higher mammals. The lower prudential considerations are
purely selfish. The higher ones, which stimulate to action for fellow-animals or men, show
at least the dawn of unselfishness. And the altruistic motives, which stimulate to action for
the happiness and welfare of others, predominate in, and are characteristic of, man. The human
will is slowly rising above the dominance of selfishness. With the dawn of the rational perception
of truth, right, and duty, the very highest motives begin to gain control. And the will becomes
more and more powerful as the motives become higher. It is almost a mis-use of language to
speak of the will of a slave of appetite. He is governed by the body, not at all by the mind.

The man who is governed by prudential considerations, and is always asking, Will it pay? is
the incarnation of fickleness, instability, and feebleness. The apparent strength of the selfish
will is usually a hollow sham. But truth, right, and love are motives stronger than death.
And the will, dominated by these, gives the body to be burned. The man of the future will have
an iron will, because he will keep these highest motives constantly before his mind.

In the preceding lectures we have traced the sequence of functions and have found that brain
and mind, not digestion and muscle, are the goal of animal development. In this lecture we
have attempted to trace a corresponding series of functions in the realm of mind. We have found,
I think, that there has been an orderly and logical development of perceptions, modes of action,
and finally of motives in the animal mind. Let us now briefly review this history and see whether
it throws any light on the path of man's future progress.

Most of the sensory cells of the animal minister at first to reflex action, and there is thus
little true perception. The stimuli which have called forth the reflex action may result afterward
in consciousness; but until brain and muscle have reached a higher grade, this could be of
but slight benefit to the animal. Perception and consciousness are exercised mainly in the
recognition and attainment of food. When the animal begins to show fear, we may feel tolerably
certain that it has been conscious of past experience of danger and remembers these experiences.
But the sense-organs are all the time improving, whether as servants of conscious perception
or of reflex action, and the development of the higher sense-organs, especially of the eyes,
has called forth a higher development of the brain. The brain continually develops both through
constant exercise and through natural selection. Through the higher and more delicate sense-organs
it perceives a continually wider range of more subtile elements in its environment. And the
higher the sense-organ the more directly and purely does it minister to consciousness. The
eye, when capable of forming an image, is almost never concerned in a purely reflex action.

From the constant recurrence of perceptions and experiences in a constant order the animal
begins to associate these, and when he has perceived the one to expect the other. Out of this
grows, in time, inference and understanding. The mind is beginning to turn its attention not
merely to objects and qualities, but to perceive relations. And thus it has taken the first
step toward the perception of abstract truth. And if it has the æsthetic perception and can
perceive beauty, we have every reason to believe that the same faculty will one day perceive
truth and right. But on the purely animal plane of existence these powers could be of but little
service, and we can expect to find them developed only very slightly and under peculiar surroundings.
And in this connection it is interesting to notice the great results of man's training and
education in the dog. For the wolf and the jackal, the dog's nearest relatives, if not his
actual ancestors, are not especially intelligent mammals. Compared with them the dog is a sage
and a saint.

The earliest form of action is the reflex. This is independent of both consciousness and will.
The only conscious voluntary action of the animal is limited mainly or entirely to the recognition
and attainment of food. The motive for the exertion of the will is the appetite, and the will
is the slave or mouthpiece of the body. Far higher than this is the stage of instinct. Here
the animal is conscious of its actions and new motives begin to appear. But the animal is guided
by tendencies inherited from its ancestors. The will has, so to speak, advisory power; it is
by no means supreme. But with a wider and deeper knowledge of its environment, with the memory
of past experiences, carried by the higher locomotive powers into new surroundings, brought
face to face with new emergencies outside of the range of its old instincts, it is compelled
to try some experiments of its own. It begins to modify these instincts, and in time altogether
does away with many of them. It has risen a little above its old abject slavery to the appetites,
it is slowly throwing off the bondage to heredity. New emotions or motives have arisen appealing
directly to the individual will. The heir has been long enough under guardians and regents,
it assumes the government and can rightly say, "L'état, c'est moi."

But a greater problem confronts it; can it rise above self? The animal often seems absolutely
selfish. Can the unselfish be developed out of the selfish? This seems at first sight impossible.
And the first lessons are so easy, the first steps so short, that we do not notice them. Reproduction
comes to the aid of mind. The young are born more and more immature. They begin to receive
the care of the parent. The love of the parent for the young is at first short lived and feeble.
But it is the genuine article, and, like the mustard-seed planted in good soil, must grow.
It strengthens and deepens. Soon it begins to widen also. Social life, very rude and imperfect,
appears. And the members of this social group support, help, and defend one another. And doing
for one another and helping each other, however slightly and imperfectly, strengthens their
affection for one another. The animal is still selfish, so is man frequently, but it is in
a fair way to become unselfish, and this is all we can reasonably expect of it.

For these are vast revolutions from reflex action to instinct, and from instinct to the reign
of the individual will, and from appetite to selfishness on the ground of higher motives, and
from immediate gratification to prudential considerations. And the crowning change of all is
from selfishness to love. And each one of them takes time. Remember that the Old Testament
history is the record of how God taught one little people that there is but one God, Jehovah.
Think of the struggles, defeats, and captivities which the Israelites had to undergo before
they learned this lesson, and even then only a fraction of the people ever learned it at all.
As the prophet foretold, so it came to pass. Though Israel was as the sand by the sea-shore,
but a remnant was saved.

But while we seek to do full justice to the animal, let us not underestimate the vast differences
between it and man. The true evolutionist takes no low view of man's present actual attainments;
in his possibilities he has a larger faith than that of the disbeliever in evolution. In intelligence
and thought, in will power and freedom of choice, in one word, in all that makes up character
and personality, man is immeasurably superior to the animal. These powers raise him to a new
plane of being, give him an indefinitely higher and broader life, and his appearance marks
a new era. He alone is a moral, responsible being, to a certain extent the former of his own
destiny and recorder of his doom, if he fails. This gives to all his actions a peculiar stamp
of a dignity only his. What he is and is to be we must attempt to trace in another lecture.
But to one or two characteristic results of his progress we must call attention here.

The principal subject of man's study is not so much the things which surround him as his relation
to them and theirs to each other. His environment has become really one, not so much one of
tangible and visible objects as of invisible relations. And these will demand endless investigation.
The more he studies them the more wonderful do they become. The vein broadens and grows indefinitely
richer the deeper he searches into it. We find thus the purpose of the intellect; it is to
study environment.

And now a little about motives. The animal begins with appetite, and some animals and men never
get any farther. And yet how easily this appetite for food is satiated! We all remember our
experiences as children around the Thanksgiving or Christmas table. What a disappointment it
was to us to find how soon our appetite had forsaken us, and that we had lost the power of
enjoying the delicacies which we had most anticipated. And over-indulgence often brought sad
results and was followed by a period of penitential fasting. And the appetites for sense gratification
must always lead to this result. They not only crave things which "perish with the using;"
temporarily at least, often permanently, the appetite itself perishes with the gratification.

But what of the appetite, if you will pardon the expression, for truth and right? All attainment
only strengthens it; and, instead of enslaving, it makes men ever more free. And yet what a
power there is in the appetite for truth and righteousness? In obedience to it man gives his
body to be burned, or pours out his life-blood drop by drop for its attainment, and rejoices
in the sacrifice. There are victims to appetite: there are only martyrs to truth. This soul
hunger for truth and right, growing more intense as the soul is filled with the object of desire,
is the only one capable of indefinite development and dominance of the will. This must be and
is the mental goal of animal development, if man has a future corresponding in length at all
to his past. Otherwise the history of life becomes a "story told by an idiot." For its satisfaction
is the only one which never causes satiety, and of which over-indulgence is impossible. All
others lead only to a slough of despond, or the deeper and more treacherous slough of contentment,
beyond which rise no delectable mountains or golden city.

And now in closing let me call your attention to one thought of practical vital importance.

According to the theory which we have agreed to adopt, higher species have arisen through a
process of natural selection, those species surviving which are best conformed to their environment.
And this applies to man as well as to lower animals. All knowledge is in man, therefore, primarily,
a means by which he may conform to environment, survive, and progress. But conformity includes
more than mere knowledge of environment. A man might have all knowledge, and yet refuse to
conform; and then his knowledge could not save him from destruction. For conformity alone gives
survival. Conformity in man requires an effort of the will. It is intelligent, but it is also
voluntary action. And knowledge is a necessary means of conformity because through it we see
how we may conform, and because it furnishes the motives which stimulate the will to the necessary
effort.

Now, that faculty of the intellect which is dominant in man, and which has raised him immeasurably
above the animal, and made him man, is the rational intelligence. If there is any such thing
as a law of history or as continuity in evolution, man's future progress must depend upon his
clearer vision and recognition of the perceptions of this faculty. Through it man perceives
beauty, truth, and goodness, and attains knowledge of himself as a person and moral agent,
and recognizes his rights and duties. Of all this the animal is and remains unconscious; indeed
he is not yet a moral being and person in any proper sense of the word.

Inasmuch as the rational perception is the dominant faculty in man, it must perceive the lines
along which he is to conform. Truth, right, and duty must be his watchwords. These are to be
the rules and motives of all his actions. He cannot live for the body, but for something higher,
the mind. This was proven before man appeared on the globe. He is to be a mental, intelligent
being. But he is not to be governed by appetite or mere prudential considerations. These are
animal, not human motives. These are not to be disregarded any more than digestion can be safely
disregarded by man. But they are not to be his chief motives. He must subordinate these to
the higher motives furnished by right and duty. Man is not merely a mental but a moral being.
If he sinks below this plane of life he is not following the path marked out for him in all
his past development. In order to progress, the higher vertebrate had to subordinate everything
to mental development. In order to become man it had to develop the rational intelligence.
In order to become higher man, present man must subordinate everything to moral development.
This is the great law of animal and human development clearly revealed in the sequence of physical
and mental functions.

Must man be a religious being also? This question we must try to answer in a future lecture.

CHAPTER VI

NATURAL SELECTION AND ENVIRONMENT

I have attempted to show that animal development has not been an aimless drifting. Functions
developed and organs arose and were perfected in a certain order. First the purely vegetative
organs appeared, and the animal lived for digestion and reproduction; then came muscle and
it brought with it nerve. But these were not enough; the brain had all the time been gradually
improving, and now it becomes the dominant function to which all others are subordinated. The
experiment was fairly tried. Mere digestion and reproduction are carried to about the highest
perfection which can be expected of them in worms and mollusks. The bird tried what could be
done with digestion ministering to locomotion guided by the very keenest sense-organs and controlled
by no mean brain. Even this experiment was not a success. But one organ remained, the brain,
and on its mental possibilities depend the future of the animal kingdom. Vegetative organs
and muscle have been tried and found wanting.[1]

  [Footnote 1: See chart, p. 310.]

We have followed hastily the development of mind. The mind began its career as the servant
of digestion, recognizing and aiding to attain food. Action is at first mainly reflex. But
conscious perception plays an ever more important part. The animal is at first guided by natural
selection through the survival of the most suitable reflex actions, then by inherited tendencies,
finally by its own conscious intelligence and will. The first motives are the appetites, but
these are succeeded by ever higher motives as the perceptions become clearer and more subtile
relations in environment are taken into account. Governed first purely by appetites, the will
is ever more influenced by prudential considerations, and finally shows well-developed "natural
affections." It has set its face toward unselfishness.

Digestion and muscle, as well as mind, have persisted in man. He is not, cannot be, disembodied
spirit. And in his mental life reflex action and instinct, appetite and prudence, are still
of great importance. But the higher and supreme development of these powers could never have
resulted in man. They might alone have produced a superior animal, never man. His mammalian
structure found its logical and natural goal in family and social life. And even the lowest
goal of family life is incompatible with pure selfishness, and as family life advanced to an
ever higher grade it became the school of unselfishness and love. And social life had a similar
effect.

Moreover, man as a social being early began to learn that he could claim something from his
fellows, and that he owed something to them. If he refused to help others, they would refuse
to help him. This was his first, very rude lesson in rights and duties. Love, duty, and right
have ever since been the watchwords of his development and progress. We have not yet considered,
and must for the present disregard, the value and efficiency of religion in aiding his advance.
At present we emphasize only the historical fact that man has not become what he is by a higher
development of the body, nor by giving free rein to appetite, nor yet by making the dictates
of selfish prudence supreme. And if there is any such thing as continuity in history, such
modes and aims of life, if now followed, would surely only brutalize him and plunge him headlong
in degeneration. He must live for right, truth, love, and duty. In just so far as he makes
any other aim in life supreme, or allows it to even rival these, he is sinking into brutality.
This is the clear, unmistakable verdict of history, and we shall do well to heed it.

But granting all that can be claimed for this sequence, have not the lower forms whose anatomy
we have sketched--worm, fish, and bird--halted at various points along this line of march?
Yet they have evidently survived. And if they have found safe resting-places, cannot higher
forms turn back and join them? In other words, is not degeneration easier than advance and
just as safe? What is the result if an animal tries to return to a lower plane of life or refuses
to take the next upward step? Generally extermination. The very classification of worms in
a number of small isolated groups, which must once have been connected by a host of intermediate
forms, is indisputable proof of most terrible extermination. They did not go forward, and the
survivors are but an infinitesimal fraction of those which perished. Let us take an illustration
where palæontology can help us. The earth was at one time covered with marsupial mammals. Some
advanced into placental forms. The great mass remained behind. And outside of Australia the
opossums are the only survivors of them all. And this is only one example where a thousand
could be given. Place is not long reserved for mere cumberers of the ground. There are so few
exceptions to this statement that we might almost call it a law of biology.

Let us see how it fares with an animal which retreats to a lower plane of life. A worm, rather
than seek its own food, becomes a parasite. It degenerates, but still is easily recognized
as a worm. A crustacean tries the same experiment, though living outside of its host instead
of in it. It sinks to a place even lower, if possible, than that of the parasitic worm. A locomotive
form becomes sessile. It loses most of its muscles and the larger part of its nervous system;
and even the digestive system, which it has made the goal of its existence, is inferior to
that of its locomotive ancestors and relatives. But to the vertebrate these lowest depths of
stagnation and degeneration are, as a rule, impossible. From true fish upward parasitism and
sessile life are practically impossible. Here stagnation and degeneration mean, as a rule,
extinction. Of all the relatives of vertebrates back to worms only the very aberrant lines
of amphioxus and of the tunicata remain. Of the rest not a single survivor has yet been discovered.
And yet what hosts of species must have peopled the sea. The primitive round-mouthed fishes
have practically disappeared. The ganoids survive in a few species out of thousands. The amphibia
of the carboniferous and the next period and the reptiles of the mesozoic have disappeared;
only a few feeble degenerate remnants persist. And this was necessarily so. Each advancing
form crowded hardest on those which occupied the same place and sought the same food, that
is, the members of the same species. And the first to suffer from its competition were its
own brethren. Death, rarely commuted into life imprisonment, is the verdict pronounced on all
forms which will not advance. And does not the same law of advance or extinction apply to man?
What is the record of successive civilizations but its verification?

Notice once more that as we ascend in the scale of development natural selection selects more
unsparingly and the path to life narrows. It is a very easy matter for the lowest forms to
get food. Indeed the plant sits still and its food comes to it. And the battle of brute force
can be fought in a multitude of ways--by mere strength, by activity, by offensive or defensive
armor, or even by running into the mud and skulking. It is harder to gain knowledge, and yet
many roads lead to an education. Colleges are by no means the only seats of education. And
many totally uneducated men have college diplomas. And life is, after all, the great university,
and here the sluggard fails and the plucky man with the poor "fit" often carries off the honors.

  "But where shall wisdom be found?
   And where is the place of understanding?
   The gold and the crystal cannot equal it:
   And the exchange of it shall not be for jewels of fine gold.
   No mention shall be made of corals or of pearls:
   For the price of wisdom is above rubies."

And when it comes to righteousness there is only one right, and everything else is wrong. Therefore
"strive to enter in at the strait gate." And remember that "strive" means wrestle like one
of the athletes in the old Olympic games.

If you wish to climb the Matterhorn many paths lead up the lower slopes, and a stumble here
may cost you only a sprain. And I suppose that several paths lead to the base of the cone.
But thence to the summit there is but one path, and a misstep means death. Pardon these quotations
and illustrations. They are my only means of at all adequately presenting to you a scientific
man's conception of the meaning of the struggle for life. The laws of evolution are written
in blood and bear the death penalty.

There would seem therefore to be going on a process of natural selection. Natural selection
seems to select more unsparingly and the struggle for life--or even existence--to grow fiercer
as we advance from lower forms to higher in the animal kingdom.

But the theory which we have agreed to accept teaches us that these survivors are those which
or who have conformed to their environment and that they have survived because of their conformity.
And what do we mean by environment? And does not man modify his environment? Certainly he changes
by irrigation a desert into a garden. He carries water against its tendency to the hill-top.
But he has learned to do this only by studying the laws which govern the motions of fluids
and rigorously obeying them. He must carry his water in strong pipes and take it from some
higher point, or must use heat or some means to furnish the force to drive it to the higher
point. He cannot change a single iota of the law, and gains control of the elements only by
obedience to their laws. Electricity is man's best servant as long as he respects its laws,
but it kills him who disobeys them. But does not man make his own surroundings in social life?
He merely enters upon a new mode of life; and if this new mode be in conformity with the eternal
forces and laws of environment man prospers in this new mode of life and conforms still more
closely.

There is, indeed, but one environment, but the lower animal comes in contact with, and is affected
by, but a small portion of its elements. Form and color were in the world before the animal
had developed an eye, but up to this time these could have but little effect on animal life.
Light vibrations were present in ether long before the animal by responding to them made them
any part of its own true environment. There is vastly more in environment than man has yet
discovered, and he will discover these elements only by obedience to their laws.

Environment includes ultimately all the forces and elements which go to make up our world or
universe. It is an exceedingly general term. I might say that under the environment of certain
wheels, springs, and spindles, which we call a Jacquard loom, silk threads become a ribbon
worthy of a queen. Is Nature and environment only a huge divine loom to weave man and something
higher yet? One great difference is evident. Under normal conditions the silk must become a
ribbon. But protoplasm can fail to conform and become waste. Environment is a very hard word
to define, and our views concerning it may differ.

One thing, however, seems to me clear and evident. If each successive stage in the ascending
series is selected or survives on account of its conformity to environment there must be some
element or power, something or somewhat in environment specially corresponding in some way
to, or suited to drawing out, the characteristic of this ascending stage on account of which
it survives. The forces and elements of environment make and work against those at each stage
who wander from the right path, and for those who follow it. And thus natural selection arises
as the total result of the combined working of all these forces. They all unite in one resultant
working along a certain line, and natural selection is the effect of this resultant. In the
stage represented by hydra the forces of environment combine in a resultant which works for
digestion and reproduction and the best development of their organs. But as the animal changes
he comes into a new relation or occupies a new position in respect to these forces. New elements
in the old environment are beginning to press upon him. And the resultant changes accordingly.
He may be compared to a steamer at sea which raises a sail. The wind has been blowing for hours,
but the sail gives it a new hold on the ship. Steam and wind now combine in a new resultant
of forces. From worms upward environment manifests itself through natural selection as a power
working for muscular force and brute strength or activity.

But soon natural selection ceases to select on the ground of brute force. After a time environment
proves to be a power making for shrewdness. And when the mammal has appeared the resultant
of the forces of environment impels more and more toward unselfishness, and when man has appeared
environment proves to be a "power, not ourselves, that makes for righteousness." But what shall
we say of an environment which unmasks itself at last as a power making for intelligence, unselfishness,
and righteousness? Someone may answer it is a host of chemical and physical forces bringing
about very high ends. That is very true, but is it the whole truth? The thinking man must ask,
How did it come about, and why is it that all these forces work together for such high moral
and intelligent ends?

We face, therefore, the question, Can an environment which proves finally and ultimately to
be a power not ourselves making for righteousness and unselfishness be purely material and
mechanical? Or must there be in or behind it something spiritual? Shall we best call environment,
in its highest manifestation, "it" or "him?"

The old argument of Socrates, as on the last day of his life he sits discoursing with his friends,
still holds good. He is discussing the same old question, whether there is anything more than
force, material, mechanism in the world. He says that one might assign as "the cause why I
am sitting here that my body is composed of bones and muscles; that the bones are solid and
separate, and that the muscles can be contracted and extended, and are all inclosed in the
flesh and skin; and that the bones, being jointed, can be drawn by the muscles, and so I can
move my legs as you see; and that this is the reason why I am sitting here. But by the dog,
these bones and muscles would long ago have carried me to Megara or Booetia, moved by my opinion
of what was best, if I had not thought it more right and honorable to submit to the sentence
pronounced by the state than to run away from it. To call such things causes is absurd. For
there is a great difference between the cause and that without which the cause would not produce
its effect."

If there is no intelligence or love of truth in the cause, how can there be anything higher
in the effect? And if Socrates had been only bone and muscle, he ought to have run away.

Our problem stands somewhat as follows: We have given protoplasm, a strange substance of marvellous
capacities, which we call functions, and possessing a power of developing into beings of ever
higher grades of organization. Environment proves to be a combination of forces working for
the higher development of functions in a certain orderly sequence. And every lower function
in the ascending line demands the development of the next higher. Digestion demands muscle,
and muscle nerve, and nerve brain. We shall soon see that mammalian structure had to culminate
in the family, and the family demands unselfishness and obedience. Environment therefore proves
from the beginning to have been unceasingly working for the highest end; never, even temporarily,
merely for the lower. For we have seen that environment works most unsparingly against those
who, having taken certain of the steps in the ascending path, fail to continue therein.

But in order to attain this highest end for which it has always been working, an immense number
of subsidiary ends have had to be attained. These are not merely digestion and brain, but a
host of others: e.g., in vertebrates, vertebræ of the right substance, position, form, arrangement,
and union. And in the ascending line, for whose highest forms it has continually worked, the
difficulties of attaining each subsidiary end have been successively solved, and through this
host of subsidiary ends the animal kingdom has advanced straight to its goal of intelligence
and righteousness. Now the whole process is a grand argument for design. But I would not emphasize
the process so much as the end attained. This especially, when attained by conformity to that
environment, demands more than mere mindless atoms in or behind that environment. Can we call
the ultimate power which makes for righteousness "it?" Can we call it less than "Him, in whom
we live and move and have our being?"

The history of life is a grand drama. "Paradise Lost" and Shakespeare's plays are but fragments
of it. But without intelligence they could never have been composed; without a choice of means
and ends they could never have been placed upon the stage. Does the plot of this grander drama
of evolution demand no intelligence in its ultimate cause and producer? Is the succession of
steps, each succeeding the other in such order as to lead to truth and right and continual
progress toward a spiritual goal, is this plot possible without a great composer who has seen
the end from the beginning? Could it ever have been executed upon the stage of the world, and
perhaps of the universe, without an executing will?

Now I freely grant you that this is no mathematical demonstration. Natural science does not
deal in demonstrations, it rests upon the doctrine of probabilities; just as we have to order
our whole lives according to this doctrine. Its solution of a problem is never the only conceivable
answer, but the one which best fits and explains all the facts and meets the fewest objections.
The arguments for the existence of a personal God are far stronger than those in favor of any
theory of evolution. But we very rightly test the former arguments, indefinitely more rigidly
and severely, just because our very life hangs on them. On the other hand, we should not reject
them as useless, because they are not of an entirely different kind from those on which all
the actions and beliefs of our common daily life are based. There is a scepticism which is
merely a credulity of negations. This also we should avoid.

We have considered a few of the reasons for thinking that, with the material, there must be
something spiritual in environment, that if the woof is material the warp is God. Here we need
not delay long. Blank atheism seems to be at present unpopular and generally regarded as unscientific.
The so-called philosophic materialism of the present day seems to be in general far nearer
to pantheism than to the old form of materialism which recognized only atoms and mechanism.
Atheism as a power to deform the lives of men has, for the present, lost its hold, and even
agnosticism is respectful. The materialism against which we have to struggle is not that of
the school, but of the shop, of society, of life. There are comparatively few now who avow
a system of philosophy making mindless atoms their first cause.

But there is a far grosser, more deadly materialism of the heart and will. It sits unrebuked
in the front pews of our churches and controls alike church and parish, caucus and legislature.
It calls on us all to fall down and worship, promising the world if we obey, the cross if we
refuse. And we bow to it; and that is all it asks, for a nod on our part makes us its slaves.
It is the idolatry of money, position, shrewdness, learning--in one word, of success. It takes
all the strength out of our morality, loyalty and obedience to God out of our religion, and
makes cowards and liars of us, who should be heroes. It makes our religion a byword with honest
unbelievers. And if they are honest scientific minds, waiting for evidence of the practical
value of our religion, why should they believe, when we live so successfully down to the religion
which we would scorn to openly profess? Our fathers may have been narrow or straight-laced;
they were not cross-eyed from trying to keep one eye on God and the other on the main chance.
What is the use of whispering, "Lord, Lord," Sundays, if we shout, "Oh, Baal, hear us," all
the rest of the week. Let us at least be honest, and "if Baal be god, follow him," and avow
it. And worst, and most hideous, of all, we are not so much hypocrites as self-deceived. Let
us not forget the old Greek doctrine of Ate, goddess of judicial blindness, sent down only
upon those who were living the unpardonable sin of indifference.

But supposing that there is in environment something more and other than material, can we possibly
know anything about it?

I am in a boat near the mouth of a river. The boat is tossed by the waves, driven by currents
of wind, and now and then temporarily turned by eddies. I seem to look out upon a chaos of
apparently conflicting forces. But all the time the wind and tide are sweeping me homeward.
Now the wind, which sometimes indeed does shift, and the great tidal wave are steadily bearing
me in a certain direction, though wave and eddy and gust may often make this appear doubtful
to me. So, underneath all waves and eddies of environment, there is a great tidal wave, bearing
man steadily onward; and I gain a certain amount of valid knowledge of environment from the
direction in which it is bearing me.

Let us change the illustration. Man survives as all his ancestors have survived before him,
through conformity to environment. Environment has therefore during ages past been continually
making impressions upon him. And he can draw valid inferences concerning the one power, which
must underlie the apparent host of forces of environment, from the impressions which these
have left upon the structure of his mind and character. By studying himself he gains valid
knowledge of what is deepest in environment. For man is the most completely and closely conformed
thereto of all living beings.

But man is a religious being. This is a fact which demands explanation just as much as bone
and muscle. Now no evolutionist would believe that the eye could ever have developed without
the stimulus of light acting upon the cells of the skin. Place the animal in darkness and the
eye becomes rudimentary and disappears. Could a visual organ for seeing moral and religious
truth have ever originated in the mind of man had there been no corresponding pulsation and
thrill of a corresponding reality in environment? Is not the one development just as improbable
or inconceivable as the other?

And this is the reason that, when man awakened to himself and his own powers, he knew that
there was and must be a God. "Pass over the earth," says Plutarch; "you may discover cities
without walls, without literature, without monarchs, without palaces and wealth; where the
theatre and the school are not known; but no man ever saw a city without temples and gods,
where prayers and oaths and oracles and sacrifices were not used for obtaining pardon or averting
evil." Given man and environment as they are, and a belief in God is a necessary result. But
you may ask, if we are to worship a personal God, why might not a conscious and religious hydra,
with equal right, worship an infinite stomach, and the annelid a god of mere brute force?

There stands in Florence a magnificent statue by Michel Angelo. A human figure is only partially
hewn out of the stone. He never finished it. If you could have seen the master hewing the chips
with hasty, impatient blows from the shapeless block, you would have been tempted to say that
he was but a stonecutter, and but a hasty workman at that. Even now we do not know exactly
what form and expression he would have given to the still unfinished head. But no one can examine
it and hesitate to pronounce it a grand work of a master-mind. In any manifestly incomplete
work you must judge the purpose and character and powers of the workman or artist by its highest
possibilities, just so far as you have any reason to believe that these possibilities will
be realized. You must look at the rudely outlined heroic human figure in the block of stone,
not at the rough unfinished pedestal, if you would know Michel Angelo. So in the hydra and
the annelid you must look at the possibilities of the nervous system before you or he think
that digestion and muscle are all.

Once more the highest powers dawn far down in the animal kingdom. There are traces of mind
in the amoeba, and of unselfishness in the lower mammals. If there were a goal of human development
higher and other than unselfishness, wisdom, and love, we should have seen traces of it before
this. But have we found the faintest sign of any such? Moreover, remember that a function continues
to develop about as long as it shows the capacity for development. And during that period environment
is a power making for its higher development. But is there any limit to the possible development
of the three mental activities mentioned above? I can see none. Then must we not expect that
environment will always make for these? And will environment ever manifest itself to man as
the seat or instrument of a power possessing higher faculties other than these? Man must worship
a personal God of wisdom, unselfishness, and love, or cease to worship. The latter alternative
he never yet has been able to take, and society survive under its domination. So I at least
am compelled to read the finding of biological history.

But let us grant for the sake of argument that man contains still undeveloped germs of faculties
capable of perceiving and attaining something as much higher than wisdom and love as these
are higher than brute force. You will answer, this is not only inconceivable, it is impossible.
Still let us grant the possibility. We notice, first of all, that it is against the whole course
of evolution that these faculties should be other than mental, and what we class under powers
pertaining to our personality. For ages past evidently, and no less really from the very beginning,
evolution has worked for the body only as a perfect vehicle of mind, and for this as leading
to will and character. And human development has led, and ever more tends, as Mr. Drummond
has shown, to the arrest, though not the degeneration, of the body. It is to remain at the
highest possible stage of efficiency as the servant of mind. These higher powers will thus
be mental and personal powers. And how has any and every advance to higher capabilities been
attained in the animal kingdom? Merely by the most active possible exercise of the next lower
power. This is proven by the sequence of physical and mental functions. We shall attain, therefore,
any higher mental capacities only by the continual practice of wisdom and love. That is our
only path to something higher, if higher there shall ever be. But if we find that the God of
our environment is a God of something higher than love and righteousness, will these cease
to be characteristics of his nature and essence? Not at all.

I have learned, perhaps, to know my father as a plain citizen. If I later find that he is a
king and statesman, with powers and mental capacities of which I have never dreamed, do I therefore
from that time cease to think of him as wise and kind and good? Not in the least. I only trust
his love and wisdom as guide of my little life all the more. And shall not the same be true
of God though he be king of all worlds and ages? It becomes unwise and wrong to worship God
as the God of might only when we have found that he is a God also of something higher and nobler,
of love; and after we have perceived this fully and worship him as love, we rest in the arms
of his infinite power.

But now that the work has gone thus far, we can see that all development must take place along
personal, spiritual lines; and are compelled to believe in a spiritual cause who knew the end
from the beginning. And man's farther progress depends upon his conformity to this spiritual
environment. And what is conformity to the personal element in our environment but likeness
to him? This is my only possible mode of conformity to a person--to become like him in word,
action, thought, and purpose, and finally in all my being. Very far from a close resemblance
we still are. But we are more like him than primitive man was; and our descendants will resemble
him far more closely than we. Man is and must be a religious being. And he conforms consciously.
Thus to be more like God he must know more about him, and to know more about him he must become
more like him. The two go hand in hand, and by mutual reaction strengthen each other. I will
not enter into the most important question of all, whether we can ever really know a person
unless we have some love for him. The facts of evolution seem to me to admit of but one interpretation,
that of Augustine: "Thou hast formed me for thee, O Lord, and my restless spirit finds no rest
but in thee." Granted, therefore, a personal God in and behind environment, however dimly perceived,
and conformity to environment means god-likeness; for conformity to a person can mean nothing
less than likeness to him.

Some of you must, all of you should, have read Professor Huxley's "Address on Education." But
that "calm, strong angel who is playing for love, as we say, and would rather lose than win,"
is certainly a very strange antagonist. Is it, after all, possible that our clear-eyed scientific
man has altogether misunderstood the game? Is not the "calm, strong angel" more probably our
partner? Certainly very many things point that way. And who are our antagonists? Look within
yourself and you will always find at least a pair ready to take a hand against you, to say
nothing of the possibilities of environment. "Rex regis rebellis." Our partner is trying by
every method, except perhaps by "talking across the board," to teach us the laws and methods
of this great game. And calls and signals are always allowable. The game is not finished in
one hand; he gives us a second and third, and repeats the signals, and never misleads. Only
when we carelessly or obstinately refuse to learn, and wilfully lose the game beyond all hope,
does he leave us to meet our losses as best we may.

Let us carry the illustration a step farther. Who knows that the game was, or could be, at
first taught without talking across the board? I can find nothing in science to compel such
a belief, many things render it improbable. Grant a personality in environment to which personality
in man is to conform and gain likeness. Environment can act on the digestive and muscular systems
through mere material. But how can personality in environment act on personality in man except
by personal contact or by symbols easy of comprehension according to its own laws? Some method
of attaining acquaintance at least we should certainly expect.

But some of you may ask, How can any theory of evolution guarantee that anything of the present
shall survive in the future? It is continually changing and destroying former types. The old
order of everything changes and passes away, giving place to the new. He could scarcely see anything
at first, the change from broad daylight to the glimmering light of the lamps that the men
carried was so great.
"Are you all right, my boy?" said Brownlee's cheery voice; "keep
up your heart, we shall soon be out of this. Our tissues were formed ages
on ages ago; they have all persisted. Most of our organs are as old as worms. All these are
very old, older than the mountains, and yet I cannot doubt that they must last as long as man
exists. Indeed, while Nature is wonderfully inventive of new structures, her conservatism in
holding on to old ones is still more remarkable. In the ascending line of development she tries
an experiment once exceedingly thorough, and then the question is solved for all time. For
she always takes time enough to try the experiment exhaustively. It took ages to find how to
build a spinal column or brain, but when the experiment was finished she had reason to be,
and was, satisfied. And if this is true of bodily organs we should expect that the same law
would hold good when the animal development gradually passes over into the spiritual. And what
is human history but the record of moral and religious experiments, and their success or failure
according as the experimenters conformed to the laws of the spiritual forces with which they
had to do?

We need not fear that our old fundamental beliefs will be lost. Their very age shows that they
have been thoroughly tested in the great experiment of human history and found sure. Modified
they may be; they will be used for higher purposes and the building of better characters than
ours. They will not be lost or discarded. We too often think of nature as building like man,
with huge scaffoldings, which must later be torn down and destroyed. But in the forest the
only scaffolding is the heart of oak.

We have seen that the sequence of functions in animal development has culminated in man's rational,
moral nature. He alone has the clear perception of the reality of right, truth, and duty. The
pursuit of these has made him what he is. His advance, if there is any continuity in history,
depends upon his making these the ruling motives and aims of his life. He must continually
grow in righteousness and unselfishness, if he is not to degenerate and give place to some
other product of evolution. Moreover, as these moral faculties are capable of indefinite, if
not infinite, development, they must dominate his life through a future of indefinite duration.
For the length of the period of dominance of a function has always been proportional to the
capacity of that function for future development. These can never, so far as we can see, be
superseded, for no rival to them can be discovered. We have found in them the culmination of
the sequence of functions.

We have attempted to show in this lecture that reversal of this grand sequence has always led
to degeneration, or, in higher forms, far more frequently, to extinction. As we ascend, natural
selection works more, rather than less, unsparingly. And as advance depends upon conformity
to environment, and as the highest forms must be regarded as therefore most completely conformed,
we gain our most adequate knowledge of environment when we study it as working especially for
these. For these have been from the very beginning its far-off, chief aim and goal. Viewed
from this standpoint, environment proves to be a host of interacting forces uniting in a resultant
"power, not ourselves, that makes for righteousness," and unselfishness.

Inasmuch as man's rational moral nature, his personality, is the result of the last and longest
step toward and in conformity to environment, these powers correspond to that which is at the
same time highest, and deepest, and most fundamental in that environment. This power which
makes for righteousness is therefore to be regarded as personal and spiritual rather than material.
It is God immanent in nature. And it is mainly to this personal and spiritual element in his
environment that man is in the future to more completely conform. Conformity to this element
in man's environment does not so much result in life as it is life; failure to conform is death.
And the pressure of environment upon man, compelling him to choose between life through conformity
and non-conformity with death, can be most naturally and adequately explained as the expression
of his will. We know what he requires of us.

Our knowledge of him is very incomplete, but may be valid as far as it extends. And it would
seem to be valid, for it has been tested by ages of experiment. The results of this grand experiment
have been summed up in man's fundamental religious beliefs. And farther knowledge will be gained
by more complete obedience to the requirements already known. The evidence, that these fundamental
religious beliefs will persist, is of the same character as that upon which rests our belief
in the persistence of cells and tissues. The one is rooted in the structure of our minds; the
other, in the structure of our bodies. But, after all, only will can act upon will, and personality
upon personality. C. J. Nichod, late Secretary of the London Athletic Club, writes in his book--"Guide
to Athletic Training," that "Tea is preferable for training purposes, possessing less heating properties
and being more digestible than beer or spirits." And in connection
with this study we may hope to gain some new light on the laws of conformity.

CHAPTER VII

CONFORMITY TO ENVIRONMENT

We are too prone to think that soil and climate, hill-side or plain, mountain and shore, temperature
and rainfall, constitute the sole or the most important elements in human environment. Every
one of these elements is doubtless important. Frost, drought, or barrenness of soil may make
a region a desert, or dwarf the development of its inhabitants. Mountaineer, and the dweller
on the plain, and the fisherman on the shore of the ocean develop different traits through
the influence of their surroundings. In too warm a climate the human race loses its mental
and moral vigor and degenerates. This is undeniable.

But, though one soil and climate and set of physical surroundings may be more conducive than
another to the development of heroism, truthfulness, unselfishness, and righteousness, no one
is essential to their production or sure to give rise to them. Moral and religious character
is a feature of man's personality, and our personality is moulded mainly by the men and women
with whom we associate. A man is not only "known by the company which he keeps;" he is usually
fashioned by and conforms to it. As President Seelye has well said, "The only motive which
can move a will is either a will itself, or something into which a will enters. It is not a
thought, but only a sentiment, a deed, or a person, by which we become truly inspired. It is
not the intellect, but the heart and will, through which and by which we are controlled. It
is not the precepts of life, but life itself, by which alone we are begotten and born unto life.

"Now, there are two ways in which living power, personal power, the power of a will, may enter
a soul and give it life; the one is when God's will works upon us, and the other when our wills
work upon one another. God's will may directly penetrate ours, enabling us to will and to do
of his good pleasure; and our own wills, thus inspired, may be the torch to kindle other wills
with the same inspiration. It is in only one of these two ways that a human soul can be truly
inspired; and, without a true inspiration, no amount of instruction, whether in duty, or life,
or anything else, will change a single moral propensity."[A]

  [Footnote A: Seelye: Christian Missions, p. 154.]

Even though a Lincoln may rise above his hereditary position or his surroundings, they are
the school in which he is trained; the gymnasium in which his mental and moral fibre is strengthened.
Family and social life form thus the element of man's environment by which he is mostly moulded,
and to which he most naturally and completely conforms. Let us therefore briefly trace the
origin of this new element of man's environment, and then notice the effect upon him of conformity
to its laws, and see whither these would lead him.

We have already seen that intra-uterine development of the young was being carried ever farther
by mammals, and we found one explanation of this in the fact that each mammalian egg represented
a large amount of nutriment, and that the mammal had very little material to spare for reproduction.
Very possibly, too, the newly hatched mammals were exposed to even more numerous and greater
dangers than the young of birds. Even among lower mammals the young is feeble at birth. But
the human infant is absolutely helpless. And the centre of its helplessness is its brain. Its
eyes and ears are comparatively perfect, but its perceptions are very dim. Its muscles are
all present, but it must very slowly and gradually learn to use them. Its language is but a
cry, its few actions reflex. The new-born kitten may be just as helpless, but in a few weeks
it will run and play and hunt, and after a few months can care for itself. Not so the child.
It must be cared for during months and years before it can be given independence. Its brain
is so marvellously complex that it is finished as a thinking and willing and muscle-controlling
mechanism only long after birth. This means a period of infancy during which the young clings
helplessly to the mother, who is its natural protector. And during this period the mother and
young have to be cared for and protected by the male. And the period of infancy and the protection
of the female and young are just as truly, though in far less degree, characteristic of the
highest apes as of man.

I can give you only this very condensed and incomplete abstract of Mr. John Fiske's argument;
you must read it for yourself in his "Destiny of Man." And as he has there shown, this can
have but one result, and that is the family life of man. And we may yet very possibly have
to acknowledge that family life of a very low grade is just as truly characteristic of the
higher apes as of lower man. And thus the family life of man is the physiological result of,
and rooted in, mammalian structure.

And the benefits of family life are too great and numerous to even enumerate. First of all
the family is the school of unselfishness. All the love of the parent is drawn out for the
helpless and dependent child, and grows as the parent works and thinks for it. And the child
returns a fraction of his parents' love. Within the close bond of the family the struggle for
place and opportunity is replaced by mutual helpfulness; and this doing and burden-bearing
with and for each other is a constant exercise in the practice of love. A president of an English
Court of Sessions also complained that tea was driving out beer,
and indirectly injuring the farmer, in whose cottage, he omitted to
say, the tea canister had begun to occupy a place of honor, despite
the lessened demand for his malt.


A voice within him tells him continually that love is better than selfishness and ministering
better than being ministered unto. It dawns upon him that it is against the nature of things
that other people should be so selfish and grasping; a few begin to apply the moral to themselves,
and a few of these to act accordingly.

And what a change the few steps which man has taken in this direction have wrought in his life.

It is a vast change from the "gladiatorial theory" to that of "mutual helpfulness." Call it
a revolution, if you will. Revolutions are not unheard of in the history of the animal kingdom
any more than in human history. We have seen, first, digestion and reproduction on the throne
of animal organization, then muscle, and finally brain. Each of these changes is in one sense
a revolution.

