How many times have I changed hands?  I think it is twelve times--I cannot remember; and each
time it was down a step lower, and each time I got a harder master.  They have been cruel,
every one; they have worked me night and day in degraded employments, and beaten me; they have
fed me ill, and some days not at all.  And so I am but bones, now, with a rough and frowsy
skin humped and cornered upon my shrunken body--that skin which was once so glossy, that skin
which she loved to stroke with her hand.  I was the pride of the mountains and the Great Plains;
now I am a scarecrow and despised.  These piteous wrecks that are my comrades here say we have
reached the bottom of the scale, the final humiliation; they say that when a horse is no longer
worth the weeds and discarded rubbish they feed to him, they sell him to the bull-ring for
a glass of brandy, to make sport for the people and perish for their pleasure.

To die--that does not disturb me; we of the service never care for death.  But if I could see
her once more! if I could hear her bugle sing again and say, "It is I, Soldier--come!"

CHAPTER XV--GENERAL ALISON TO MRS. DRAKE, THE COLONEL'S WIFE

To return, now, to where I was, and tell you the rest.  We shall never know how she came to
be there; there is no way to account for it.  She was always watching for black and shiny and
spirited horses--watching, hoping, despairing, hoping again; always giving chase and sounding
her call, upon the meagrest chance of a response, and breaking her heart over the disappointment;
always inquiring, always interested in sales-stables and horse accumulations in general.  How
she got there must remain a mystery.

At the point which I had reached in a preceding paragraph of this account, the situation was
as follows:  two horses lay dying; the bull had scattered his persecutors for the moment, and
stood raging, panting, pawing the dust in clouds over his back, when the man that had been
wounded returned to the ring on a remount, a poor blindfolded wreck that yet had something
ironically military about his bearing--and the next moment the bull had ripped him open and
his bowls were dragging upon the ground:  and the bull was charging his swarm of pests again.
Then came pealing through the air a bugle-call that froze my blood--"IT IS I, SOLDIER--COME!"
I turned; Cathy was flying down through the massed people; she cleared the parapet at a bound,
and sped towards that riderless horse, who staggered forward towards the remembered sound;
but his strength failed, and he fell at her feet, she lavishing kisses upon him and sobbing,
the house rising with one impulse, and white with horror!  Before help could reach her the
bull was back again--

She was never conscious again in life.  We bore her home, all mangled and drenched in blood,
and knelt by her and listened to her broken and wandering words, and prayed for her passing
spirit, and there was no comfort--nor ever will be, I think.  But she was happy, for she was
far away under another sky, and comrading again with her Rangers, and her animal friends, and
the soldiers.  Their names fell softly and caressingly from her lips, one by one, with pauses
between.  She was not in pain, but lay with closed eyes, vacantly murmuring, as one who dreams.
Sometimes she smiled, saying nothing; sometimes she smiled when she uttered a name--such as
Shekels, or BB, or Potter.  Sometimes she was at her fort, issuing commands; sometimes she
was careering over the plain at the head of her men; sometimes she was training her horse;
once she said, reprovingly, "You are giving me the wrong foot; give me the left--don't you
know it is good-bye?"

