The project of settling the shores of Port Roseway had its birth in the autumn of 1782, when
one hundred and twenty Loyalist families, whose attention had been directed to that part of
Nova Scotia by a friend in Massachusetts, banded together with the object of emigrating thither.
They first appointed a committee of seven to make arrangements for their removal; and, a few
weeks later, they commissioned two members of the association, Joseph Pynchon and James Dole,
to go to Halifax and lay before Governor Parr their desires and intentions. Pynchon and Dole,
on their arrival at Halifax, had an interview with the governor, and obtained from him very
satisfactory arrangements. The governor agreed to give the settlers the land about Port Roseway
which they desired. He promised them that surveyors should be sent to lay out the grants, that
carpenters and a supply of 400,000 feet of lumber should be furnished for building their houses,
that for the first year at least the settlers should receive army rations, and that they should
be free for ever from impressment in the British Navy. All these promises were made on the
distinct understanding that they should interfere in no way with the claims of the Loyalists
on the British government for compensation for losses sustained in the war. Elated by the reception
they had received from the governor, the agents wrote home enthusiastic accounts of the prospects
of the venture. Pynchon even hinted that the new town would supersede Halifax. 'Much talk is
here,' he wrote, 'of capital of Province... Halifax can't but be sensible that Port Roseway,
if properly attended to in encouraging settlers of every denomination, will have much the advantage
of all supplies from the Bay of Fundy and westward. What the consequence will be time only
will reveal.' Many persons at Halifax, wrote Pynchon, prophesied that the new settlement would
dwindle, and recommended the shore of the Bay of Fundy or the banks of the river St John in
preference to Port Roseway; but Pynchon attributed their fears to jealousy. A few years' experience
must have convinced him that his suspicions were ill-founded.

The first instalment of settlers, about four thousand in number, arrived in May 1783. They
found nothing but the virgin wilderness confronting them. But they set to work with a will
to clear the land and build their houses. 'As soon as we had set up a kind of tent,' wrote
the Rev. Jonathan Beecher in his Journal, 'we knelt down, my wife and I and my two boys, and
kissed the dear ground and thanked God that the flag of England floated there, and resolved
that we would work with the rest to become again prosperous and happy.' By July 11 the work
of clearing had been so far advanced that it became possible to allot the lands. The town had
been laid out in five long parallel streets, with other streets crossing them at right angles.
Each associate was given a town lot fronting on one of these streets, as well as a water lot
facing the harbour, and a fifty-acre farm in the surrounding country. With the aid of the government
artisans, the wooden houses were rapidly run up; and in a couple of months a town sprang up
where before had been the forest and some fishermen's huts.

At the end of July Governor Parr paid the town a visit, and christened it, curiously enough,
with the name of Shelburne, after the British statesman who was responsible for the Peace of
Versailles. The occasion was one of great ceremony. His Excellency, as he landed from the sloop
Sophie, was saluted by the booming of cannon from the ships and from the shore. He proceeded
up the main street, through a lane of armed men. At the place appointed for his reception he
was met by the magistrates and principal citizens, and presented with an address. In the evening
there was a dinner given by Captain Mowat on board the Sophie; and the next evening there was
another dinner at the house of Justice Robertson, followed by a ball given by the citizens,
which was 'conducted with the greatest festivity and decorum,' and 'did not break up till five
the next morning.' Parr was delighted with Shelburne, and wrote to Sir Guy Carleton, 'From
every appearance I have not a doubt but that it will in a short time become the most flourishing
Town for trade of any in this part of the world, and the country will for agriculture.'

For a few years it looked as though Shelburne was not going to belie these hopes. The autumn
of 1783 brought a considerable increase to its population; and in 1784 it seems to have numbered
no less than ten thousand souls, including the suburb of Burchtown, in which most of the negro
refugees in New York had been settled. It became a place of business and fashion. There was
for a time an extensive trade in fish and lumber with Great Britain and the West Indies. Ship-yards
were built, from which was launched the first ship built in Nova Scotia after the British occupation.
Shops, taverns, churches, coffee-houses, sprang up. At one time no less than three newspapers
were published in the town. The military were stationed there, and on summer evenings the military
band played on the promenade near the bridge. On election day the main street was so crowded
that 'one might have walked on the heads of the people.'

Then Shelburne fell into decay. It appeared that the region was ill-suited for farming and
grazing, and was not capable of supporting so large a population. The whale fishery which the
Shelburne merchants had established in Brazilian waters proved a failure. The regulations of
the Navigation Acts thwarted their attempts to set up a coasting trade. Failure dogged all
their enterprises, and soon the glory of Shelburne departed. It became like a city of the dead.
'The houses,' wrote Haliburton, 'were still standing though untenanted: It had all the stillness
and quiet of a moonlight scene. It was difficult to imagine it was deserted. The idea of repose
more readily suggested itself than decay. All was new and recent. Seclusion, and not death
or removal, appeared to be the cause of the absence of inhabitants.' The same eye-witness of
Shelburne's ruin described the town later:

   The houses, which had been originally built of wood,
   had severally disappeared. Some had been taken to
   pieces and removed to Halifax or St John; others had
   been converted into fuel, and the rest had fallen a
   prey to neglect and decomposition. The chimneys stood
   up erect, and marked the spot around which the social
   circle had assembled; and the blackened fireplaces,
   ranged one above another, bespoke the size of the
   tenement and the means of its owner. In some places
   they had sunk with the edifice, leaving a heap of
   ruins, while not a few were inclining to their fall,
   and awaiting the first storm to repose again in the
   dust that now covered those who had constructed them.
   Hundreds of cellars with their stone walls and granite
   partitions were everywhere to be seen like uncovered
   monuments of the dead. Time and decay had done their
   work. All that was perishable had perished, and those
   numerous vaults spoke of a generation that had passed
   away for ever, and without the aid of an inscription,
   told a tale of sorrow and of sadness that overpowered
   the heart.

Alas for the dreams of the Pynchons and the Parrs! Shelburne is now a quaint and picturesque
town; but it is not the city which its projectors planned.

CHAPTER VII

THE BIRTH OF NEW BRUNSWICK

When Governor Parr wrote to Sir Guy Carleton, commending in such warm terms the advantages
of Shelburne, he took occasion at the same time to disparage the country about the river St
John. 'I greatly fear,' he wrote, 'the soil and fertility of that part of this province is
overrated by people who have explored it partially. I wish it may turn out otherwise, but have
my fears that there is scarce good land enough for them already sent there.'

How Governor Parr came to make so egregious a mistake with regard to the comparative merits
of the Shelburne districts and those of the St John river it is difficult to understand. Edward
Winslow frankly accused him of jealousy of the St John settlements. Possibly he was only too
well aware of the inadequacy of the preparations made to receive the Loyalists at the mouth
of the St John, and wished to divert the stream of immigration elsewhere. At any rate his opinion
was in direct conflict with the unanimous testimony of the agents sent to report on the land.
'We have returned,' wrote Winslow after his trip, 'delighted beyond expression.'

Governor Parr's fears, therefore, had little effect on the popularity of the St John river
district. In all, no less than ten thousand people settled on the north side of the Bay of
Fundy in 1783. These came, in the main, in three divisions. With the spring fleet arrived about
three thousand people; with the summer fleet not quite two thousand; and with the autumn fleet
well over three thousand. Of those who came in the spring and summer most were civilian refugees;
but of those who arrived in the autumn nearly all were disbanded soldiers. Altogether thirteen
distinct corps settled on the St John river. There were the King's American Dragoons, De Lancey's
First and Second Battalions, the New Jersey Volunteers, the King's American Regiment, the Maryland
Loyalists, the 42nd Regiment, the Prince of Wales American Regiment, the New York Volunteers,
the Royal Guides and Pioneers, the Queen's Rangers, the Pennsylvania Loyalists, and Arnold's
American Legion. All these regiments were reduced, of course, to a fraction of their original
strength, owing to the fact that numbers of their men had been discharged in New York, and
that many of the officers had gone to England. But nevertheless, with their women and children,
their numbers were not far from four thousand.

The arrangements which the government of Nova Scotia had made for the reception of this vast
army of people were sadly inadequate. In the first place there was an unpardonable delay in
the surveying and allotment of lands. This may be partly explained by the insufficient number
of surveyors at the disposal of the governor, and by the tedious and difficult process of escheating
lands already granted; but it is impossible not to convict the governor and his staff of want
of foresight and expedition in making arrangements and carrying them into effect. When Joseph
Aplin arrived at Parrtown, as the settlement at the mouth of the river was for a short time
called, he found 1,500 frame houses and 400 log huts erected, but no one had yet received a
title to the land on which his house was built. The case of the detachment of the King's American
Dragoons who had settled near the mouth of the river was particularly hard. They had arrived
in advance of the other troops, and had settled on the west side of the harbour of St John,
in what Edward Winslow described as 'one of the pleasantest spots I ever beheld.' They had
already made considerable improvements on their lands, when word came that the government had
determined to reserve the lands about the mouth of the river for the refugees, and to allot
blocks of land farther up the river to the various regiments of provincial troops. When news
of this decision reached the officers of the provincial regiments, there was great indignation.
When the main body of the Loyalist regiments arrived in the autumn they found that the blocks
of land assigned to them had not yet been surveyed. Of their distress and perplexity there
is a picture in one of Edward Winslow's letters.

A second difficulty was that food and building materials supplied by government proved inadequate.
At first the settlers were given lumber and bricks and tools to build their houses, but the
later arrivals, who had as a rule to go farthest up the river, were compelled to find their
building materials in the forest. Even the King's American Dragoons, evicted from their lands
on the harbour of St John, were ordered to build their huts 'without any public expence.' Many
were compelled to spend the winter in tents banked up with snow; others sheltered themselves
in huts of bark. The privations and sufferings which many of the refugees suffered were piteous.
Some, especially among the women and children, died from cold and exposure and insufficient
food. In the third place there was great inequality in the area of the lands allotted. When
the first refugees arrived, it was not expected that so many more would follow; and consequently
the earlier grants were much larger in size than the later. In Parrtown a town lot at length
shrank in size to one-sixteenth of what it had originally been. There was doubtless also some
favouritism and respect of persons in the granting of lands. At any rate the inequality of
the grants caused a great many grievances among a certain class of refugees. Chief Justice
Finucane of Nova Scotia was sent by Governor Parr to attempt to smooth matters out; but his
conduct seemed to accentuate the ill-feeling and alienate from the Nova Scotia authorities
the good-will of some of the better class of Loyalists.

It was not surprising, under these circumstances, that Governor Parr and the officers of his
government should have become very unpopular on the north side of the Bay of Fundy. Governor
Parr was himself much distressed over the ill-feeling against him among the Loyalists; and
it should be explained that his failure to satisfy them did not arise from unwillingness to
do anything in his power to make them comfortable. The trouble was that his executive ability
had not been sufficient to cope with the serious problems confronting him. Out of the feeling
against Governor Parr arose an agitation to have the country north of the Bay of Fundy removed
from his jurisdiction altogether, and erected into a separate government. This idea of the
division of the province had been suggested by Edward Winslow as early as July 1783: 'Think
what multitudes have and will come here, and then judge whether it must not from the nature
of things immediately become a separate government.' There were good reasons why such a change
should be made. The distance of Parrtown from Halifax made it very difficult and tedious to
transact business with the government.' and the Halifax authorities, being old inhabitants,
were not in complete sympathy with the new settlers. The erection of a new province, moreover,
would provide offices for many of the Loyalists who were pressing their claims for place on
the government at home. The settlers, therefore, brought their influence to bear on the Imperial
authorities, through their friends in London; and in the summer of 1784 they succeeded in effecting
the division they desired, in spite of the opposition of Governor Parr and the official class
at Halifax. Governor Parr, indeed, had a narrow escape from being recalled.

The new province, which it was intended at first to call New Ireland, but which was eventually
called New Brunswick, was to include all that part of Nova Scotia north of a line running across
the isthmus from the mouth of the Missiquash river to its source, and thence across to the
nearest part of Baie Verte. This boundary was another triumph for the Loyalists, as it placed
in New Brunswick Fort Cumberland and the greater part of Cumberland county. The government
of the province was offered first to General Fox, who had been in command at Halifax in 1783,
and then to General Musgrave; but was declined by both. It was eventually accepted by Colonel
Thomas Carleton, a brother of Sir Guy Carleton, by whom it was held for over thirty years.
The chief offices of government fell to Loyalists who were in London. The secretary of the
province was the Rev. Jonathan Odell, a witty New Jersey divine, who had been secretary to
Sir Guy Carleton in New York. It is interesting to note that Odell's son, the Hon. W. F. Odell,
was secretary of the province after him, and that between them they held the office for two-thirds
of a century. The chief justice was a former judge of the Supreme Court of New York; the other
judges were retired officers of regiments who had fought in the war. The attorney-general was
Jonathan Bliss, of Massachusetts; and the solicitor-general was Ward Chipman, the friend and
correspondent of Edward Winslow. Winslow himself, whose charming letters throw such a flood
of light on the settlement of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, was a member of the council. New
Brunswick was indeed par excellence the Loyalist province.

The new governor arrived at Parrtown on November 21, 1784, and was immediately presented with
an enthusiastic address of welcome by the inhabitants. They described themselves as 'a number
of oppressed and insulted Loyalists,' and added that they had formerly been freemen, and again
hoped to be so under his government. Next spring the governor granted to Parrtown incorporation
as a city under the name of St John. The name Parrtown had been given, it appears, at the request
of Governor Parr himself, who explained apologetically that the suggestion had arisen out of
'female vanity'; and in view of Governor Parr's unpopularity, the change of name was very welcome.
At the same time, however, Colonel Carleton greatly offended the people of St John by removing
the capital of the province up the river to St Anne's, to which he gave the name Fredericktown
(Fredericton) in honour of the Duke of York.

