But there is no joke about the water; it is pouring in torrents from above; the streets are
shallow streams; and from scores of ditches and gullies comes the merry music of swiftly rushing
waters, while, to crown all, scores of monster streams are rushing with a hissing sound from
the mouths of huge pipes or nozzles, and playing against the surrounding hills; for Dutch Flat
and neighboring camps are the great centre of hydraulic mining operations in California at
the present day.  Streams of water, higher lip the mountains, are taken from their channels
and conducted hither through miles of wooden flumes and iron piping; and from the mouths of
huge nozzles are thrown with tremendous force against the hills, literally mowing them down.
The rain stops as abruptly as it began.  The sun shines out clear and warm, and I push ahead
once more.

Gradually I have been getting up into the snow, and ever and anon a muffled roar comes booming
and echoing over the mountains like the sound of distant artillery.  It is the sullen noise
of monster snow-slides among the deep, dark ca¤ons of the mountains, though a wicked person
at Gold Run winked at another man and tried to make me believe it was the grizzlies "going
about the mountains like roaring lions, seeking whom they might devour." The giant voices of
nature, the imposing scenery, the gloomy pine forests which have now taken the place of the
gay chaparral, combine to impress one who, all alone, looks and listens with a realizing sense
of his own littleness.  What a change has come over the whole face of nature in a few days'
travel.  But four days ago I was in the semi-tropical Sacramento Valley; now gaunt winter reigns
supreme, and the only vegetation is the hardy pine.

This afternoon I pass a small camp of Digger Indians, to whom my bicycle is as much a mystery
as was the first locomotive; yet they scarcely turn their uncovered heads to look; and my cheery
greeting of "How," scarce elicits a grunt and a stare in reply.  Long years of chronic hunger
and wretchedness have well-nigh eradicated what little energy these Diggers ever possessed.
The discovery of gold among their native mountains has been their bane; the only antidote the
rude grave beneath the pine and the happy hunting-grounds beyond.

The next morning finds me briskly trundling through the great, gloomy snow-sheds that extend
with but few breaks for the next forty miles. When I emerge from them on the other end I shall
be over the summit and well down the eastern slope of the mountains.  These huge sheds have
been built at great expense to protect the track from the vast quantities of snow that fall
every winter on these mountains.  They wind around the mountain-sides, their roofs built so
slanting that the mighty avalanche of rock and snow that comes thundering down from above glides
harmlessly over, and down the chasm on the other side, while the train glides along unharmed
beneath them.  The section-houses, the water-tanks, stations, and everything along here are
all under the gloomy but friendly shelter of the great protecting sheds.  Fortunately I find
the difficulties of getting through much less than I had been led by rumors to anticipate;
and although no riding can be done in the sheds, I make very good progress, and trudge merrily
along, thankful of a chance to get over the mountains without having to wait a month or six
weeks for the snow outside to disappear.  At intervals short breaks occur in the sheds, where
the track runs over deep gulch or ravine, and at one of these openings the sinuous structure
can be traced for quite a long distance, winding its tortuous way around the rugged mountain
sides, and through the gloomy pine forest, all but buried under the snow.  It requires no great
effort of the mind to imagine it to be some wonderful relic of a past civilization, when a
venturesome race of men thus dared to invade these vast wintry solitudes and burrow their way
through the deep snow, like moles burrowing through the loose earth.  Not a living thing is
in sight, and the only sounds the occasional roar of a distant snow-slide, and the mournful
sighing of the breeze as it plays a weird, melancholy dirge through the gently swaying branches
of the tall, sombre pines, whose stately trunks are half buried in the omnipresent snow.  To-night
I stay at the Summit Hotel, seven thousand and seventeen feet above the level of the sea. 
The "Summit" is nothing if not snowy, and I am told that thirty feet on the level is no unusual
thing up here.  Indeed, it looks as if snow-balling on the " Glorious Fourth" were no great
luxury at the Summit House; yet notwithstanding the decidedly wintry aspect of the Sierras,
the low temperature of the Rockies farther east is unknown; and although there is snow to the
right, snow to the left, snow all around, and ice under foot, I travel all through the gloomy
sheds in my shirt-sleeves, with but a gossamer rubber coat thrown over my shoulders to keep
off the snow- water which is constantly melting and dripping through the roof, making it almost
like going through a shower of rain.  Often, when it is warm and balmy outside, it is cold
and frosty under the sheds, and the dripping water, falling among the rocks and timbers, freezes
into all manner of fantastic shapes.  Whole menageries of ice animals, birds and all imaginable
objects, are here reproduced in clear crystal ice, while in many places the ground is covered
with an irregular coating of the same, that often has to be chipped away from the rails.

East of the summit is a succession of short tunnels, the space between being covered with snow-shed;
and when I came through, the openings and crevices through which the smoke from the engines
is wont to make its escape, and through which a few rays of light penetrate the gloomy interior,
are blocked up with snow, so that it is both dark and smoky; and groping one's way with a bicycle
over the rough surface is anything but pleasant going.  But there is nothing so bad, it seems,
but that it can get a great deal worse; and before getting far, I hear an approaching train
and forthwith proceed to occupy as small an amount of space as possible against the side, while
three laboriously puffing engines, tugging a long, heavy freight train up the steep grade,
go past.  These three puffing, smoke-emitting monsters fill every nook and corner of the tunnel
with dense smoke, which creates a darkness by the side of which the natural darkness of the
tunnel is daylight in comparison.  Here is a darkness that can be felt; I have to grope my
way forward, inch by inch; afraid to set my foot down until I have felt the place, for fear
of blundering into a culvert; at the same time never knowing whether there is room, just where
I am, to get out of the way of a train.  A cyclometer wouldn't have to exert itself much through
here to keep tally of the revolutions; for, besides advancing with extreme caution, I pause
every few steps to listen; as in the oppressive darkness and equally oppressive silence the
senses are so keenly on the alert that the gentle rattle of the bicycle over the uneven surface
seems to make a noise that would prevent me hearing an approaching train.  This finally comes
to am end; and at the opening in the sheds I climb up into a pine-tree to obtain a view of
Donner Lake, called the "Gem of the Sierras." It is a lovely little lake, and amid the pines,
and on its shores occurred one of the most pathetically tragic events of the old emigrant days.
Briefly related : A small party of emigrants became snowed in while camped at the lake, and
when, toward spring, a rescuing party reached the spot, the last survivor of the partly, crazed
with the fearful suffering he had under- gone, was sitting on a log, savagely gnawing away
at a human arm, the last remnant of his companions in misery, off whose emaciated carcasses
he had for some time been living!

My road now follows the course of the Truckee River down the eastern slope of the Sierras,
and across the boundary line into Nevada.  The Truckee is a rapid, rollicking stream from one
end to the other, and affords dam-sites and mill-sites without limit.  There is little ridable
road down the Truckee ca¤on; but before reaching "Verdi, a station a few miles over the Nevada
line, I find good road, and ride up and dismount at the door of the little hotel as coolly
as if I had rode without a dismount all the way from 'Frisco.  Here at Verdi is a camp of Washoe
Indians, who at once showed their superiority to the Diggers by clustering around and examining;
the bicycle with great curiosity.  Verdi is less than forty miles from the summit of the Sierras,
and from the porch of the hotel I can see the snow-storm still fiercely raging up in the place
where I stood a few hours ago; yet one can feel that he is already in a dryer and altogether
different climate.  The great masses of clouds, travelling inward from the coast with their
burdens of moisture, like messengers of peace with presents to a far country, being unable
to surmount the great mountain barrier that towers skyward across their path, unload their
precious cargoes on the mountains; and the parched plains of Nevada open their thirsty mouths
in vain.  At Verdi I bid good-by to the Golden State and follow the course of the sparkling
Truckee toward the Forty-mile Desert.

CHAPTER II.

OVER THE DESERTS OF NEVADA.

Gradually I leave the pine-clad slopes of the Sierras behind, and every revolution of my wheel
reveals scenes that constantly remind me that I am in the great "Sage-brush State." How appropriate
indeed is the name. Sage-brush is the first thing seen on entering Nevada, almost the only
vegetation seen while passing through it, and the last thing seen on leaving it.  Clear down
to the edge of the rippling waters of the Truckee, on the otherwise barren plain, covering
the elevated table-lands, up the hills, even to the mountain-tops-everywhere, everywhere, nothing
but sagebrush.  In plain view to the right, as I roll on toward Reno, are the mountains on
which the world-renowned Comstock lode is situated, and Reno was formerly the point from which
this celebrated mining-camp was reached.

Before reaching Reno I meet a lone Washoe Indian; he is riding a diminutive, scraggy-looking
mustang.  One of his legs is muffled up in a red blanket, and in one hand he carries a rudely-invented
crutch.  "How will you trade horses?" I banteringly ask as we meet in the road; and I dismount
for an interview, to find out what kind of Indians these Washoes are.  To my friendly chaff
he vouchsafes no reply, but simply sits motionless on his pony, and fixes a regular "Injun
stare" on the bicycle.  "What's the matter with your leg?" I persist, pointing at the blanket-be-muffled
member.

"Heap sick foot" is the reply, given with the characteristic brevity of the savage; and, now
that the ice of his aboriginal reserve is broken, he manages to find words enough to ask me
for tobacco.  I have no tobacco, but the ride through the crisp morning air has been productive
of a surplus amount of animal spirits, and I feel like doing something funny; so I volunteer
to cure his " sick foot" by sundry dark and mysterious manoeuvres, that I unbiushingly intimate
are "heap good medicine." With owlish solemnity my small monkey-wrench is taken from the tool-bag
and waved around the " sick foot" a few times, and the operation is completed by squirting
a few drops from my oil-can through a hole in the blanket. Before going I give him to understand
that, in order to have the "good medicine " operate to his advantage, he will have to soak
his copper-colored hide in a bath every morning for a week, flattering myself that, while my
mystic manoauvres will do him no harm, the latter prescription will certainly do him good if
he acts on it, which, however, is extremely doubtful.  Boiling into Reno at 10.30 A.M. the
characteristic whiskey- straight hospitality of the Far West at once asserts itself, and one
individual with sporting proclivities invites me to stop over a day or two and assist him to
"paint Reno red " at his expense.  Leaving Reno, my route leads through the famous Truckee
meadows - a strip of very good agricultural land, where plenty of money used to be made by
raising produce for the Virginia City market." But there's nothing in it any more, since the
Comstock's played out," glumly remarks a ranchman, at whose place I get dinner.  "I'll take
less for my ranch now than I was offered ten years ago," he continues.

The " meadows" gradually contract, and soon after dinner I find myself again following the
Truckee down a narrow space between mountains, whose volcanic-looking rocks are destitute of
all vegetation save stunted sage- brush.  All down here the road is ridable in patches; but
many dismounts have to be made, and the walking to be done aggregates at least one-third of
the whole distance travelled during the day.  Sneakish coyotes prowl about these mountains,
from whence they pay neighborly visits to the chicken-roosts of the ranchers in the Truckee
meadows near by.  Toward night a pair of these animals are observed following behind at the
respectful distance of five hundred yards.  One need not be apprehensive of danger from these
contemptible animals, however; they are simply following behind in a frame of mind similar
to that of a hungry school-boy's when gazing longingly into a confectioner's window.  Still,
night is gathering around, and it begins to look as though I will have to pillow my head on
the soft side of a bowlder, and take lodgings on the footsteps of a bald mountain to-night;
and it will scarcely invite sleep to know that two pairs of sharp, wolfish eyes are peering
wistfully through the darkness at one's prostrate form, and two red tongues are licking about
in hungry anticipation of one's blood.  Moreover, these animals have an unpleasant habit of
congregating after night to pay their compliments to the pale moon, and to hold concerts that
would put to shame a whole regiment of Kilkenny cats; though there is but little comparison
between the two, save that one howls and the other yowls, and either is equally effective in
driving away the drowsy Goddess.  I try to draw these two animals within range of my revolver
by hiding behind rocks; but they are too chary of their precious carcasses to take any risks,
and the moment I disappear from their sight behind a rock they are on the alert, and looking
" forty ways at the same time," to make sure that I am not creeping up on them from some other
direction.  Fate, however, has decreed that I am not to sleep out to-night - not quite out.
A lone shanty looms up through the gathering darkness, and I immediately turn my footsteps
thitherwise.  I find it occupied.  I am all right now for the night.  Hold on, though! not
so fast.  "There is many a slip," etc.  The little shanty, with a few acres of rather rocky
ground, on the bank of the Truckee, is presided over by a lonely bachelor of German extraction,
who eyes me with evident suspicion, as, leaning on my bicycle in front of his rude cabin door
I ask to be accommodated for the night.  Were it a man on horseback, or a man with a team,
this hermit-like rancher could satisfy himself to some extent as to the character of his visitor,
for he sees men on horseback or men in wagons, on an average, perhaps, once a week during the
summer, and can see plenty of them any day by going to Reno. But me and the bicycle he cannot
"size up" so readily.  He never saw the like of us before, and we are beyond his Teutonic frontier-like
comprehension.  He gives us up; he fails to solve the puzzle; he knows not how to unravel the
mystery; and, with characteristic Teutonic bluntness, he advises us to push on through fifteen
miles of rocks, sand, and darkness, to Wadsworth.  The prospect of worrying my way, hungry
and weary, through fifteen miles of rough, unknown country, after dark, looms up as rather
a formidable task.  So summoning my reserve stock of persuasive eloquence, backed up by sundry
significant movements, such as setting the bicycle up against his cabin-wall, and sitting down
on a block of wood under the window, I finally prevail upon him to accommodate me with a blanket
on the floor of the shanty.  He has just finished supper, and the remnants of the frugal repast
are still on the table; but he says nothing about any supper for me: he scarcely feels satisfied
with himself yet: he feels that I have, in some mysterious manner, gained an unfair advantage
over him, and obtained a foothold in his shanty against his own wish-jumped his claim, so to
speak.  Not that I think the man really inhospitable at heart; but he has been so habitually
alone, away from his fellowmen so much, that the presence of a stranger in his cabin makes
him feel uneasy; and when that stranger is accompanied by a queer-looking piece of machinery
that cannot stand alone, but which he nevertheless says he rides on, our lonely rancher is
perhaps not so much to be wondered at, after all, for his absent-mindedness in regard to my
supper.  His mind is occupied with other thoughts.  "You couldn't accommodate a fellow with
a bite to eat, could you." I timidly venture, after devouring what eatables are in sight, over
and over again, with my eyes.  "I have plenty of money to pay for any accommodation I get,"
I think it policy to add, by way of cornering him up and giving him as little chance to refuse
as possible, for I am decidedly hungry, and if money or diplomacy, or both, will produce supper,
I don't propose to go to bed supperless.  I am not much surprised to see him bear out my faith
in his innate hospitality by apologizing for not thinking of my supper before, and insisting,
against my expressed wishes, on lighting the fire and getting me a warm meal of fried ham and
coffee, for which I beg leave to withdraw any unfavorable impressions in regard to him which
my previous remarks may possibly have made on the reader's mind.

After supper he thaws out a little, and I wheedle out of him a part of his history.  He settled
on this spot of semi-cultivable land during the flush times on the Comstock, and used to prosper
very well by raising vegetables, with the aid of Truckee-River water, and hauling them to the
mining-camps; but the palmy days of the Comstock have departed and with them our lonely rancher's
prosperity.  Mine host has barely blankets enough for his own narrow bunk, and it is really
an act of generosity on his part when he takes a blanket off his bed and invites me to extract
what comfort I can get out of it for the night.  Snowy mountains are round about, and curled
up on the floor of the shanty, like a kitten under a stove in mid-winter, I shiver the long
hours away, and endeavor to feel thankful that it is no worse.

For a short distance, next morning, the road is ridable, but nearing Wadsworth it gets sandy,
and " sandy," in Nevada means deep, loose sand, in which one sinks almost to his ankles at
every step, and where the possession of a bicycle fails to awaken that degree of enthusiasm
that it does on a smooth, hard road.  At Wadsworth I have to bid farewell to the Truckee River,
and start across the Forty-mile Desert, which lies between the Truckee and Humboldt Rivers.
Standing on a sand-hill and looking eastward across the dreary, desolate waste of sand, rocks,
and alkali, it is with positive regret that I think of leaving the cool, sparkling stream that
has been my almost constant companion for nearly a hundred miles.  It has always been at hand
to quench my thirst or furnish a refreshing bath.  More than once have I beguiled the tedium
of some uninteresting part of the journey by racing with some trifling object hurried along
on its rippling surface.  I shall miss the murmuring music of its dancing waters as one would
miss the conversation of a companion.

This Forty-mile Desert is the place that was so much dreaded by the emigrants en route to the
gold-fields of California, there being not a blade of grass nor drop of water for the whole
forty miles; nothing but a dreary waste of sand and rocks that reflects the heat of the sun,
and renders the desert a veritable furnace in midsummer; and the stock of the emigrants, worn
out by the long journey from the States, would succumb by the score in crossing.  Though much
of the trail is totally unfit for cycling, there are occasional alkali flats that are smooth
and hard enough to play croquet on; and this afternoon, while riding with careless ease across
one of these places, I am struck with the novelty of the situation.  I am in the midst of the
dreariest, deadest-looking country imaginable.  Whirlwinds of sand, looking at a distance like
huge columns of smoke, are wandering erratically over the plains in all directions. The blazing
sun casts, with startling vividness on the smooth white alkali, that awful scraggy, straggling
shadow that, like a vengeful fate, always accompanies the cycler on a sunny day, and which
is the bane of a sensitive wheelman's life.  The only representative of animated nature hereabouts
is a species of small gray lizard that scuttles over the bare ground with astonishing rapidity.
Not even a bird is seen in the air. All living things seem instinctively to avoid this dread
spot save the lizard.  A desert forty miles wide is not a particularly large one; but when
one is in the middle of it, it might as well be as extensive as Sahara itself, for anything
he can see to the contrary, and away off to the right I behold as perfect a mirage as one could
wish to see.  A person can scarce help believing his own eyes, and did one not have some knowledge
of these strange and wondrous phenomena, one's orbs of vision would indeed open with astonishment;
for seemingly but a few miles away is a beautiful lake, whose shores are fringed with wavy
foliage, and whose cool waters seem to lave the burning desert sands at its edge.

A short distance to the right of Hot Springs Station broken clouds of steam are seen rising
from the ground, as though huge caldrons of water were being heated there.  Going to the spot
I find, indeed, " caldrons of boiling water;" but the caldrons are in the depths.  At irregular
openings in the rocky ground the bubbling water wells to the surface, and the fires-ah! where
are the fires.  On another part of this desert are curious springs that look demure and innocuous
enough most of the time, but occasionally they emit columns of spray and steam.  It is related
of these springs that once a party of emigrants passed by, and one of the men knelt down to
take a drink of the clear, nice-looking water.  At the instant he leaned over, the spring spurted
a quantity of steam and spray all over him, scaring him nearly out of his wits.  The man sprang
up, and ran as if for his life, frantically beckoning the wagons to move on, at the same time
shouting, at the top of his voice, "Drive on! drive on! hell's no great distance from here!"

>From the Forty-mile Desert my road leads up the valley of the Humboldt River.  On the shores
of Humboldt Lake are camped a dozen Piute lodges, and I make a half-hour halt to pay them a
visit.  I shall never know whether I am a welcome visitor or not; they show no signs of pleasure
or displeasure as I trundle the bicycle through the sage-brush toward them.  Leaning it familiarly
up against one of their teepes, I wander among them and pry into their domestic affairs like
a health-officer in a New York tenement.  I know I have no right to do this without saying,
"By your leave," but item-hunters the world over do likewise, so I feel little squeamishness
about it.  Moreover, when I come back I find the Indians are playing " tit-for-tat" against
me.  Not only are they curiously examining the bicycle as a whole, but they have opened the
toolbag and are examining the tools, handing them around among themselves.  I don't think these
Piutes are smart or bold enough to steal nowadays; their intercourse with the whites along
the railroad has, in a measure, relieved them of those aboriginal traits of character that
would incite them to steal a brass button off their pale-faced brother's coat, or screw a nut
off his bicycle; but they have learned to beg; the noble Piute of to-day is an incorrigible
mendicant.  Gathering up my tools from among them, the monkey-wrench seems to have found favor
in the eyes of a wrinkled-faced brave, who, it seems, is a chief.  He hands the wrench over
with a smile that is meant to be captivating, and points at it as I am putting it back into
the bag, and grunts, " Ugh.  Piute likum.  Piute likum!" As I hold it up, and ask him if this
is what he means, he again points and repeats, " Piute likum;" and this time two others standing
by point at him and also smile and say, " Him big chief; big Piute chief, him;" thinking, no
doubt, this latter would be a clincher, and that I would at once recognize in " big Piute chief,
him " a vastly superior being and hand him over the wrench.  In this, however, they are mistaken,
for the wrench I cannot spare; neither can I see any lingering trace of royalty about him,
no kingliness of mien, or extra cleanliness; nor is there anything winning about his smile
- nor any of their smiles for that matter.  The Piute smile seems to me to be simply a cold,
passionless expansion of the vast horizontal slit that reaches almost from one ear to the other,
and separates the upper and lower sections of their expressionless faces.  Even the smiles
of the squaws are of the same unlovely pattern, though they seem to be perfectly oblivious
of any ugliness whatever, and whenever a pale-faced visitor appears near their teepe they straightway
present him with one of those repulsive, unwinning smiles.  Sunday, May 4th, finds me anchored
for the day at the village of Lovelocks, on the Humboldt River, where I spend quite a remarkable
day.  Never before did such a strangely assorted crowd gather to see the first bicycle ride
they ever saw, as the crowd that gathers behind the station at Lovelocks to-day to see me.
There are perhaps one hundred and fifty people, of whom a hundred are Piute and Shoshone Indians,
and the remainder a mingled company of whites and Chinese railroaders; and among them all it
is difficult to say who are the most taken with the novelty of the exhibition - the red, the
yellow, or the white.  Later in the evening I accept the invitation of a Piute brave to come
out to their camp, behind the village, and witness rival teams of Shoshone and Piute squaws
play a match-game of " Fi-re-fla," the national game of both the Shoshone and Piute tribes.
The principle of the game is similar to polo.  The squaws are armed with long sticks, with
which they endeavor to carry a shorter one to the goal.  It is a picturesque and novel sight
to see the squaws, dressed in costumes in which the garb of savagery and civilization is strangely
mingled and the many colors of the rainbow are promiscuously blended, flitting about the field
with the agility of a team of professional polo-players; while the bucks and old squaws, with
their pappooses, sit around and watch the game with unmistakable enthusiasm.  The Shoshone
team wins and looks pleased.  Here, at Lovelocks, I fall in with one of those strange and seemingly
incongruous characters that are occasionally met with in the West.  He is conversing with a
small gathering of Piutes in their own tongue, and I introduce myself by asking him the probable
age of one of the Indians, whose wrinkled and leathery countenance would indicate unusual longevity.
He tells me the Indian is probably ninety years old; but the Indians themselves never know
their age, as they count everything by the changes of the moon and the seasons, having no knowledge
whatever of the calendar year.  While talking on this subject, imagine my surprise to hear
my informant - who looks as if the Scriptures are the last thing in the world for him to speak
of - volunteer the information that our venerable and venerated ancestors, the antediluvians,
used to count time in the same way as the Indians, and that instead of Methuselah being nine
hundred and sixty-nine years of age, it ought to be revised so as to read " nine hundred and
sixty-nine moons," which would bring that ancient and long-lived person-the oldest man that
ever lived-down to the venerable but by no means extraordinary age of eighty years and nine
months.  This is the first time I have heard this theory, and my astonishment at hearing it
from the lips of a rough-looking habitue of the Nevada plains, seated in the midst of a group
of illiterate Indians, can easily be imagined.  On, up the Humboldt valley I continue, now
riding over a smooth, alkali flat, and again slavishly trundling through deep sand, a dozen
snowy mountain peaks round about, the Humboldt sluggishly winding its way through the alkali
plain; on past Eye Patch, to the right of which are more hot springs, and farther on mines
of pure sulphur-all these things, especially the latter, unpleasantly suggestive of a certain
place where the climate is popularly supposed to be uncomfortably warm; on, past Humboldt

Station, near which place I wantonly shoot a poor harmless badger, who peers inquisitively
out of his hole as I ride past.  There is something peculiarly pathetic about the actions of
a dying badger, and no sooner has the thoughtless shot sped on its mission of death than I
am sorry for doing it.

Going out of Mill City next morning I lose the way, and find myself up near a small mining
camp among the mountains south of the railroad. Thinking to regain the road quickly by going
across country through the sage-brush, I get into a place where that enterprising shrub is
go thick and high that I have to hold the bicycle up overhead to get through.

At three o'clock in the afternoon I come to a railroad section-house. At the Chinese bunk-house
I find a lone Celestial who, for some reason, is staying at home.  Having had nothing to eat
or drink since six o'clock this morning, I present the Chinaman with a smile that is intended
to win his heathen heart over to any gastronomic scheme I may propose; but smiles are thrown
away on John Chinaman.

" John, can you fix me up something to eat.  " " No; Chinaman no savvy whi' man eatee; bossee
ow on thlack.  Chinaman eatee nothing bu' licee [rice]; no licee cookee." This sounds pretty
conclusive; nevertheless I don't intend to be thus put off so easily.  There is nothing particularly
beautiful about a silver half-dollar, but in the almond-shaped eyes of the Chinaman scenes
of paradisiacal loveliness are nothing compared to the dull surface of a twenty-year-old fifty-cent
piece; and the jingle of the silver coins contains more melody for Chin Chin's unromantic ear
than a whole musical festival.

