"I stayed in Georgia till '74. I heared em say the cotton grow so big here in Arkansas you
could sit on a limb and eat dinner. I know when I got here they was havin' that Brooks-Baxter
war in Little Rock. I say, 'Press me into the war.' Man say, 'I ain't goin' press no boys.'
I say, 'Give me a gun, I can kill em.' I wanted to fight.

"I tell you where I voted--colored folks don't vote now--it was when I was on the Davis place.
I voted once or twice since I been up here. I called myself votin' Republican. I member since
I been up here you know they had a colored man in the courthouse. When they had a grand jury
they had em mixed, some colored and some white. I say now they ain't got no privilege. If they
don't want em to vote ought not make em pay taxes.

"Up north they all sits together in the deppo but here in the south they got a 'tition between em.

"When I first went to farmin' I rented the land and the cotton was all mine, but now you work
on the shares and don't have nothin'.

"If I keep a livin', I'm goin' away from here. I'm goin' up north. I won't go fore it gets
warm though. I seen the snow knee deep in Cleveland, Ohio.

"I was workin' up north once. I had a pretty good job in Detroit doin' piece work, and doin'
well, but I come back here cause my wife's mother was too old to move. If I had stayed I might
have done well.

"I own this property but I'm bout to lose it on account o' taxes.

"I got grown boys and they ain't no more help to me than the spit out o' my mouth. None of
em has ever give me a dime in their life. This younger generation is goin' to nothin'. They
got a good education. She came in with a cheerful air to announce that the beloved patient had
slept well, and that she was going back soon to give her some soup.

I felt an almost maddening joy in listening to her, and I thought the oracle of AEsculapius a
thousand times more reliable than that of Apollo.

But it was not yet time to exult in our victory, for my poor little
friend had to recover her strength and to make up for all the blood
she had lost; that could be done only by time and careful nursing.

I remained another week at Laura's house, which I left only after
my dear C---- C---- had requested me to do so in a letter of four
pages.

Laura, when I left, wept for joy in seeing herself rewarded by the gift of all the fine linen
I had bought for my C---- C----, and her daughters were weeping likewise, most probably because,
during the ten days I had spent near them, they had not obtained a single kiss from me.

After my return to Venice, I resumed my usual habits; but with a nature
like mine how could I possibly remain satisfied without positive love?

My only pleasure was to receive a letter from my dear recluse every Wednesday, who advised me
to wait patiently rather than to attempt carrying her off.

Laura assured me that she had become more lovely than ever, and I longed to see her. An opportunity
of gratifying my wishes soon offered itself, and I did not allow it to escape. There was to be
a taking of the veil--a ceremony which always attracts a large number of persons. On those occasions
the nuns always received a great many visitors, and I thought that
the boarders were likely to be in the parlour on such an occasion.

I ran no risk of being remarked any more than any other person, for
I would mingle with the crowd.

I therefore went without saying anything about it to Laura, and without acquainting my dear
little wife of my intentions.

I thought I would fall, so great was my emotion, when I saw her within four yards from me,
and looking at me as if she had been in an ecstatic state.

I thought her taller and more womanly, and she certainly seemed to
me more beautiful than before.

I saw no one but her; she never took her eyes off me, and I was the
last to leave that place which on that day struck me as being the
temple of happiness.

Three days afterwards I received
a letter from her. She painted with
                    such vivid colours the happiness she had felt
in seeing me, that I made up my mind to give her that pleasure as
often as I could.

 They give ever'body
on the place their ages but mama said it wasn't no 'count and tore it up, so I don't know what
year I was born.

"Cy Magby--mama was under his control. He would carry us over to the white folks' house every
morning to see Miss Becky. When old master come after us, he'd say, 'What you gwine say?' and
we'd say, 'One-two-three.' Then we'd go over to old Mis' and courtesy and say, 'Good morning,
Miss Becky; good morning, Mars Albert; good morning, Mars Wardly.' They was just little old
kids but we had to call 'em Mars.

"What I know I'm gwine tell you, but you ain't gwine ketch me in no tale.

"I 'member they was gwine put us to carryin' water for the hands next year, and that year we
got free. My mother shouted, 'Now I ain't lyin' 'bout dat.' I sure 'member when they sot the
people free. They was just ready to blow the folks out to the field. I 'member old Mose would
blow the bugle and he could blow that bugle. If you wasn't in, you better get in. Yes ma'am!
The day freedom come, I know Mose was just ready to blow the bugle when the Yankees begun to
beat the drum down the road. They knowed it was all over then. That ain't no joke.

"I was a full grown woman then I come to Arkansas; I wasn't no baby.

"I went to school one month in my life. That was in Mississippi.

"My Joe" (her husband) "just lack one year bein' a graduate. He went up here to that Branch
Normal. That boy had good learnin'. He could a learnt me but he was too high tempered. If I
missed a word he would be so crabb'y. So one night I throwed the book across the room and said,
'You don't need try to learn me no more.'"

Interviewer: Samuel S. Taylor
Person interviewed: William L. Dunwoody
                    2116 W. 24th Street, Little Rock, Arkansas
Age: About 98

[HW: Remembers Jeff Davis]

"I was born in Charleston, South Carolina, in the year 1840.

"My father was killed in the Civil War when they taken South Carolina. His name was Charles
Dunwoody. My mother's name was Mary Dunwoody. My father was a free man and my mother was a
slave. When he courted and married her he took the name of Dunwoody.

Houses

"Ain't you seen a house built in the country when they were clearing up and wanted to put up
somethin' for the men to live in while they were working? They'd cut down a tree. Then they'd
line it--fasten a piece of twine to each end and whiten it and pull it up and let it fly down
and mark the log. Then they'd score it with axes. Then the hewers would come along and hew
the log. Sometimes they could hew it so straight you couldn't put a line on it and find any
difference. Where they didn't take time with the logs, it would be where they were just putting
up a little shack for the men to sleep in.

"Just like you box timber in the sawmill, the men would straighten out a log.

"To make the log house, you would saw your blocks, set em up, then you put the sills on the
blocks, then you put the sleepers. When you get them in, lay the planks to walk on. Then they
put on the first log. You notch it. To make the roof, you would keep on cutting the logs in
half first one way and then the other until you got the blocks small enough for shingles. Then
you would saw the shingles off. They had plenty of time.

Food

"The slaves ate just what the master ate. They ate the same on my master's place. All people
didn't farm alike. Some just raised cotton and corn. Some raised peas, oats, rye, and a lot
of different things. My old master raised corn, potatoes--Irish and sweet--, goober peas (peanuts),
rye, and wheat, and I can't remember what else. That's in the eating line. He had hogs, goats,
sheep, cows, chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks. That is all I can remember in the eating line.
My old master's slaves et anything he raised.

"He would send three or four wagons down to the mill at a time. One of them would carry sacks;
all the rest would carry wheat. You know flour seconds, shorts and brand come from the wheat.
You get all that from the wheat. Buckwheat flour comes from a large grained wheat. The wagons
came back loaded with flour, seconds, shorts and brand. The old man had six wheat barns to
keep the wheat in.

"All the slaves ate together. They had a cook special for them. This cook would cook in a long
house more than thirty feet long. Two or three women would work there and a man, just like
the cooks would in a hotel now. All the working hands ate there and got whatever the cook gave
them. It was one thing one time and another another. The cook gave the hands anything that
was raised on the place. There was one woman in there cooking that was called 'Mammy' and she
seed to all the chilen.

Feeding the Children

"After the old folks among the slaves had had their breakfast, the cook would blow a horn.
That would be about nine o'clock or eight. All the children that were big enough would come
to the cook shack. Some of them would bring small children that had been weaned but couldn't
look after themselves. The cook would serve them whatever the old folks had for breakfast.
They ate out of the same kind of dishes as the old folks.

"Between ten and eleven o'clock, the cook would blow the horn again and the children would
come in from play. There would be a large bowl and a large spoon for each group of larger children.
There would be enough children in each group to get around the bowl comfortably. One would
take a spoon of what was in the bowl and then pass the spoon to his neighbor. His neighbor
would take a spoonful and then pass the spoon on, and so on until everyone would have a spoonful.
Then they would begin again, and so on until the bowl was empty. If they did not have enough
then, the cook would put some more in the bowl. Most of the time, bread and milk was in the
bowl; sometimes mush and milk.

"There was a small spoon and a small bowl for the smaller children in the group that the big
children would use for them and pass around just like they passed around the big spoon.

"About two or three o'clock, the cook would blow the horn again. Time the children all got
in there and et, it would be four or five o'clock. The old mammy would cut up greens real fine
and cut up meat into little pieces and boil it with corn-meal dumplings. They'd call it pepper
pot. Then she'd put some of the pepper pot into the bowls and we'd eat it. And it was good.

"After the large children had et, they would go back to see after the babies. If they were
awake, the large children would put on their clothes and clean them up. Then where there was
a woman who had two or three small children and didn't have one large enough to do this, they'd
give her a large one from some other family to look after her children. If she had any relatives,
they would use their children for her. If she didn't then they would use anybody's children.

"About eleven o'clock all the women who had little children that had not been weaned would
come in to see after them and let them suck. When a woman had nursing children, she would nurse
them before she went to work, again at around eleven o'clock and again when she came from work
in the evening. She would come in long before sundown. In between times, the old mammy and
the other children would look after them.

War Memories

"I saw Jeff Davis once. He was one-eyed. He had a glass eye. My old mistiss had three girls.
They got into the buggy and went to see Jeff Davis when he come through Auburn, Alabama. We
were living in Auburn then. I drove them. Jeff Davis came through first, and then the Confederate
army, and then the Yankees. They didn't come on the same day but some days apart.

"The way I happened to see the Yanks was like this. I went to carry some clothes to my young
master. He was a doctor, and was out where they were drilling the men. I laid down on the carpet
in his tent and I heard music playing 'In Dixie Land I'll take my stand and live and die in
Dixie.' I got up and come out and looked up ever which way but I couldn't see nothing. I went
back again and laid down again in the tent, and I heard it again. I run out and looked all
up and around again, and I still couldn't see nothin'. That time I looked and saw my young
master talking to another officer--I can't remember his name. My young master said, 'What you
looking for?'

"I said, 'I'm looking for them angels I hear playing. Don't you hear em playing Dixie?' The
other officer said, 'Celas, you ought to whip that nigger.' I went back into the tent. My young
master said, 'Whip him for what?' And he said, 'For telling that lie.' My young master said
to him like this, 'He don't tell lies. He heard something somewhere.'

"Then they got through talking and he come on in and I seed him and beckoned to him. "One can
ignore pride," she would say, "for dignity wears the same garb. Avarice is fearful, it is true;
but one might be mistaken about it, because it is often very like
economy.

As for anger, it is a murderous disease in its excess, but murder
is punishable with death. The doctor (that was my young master) said, 'Lie
down there.' When he laid down by my young master, he heard it too. Then the doctor said to
him, 'You said William was telling a damn lie.' He said, 'I beg your pardon, doctor.'

"My young master got up and said, 'Where is my spy glasses? Le'me have a look.' He went out
and there was a mountain called the Blue Ridge Mountain. He looked but he didn't see nothin'.
I went out and looked too. I said, 'Look down the line beside those two big trees,' and I handed
the glasses back to him. He looked and then he hollered, 'My God, look yonder' and handed the
spy glasses to the other officer. He looked too. Then the doctor said, 'What are we going to
do?' He said, 'I am goin' to put pickets way out.' He told me to get to my mule. I got. He
put one of his spurs on my foot and told me to go home and tell 'ma' the Yanks were coming.
You know what 'ma' he was talking about? That was his wife's mother. We all called her 'mother.'

"I carried the note. When I got to Mrs. Dobbins' house, I yelled, 'The Yanks are coming--Yankees,
Yankees, Yankees!' She had two boys. They runned out and said, 'What did you say?'

"I said, 'Yankees, Yankees!'

"They said, 'Hell, what could he see?'

"I come on then and got against Miss Yancy's. She had a son, a man named Henry Yancy. They're
the ones to trust first of all."

"But when father--mother is dead--sees the telescope, he'll want to
know where I've been. He doesn't know I have it. I told him I might
stay with a girl at San Mateo over night, and then sneaked it out." Did he see them. He said he
didn't see them, that Celas Neal saw them and the doctor's mother's boy brought the message.
Then he taken off.

"Jeff Davis went on. The Confederates went on. They all went on. Then the Yanks passed through.

"The first fight they had there, they cleaned up the Sixty-Ninth Alabama troops. My young master
had been helping drill them. He went on and overtook the others.

Right After the War

