This man had plenty of clients--has plenty yet.  He receives letters from spirits located in
every part of the spirit world, and delivers them all over this country through the United
States mail. These letters are filled with advice--advice from 'spirits' who don't know as
much as a tadpole--and this advice is religiously followed by the receivers. One of these clients
was a man whom the spirits (if one may thus plurally describe the ingenious Manchester) were
teaching how to contrive an improved railway car-wheel. It is coarse employment for a spirit,
but it is higher and wholesomer activity than talking for ever about 'how happy we are.'

Chapter 49 Episodes in Pilot Life

IN the course of the tug-boat gossip, it came out that out of every five of my former friends
who had quitted the river, four had chosen farming as an occupation.  Of course this was not
because they were peculiarly gifted, agriculturally, and thus more likely to succeed as farmers
than in other industries: the reason for their choice must be traced to some other source.
Doubtless they chose farming because that life is private and secluded from irruptions of undesirable
strangers--like the pilot- house hermitage.  And doubtless they also chose it because on a
thousand nights of black storm and danger they had noted the twinkling lights of solitary farm-houses,
as the boat swung by, and pictured to themselves the serenity and security and coziness of
such refuges at such times, and so had by-and-bye come to dream of that retired and peaceful
life as the one desirable thing to long for, anticipate, earn, and at last enjoy.

But I did not learn that any of these pilot-farmers had astonished anybody with their successes.
Their farms do not support them:  they support their farms.  The pilot-farmer disappears from
the river annually, about the breaking of spring, and is seen no more till next frost. Then
he appears again, in damaged homespun, combs the hayseed out of his hair, and takes a pilot-house
berth for the winter. In this way he pays the debts which his farming has achieved during the
agricultural season.  So his river bondage is but half broken; he is still the river's slave
the hardest half of the year.

One of these men bought a farm, but did not retire to it. He knew a trick worth two of that.
He did not propose to pauperize his farm by applying his personal ignorance to working it.
No, he put the farm into the hands of an agricultural expert to be worked on shares--out of
every three loads of corn the expert to have two and the pilot the third. But at the end of
the season the pilot received no corn. The expert explained that his share was not reached.
The farm produced only two loads. 

He read the Bible, Aesop's Fables, Murray's English Reader, Robinson Crusoe, The Pilgrim's Progress,
A History of the United States, Weem's Life of Washington and the Revised Statutes of Indiana.
He studied by the fire-light and practiced writing with a pen made from a buzzard's quill dipped
in ink made from brier roots. He practiced writing on the subjects of Temperance, Government,
and Cruelty to Animals. The unkindness so often common to those frontier
folks shocked his sensitive soul. Once when he was captain of the
'Crescent City,' I was bringing the boat into port at New Orleans, and momently expecting orders
from the hurricane deck, but received none.  I had stopped the wheels, and there my authority
and responsibility ceased. It was evening--dim twilight--the captain's hat was perched upon
the big bell, and I supposed the intellectual end of the captain was in it, but such was not
the case.  The captain was very strict; therefore I knew better than to touch a bell without
orders. My duty was to hold the boat steadily on her calamitous course, and leave the consequences
to take care of themselves--which I did.