Then spake ye queene of how she met old Rabelais when she was turned of fifteen, and he did
tell her of a man his father knew that had a double pair of bollocks, whereon a controversy
followed as concerning the most just way to spell the word, ye contention running high betwixt
ye learned Bacon and ye ingenious Jonson, until at last ye old Lady Margery, wearying of it
all, saith, 'Gentles, what mattereth it how ye shall spell the word? I warrant Ye when ye use
your bollocks ye shall not think of it; and my Lady Granby, be ye content; let the spelling
be, ye shall enjoy the beating of them on your buttocks just the same, I trow. Before I had
gained my fourteenth year I had learnt that them that would explore a cunt stop'd not to consider
the spelling o't.'

Sr W.--In sooth, when a shift's turned up, delay is meet for naught but dalliance. Boccaccio
hath a story of a priest that did beguile a maid into his cell, then knelt him in a corner
to pray for grace to be rightly thankful for this tender maidenhead ye Lord had sent him; but
ye abbot, spying through ye key-hole, did see a tuft of brownish hair with fair white flesh
about it, wherefore when ye priest's prayer was done, his chance was gone, forasmuch as ye
little maid had but ye one cunt, and that was already occupied to her content.

Then conversed they of religion, and ye mightie work ye old dead Luther did doe by ye grace
of God. Then next about poetry, and Master Shaxpur did rede a part of his King Henry IV., ye
which, it seemeth unto me, is not of ye value of an arsefull of ashes, yet they praised it
bravely, one and all.

Ye same did rede a portion of his "Venus and Adonis," to their prodigious admiration, whereas
I, being sleepy and fatigued withal, did deme it but paltry stuff, and was the more discomforted
in that ye blody bucanier had got his wind again, and did turn his mind to farting with such
villain zeal that presently I was like to choke once more. God damn this windy ruffian and
all his breed. I wolde that hell mighte get him.

They talked about ye wonderful defense which old Sr. Nicholas Throgmorton did make for himself
before ye judges in ye time of Mary; which was unlucky matter to broach, sith it fetched out
ye quene with a 'Pity yt he, having so much wit, had yet not enough to save his doter's maidenhedde
sound for her marriage-bed.' And ye quene did give ye damn'd Sr. Walter a look yt made hym
wince--for she hath not forgot he was her own lover it yt olde day. There was silent uncomfortableness
now; 'twas not a good turn for talk to take, sith if ye queene must find offense in a little
harmless debauching, when pricks were stiff and cunts not loathe to take ye stiffness out of
them, who of this company was sinless; behold, was not ye wife of Master Shaxpur four months
gone with child when she stood uppe before ye altar? Was not her Grace of Bilgewater roger'd
by four lords before she had a husband? Was not ye little Lady Helen born on her mother's wedding-day?
And, beholde, were not ye Lady Alice and ye Lady Margery there, mouthing religion, whores from
ye cradle?

In time came they to discourse of Cervantes, and of the new painter, Rubens, that is beginning
to be heard of. Fine words and dainty-wrought phrases from the ladies now, one or two of them
being, in other days, pupils of that poor ass, Lille, himself; and I marked how that Jonson
and Shaxpur did fidget to discharge some venom of sarcasm, yet dared they not in the presence,
the queene's grace being ye very flower of ye Euphuists herself. But behold, these be they
yt, having a specialty, and admiring it in themselves, be jealous when a neighbor doth essaye
it, nor can abide it in them long. Wherefore 'twas observable yt ye quene waxed uncontent;
and in time labor'd grandiose speeche out of ye mouth of Lady Alice, who manifestly did mightily
pride herself thereon, did quite exhauste ye quene's endurance, who listened till ye gaudy
speeche was done, then lifted up her brows, and with vaste irony, mincing saith 'O shit!' Whereat
they alle did laffe, but not ye Lady Alice, yt olde foolish bitche.

Now was Sr. Walter minded of a tale he once did hear ye ingenious Margrette of Navarre relate,
about a maid, which being like to suffer rape by an olde archbishoppe, did smartly contrive
a device to save her maidenhedde, and said to him, First, my lord, I prithee, take out thy
holy tool and piss before me; which doing, lo his member felle, and would not rise again.

FOOTNOTES To Frivolity

The historical consistency of 1601 indicates that Twain must have given the subject considerable
thought. The author was careful to speak only of men who conceivably might have been in the
Virgin Queen's closet and engaged in discourse with her.

THE CHARACTERS

At this time (1601) Queen Elizabeth was 68 years old. She speaks of having talked to "old Rabelais"
in her youth. This might have been possible as Rabelais died in 1552, when the Queen was 19
years old.

Among those in the party were Shakespeare, at that time 37 years old; Ben Jonson, 27; and Sir
Walter Raleigh, 49. Beaumont at the time was 17, not 16. He was admitted as a member of the
Inner Temple in 1600, and his first translations, those from Ovid, were first published in
1602. Therefore, if one were holding strictly to the year date, neither by age nor by fame
would Beaumont have been eligible to attend such a gathering of august personages in the year
1601; but the point is unimportant.

THE ELIZABETHAN WRITERS

In the Conversation Shakespeare speaks of Montaigne's Essays. These were first published in
1580 and successive editions were issued in the years following, the third volume being published
in 1588. "In England Montaigne was early popular. It was long supposed that the autograph of
Shakespeare in a copy of Florio's translation showed his study of the Essays. The autograph
has been disputed, but divers passages, and especially one in The Tempest, show that at first
or second hand the poet was acquainted with the essayist." (Encyclopedia Brittanica.)

The company at the Queen's fireside discoursed of Lilly (or Lyly), English dramatist and novelist
of the Elizabethan era, whose novel, Euphues, published in two parts, 'Euphues', or the 'Anatomy
of Wit' (1579) and 'Euphues and His England' (1580) was a literary sensation. It is said to
have influenced literary style for more than a quarter of a century, and traces of its influence
are found in Shakespeare. (Columbia Encyclopedia).

The introduction of Ben Jonson into the party was wholly appropriate, if one may call to witness
some of Jonson's writings. The subject under discussion was one that Jonson was acquainted
with, in The Alchemist:

Act. I, Scene I,

FACE: Believe't I will.

SUBTLE: Thy worst. I fart at thee.

DOL COMMON: Have you your wits? Why, gentlemen, for love----

Act. 2, Scene I,

SIR EPICURE MAMMON:....and then my poets, the same that writ so subtly of the fart, whom I
shall entertain still for that subject and again in Bartholomew Fair

NIGHTENGALE: (sings a ballad)

     Hear for your love, and buy for your money.
     A delicate ballad o' the ferret and the coney.
     A preservative again' the punk's evil.
     Another goose-green starch, and the devil.
     A dozen of divine points, and the godly garter
     The fairing of good counsel, of an ell and three-quarters.
     What is't you buy?
     The windmill blown down by the witche's fart,
     Or Saint George, that, O! did break the dragon's heart.

GOOD OLD ENGLISH CUSTOM

That certain types of English society have not changed materially in their freedom toward breaking
wind in public can be noticed in some comparatively recent literature. Frank Harris in My Life,
Vol. 2, Ch. XIII, tells of Lady Marriott, wife of a judge Advocate General, being compelled
to leave her own table, at which she was entertaining Sir Robert Fowler, then the Lord Mayor
of London, because of the suffocating and nauseating odors there. He also tells of an instance
in parliament, and of a rather brilliant bon mot spoken upon that occasion.

"While Fowler was speaking Finch-Hatton had shewn signs of restlessness; towards the end of
the speech he had moved some three yards away from the Baronet. As soon as Fowler sat down
Finch-Hatton sprang up holding his handkerchief to his nose:

"'Mr. Speaker,' he began, and was at once acknowledged by the Speaker, for it was a maiden
speech, and as such was entitled to precedence by the courteous custom of the House, 'I know
why the Right Honourable Member from the City did not conclude his speech with a proposal.
The only way to conclude such a speech appropriately would be with a motion!'"

AEOLIAN CREPITATIONS

But society had apparently degenerated sadly in modern times, and even in the era of Elizabeth,
for at an earlier date it was a serious--nay, capital--offense to break wind in the presence
of majesty. The Emperor Claudius, hearing that one who had suppressed the urge while paying
him court had suffered greatly thereby, "intended to issue an edict, allowing to all people
the liberty of giving vent at table to any distension occasioned by flatulence:"

Martial, too (Book XII, Epigram LXXVII), tells of the embarrassment of one who broke wind while
praying in the Capitol,

"One day, while standing upright, addressing his prayers to Jupiter, Aethon farted in the Capitol.
Men laughed, but the Father of the Gods, offended, condemned the guilty one to dine at home
for three nights. Since that time, miserable Aethon, when he wishes to enter the Capitol, goes
first to Paterclius' privies and farts ten or twenty times. Yet, in spite of this precautionary
crepitation, he salutes Jove with constricted buttocks." Martial also (Book IV, Epigram LXXX),
ridicules a woman who was subject to the habit, saying,

"Your Bassa, Fabullus, has always a child at her side, calling it her darling and her plaything;
and yet--more wonder--she does not care for children. What is the reason then. Bassa is apt
to fart. (For which she could blame the unsuspecting infant.)"

The tale is told, too, of a certain woman who performed an aeolian crepitation at a dinner
attended by the witty Monsignieur Dupanloup, Bishop of Orleans, and that when, to cover up
her lapse, she began to scrape her feet upon the floor, and to make similar noises, the Bishop
said, "Do not trouble to find a rhyme, Madam!"

Nay, worthier names than those of any yet mentioned have discussed the matter. Herodotus tells
of one such which was the precursor to the fall of an empire and a change of dynasty--that
which Amasis discharges while on horseback, and bids the envoy of Apries, King of Egypt, catch
and deliver to his royal master. Even the exact manner and posture of Amasis, author of this
insult, is described.

St. Augustine (The City of God, XIV:24) cites the instance of a man who could command his rear
trumpet to sound at will, which his learned commentator fortifies with the example of one who
could do so in tune!

Benjamin Franklin, in his "Letter to the Royal Academy of Brussels" has canvassed suggested
remedies for alleviating the stench attendant upon these discharges:

"My Prize Question therefore should be: To discover some Drug, wholesome and--not disagreeable,
to be mixed with our common food, or sauces, that shall render the natural discharges of Wind
from our Bodies not only inoffensive, but agreeable as Perfumes.

"That this is not a Chimerical Project & altogether impossible, may appear from these considerations.
That we already have some knowledge of means capable of varying that smell. He that dines on
stale Flesh, especially with much Addition of Onions, shall be able to afford a stink that
no Company can tolerate; while he that has lived for some time on Vegetables only, shall have
that Breath so pure as to be insensible of the most delicate Noses; and if he can manage so
as to avoid the Report, he may anywhere give vent to his Griefs, unnoticed. But as there are
many to whom an entire Vegetable Diet would be inconvenient, & as a little quick Lime thrown
into a Jakes will correct the amazing Quantity of fetid Air arising from the vast Mass of putrid
Matter contained in such Places, and render it pleasing to the Smell, who knows but that a
little Powder of Lime (or some other equivalent) taken in our Food, or perhaps a Glass of Lime
Water drank at Dinner, may have the same Effect on the Air produced in and issuing from our
Bowels?"

One curious commentary on the text is that Elizabeth should be so fond of investigating into
the authorship of the exhalation in question, when she was inordinately fond of strong and
sweet perfumes; in fact, she was responsible for the tremendous increase in importations of
scents into England during her reign.

"YE BOKE OF YE SIEUR MICHAEL DE MONTAINE"

There is a curious admixture of error and misunderstanding in this part of the sketch. In the
first place, the story is borrowed from Montaigne, where it is told inaccurately, and then
further corrupted in the telling.

It was not the good widows of Perigord who wore the phallus upon their coifs; it was the young
married women, of the district near Montaigne's home, who paraded it to view upon their foreheads,
as a symbol, says our essayist, "of the joy they derived therefrom." If they became widows,
they reversed its position, and covered it up with the rest of their head-dress.

The "emperor" mentioned was not an emperor; he was Procolus, a native of Albengue, on the Genoese
coast, who, with Bonosus, led the unsuccessful rebellion in Gaul against Emperor Probus. Even
so keen a commentator as Cotton has failed to note the error.

The empress (Montaigne does not say "his empress") was Messalina, third wife of the Emperor
Claudius, who was uncle of Caligula and foster-father to Nero. Furthermore, in her case the
charge is that she copulated with twenty-five in a single night, and not twenty-two, as appears
in the text. Montaigne is right in his statistics, if original sources are correct, whereas
the author erred in transcribing the incident.

As for Proculus, it has been noted that he was associated with Bonosus, who was as renowned
in the field of Bacchus as was Proculus in that of Venus (Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire). The feat of Proculus is told in his own words, in Vopiscus, (Hist. Augustine, p. 246)
where he recounts having captured one hundred Sarmatian virgins, and unmaidened ten of them
in one night, together with the happenings subsequent thereto.

Concerning Messalina, there appears to be no question but that she was a nymphomaniac, and
that, while Empress of Rome, she participated in some fearful debaucheries. The question is
what to believe, for much that we have heard about her is almost certainly apocryphal.

The author from whom Montaigne took his facts is the elder Pliny, who, in his Natural History,
Book X, Chapter 83, says, "Other animals become sated with veneral pleasures; man hardly knows
any satiety. Messalina, the wife of Claudius Caesar, thinking this a palm quite worthy of an
empress, selected for the purpose of deciding the question, one of the most notorious women
who followed the profession of a hired prostitute; and the empress outdid her, after continuous
intercourse, night and day, at the twenty-fifth embrace."

