THE LIFE OF FRANCIS MARION

By W. Gilmore Simms

Author of "Yemassee", "History of South Carolina", etc.

 "The British soldier trembles
  When Marion's name is told."
  --Bryant.

     [Note on text: Italicized words or phrases are capitalized.
     Some obvious errors have been corrected.]

     [William Gilmore Simms, American (South Carolinian) Writer.
     1806-1870.]

Contents.

     Chapter 1.  Introduction--The Huguenots in South Carolina.

     Chapter 2.  The Marion Family--Birth of Francis Marion--His
     Youth--Shipwreck.

     Chapter 3.  Marion a Farmer--Volunteers in the Cherokee
     Campaign.

     Chapter 4.  Cherokee War continues--Marion leads the Forlorn
     Hope at the Battle of Etchoee.

     Chapter 5.  Marion is returned for the Provincial Congress
     from St. John's, Berkeley--Made Captain in the Second
     Regiment--Fort Johnson taken--Battle of Fort Moultrie.

     Chapter 6.  From the Battle of Fort Moultrie to that of
     Savannah--Anecdote of Jasper--His Death.

     Chapter 7.  From the Battle of Savannah to the Defeat of
     Gates at Camden.

     Chapter 8.  Organization of "Marion's Brigade"--Surprise of
     Tories under Gainey--Defeat of Barfield--Capture of British
     Guard with Prisoners at Nelson's Ferry.

     Chapter 9.  Marion retreats before a superior Force--Defeats
     the Tories at Black Mingo--Surprises and disperses the Force
     of Colonel Tynes at Tarcote--Is pursued by Tarleton.

     Chapter 10.  Marion attempts Georgetown--Horry defeats
     Merritt--Melton defeated by Barfield--Gabriel Marion taken
     by the Tories and murdered--Marion retires to Snow's Island.

     Chapter 11.  Marion's Camp at Snow's Island--The Character
     of his Warfare--Of his Men--Anecdotes of Conyers and Horry--
     He feasts a British Officer on Potatoes--Quells a Mutiny.

     Chapter 12.  General Greene assumes Command of the Southern
     Army--His Correspondence with Marion--Condition of the
     Country--Marion and Lee surprise Georgetown--Col. Horry
     defeats Gainey--Marion pursues McIlraith--Proposed Pitched
     Battle between Picked Men.

     Chapter 13.  Watson and Doyle pursue Marion--He baffles and
     harasses them--Pursues Doyle--His Despondency and final
     Resolution.

     Chapter 14.  Marion renews his Pursuit of Doyle--Confronts
     Watson--Is joined by Col. Lee--Invests and takes Fort
     Watson--Fort Motte taken--Anecdote of Horry and Marion.

     Chapter 15.  Correspondence of Marion and Greene--Anecdote
     of Colonel Snipes--Marion takes Georgetown--Attempt of
     Sumter and Marion on Col. Coates--Battle of Quinby Bridge.

     Chapter 16.  Marion moves secretly to Pon-Pon--Rescues Col.
     Harden--Defeats Major Frazier at Parker's Ferry--Joins the
     main Army under Greene--Battle of Eutaw.

     Chapter 17.  Retreat of the British from Eutaw--Pursuit of
     them by Marion and Lee--Close of the Year.

     Chapter 18.  Marion summoned to the Camp of Greene--Defeats
     the British Horse at St. Thomas--Leaves his Command to
     Horry, and takes his Seat in the Assembly at Jacksonborough,
     as Senator from St. John's, Berkeley--Proceedings of the
     Assembly--Confiscation Act--Dispute between Cols. Mayham and
     Horry--The Brigade of Marion surprised, during his absence,
     by a Detachment from Charleston--Marion's Encounter with the
     British Horse--Conspiracy in the Camp of Greene.

     Chapter 19.  Marion summoned with his Force to that of
     Greene--Insurrection of the Loyalists on the Pedee--Marches
     against them--Subdues them--Treats with Gainey--Fanning--
     Protects the Tory, Butler, from his Men--Returns to the
     Country between the Santee and the Cooper--Moves to protect
     Georgetown from the British Fleet--Takes post at Watboo, on
     Cooper River--Defeats the British Cavalry under Major
     Frasier.

     Chapter 20.  The British propose Terms of Pacification--
     Rejected by the Civil Authorities--They penetrate the
     Combahee with their Fleet--Death of Col. Laurens--Anecdote
     of Marion--Death of Wilmot--The British evacuate Charleston--
     Marion separates from his Brigade at Watboo--His Military
     Genius.

     Chapter 21.  Marion retires to his Farm, which he finds in
     Ruins--Is returned to the Senate from St. John--His Course
     on the Confiscation Act--Anecdotes--Is made Commandant at
     Fort Johnson--His Marriage--A Member of the State Convention
     in 1794--Withdraws from Public Life--His Death.

     Appendix A. Notes on the Electronic Text.

     Appendix B. Song of Marion's Men. By William Cullen Bryant
     [1794-1878].

Note.

In preparing this biography, the following works have been consulted:

     1.  A Sketch of the Life of Brig. Gen. Francis Marion, and a
     History of his Brigade, &c.  By Wm. Dobein James, A.M.
     Charleston, S.C.  1821.

     2.  The Life of Gen. Francis Marion, &c.  By Brig. Gen. P.
     Horry, and M. L. Weems.  Philadelphia.  1833.

     3.  A MS. Memoir of the Life of Brig. Gen. P. Horry.  By
     Himself.

     4.  Sketches of the Life and Correspondence of Nathanael
     Greene, &c. By William Johnson.  Charleston.  1822.

     5.  Memoirs of the American Revolution, &c.  By William
     Moultrie. New York.  1802.

     6.  Anecdotes of the Revolutionary War in America (1st and
     2d series). By Alex. Garden.  1822 and 1828.

     7.  Memoirs of the War in the Southern Department of the
     United States. By Henry Lee, &c.  Philadelphia.  1812.

     8.  Memoirs of the American Revolution, &c., as relating to
     the State of South Carolina, &c.  By John Drayton, LL.D.
     Charleston.  1821.

     9.  The History of South Carolina, &c.  By David Ramsay.
     Charleston.  1809.

     10. The History of Georgia, &c. By Capt. Hugh M'Call.
     Savannah. 1811.

     11. A History of the Campaigns of 1780 and 1781, in the
     Southern Provinces of North America.  By Lieut. Col.
     Tarleton, Commandant of the late British Legion.  London.
     1797.

     12. Strictures on Lieut. Col. Tarleton's History, &c. By
     Roderick Mackenzie, late Lieutenant in the 71st Regiment,
     &c.  London.  1787.

     13. History of the Revolution of South Carolina from a
     British Province to an Independent State.  By David Ramsay,
     M.D.  Trenton.  1785.

     14. An Historical Account of the Rise and Progress of the
     Colonies of South Carolina and Georgia.  (Hewatt.)  London.
     1779.

     15. A New Voyage to Carolina, &c. By John Lawson, Gent.,
     Surveyor-General of North Carolina.  London.  1709.

     16.  1789.

     17. Five volumes of MS. Letters from distinguished officers
     of the Revolution in the South.  From the Collection of Gen.
     Peter Horry.

Preface.

The facts, in the life of Francis Marion, are far less generally extended in our country than
his fame. The present is an attempt to supply this deficiency, and to justify, by the array
of authentic particulars, the high position which has been assigned him among the master-workers
in our revolutionary history. The task has been a difficult, but I trust not entirely an unsuccessful
one. Our southern chronicles are meagre and unsatisfactory. South Carolina was too long in
the occupation of the British--too long subject to the ravages of civil and foreign war, to
have preserved many of those minor records which concern only the renown of individuals, and
are unnecessary to the comprehension of great events; and the vague tributes of unquestioning
tradition are not adequate authorities for the biographer, whose laws are perhaps even more
strict than those which govern the historian. Numerous volumes, some private manuscripts, and
much unpublished correspondence, to which reference has been more particularly made in the
appendix, have been consulted in the preparation of this narrative. The various histories of
Carolina and Georgia have also been made use of. Minor facts have been gathered from the lips
of living witnesses. Of the two works devoted especially to our subject, that by the Rev. Mr.
Weems is most generally known--a delightful book for the young. The author seems not to have
contemplated any less credulous readers, and its general character is such as naturally to
inspire us with frequent doubts of its statements. Mr. Weems had rather loose notions of the
privileges of the biographer; though, in reality, he has transgressed much less in his Life
of Marion than is generally supposed. But the untamed, and sometimes extravagant exuberance
of his style might well subject his narrative to suspicion. Of the "Sketch" by the Hon. Judge
James, we are more secure, though, as a literary performance, it is quite as devoid of merit
as pretension. Besides, the narrative is not thorough. It dwells somewhat too minutely upon
one class of facts, to the neglect or the exclusion of others. I have made both of these works
tributary to my own whenever this was possible.

Woodland, S.C., May 25, 1844.

THE LIFE OF FRANCIS MARION

Chapter 1.

     Introduction--The Huguenots in South Carolina.

The name of FRANCIS MARION is identified, in the history of South Carolina, his parent state,
with all that is pleasing and exciting in romance. He is, par excellence, the famous partisan
of that region. While Sumter stands conspicuous for bold daring, fearless intrepidity and always
resolute behavior; while Lee takes eminent rank as a gallant Captain of Cavalry, the eye and
the wing of the southern liberating army under Greene; Marion is proverbially the great master
of strategy--the wily fox of the swamps--never to be caught, never to be followed,--yet always
at hand, with unconjectured promptness, at the moment when he is least feared and is least
to be expected. His pre-eminence in this peculiar and most difficult of all kinds of warfare,
is not to be disputed. In his native region he has no competitor, and it is scarcely possible
to compute the vast influence which he possessed and exercised over the minds and feelings
of the people of Carolina, simply through his own resources, at a period most adverse to their
fortunes, and when the cause of their liberties, everywhere endangered, was almost everywhere
considered hopeless. His name was the great rallying cry of the yeoman in battle--the word
that promised hope--that cheered the desponding patriot--that startled, and made to pause in
his career of recklessness and blood, the cruel and sanguinary tory. Unprovided with the means
of warfare, no less than of comfort--wanting equally in food and weapons--we find him supplying
the one deficiency with a cheerful courage that never failed; the other with the resources
of a genius that seemed to wish for nothing from without. With a force constantly fluctuating
and feeble in consequence of the most ordinary necessities--half naked men, feeding upon unsalted
pottage,--forced to fight the enemy by day, and look after their little families, concealed
in swamp or thicket, by night--he still contrived,--one knows not well how,--to keep alive
and bright the sacred fire of his country's liberties, at moments when they seemed to have
no other champion. In this toil and watch, taken cheerfully and with spirits that never appeared
to lose their tone and elasticity, tradition ascribes to him a series of achievements, which,
if they were small in comparison with the great performances of European war, were scarcely
less important; and which, if they sometimes transcend belief, must yet always delight the
imagination. His adventures have given a rich coloring to fable, and have stimulated its performances.
The language of song and story has been employed to do them honor, and our children are taught,
in lessons that they love, to lisp the deeds and the patriotism of his band. "Marion"--"Marion's
Brigade" and "Marion's men", have passed into household words, which the young utter with an
enthusiasm much more confiding than that which they yield to the wondrous performances of Greece
and Ilium. They recall, when spoken, a long and delightful series of brilliant exploits, wild
adventures, by day and night, in swamp and thicket, sudden and strange manoeuvres, and a generous,
unwavering ardor, that never found any peril too hazardous, or any suffering too unendurable.
The theme, thus invested, seems to have escaped the ordinary bounds of history. It is no longer
within the province of the historian. It has passed into the hands of the poet, and seems to
scorn the appeal to authentic chronicles. When we look for the record we find but little authority
for a faith so confiding, and seemingly so exaggerated. The story of the Revolution in the
southern colonies has been badly kept. Documentary proofs are few, bald and uninteresting.
A simple paragraph in the newspapers,--those newspapers issued not unfrequently in cities where
the enemy had power, and in the control of Editors, unlike the present, who were seldom able
to expatiate upon the achievement which they recorded;--or the brief dispatches of the Captain
himself, whose modesty would naturally recoil from stating more than the simple result of his
performances;--these are usually the sum total of our authorities. The country, sparsely settled,
and frequently overrun by the barbarous enemy, was incapable of that patient industry and persevering
care, which could chronicle the passing event, give place and date to the brilliant sortie,
the gallant struggle, the individual deed of audacity, which, by a stroke, and at a moment,
secures an undying remembrance in the bosoms of a people. The fame of Marion rests very much
upon tradition. There is little in the books to justify the strong and exciting relish with
which the name is spoken and remembered throughout the country. He was not a bloody warrior.
His battle fields were never sanguinary. His ardor was never of a kind to make him imprudent.
He was not distinguished for great strength of arm, or great skill in his weapon. We have no
proofs that he was ever engaged in single combat: yet the concurrent testimony of all who have
written, declare, in general terms, his great services: and the very exaggeration of the popular
estimate is a partial proof of the renown for which it speaks. In this respect, his reputation
is like that of all other heroes of romantic history. It is a people's history, written in
their hearts, rather than in their books; which their books could not write--which would lose
all its golden glow, if subjected to the cold details of the phlegmatic chronicles. The tradition,
however swelling, still testifies to that large merit which must have been its basis, by reason
of which the name of the hero was selected from all others for such peculiar honors; and though
these exaggerations suggest a thousand difficulties in the way of sober history, they yet serve
to increase the desire, as well as the necessity, for some such performance.

  *****

The family of Marion came from France. They emigrated to South Carolina somewhere about the
year 1685, within twenty years after the first British settlement of the province. They belonged,
in the parent country, to that sect of religious dissenters which bore the name of Huguenots;
and were among those who fled from the cruel persecutions which, in the beginning of the reign
of Louis XIV., followed close upon the re-admission of the Jesuits into France. The edict of
Nantz, which had been issued under the auspices of Henri IV., and by which the Huguenots had
been guaranteed, with some slight qualifications, the securities of the citizen, almost in
the same degree with the Catholic inhabitants, had, under the weak and tyrannous sway of the
former monarch, proved totally inadequate to their protection. Long before its formal revocation,
the unmeasured and inhuman persecutions to which they were subjected, drove thousands of them
into voluntary banishment. The subsequent decree of Louis, by which even the nominal securities
of the Huguenots were withdrawn, increased the number of the exiles, and completed the sentence
of separation from all those ties which bind the son to the soil. The neighboring Protestant
countries received the fugitives, the number and condition of whom may be estimated by the
simple fact, not commonly known, that England alone possessed "eleven regiments composed entirely
of these unhappy refugees, besides others enrolled among the troops of the line. There were
in London twenty French churches supported by Government; about three thousand refugees were
maintained by public subscription; many received grants from the crown; and a great number
lived by their own industry.* Some of the nobility were naturalized and obtained high rank;
among others, Ruvigny, son of the Marquis, was made Earl of Galway, and Schomberg received
the dignity of Duke."**

     * Memoires et Observations faites par un Voyageur en
     Angleterre, 12mo. La Haye, 1698, p. 362.  Quoted by Browning
     in his History of the Huguenots.

     ** Browning, [William Shergold]:  History of the Huguenots.
     London:  Whittaker and Co.  1840.  p. 256.  Of the Refugees
     from France, Hume says, "near fifty thousand passed over
     into England;" and Voltaire writes that "one of the suburbs
     of London was entirely peopled with French workers of silk."

     [W. S. Browning was uncle to the poet, Robert Browning.
     A. L., 1996.]

America, the new world, was naturally a land of refuge, and soon received her share of these
unhappy fugitives. The transition was easy from England to her colonies. Every facility was
afforded them for transportation, and the wise policy which encouraged their settlement in
the new countries was amply rewarded by the results. Altogether, the Huguenots were a much
better sort of people than those who usually constituted the mass of European emigrants. The
very desperation of their circumstances was a proof of their virtues. They were a people of
principle, for they had suffered everything for conscience sake. They were a people of pure
habits, for it was because of their religion that they suffered banishment. In little patriarchal
groups of sixty, seventy, or eighty families, they made their way to different parts of America;
and with the conscious poverty of their own members, were generally received with open arms
by those whom they found in possession of the soil. The English, as they beheld the dependent
and destitute condition of the fugitives, forgot, for a season, their usual national animosities;
and assigning ample tracts of land for their occupation, beheld them, without displeasure,
settling down in exclusive colonies, in which they sought to maintain, as far as possible,
the pious habits and customs of the mother country. One of these communities, comprising from
seventy to eighty families, found their way to the banks of the Santee in South Carolina.*
From this point they gradually spread themselves out so as to embrace, in partial settlements,
the spacious tract of country stretching to the Winyah, on the one hand, and the sources of
Cooper River on the other; extending upward into the interior, following the course of the
Santee nearly to the point where it loses its identity in receiving the descending streams
of the Wateree and Congaree. These settlers were generally poor. They had been despoiled of
all their goods by the persecutions which had driven them into exile. This, indeed, had been
one of the favorite modes by which this result had been effected. Doubtless, also, it had been,
among the subordinates of the crown, one of the chief motives of the persecution. It was a
frequent promise of his Jesuit advisers, to the vain and bigoted Louis, that the heretics should
be brought into the fold of the Church without a drop of bloodshed; and, until the formal revocation
of the edict of Nantz, by which the Huguenots were put without the pale and protection of the
laws, spoliation was one of the means, with others, by which to avoid this necessity. These
alternatives, however, were of a kind not greatly to lessen the cruelties of the persecutor
or the sufferings of the victim. It does not fall within our province to detail them. It is
enough that one of the first and most obvious measures by which to keep their promise to the
king, was to dispossess the proscribed subjects of their worldly goods and chattels. By this
measure a two-fold object was secured. While the heretic was made to suffer, the faithful were
sure of their reward. It was a principle faithfully kept in view; and the refugees brought
with them into exile, little beyond the liberties and the virtues for which they had endured
so much. But these were possessions, as their subsequent history has shown, beyond all price.

     * Dalcho, in his Church History, says, "upwards of one
     hundred families."

Our humble community along the Santee had suffered the worst privations of their times and
people. But, beyond the necessity of hard labor, they had little to deplore, at the outset,
in their new condition. They had been schooled sufficiently by misfortune to have acquired
humility. They observed, accordingly, in their new relations, a policy equally prudent and
sagacious. More flexible in their habits than the English, they conciliated the latter by deference;
and, soothing the unruly passions of the Indians--the Santee and Sewee tribes, who were still
in considerable numbers in their immediate neighborhood--they won them to alliance by kindness
and forbearance. From the latter, indeed, they learned their best lessons for the cultivation
of the soil. That, upon which they found themselves, lay in the unbroken forest. The high lands
which they first undertook to clear, as less stubborn, were most sterile; and, by a very natural
mistake, our Frenchmen adopted the modes and objects of European culture; the grains, the fruits
and the vegetables, as well as the implements, to which they had been accustomed. The Indians
came to their succor, taught them the cultivation of maize, and assisted them in the preparation
of their lands; in return for lessons thought equally valuable by the savages, to whom they
taught, along with gentler habits and morals, a better taste for music and the dance! To subdue
the forest, of itself, to European hands, implied labors not unlike those of Hercules. But
the refugees, though a gentle race, were men of soul and strength, capable of great sacrifices,
and protracted self-denial. Accommodating themselves with a patient courage to the necessities
before them, they cheerfully undertook and accomplished their tasks. We have more than one
lively picture among the early chroniclers of the distress and hardship which they were compelled
to encounter at the first. But, in this particular, there was nothing peculiar in their situation.
It differed in no respect from that which fell to the lot of all the early colonists in America.
The toil of felling trees, over whose heavy boughs and knotty arms the winters of centuries
had passed; the constant danger from noxious reptiles and beasts of prey, which, coiled in
the bush or crouching in the brake, lurked day and night, in waiting for the incautious victim;
and, most insidious and fatal enemy of all, the malaria of the swamp, of the rank and affluent
soil, for the first time laid open to the sun; these are all only the ordinary evils which
encountered in America, at the very threshold, the advances of European civilisation. That
the Huguenots should meet these toils and dangers with the sinews and the hearts of men, was
to be expected from their past experience and history. They had endured too many and too superior
evils in the old world, to be discouraged by, or to shrink from, any of those which hung upon
their progress in the new. Like the hardy Briton, whom, under the circumstances, we may readily
suppose them to have emulated, they addressed themselves, with little murmuring, to the tasks
before them. We have, at the hands of one of their number,--a lady born and raised in affluence
at home,--a lively and touching picture of the sufferings and duties, which, in Carolina, at
that period, neither sex nor age was permitted to escape. "After our arrival," she writes,
"we suffered every kind of evil. In about eighteen months our elder brother, unaccustomed to
the hard labor we were obliged to undergo, died of a fever. Since leaving France, we had experienced
every kind of affliction, disease, pestilence, famine, poverty and hard labor! I have been
for six months together without tasting bread, working the ground like a slave; and I have
even passed three or four years without always having it when I wanted it. I should never have
done were I to attempt to detail to you all our adventures."*

     * The narrative of Mrs. Judith Manigault, wife of Peter
     Manigault, as quoted by Ramsay.--Hist. S. C. Vol. I., p.
     4. For a graphic detail of the usual difficulties and
     dangers attending the escape of the Huguenots from France,
     at the period of migration, see the first portion of this
     letter.--

We may safely conclude that there was no exaggeration in this picture. The lot of all the refugees
seems to have been very equally severe. Men and women, old and young, strove together in the
most menial and laborious occupations. But, as courage and virtue usually go hand in hand with
industry, the three are apt to triumph together. Such was the history in the case of the Carolina
Huguenots. If the labor and the suffering were great, the fruits were prosperity. They were
more. Honors, distinction, a goodly name, and the love of those around them, have blessed their
posterity, many of whom rank with the noblest citizens that were ever reared in America. In
a few years after their first settlement, their forest homes were crowned with a degree of
comfort, which is described as very far superior to that in the usual enjoyment of the British
colonists. They were a more docile and tractable race; not so restless, nor--though this may
seem difficult to understand to those who consider their past history--so impatient of foreign
control. Of their condition in Carolina, we have a brief but pleasing picture from the hands
of John Lawson, then surveyor-general of the province of North Carolina.* This gentleman, in
1701, just fifteen years after its settlement, made a progress through that portion of the
Huguenot colony which lay immediately along the Santee. The passages which describe his approach
to the country which they occupied, the hospitable reception which they gave him, the comforts
they enjoyed, the gentleness of their habits, the simplicity of their lives, and their solicitude
in behalf of strangers, are necessary to furnish the moral of those fortunes, the beginning
of which was so severe and perilous. "There are," says he, "about seventy families seated on
this river, WHO LIVE AS DECENTLY AND HAPPILY AS ANY PLANTERS IN THESE SOUTHWARD PARTS OF AMERICA.
THE FRENCH BEING A TEMPERATE, INDUSTRIOUS PEOPLE, some of them bringing very little of effects,
YET, BY THEIR ENDEAVORS AND MUTUAL ASSISTANCE AMONG THEMSELVES (which is highly to be commended),
HAVE OUTSTRIPT OUR ENGLISH, WHO BROUGHT WITH THEM LARGER FORTUNES, though (as it seems) less
endeavor to manage their talent to the best advantage. 'Tis admirable to see what time and
industry will (with God's blessing) effect," &c.... ... "We lay all that night at Mons. EUGEE'S
(Huger), and the next morning set out farther, to go the remainder of our voyage by land. At
ten o'clock we passed over a narrow, deep swamp, having left the three Indian men and one woman,
that had piloted the canoe from Ashley river, having hired a Sewee Indian, a tall, lusty fellow,
who carried a pack of our clothes, of great weight. Notwithstanding his burden, we had much
ado to keep pace with him. At noon we came up with several French plantations. Meeting with
several creeks by the way, THE FRENCH WERE VERY OFFICIOUS IN ASSISTING US WITH THEIR SMALL
DORIES TO PASS OVER THESE WATERS: whom we met coming from their church, BEING ALL OF THEM VERY
CLEAN AND DECENT IN THEIR APPAREL; their HOUSES AND PLANTATIONS SUITABLE IN NEATNESS AND CONTRIVANCE.
They are all of the same opinion with the church of Geneva,** there being no difference among
them concerning the punctilios of their Christian faith; WHICH UNION HATH PROPAGATED A HAPPY
AND DELIGHTFUL CONCORD IN ALL OTHER MATTERS THROUGHOUT THE WHOLE NEIGHBORHOOD; LIVING AMONGST
THEMSELVES AS ONE TRIBE OR KINDRED, EVERY ONE MAKING IT HIS BUSINESS TO BE ASSISTANT TO THE
WANTS OF HIS COUNTRYMEN, PRESERVING HIS ESTATE AND REPUTATION WITH THE SAME EXACTNESS AND CONCERN
AS HE DOES HIS OWN: ALL SEEMING TO SHARE IN THE MISFORTUNES, AND REJOICE AT THE ADVANCE AND
RISE OF THEIR BRETHREN." Lawson fitly concludes his account of the settlers upon the Santee,
by describing them as "a very kind, loving, and affable people"--a character which it has been
the happy solicitude of their descendants to maintain to the present day.***

     * Lawson's "Journal of a Thousand Miles' Travel among the
     Indians, from South to North Carolina", is a work equally
     rare and interesting. This unfortunate man fell a victim to
     his official duties. He was confounded, by the savages, with
     the government which he represented, and sacrificed to their
     fury, under the charge of depriving them, by his surveys, of
     their land.  He was made captive with the Baron de
     Graffenreid.  The latter escaped, but Lawson was subjected
     to the fire-torture.

     ** "The inhabitants [of St. James, otherwise French Santee]
     petitioned the Assembly, in 1706, to have their settlement
     made a parish; and, at the same time, expressed their desire
     of being united to the Church of England, whose doctrines
     and discipline they professed highly to esteem.  The
     Assembly passed an act, April 9, 1706, to erect the French
     settlement of Santee into a parish."--'Dalcho's Historical
     Account', ch. 9, p. 295.

     *** See "A new Voyage to Carolina, containing the exact
     description and natural history of that country, &c.; and a
     journey of a thousand miles, travelled through several
     nations of Indians. The rational beauty of the voluntary
system could not find a happier illustration; and, duly impressed with
its loveliness, we shall cease to wonder at the instances of excellence,
equally frequent and admirable, which rose up among this little group of
exiles, to the good fortune of the country which gave them shelter,
and in attestation of their own virtues. But this happy result was due
entirely to their training. It would be wonderful, indeed, if such an
education, toil and watch, patient endurance of sickness and suffering,
sustained only by sympathy with one another and a humble reliance upon
divine mercy, should not produce many perfect characters--men like
Francis Marion, the beautiful symmetry of whose moral structure leaves
us nothing to regret in the analysis of his life. Uncompromising in
the cause of truth, stern in the prosecution of his duties, hardy
and fearless as the soldier, he was yet, in peace, equally gentle
and compassionate, pleased to be merciful, glad and ready to forgive,
sweetly patient of mood, and distinguished throughout by such prominent
virtues, that, while always sure of the affections of followers and
comrades, he was not less secure in the unforced confidence of his
enemies, among whom his integrity and mercy were proverbial. By their
fruits, indeed, shall we know this community, the history of which
furnishes as fine a commentary upon the benefit of good social training
for the young--example and precept happily keeping concert with the
ordinary necessities and performances of life, the one supported by the
manliest courage, the other guided by the noblest principle--as any upon
record.*

     * It is one of the qualifications of the delight which an
     historian feels while engaged in the details of those
     grateful episodes which frequently reward his progress
     through musty chronicles, to find himself suddenly arrested
     in his narrative by some of those rude interruptions by
     which violence and injustice disfigure so frequently, in the
     march of history, the beauty of its portraits.  One of these
     occurs to us in this connection.  Our Huguenot settlers on
     the Santee were not long suffered to pursue a career of
     unbroken prosperity. The very fact that they prospered--
     that, in the language of Mr. Lawson, "they outstript our
     English," when placed in like circumstances--that they were
     no longer desolate and dependent, and had grown vigorous,
     and perhaps wanton, in the smiles of fortune--was quite
     enough to re-awaken in the bosoms of "our English" the
     ancient national grudge upon which they had so often fed
     before.  The prejudices and hostilities which had prevailed
     for centuries between their respective nations, constituted
     no small part of the moral stock which the latter had
     brought with them into the wilderness.  This feeling was
     farther heightened, at least maintained, by the fact that
     France and England had contrived to continue their old
     warfare in the New World; and, while French emissaries were
     busy in the back parts of the colony, stimulating the Creeks
     and Cherokees to hostility, it was perhaps natural enough
     that the English, whose frontiers were continually ravaged
     in consequence, should find it easy to confound the "parley-
     vous", their enemies, with those, their neighbors, who spoke
     the same unpopular language.  It is not improbable, on the
     other hand, that the Huguenot settlers were a little too
     exclusive, a little too tenacious of their peculiar habits,
     manners, and language. They did not suffer themselves to
     assimilate with their neighbors; but, maintaining the policy
     by which they had colonized in a body, had been a little too
     anxious to preserve themselves as a singular and separate
     people.  In this respect they were not unlike the English
     puritans, in whom and their descendants, this passion for
     homogeneousness has always been thought a sort of merit,
     appealing very much to their self-esteem and pride. In the
     case of the French colonists, whether the fault was theirs
     or not, the evil results of being, or making themselves, a
     separate people, were soon perceptible.  They were subjected
     to various political and social disabilities, and so odious
     had they become to their British neighbors, that John
     Archdale, one of the proprietors, a man like Wm. Penn (and
     by Grahame, the historian, pronounced very far his
     superior), equally beloved by all parties, as a man just and
     fearless, was, when Governor of the colony, compelled to
     deny them representation in the colonial Assembly, under
     penalty of making invalid all his attempts at proper
     government. Under this humiliating disability the Huguenots
     lived and labored for a considerable period, until the
     propriety of their lives, the purity of their virtues, and
     their frequently-tried fidelity in the cause of the country,
     forced the majority to be just. An act, passed in 1696,
     making all aliens, THEN inhabitants, free--enabling them to
     hold lands and to claim the same as heirs--according
     liberty of conscience to all Christians (except Papists),
     &c.--placed our refugees on a footing of equality with the
     rest of the inhabitants, and put an end to the old
     hostilities between them.--

When our traveller turned his back upon this "kind, loving, and affable people," to pursue
his journey into North Carolina, his first forward step was into a howling wilderness. The
Santee settlement, though but forty miles distant from Charleston, was a frontier--all beyond
was waste, thicket and forest, filled with unknown and fearful animals, and

         "sliding reptiles of the ground,
    Startlingly beautiful,"--

which the footstep of man dreaded to disturb. Of the wild beasts by which it was tenanted,
a single further extract from the journal of Mr. Lawson will give us a sufficient and striking
idea. He has left the Santee settlements but a single day--probably not more than fifteen miles.
His Indian companion has made for his supper a bountiful provision, having killed three fat
turkeys in the space of half an hour. "When we were all asleep," says our traveller, "in the
beginning of the night, we were awakened with the dismallest and most hideous noise that ever
pierced my ears. This sudden surprisal incapacitated us of guessing what this threatening noise
might proceed from; but our Indian pilot (who knew these parts very well) acquainted us that
it was customary to hear such musick along that swamp-side, there being endless numbers of
panthers, tygers, wolves, and other beasts of prey, which take this swamp for their abode in
the day, coming in whole droves to hunt the deer in the night, making this frightful ditty
till day appears, then all is still as in other places." (Page 26.)

Less noisy, except in battle, but even more fearful, were the half-human possessors of the
same regions, the savages, who, at that period, in almost countless tribes or families, hovered
around the habitations of the European. Always restless, commonly treacherous, warring or preparing
for war, the red men required of the white borderer the vigilance of an instinct which was
never to be allowed repose. This furnished an additional school for the moral and physical
training of our young Huguenots. In this school, without question, the swamp and forest partisans
of a future day took some of their first and most valuable lessons in war. Here they learned
to be watchful and circumspect, cool in danger, steady in advance, heedful of every movement
of the foe, and--which is of the very last importance in such a country and in such a warfare
as it indicates--happily dextrous in emergencies to seize upon the momentary casualty, the
sudden chance--to convert the most trivial circumstance, the most ordinary agent, into a means
of extrication or offence. It was in this last respect particularly, in being quick to see,
and prompt to avail themselves of the happy chance or instrument, that the partisans of the
revolution in the southern colonies, under Marion and others, asserted their vast superiority
over the invader, and maintained their ground, and obtained their final triumph, in spite of
every inequality of arms and numbers.

We have dwelt upon the Huguenot Settlement in Carolina, somewhat more largely than our immediate
subject would seem to require. Our apology must be found in the obvious importance and beauty
of the fact, could this be shown, that the character of Francis Marion was in truth a remarkable
illustration, in all its parts, of the moral nature which prevailed in this little colony of
exiles: that, from the harmony existing among them, their purity of conduct, propriety of sentiment,
the modesty of their deportment and the firmness of their virtues, he most naturally drew all
the components of his own. His hardihood, elasticity, great courage and admirable dexterity
in war, were also the natural results of their frontier position. We do not pretend that his
acquisitions were at all peculiar to himself. On the contrary, we take for granted, that every
distinguished person will, in some considerable degree, betray in his own mind and conduct,
the most striking of those characteristics, which mark the community in which he has had his
early training; that his actions will, in great measure, declare what sort of moral qualities
have been set before his eyes, not so much by his immediate family, as by the society at large
in which he lives; that he will represent that society rather than his immediate family, as
it is the nature of superior minds to rush out of the narrow circles of domestic life; and
that his whole after-performances, even where he may appear in the garb and guise of the reformer,
will indicate in numerous vital respects, the tastes and temper of the very people whose alteration
and improvement he seeks. The memoir upon which we are about to enter, will, we apprehend,
justify the preliminary chapter which has been given to the history of the Huguenots upon the
Santee. Gabriel Marion, the grandfather of our subject, was one of those who left France in
1685. His son, named after himself, married Charlotte Cordes, by whom he had seven children,
five of whom were sons and two daughters.* Francis Marion was the last. He was born at Winyah,
near Georgetown, South Carolina, in 1732; a remarkable year, as, in a sister colony (we are
not able to say how nearly at the same time), it gave birth to GEORGE WASHINGTON. This coincidence,
which otherwise it might seem impertinent to notice here, derives some importance from the
fact that it does not stand alone, but is rendered impressive by others, to be shown as we
proceed; not to speak of the striking moral resemblances, which it will be no disparagement
to the fame of the great Virginian to trace between the two.

     * Weems speaks of six children only, naming all the sons and
     one of the daughters.  Of her, he frankly says, "I have
     never heard what became; but for his four brothers, I am
     happy to state, that though not formidable as soldiers, they
     were very amiable as citizens." James tells us of two
     daughters, not naming either, but describing them as
     "grandmothers of the families of the Mitchells, of
     Georgetown, and of the Dwights, formerly of the same place,
     but now of St. Stephen's parish."  Such particularity might
     be presumed to settle the question.--

The infancy of Marion was unpromising. At birth he was puny and diminutive in a remarkable
degree. Weems, in his peculiar fashion, writes, "I have it from good authority, that this great
soldier, at his birth, was not larger than a New England lobster, and might easily enough have
been put into a quart pot." It was certainly as little supposed that he should ever live to
manhood, as that he should then become a hero. But, by the time that he had reached his twelfth
year, his constitution underwent a change. His health became good. The bracing exercises and
hardy employments of country life invigorated his frame, and with this improvement brought
with it a rare increase of energy. He grew restless and impatient. The tendency of his mind,
which was so largely developed in the partisan exercises of after years, now began to exhibit
itself. Under this impulse he conceived a dislike to the staid and monotonous habits of rural
life, and resolved upon seafaring as a vocation. Such, it may be remarked, was also the early
passion of Washington; a passion rather uncommon in the history of a southern farmer's boy.
In the case of Washington the desire was only overcome at the solicitations of his mother.
The mother of Marion, in like manner, strove to dissuade her son from this early inclination.
She did not succeed, however, and when scarcely sixteen, he embarked in a small vessel for
the West Indies. The particulars of this voyage, with the exception of the mode in which it
terminated, have eluded our inquiry. We have looked for the details in vain. The name of the
vessel, the captain, the port she sailed from, have equally escaped our search. To the wanton
destruction of private and public records by the British, together with the heedless improvidence
of heads of families in the South, we owe this poverty of historical resource. The voyage must
have been taken somewhere about the year 1747-8. At that period there were perils of the sea
to which the mariner is not often exposed at the present day. The waters of the Gulf of Mexico,
in particular, were covered with pirates. The rich produce of New Spain, the West Indies, and
the Southern Colonies of the English, were rare temptations. The privateers of Spain and France,
a sort of legalized pirates, hung about the ports of Carolina, frequently subjecting them to
a condition of blockade, and sometimes to forced contributions. In the occasional absence of
the British armed vessels appointed for the protection of these ports, the more enterprising
and spirited among their citizens frequently fitted out their own cruisers, drawing them, for
this purpose, from the merchant service; manning them in person, and requiting themselves for
their losses of merchandise by the occasional capture of some richly laden galleon from New
Spain. No doubt the imagination of young Marion was fired by hearing of these exploits. The
sensation produced in the community, by the injuries done to its commerce, in all probability
gave the direction to his already excited and restless disposition. It does not appear, however,
that Marion's first and only voyage was made in an armed vessel. Such, we may well suppose,
would have been his desire; but the period when he set forth to procure service upon the seas,
may not have been auspicious. He may have reached the seaport a moment too soon or too late,
and the opportunities of this kind were necessarily infrequent in a small and frontier city,
whose commerce lay mostly in the hands of strangers. His small size and puny appearance must
have operated very much against his hopes of obtaining employment in a service which particularly
calls for manhood and muscle. In what capacity, or in what sort of vessel he obtained a berth,
we are left wholly to conjecture. Choosing the sea as a vocation, and laudably resolved on
acquiring a proper knowledge of his business (as from what we know of his character, we may
suppose was the case), he most probably went before the mast. His first and only voyage was
unfortunate. The ship in which he sailed was no doubt equally frail and small. She foundered
at sea, whether going or returning is not said; in consequence, we are told, of injuries received
from the stroke of a whale, of the thornback species. So suddenly did she sink, that her crew,
only six in number, had barely time to save themselves. They escaped to the jolly boat, saving
nothing but their lives. They took with them neither water nor provisions; and for six days,
hopeless of succor, they lay tossing to and fro, upon the bald and cheerless ocean. A dog,
which swam to them from the sinking vessel, was sacrificed to their hunger. His raw flesh was
their only food, his blood their only drink, during this distressing period. Two of their number
perished miserably.* The survivors, on the seventh day, were found and taken up by a passing
vessel, nourished carefully and finally restored to their homes.

     * Weems represents the captain and mate, as throwing
     themselves overboard in a state of phrenzy, and there is
     nothing improbable or unnatural in the statement.  Privation
     of food, the use of salt water, and exposure in an open boat
     to a burning sun, might very well produce such an effect.
     The only difficulty, however, consists in the simple fact
     that we have no other authority for the statement.  James is
     silent on the point, and contents himself with simply
     stating the death of two of the crew.  Weems, however, adds
     that of two others, whose end receives, as usual, quite a
     dramatic finish at his hands.  He suffers none to live but
     "little Marion", and, in the exuberance of his imagination,
     actually goes so far as to describe the particular food,
     "chocolate and turtle broth", by which the youthful hero is
     recruited and recovered.  By this he designs to show, more
     emphatically, the immediate interposition, in his behalf, of
     an especial providence. The truth is, that any attempt at
     details where so little is known to have been preserved,
     must necessarily, of itself, subject to doubt any narrative
     not fortified by the most conclusive evidence. Unfortunately
     for the reverend historian, his known eccentricities as a
     writer, and fondness for hyperbole, must always deprive his
     books--though remarkably useful and interesting to the
     young--of any authority which might be claimed for them as
     histories.  As fictions from history, lively and romantic,
     they are certainly very astonishing performances; have
     amused and benefited thousands, and entitle the writer to a
     rank, in a peculiar walk of letters, which has not yet been
     assigned him.--

Francis Marion was one of these survivors. The puny boy lived through the terrors and sufferings
under which the strong men perished. So intense were their sufferings, so terrible the trial,
that it will not greatly task the imagination to recognize in the preservation of the youth,--looking
to his future usefulness--the agency of a special providence. The boy was preserved for other
times and fortunes; and, in returning to his mother, was perhaps better prepared to heed her
entreaties that he should abandon all idea of an element, from which his escape had been so
hazardous and narrow. It was well for himself and country that he did so. It can scarcely be
conjectured that his achievements on the sea would have been half so fortunate, or half so
honorable to himself and country, as those which are now coupled with his name.

Returning to his home and parents, young Marion sunk once more into the humble condition of
the farmer. His health and strength had continued to improve. His adventures by sea had served,
seemingly, to complete that change for the better, in his physical man, which had been so happily
begun on land; and, subduing his roving inclinations, we hear of him only, in a period of ten
years, as a tiller of the earth. In this vocation he betrayed that diligent attention to his
duties, that patient hardihood, and calm, equable temper, which distinguished his deportment
in every part of his career. He is represented as equally industrious and successful as a farmer.
The resources of his family seem to have been very moderate. There were several children, and
before Francis was yet twenty-five years of age, he lost his father. In 1758 he was planting
with his mother and brother Gabriel, near Friersons Lock on the Santee Canal. In 1759 they
separated. Gabriel removed to Belle Isle--the place where the mortal remains of Francis Marion
now repose--while the latter settled at a place called Pond Bluff in the Parish of St. John.*
This place he continued to hold during life. It is still pointed out to the traveller as Marion's
plantation, and is the more remarkable, as it lies within cannon shot of the battle ground
of Eutaw, which his valor and conduct contributed to render so justly famous in the history
of his native state. During this long period of repose--the interval between his shipwreck,
and removal to Pond Bluff,--we are only left to conjecture his employments. Beyond his agricultural
labors, we may suppose that his chief tasks were the cultivation of his mind, by close application
to those studies which, in the condition of the country, sparsely settled, and without teachers,
were usually very inadequately urged. It does not appear that his acquisitions in this respect
were more valuable than could be afforded at the present day by the simplest grammar-school
of the country. Here again we may trace the resemblance between his career and that of Washington.
Equally denied the advantages of education, they equally drew from the great mother-sources
of nature. Thrown upon their own thoughts, taught by observation and experience--the same results
of character,--firmness, temperance, good sense, sagacious foresight, and deliberate prudence--became
conspicuous in the conduct and career of both. In the fortunes of neither--in the several tasks
allotted to them,--in their various situations,--did their deficiencies of education appear
to qualify their successes, or diminish the respect and admiration of those around them,--a
singular fact, as indicative equally of the modesty, the good sense, and the superior intrinsic
worth of both of these distinguished persons. In the case of Marion, his want of education
neither lessened his energies, his confidence in himself, nor baffled any of his natural endowments.
On the contrary, it left his talents free to their natural direction. These, it is probable,
were never of a kind to derive, or to need, many advantages from a very superior or scientific
education. His mind was rather practical than subtile--his genius prompted him to action, rather
than to study,--and the condition and necessities of the country, calling for the former rather
than the latter character, readily reconciled him to a deficiency the importance of which he
did not feel.

     * Pond Bluff now lies at the bottom of Lake Marion.
     --A.L., 1996.

Chapter 3.

     Marion a Farmer--Volunteers in the Cherokee Campaign.

From the readiness with which young Marion yielded himself to the entreaties of his mother,
and resumed the occupations of agriculture, and from the quiet and persevering industry with
which he pursued them for a period of nearly or quite ten years, it might be supposed that
the impatience and restlessness of mood, which had formerly led him to revolt at the staid
drudgery of rural life, had been entirely extinguished in his bosom. But such was not the case.
It was only subdued, and slumbering for a season, ready to awaken at the first opportunity,
with all the vigor and freshness of a favorite passion. That opportunity was at hand. Events
were in progress which were to bring into the field, and prepare by the very best sort of training,
for the most noble trials, the great military genius of the Partisan. At the opening of the
year 1759, the colony of South Carolina was on the eve of an Indian war. The whole frontier
of the Southern Provinces, from Pennsylvania to Georgia, was threatened by the savages, and
the scalping-knife had already begun its bloody work upon the weak and unsuspecting borderers.
The French had been conquered upon the Ohio. Forts Frontenac and Duquesne had fallen. British
and Provincial valor, aided by strong bodies of Cherokee warriors, had everywhere placed the
flag of Britain above the fortresses of France. With its elevation, the Indian allies of the
French sent in their adhesion to the conquerors; and, their work at an end, the Cherokee auxiliaries
of Britain prepared to return to their homes, covered with their savage trophies, and adequately
rewarded for their services. It happened, unfortunately, that, while passing along the frontiers
of Virginia, the Cherokees, many of whom had lost their horses during the campaign, supplied
themselves rather unscrupulously from the pastures of the colonists. With inconsiderate anger,
the Virginians, forgetting the late valuable services of the savages, rose upon their footsteps,
slew twelve or fourteen of their warriors, and made prisoners of as many more. This rash and
ill-advised severity aroused the nation. The young warriors flew to arms, and pouring their
active hordes upon the frontier settlements, proceeded to the work of slaughter, without pausing
to discriminate between the offending and the innocent. The emergency was pressing, and Governor
Lyttleton, of South Carolina, called out the militia of the province. They were required to
rendezvous at the Congarees, about one hundred and forty miles from Charleston. To this rendezvous
Francis Marion repaired, in a troop of provincial cavalry commanded by one of his brothers.*
But he was not yet to flesh his maiden valor upon the enemy. The prompt preparation of the
Carolinians had somewhat lessened the appetite of the savages for war. Perhaps their own preparations
were not yet sufficiently complete to make them hopeful of its issue. The young warriors were
recalled from the frontiers, and a deputation of thirty-two chiefs set out for Charleston,
in order to propitiate the anger of the whites, and arrest the threatened invasion of their
country. Whether they were sincere in their professions, or simply came for the purpose of
deluding and disarming the Carolinians, is a question with the historians. It is certain that
Governor Lyttleton doubted their sincerity, refused to listen to their explanations, and, carrying
them along with him, rather as hostages than as commissioners in sacred trust, he proceeded
to meet the main body of his army, already assembled at the Congarees. The treatment to which
they were thus subjected, filled the Cherokee deputies with indignation, which, with the usual
artifice of the Indian, they yet contrived to suppress. But another indiscreet proceeding of
the Governor added to the passion which they felt, and soon baffled all their powers of concealment.
In resuming the march for the nation, he put them into formal custody, placed a captain's guard
over them, and in this manner hurried them to the frontiers. Whatever may have been the merits
of this movement as a mere military precaution, it was of very bad policy in a civil point
of view. It not only degraded the Indian chiefs in their own, but in the eyes of their people.
His captives deeply and openly resented this indignity and breach of faith; and, brooding in
sullen ferocity over the disgrace which they suffered, meditated in silence those schemes of
vengeance which they subsequently brought to a fearful maturity. But though thus impetuous
and imprudent, and though pressing forward as if with the most determined purposes, Lyttleton
was in no mood for war. His policy seems to have contemplated nothing further than the alarm
of the Indians. Neither party was exactly ripe for the final issue. The Cherokees needed time
for preparation, and the Governor, with an army ill disciplined and imperfectly armed, found
it politic, when on the very confines of the enemy's country, to do that which he might very
well have done in Charleston--listen to terms of accommodation. Having sent for Attakullakullah,
the wise man of the nation, who had always been the staunch friend of the whites, he made his
complaints, and declared his readiness for peace;--demanding, however, as the only condition
on which it could be granted, that twenty-four men of the nation should be delivered to him,
to be disposed of as he should think proper, by death or otherwise, as an atonement for that
number of Carolinians, massacred in the late foray of the savages. A treaty was effected, but
with some difficulty, on these terms. Compliance with this requisition was not so easy, however,
on the part of the Cherokee chiefs. The moment it was understood, the great body of their people
fled to the mountains, and the number of hostages could be secured only by the detention of
twenty-two of those chiefs already in the Governor's custody. The captives were placed, for
safe keeping, at the frontier fort of Prince George.

     * Judge James' Life of Marion, p. 17.--

But the natural sense of the savage is not inferior to that by which the laws of the civilized
are prescribed, in their dealings with one another. The treaty thus extorted from their leaders,
while in a state of duress, was disregarded by the great body of the nation. They watched their
opportunity, and, scarcely had the Governor disbanded his forces, when the war-whoop resounded
from the frontiers.

Fort Prince George was one of the most remote of a chain of military posts by which the intercourse
was maintained between the several white settlements of the seaboard and the interior. It stood
on the banks of the Isundiga River, about three hundred miles from Charleston, within gunshot
of the Indian town of Keowee. This post, to which the Cherokee hostages were carried, was defended
by cannon, and maintained by a small force under Colonel Cotymore. It was in this neighborhood,
and, as it were in defiance of this force, that the war was begun. Fourteen whites were massacred
at a blow, within a mile of this station. This was followed up by a stratagem, by which Occonostota,
one of the principal warriors, aimed to obtain possession of the fort. Pretending to have something
of importance to communicate to the commander, he dispatched a woman who had usually obtained
access to the station, to solicit an interview with him. This was to take place on the banks
of the river. Meanwhile the savage prepared his ambush. Cotymore imprudently assented to the
meeting, and, attended by Lieutenants Bell and Foster, walked down towards the river, from
the opposite side of which Occonostota addressed him. While they spoke, the Indian was seen
to wave a bridle over his head. This was the signal agreed upon with the ambushed warriors.
At this signal they rose and poured in their fire. Cotymore was slain on the spot, and his
companions wounded. But the savages failed to get possession of the fort. Suspecting a concerted
movement among the hostages, by which they would cooperate with the assailing foe without,
the officer in command of the fort gave orders to secure them with irons. The attempt to obey
these orders ended in a bloody tragedy. The Indians resisted with arms, and, stabbing three
of the soldiers, so exasperated the rest, already excited by the murder of their captain, that
they fell upon the miserable wretches and butchered them to a man.

This unhappy event, completing what the indiscreet severities of Governor Lyttleton had begun,
united the whole nation of Cherokees in war. There had been a strong party favorable to peace,
and friendly to the whites. This unfortunate proceeding involved the loss of this party. The
hostages were among their chief men, and scarcely a family in the nation but lost a relative
or friend in their massacre. They were now unanimous for battle; and, numerous parties rushing
simultaneously down upon the frontiers, baffled the courage and prevented the flight of the
fugitives. They fell without distinction upon men, women and children. "Such as fled to the
woods and escaped the scalping-knife, perished of hunger.... Every day brought fresh accounts
to the capital of their ravages, murders and desolations. But while the back settlers looked
to their governor for relief, the small-pox raged to such a degree in town that few of the
militia could be prevailed upon to leave their distressed families to serve the public."* Lyttleton,
meanwhile, by whom all the mischief was occasioned, was made Governor of Jamaica, and the charge
of the colony devolved on William Bull, a native--"a man of great integrity and erudition."
In the almost hopeless condition of the province, her sisters, North Carolina and Virginia,
raised seven troops of rangers for the frontiers; and Colonel Montgomery, afterwards Earl of
Eglintoun, was dispatched from Canada, with a battalion of Highlanders and four companies of
Royal Scots. Before the end of April, 1760, the camp of rendezvous for a new invasion of the
Cherokee territories was established at Monk's Corner. Meanwhile, the health of Carolina had
undergone some improvement, and the gentlemen of the country were not idle. They turned out
in force as volunteers, and under the spirited direction of Governor Bull, the whole disposable
force of the province was put in requisition. Among these, it is not so sure, but is believed,
that Francis Marion once more made his appearance as a volunteer. From what we know of his
character, his temperament, and that unsatisfied craving which he seems to have shown from
the beginning for such excitements, it is reasonable to infer his presence in the field. But,
though asserted by tradition, we confess that the records are silent on the subject. Unsatisfactory
as at that period they generally are, on this point they are particularly so; and but that
his share in this war, before its final conclusion, was not only unquestionable but conspicuous,
we should pass over the campaign of Montgomery, with a simple reference to its results.

     * Hewatt's Hist. S.C.--

The Cherokees, meanwhile, were not unobservant of the preparations and approaches of the Carolinians.
They gathered themselves up for defence, and in silence matured their half civilized, half
primitive modes of warfare. This people, at the period of which we write, were a people of
very superior endowments and resources to any of the neighboring savage nations. If less warlike,
in the simple sense of the word, than their rivals the Creeks, they were really more to be
feared, as it was in consequence of their superior civilisation that they had lost some of
their brute ferocity. If they were less reckless, they were better skilled; if less frantic
in their fury, they coupled it with a wary vindictiveness which rendered the blow more fatal
when it fell. The advances which they had made in civilisation had naturally increased their
numbers; while the novel tastes by which their wandering habits were diminished, had necessarily
added to their love of country, in adding to the resources and improvements by which its comforts
and delights were increased. Thus, neither degraded by the lowest condition in which we find
the human animal, nor enervated by the superior luxuries to which he may attain, the Cherokee
was perhaps at this time in possession of his greatest vigor; not very remote, in his moral
and physical condition, from the Roman when he overcame his Etrurian and Sabine neighbors.
The Cherokees occupied a country equally broad and beautiful. It lay in fertile valleys, green
meadows, sunny slopes, and mighty forests, along the sides of lofty summits, that circled their
extensive territory with natural fortresses of giant grandeur. Spreading from the Broad, or
Cherokee river, beyond the Tennessee and the Savannah, it comprised every variety of soil and
surface, and while adapted in a high degree to the hands of the agriculturist, seemed almost
as easily made secure against the footsteps of invasion. Its apparent securities had made them
insolent. Their mountain recesses had never known the presence of this foe. Their fruits and
fields, their villages and towns, with the exception of a district that lay upon the Atlantic
slopes, were generally fenced in, and admirably protected, by wild and rugged masses of rocky
mountains, natural defences, impenetrable, unless through certain passes which a few determined
hearts might easily make good against twenty times their number. But the numerical force of
this great aboriginal people, seemed of itself sufficiently strong to promise security to their
country. At the time of Montgomery's invasion they had no less than sixty-four towns and villages.
In an emergency, they could send six thousand warriors into the field. Many of these were armed
with the weapons of European warfare--were accustomed to that warfare, and were thus doubly
prepared to encounter the enemy in whose ranks they had received their best military lessons.
Such a force very far exceeded that of the Carolinians. Mustering but two thousand men, Col.
Montgomery found it advisable to urge his march upon the nation with equal celerity and caution.
Having reached a place called Twelve-mile River, within twenty miles of the Indian town of
Estatoee, he advanced by night upon it, secretly, and with a view to its surprise. In his march,
surrounding the town of Little Keowee, not a warrior of the Cherokees escaped the sword. His
success was less complete at Estatoee. The Indians, apprised of his approach, with few exceptions,
succeeded in making their escape; but the town, consisting of more than two hundred houses,
and well stored with corn, hogs, poultry and ammunition, perished in the flames. Shugaw Town
and every other settlement in the "Lower Nation", shared the same fate. The lightning-like
rapidity of the march had taken the savages everywhere, in this part of the country, by surprise.
They fled rather than fought, and while they lost everything in the shape of property, but
few of them were slain. They sought for shelter among their more numerous and better protected
brethren of the mountains; a people neither so easily approached, nor so easily overcome.

Montgomery, having finished this part of his work so successfully, hurried on to the relief
of Fort Prince George, which, from the time when their Chiefs were so cruelly butchered within
its walls, had been closely invested by a formidable force of Cherokees. The fort was relieved.
The Indians fled at his approach; and, thinking that the severe chastisement which he had inflicted
upon them, had inclined their hearts to peace, the General of the Carolinians paused in his
progress, to give them an opportunity to sue for it, as the former friends and allies of the
English. But he had mistaken the stubborn nature of his foe. They were not sufficiently humbled,
and it was resolved to march upon the "middle settlements". To this task, that which had been
performed was comparatively easy. They were now to enter upon a different country, where the
Indians were better prepared for them--nay, where they HAD prepared for them,--in all probability,
to the neglect of the lower towns. Toilsome and full of peril was this march. Dismal and dense
was the wilderness which they were now to penetrate. Rugged paths, narrow passes, gloomy thickets
and dark ravines, encountered them in their hourly progress, calling for constant vigilance
and the maintenance of all their courage. Rivers, fordable in unfrequent places and overlooked
by precipitous banks on either side, crowned most commonly by dense and intricate masses of
forest, through which and without a guide, our little army was compelled to pass,--presented
opportunities for frequent ambush and attack, in which, very inferior forces, if properly commanded,
might, with little danger to themselves, overwhelm and utterly destroy an advancing enemy.
It was in such a region that the Cherokees made their first and formidable stand. Within five
miles of Etchoee, the nearest town of the middle settlements, the army of Montgomery approached
a low valley, clothed with a thicket so dense that the soldiers could scarcely discern objects
three paces ahead. Through this thicket ran a muddy river, enclosed between steep banks of
clay. This passage, where but few men could act in unison, was that through which it became
necessary that the army should proceed. It was the very spot, which, over all others, a sagacious
warrior would choose in which to place an ambush, or meet a superior assailant. Montgomery
knew his enemy, and prepared for the encounter. Captain Morrison, commanding a company of rangers,
native marksmen and well acquainted with the forest--was sent forward to scour the thicket.
His advance was the signal for battle. Scarcely had he entered upon the dismal passage when
the savages rose from their hiding-places and poured in a severe fire. Morrison, with several
of his men, perished at the first discharge. They were sustained by the light Infantry and
Grenadiers, who boldly advanced upon the wood in the face of the invisible foe. A heavy fire
followed on both sides, the Cherokees, each with his eye upon his man, the Carolinians aiming
at the flash of the enemy's guns. The pass was disputed by the savages with a degree of conduct
and courage, which left the issue doubtful. The necessity was apparent for extraordinary effort.
The Royal Scots, who were in the rear, were now pushed forward to take possession of a rising
ground on the right, while the Highlanders were marched forward to the immediate support of
the Infantry and Grenadiers. This movement had the effect of bringing the enemy into close
action. The bayonet stirred and laid bare the thicket. The woods resounded with the shouts
and yells of the Cherokees, but they no longer fell with terror upon the ear of the whites.
They had grown familiar. The savages yielded slowly as the bayonet advanced. Suffering severely
as they fled, they yet displayed the native obstinacy of their race,--turning upon the pursuer
when they could, availing themselves of tree or thicket to retard, by shot or stroke, the assailants;
and, even in flight, only so far keeping ahead of the bayonet as to avoid its stroke. As he
beheld this, Montgomery changed the head of his army, and advanced upon the town of Etchoee,
which it had been their purpose to defend, and from which they now strove to divert him. This
movement alarmed them for their wives and children. Their retreat became a flight; and, satisfied
with having inflicted upon them this measure of punishment, the British General prepared to
march back to Fort Prince George.

This decision was the result of his exigencies. The situation of his army was neither a safe
nor an agreeable one. The victory was with the Carolinians, yet the affair was very far from
decisive in its consequences. The enemy had only retired from one advantageous position to
another. They waited his approach only to renew a conflict in which even victory might be without
its fruits. To gain a battle, unless a final one, was, with a force so small as his, a matter
of very doubtful advantage. He was already encumbered with his wounded, to furnish horses for
whom, he was compelled to discard, and to destroy, a large quantity of the provisions necessary
for the army. What remained was measured with a nice reference to their absolute wants on the
return march to Prince George. Under these suggestions of prudence the retreat was begun. It
was conducted with admirable regularity. The Cherokees, meanwhile, hung upon the retiring footsteps
of the invaders, annoying them to the utmost of their power. Sixty miles of mountainous country
were traversed in this manner, and under various hardships, with a skill and intrepidity which
confer the highest credit upon the English captain. A large train of wounded was brought to
the frontier without the loss of a man.

We have admitted an uncertainty as to the presence of Marion in this campaign. It would be
impertinent and idle, therefore, to speculate upon his performances, or the share which he
might have taken in its events. Tradition simply assures us that he distinguished himself.
That, if present, he did his duty, we have no question; and, enduring with becoming resolution
the worst severities of the march, proved himself possessed of the first great requisite for
soldiership in Indian warfare.

The Cherokees were very far from being subdued or satisfied. The snake had been "scotched not
killed", and stung, rather than humbled by the chastisement they received, they prepared to
assume the offensive with sudden vigor. Concentrating a numerous force upon the distant garrison
of Fort Loudon, on the Tennessee river, they succeeded in reducing it by famine. Here they
took bloody revenge for the massacre of their chiefs at Prince George. The garrison was butchered,
after a formal surrender upon terms which guaranteed them protection. This wholesale and vindictive
barbarity, while it betrayed the spirit which filled the savages, had the still farther effect
of encouraging them in a warfare which had so far gratified very equally their appetites for
blood and booty. In addition to this natural effect, the result of their own wild passions,
there were other influences, from without, at work among them. Certain French emissaries had
crept into their towns and were busily engaged, with bribes and arguments, in stimulating them
to continued warfare. This, in all probability, was the secret influence, which, over all,
kept them from listening, as well to their own fears, as to the urgent suggestions of the British
authorities, for peace. Hitherto, the Cherokees had given no ear to the temptations of the
French, whom they considered a frivolous people, and whose professions of faith they were very
likely to have regarded with distrust. But the labors of their emissaries at this juncture,
harmonizing with the temper of the nation, were necessarily more than usually successful. One
of these emissaries, Louis Latinac, an officer of considerable talent, proved an able instigator
to mischief. He persuaded them, against the better reason of their older chiefs, to the rejection
of every overture for peace. Their successes at Fort Loudon were, perhaps, sufficient arguments
for the continuance of war, but there were others not less potent. The king of France was now
to be their ally in place of him of Great Britain. The one "great father" was no less able
than the other to minister to their appetites and necessities. His arms and ammunition replaced
those which had been withdrawn by the latter; and we may suppose that the liberality of the
new allies was such as to admit of very favorable comparison and contrast with that which they
had experienced at the hands of the British. Their very excesses in the war were favorable
to its continuance; as they might very well doubt the binding force of treaties between parties,
the bad faith of whom had been written so terribly in blood. At a great meeting of the nation,
at which Louis Latinac was present, he, with something of their own manner, seizing suddenly
upon a hatchet, struck it violently into a block of wood, exclaiming, as he did so, "Who is
the warrior that will take this up for the king of France?" Salouee, a young chief of Estatoee,
instantly tore the weapon from the tree. He declared himself for instant and continued war.
"The spirits of our slain brothers," was his cry, "call upon us to avenge their massacre. He
is a woman that dares not follow me!"

Such being the spirit of the savages, the Carolinians had no alternative but to resume their
arms. Col. Montgomery having gone to England, the command devolved upon Colonel Grant, and
the Highlanders were once more ordered to the relief of the province. The Carolinians were
now somewhat better prepared to cooperate with their allies. A native regiment of twelve hundred
men was raised, and the command given to Col. Middleton, a brave and accomplished provincial
officer.

To this regiment Marion was attached, under the immediate command of Moultrie. Many of his
associates in this Cherokee war became subsequently, like himself, distinguished in the war
with Great Britain. Among these may be mentioned the names of Moultrie,* Henry Laurens, Andrew
Pickens and Isaac Huger. These were all officers, even in that early day, and Marion himself
held a lieutenancy--some proof that, however little we may know of the circumstances by which
he secured the confidence of his neighbors, he was already in full possession of it. How much
of the future acts and successes of these brave men was due to the exercises and events of
this Cherokee war, may reasonably be conjectured by every reader who knows the value of a stern
apprenticeship to a hazardous profession. Its successive campaigns against no inferior enemy,
and under circumstances of peril and privation of no common order, were such as must have afforded
them frequent opportunity of making themselves familiar equally with the exigencies and responsibilities
of command.

     * Moultrie in his Memoirs, vol. 2, p. 223, would seem to
     settle the question in the negative, whether Marion was or
     was not in the preceding campaign. He says, "General Marion
     and myself ENTERED THE FIELD OF MARS TOGETHER, in an
     expedition against the Cherokee Indians, under the command
     of Colonel James Grant, in 1761, when I had the honor to
     command a light infantry company in a provincial regiment;
     he was my first lieutenant.  He was an active, brave and
     hardy soldier, and an excellent partisan officer."  This is
     very far however from being conclusive, inasmuch as we have
     seen that Marion 'entered the field of Mars' two years
     before, under the command of his brother, in the first
     campaign of Lyttleton against the Indians. This latter fact
     is settled beyond all question.--

To the united forces of Colonels Grant and Middleton, were added a certain number of Chickasaw
and Catawba Indians; making a total of twenty-six hundred men. This army reached Fort Prince
George on the 29th of May, 1761. On the 7th of June following, it took up the line of march
for the enemy's country. The advance was conducted with caution, but without molestation, until
it reached the place where Montgomery, in the previous campaign, had encountered the Indians,
near the town of Etchoee. Here the Cherokees were again prepared to make a stand, and to dispute
a pass which, above all others, seemed to be admirably designed by nature for the purposes
of defence. Their position was not exactly what it had been on the previous occasion, but its
characteristic advantages were the same. Hitherto, the Indians had shown considerable judgment
in the selection of their battle-grounds, and in the general employment of their strength.
This judgment they probably owed in great part to their present adversaries. Quick in their
instinct, and surprisingly observant, they had soon learned the use of European weapons. The
various lessons of European tactics, the modes of attack and defence, were, in their united
struggles with the French, equally open to their study and acquisition. They had not suffered
these lessons to escape them. But they probably owed something of their skill in the present
war to the active counsels of the French emissaries. The fact is not recorded by the historian,
but there is no reason to suppose that the officers who counselled the war, would withhold
themselves when the opportunity offered, from giving directions in the field. The French had
frequently distinguished themselves, by leading on forces entirely composed of Indians. The
practice was common. Even at the defeat of Braddock, the French troops bore but a small proportion
to their Indian allies. There is no reason to suppose that Louis Latinac was not present at
one or both of the bloody fields of Etchoee.

The provincial army marched in good order upon the suspected position. The Indian auxiliaries,
who were in the van, first discovered signs of an enemy. The Cherokees were in possession of
a hill, strongly posted, and in considerable force, upon the right flank of the army. Finding
themselves discovered, they opened their fire upon the advanced guard, and followed it up with
a gallant charge. But the van being vigorously and promptly supported, they were driven back,
and resumed their position upon the hill. Under this hill the line of march lay for a considerable
distance. To attempt, therefore, to continue the march before dislodging the enemy in possession
of it, would be to expose the troops to a protracted fire, the more murderous, as it would
be delivered by a foe in a position of perfect security. The advanced guard was ordered upon
this duty, and from this body a forlorn-hope of thirty men was chosen, to force the perilous
entrance to the foe. The command of this devoted corps was assigned to Francis Marion, still
a lieutenant under the command of Moultrie, in the provincial regiment of Middleton. The ascent
of the hill was by means of a gloomy defile, through which the little band, headed gallantly
by their leader, advanced with due rapidity; a considerable body of the army moving forward
at the same time in support of the advance. Scarcely had the detachment penetrated the defile,
when the war-whoop gave the signal. The savages, still concealed, poured in a deadly fire,
by which no less than twenty-one of this fated band were prostrated.* Fortunately their leader
was not among them. He seems, like Washington, to have been the special care of Providence.
The residue were only saved from destruction by the proximity of the advance, whose hurried
approach, while giving them safety, brought on the main action. The battle was fought with
great carnage on both sides. The Cherokees were not only well posted, but they were in great
numbers. Repeatedly dislodged by the bayonet, they as repeatedly returned to the attack; and,
driven from one quarter, rallied upon another, with a tenacious and unshaken valor becoming
in men who were defending the passes to the bosom of their country. From eight in the morning
until noon, the fight was continued, not only without intermission, but seemingly without any
decisive results on either side. But, at length, the patient resolution of the whites prevailed;
and, about two o'clock in the day, the field was yielded by the reluctant Cherokees to their
superior foes. This victory determined the fate of Etchoee, a town of considerable size, which
was reduced to ashes.

     * Weems, p. 21.  Horry's MS. Memoir, p. 58.--

The result of this fierce engagement seems to have broken the spirit of the nation. They had
chosen the position of greatest strength to make their stand, and brought to the struggle their
best spirits and bravest warriors. In the issue, they had shown, by their dogged and determined
valor, the great importance which it carried in their eyes. The day once decided against them,
they appeared to be equally without heart and hope; they no longer appeared in arms--no longer
offered defence--and the army of the Carolinians marched through the heart of the nation, searching
its secret settlements, and everywhere inflicting the severest penalties of war. The rest of
the campaign was an easy progress, and terrible was the retribution which it brought with it.
No less than fourteen of their towns, in the middle settlements, shared the fate of Etchoee.
Their granaries were yielded to the flames, their cornfields ravaged, while the miserable fugitives,
flying from the unsparing sword, took refuge, with their almost starving families, among the
barren mountains, which could yield them little but security. A chastisement so extreme was
supposed to be necessary, in order to subdue for ever that lively disposition for war, upon
the smallest provocation, which, of late years, the Cherokees had manifested but too frequently;
but it may be doubted whether the means which were employed for administering this admonitory
lesson, were of the most legitimate character. We must always continue to doubt that humanity
required the destruction of towns and hamlets, whose miserable walls of clay and roofs of thatch
could give shelter to none but babes and sucklings--women with their young--those who had never
offended, and those who could not well offend--the innocent victims to an authority which they
never dared oppose. The reckless destruction of their granaries--fields yet growing with grain--necessarily
exposed to the worst privations of famine only those portions of the savage population who
were least guilty. The warrior and hunter could readily relieve himself from the gnawing necessities
of hunger. He could wander off to remote tribes, and, armed with rifle or bow, could easily
secure his game, sufficient for his own wants, from the contiguous forest. But these were resources
inaccessible to the weak, the old, the timid, and the imbecile. Surely, it was a cruel measure
of war, and if necessary to the safety of the whites, renders still more criminal the wanton
excesses of the latter, by which it was originally provoked. It is pleasing to be able to show
that Marion felt, in this matter, as became that rare humanity which was one of the most remarkable
and lovely traits in his character,--the more remarkable, indeed, as shining out among endowments
which, in particular, designated him for a military life--a life which is supposed to need
for its stimulus so much that is sanguinary, if not brutal, in one's nature. It is recorded
of him, that the severities practised in this campaign filled him, long after, with recollections
of sorrow. Writing to a friend,* he gives a brief description of the calamities of the war,
in terms equally touching and picturesque. "We arrived," he writes, "at the Indian towns in
the month of July.

     * In a letter quoted by Weems.
'Who did this?' they will ask their mothers. 'The white people, the
Christians did it!' will be the reply."

"It would be no easy matter," says Hewatt, the earliest regular historian of Carolina, "to
describe the hardships which this little army endured, in the wilderness, from heat, thirst,
watching, danger, and fatigue. Thirty days did Colonel Grant continue in the heart of the Cherokee
territories, and upon his return to Fort Prince George, the feet and legs of many of his army
were so mangled, and their strength and spirits so much exhausted, that they were unable to
march farther." But the chastisement which the Indians had received, secured the object for
the attainment of which it was inflicted. The Cherokees sued for peace, and Marion once more
retired to the obscurity of rural life; we may well believe with a human sense of satisfaction,
that the painful duty upon which he had been engaged was at length over. Unhappily, the details
of the war, beyond those which we have given, do not enable us to ascertain the extent of his
services. We are simply told that he behaved well, with skill and spirit. More than this perhaps
it would be unreasonable to expect from any degree of talent, in the subordinate situation
which he at that time occupied.

Chapter 5.

     1775.

Engaged in rural and domestic occupations we hear no more of Marion, except as a citizen and
farmer, until the beginning of the year 1775. In the latter capacity he is reputed to have
been successful; and between the labors and sports of the field, the more violent humors of
youth seem to have been dissipated in exercises which are seldom followed by reproach. He was
very fond of angling and hunting, and with rod or gun, his leisure was employed in a way that
would not have displeased the gentle Isaak Walton. These constituted his chief pastimes for
the fourteen years that had elapsed since his Cherokee campaigns. His connection with public
events had long since ceased; but, from all accounts, he still continued, in some degree, to
fill the eyes of his countrymen. His firmness and purity of character, his gentle temper, known
bravery, and the conduct which he had already manifested in war, had secured to him the confidence
and the affections of his neighbors. He had attained that place in their esteem which naturally
brought him conspicuously before their eyes in the moment of emergency. Emergencies were now
approaching of a kind well calculated to bring into the field all the energies, with all the
patriotism of the country. The great struggle was at hand between the colonies and that mighty
empire by which they had been established. Of the part taken by South Carolina in this conflict,
history has already sufficiently informed us. Her movements were made without reserve--her
resolves taken promptly, and steadily maintained with her best blood and treasure. Her battles
were among the boldest and bloodiest, as they were among the first and last of the revolution.
Of the political steps by which she committed herself to that event, it does not need that
we should enter into details. These belong rather to general history than to biography. It
will be enough to exhibit those particulars only, of her progress, in which the subject of
our memoir was more immediately interested. That he took an early and deep concern in the contest
may be inferred from his character. That he should not have become an active politician may
also be inferred from his known modesty, and the general reserve of his deportment in society.
He was no orator, and no doubt felt quite as awkward in debate as Washington. But his opinions
were well known; he was not the person about whose ways of thinking, in trying times, his neighbors
could entertain either doubt or discussion. He formed his opinions as promptly as he fought
for them, and his character was above concealment. We find him accordingly, in 1775, returned
to the Provincial Congress of South Carolina, as a member from St. John, Berkeley.* This Congress
distinguished itself by committing the people of South Carolina to the final destinies of the
Revolution. It adopted the American Bill of Rights, as declared by the Continental Congress--adopted
the famous "act of association", recommended by the same federative body to all the colonies,
by which the subscribers bound themselves to refuse and to prevent the importation of goods,
wares and merchandise, from the mother country; established committees of safety throughout
the province, and, in short, in possession of almost dictatorial powers, did not hesitate to
use them for the public welfare. It was at particular pains to infuse a martial spirit among
the people; and, influenced by this spirit, and under the immediate suggestion, and by direct
participation, of this assembly, certain overt acts of treason were committed. The public armory
in Charleston was broken open by night, and eight hundred stand of arms, two hundred cutlasses,
besides cartouches, flints, matches and other necessary materials of war, were withdrawn without
discovery. One party possessed itself of the public powder at Hobcau; another emptied Cochran's
Magazine, while a third, as above stated, relieved the state armory of its contents. In all
these proceedings, the members of the Provincial Congress displayed the energies of men, who,
having once set their hands to the plough, have resolved not to be turned away from it. Under
that bolder policy which, by provoking the danger, compels the timid to a part in it from which
they might otherwise shrink in terror, they were personally engaged in these acts of treason.
We may reasonably conclude that, however silent as a member, Francis Marion was not the person
to forbear taking active part in the more hazardous duties which distinguished the doings of
the body to which he belonged. There was a generous impulse in his character, which hurried
him into performance, whenever work was to be done, or daring became necessary. He could approach
such duties with a degree of cheerfulness, which to the ordinary mind, thoughtful only of the
consequences and responsibilities of action, seemed to partake of levity and recklessness.
There was, indeed, an element of playfulness, we had almost said fun, in his character; a quiet
and unobtrusive humor, which enlivened his utterance, and softened, with a gentle aspect, a
countenance that might otherwise have been esteemed severe. We have no doubt that the native
courage, and the elastic spirit of his temperament made him an active participant in all those
deeds of decision, which the deliberations of the body to which he belonged, deemed it necessary
should be done. We can very well imagine him conspicuous among those masked and midnight bands,
commissioned to do mischief for the public good, by which the arsenals were stripped of their
contents, and the tea-chests tumbled into Cooper river.**

     * "For St. John's, Berkeley County--James Ravenel, Daniel
     Ravenel, JOB MARION, John Frierson, Esqrs., Mr. Gabriel
     Gignilliat, MR. FRANCIS MARION."  Journals of the Provincial
     Congress of South Carolina.

     ** It is not so generally known that South Carolina did her
     part, as well as Massachusetts, in destroying teas and
     stamped paper.--

The Provincial Congress having thus committed the country, without doubt, to the destinies
of war, and having, to some extent, provided against its consequences, adjourned to re-assemble
on the 20th June, 1775. But this interval was shortened by the occurrence of events equally
unexpected and important. The battle of Lexington, in the meantime, had taken place, and any
hopes which might have been entertained, of a final reconciliation between the two countries,
without a trial of strength, was fairly dismissed from every reflecting, if not every loyal
mind. Instead of the 20th of June, the Provincial Congress was brought together on the first
day of that month.*

     * A letter from ISAAC MARION, one of the brothers of our
     subject, who dwelt at Little River, the Northern boundary of
     the province, is worthy of quotation, as serving to show
     that he was animated with the same public spirit that
     possessed his more distinguished kinsman. It was written to
     accompany the express, which brought the news of the battle
     of Lexington.  A letter to him, from R. Howe, of N.C.,
     forwarding the express, remarking, "I know you stand in no
     need of being prompted when your country requires your
     service"--would seem to show that he too had shared in the
     reputation of his brother. The following is the letter of
     Isaac Marion, addressed to the Committee of Safety of Little
     River.

     Boundary, May 9, 1775, Little River.

     Gentlemen of the Committee;--I have just now received an
     express, from the Committee of the Northern Provinces,
     desiring I would forward the enclosed packet to the Southern
     Committees.  As yours is the nearest, I request FOR THE GOOD
     OF YOUR COUNTRY, AND THE WELFARE OF OUR LIVES, LIBERTIES,
     AND FORTUNES, you'll not lose a moment's time, but dispatch
     the same to the Committee of Georgetown, to be forwarded to
     Charleston.  In meantime, am, gentlemen, Your obliged humble
     servant, &c. Isaac Marion. To Danness, Hawkins and others.--

The members of this body, assembling according to summons, proceeded, with the utmost vigor,
to the consideration of the subjects before them. They approached their tasks with equal speed
and solemnity. Their labors were commenced with Divine Service, and an act of association was
then passed, though not without considerable opposition. This act ran as follows:--

"The actual commencement of hostilities against this Continent by the British troops, in the
bloody scene of the 19th of April last, near Boston--the increase of arbitrary imposition from
a wicked and despotic ministry--and the dread of insurrections in the Colonies--are causes
sufficient to drive an oppressed people to the use of arms. We, therefore, the subscribers,
inhabitants of South Carolina, holding ourselves bound by that most sacred of all obligations,
the duty of good citizens to an injured country, and thoroughly convinced, that, under our
present distressed circumstances, we shall be justified before God and man, in resisting force
by force--do unite ourselves, under every tie of religion and honor, and associate as a band
in her defence, against every foe--hereby solemnly engaging, that, whenever our Continental
and Provincial Councils shall deem it necessary, we will go forth, and be ready to sacrifice
our lives and fortunes to secure her freedom and safety. This obligation to continue in force,
until a reconciliation shall take place between Great Britain and America, upon Constitutional
principles--an event which we most ardently desire. And, we will hold all those persons inimical
to the liberty of the Colonies, who shall refuse to subscribe to this association."*

     * Drayton's Memoirs, Vol. 1, p. 28.--

This open declaration was followed up with measures equally fearless and decisive. On the fourth
day of the session, the Provincial Congress resolved to raise fifteen hundred infantry, rank
and file, in two regiments; and four hundred and fifty horse, constituting another regiment.
The troops so to be raised, were to be subjected to military discipline, and to the articles
of war, in like manner with the British. On the fourteenth day of their session, a million
of money was voted, and a council of safety was elected, vested with the executive power of
the colony. Among other acts of this body, non-subscribers to the association were made amenable
to the General Committee, and punishable ACCORDING TO SOUND POLICY. Absentees having estates,
were, with certain exceptions, required to return; and it was further resolved that no persons
ought to withdraw from the service of the Colony, without giving good and sufficient reasons
to the Provincial Congress. Military duty was performed day and night, as in a state of actual
warfare, by the militia companies in rotation; and thus, having placed the province in a state
of preparation, with arms in the hands of the people, and given to the newly arrived Governor,
Lord William Campbell, a reception which boded small repose to his authority, the Provincial
Congress adjourned itself on the 22d day of June, leaving their authority, in great part, to
the Council of Safety and General Committee.

It has been seen that the only share which Marion had in the proceedings of this body, was
that of an assenting member. He was not endowed with those talents which could have rendered
him conspicuous in a deliberative assembly. But he is not the less entitled to his share in
the merit of those proceedings, which so admirably declared and illustrated the patriotism
and the spirit of the province; and one of the last, decisive measures of the Provincial Congress,
happily enabled him to appear in the character upon which he was more likely to confer distinction,
than that of the orator. He was elected a captain in the Second Regiment, of which William
Moultrie, formerly his captain in the Cherokee campaign, was made Colonel. The duties of this
appointment were immediately begun, with a promptness at once due to the necessities of the
case, and his own character. As a proof of the zeal by which the newly made officers were distinguished,
we find them seeking recruits so early as the 20th of June, and while the body to which they
belonged were still engaged in the most laborious duties of the session.*

     * Drayton's Memoirs, vol. 1, p. 265.  NOTE.--

Marion's commission was made out on the 21st June. Weems, in his life of our subject, gives
us some pictures, equally lively and ludicrous, of his progress in the business of recruiting,
upon which, in connection with his friend, Captain Horry, he at once begun. This gentleman
received his appointment as captain at the same time, and in the same regiment, with Marion.
The Provincial Congress had voted a million of money, by which to carry out their measures,
but this was yet to be procured, and, as it appears, rather more upon the credit of individuals
than that of the colony. But money, in times of danger, seems to have an instinct of its own,
by which it hides itself readily from sight and touch. It was no easy matter for our captains
to obtain the requisite sums. But faith and zeal did more for them, and for the cause, than
gold and silver; and with very inadequate supplies, but in fresh and showy uniforms, our young
officers set forth on the recruiting service. Their route lay in the several neighborhoods
of Georgetown, Black River, and the Great Pedee. In these parts both of them were known. Here,
indeed, Marion was already a favorite. Accordingly, they succeeded beyond their expectations,
and were soon enabled to complete the full number for their two companies, of fifty men each.
Another circumstance, apart from their personal popularity, probably facilitated their objects.
Some of the settlements into which they penetrated were originally founded by the Irish. The
bitter heritage of hate to the English, which they brought with them to America, was transmitted
with undiminished fervor to their descendants. It was easy to show that the power which had
trampled upon the affections of their fathers, and tyrannized over their rights in the old
world, was aiming at the same objects in the case of their children in the new. At one remove
only from the exiled and suffering generation, the sons had as lively a recollection of the
tyrannies of Britain as if the experience had been immediately their own. To this cause our
recruiting officers owed some of their success in the present expedition. Some of the bravest
fellows of the second regiment were picked up on this occasion. It was the spirit which they
brought, and to which the genius of Marion gave lively exercise, that imparted a peculiar vitality
at all times to his little brigade. Among these gallant young men there were two in particular,
of whom tradition in Carolina will long retain a grateful recollection; these were Jasper and
Macdonald. Of these two, both of whom sealed their patriotism with their blood, we shall yet
have something further to deliver.

While the friends of liberty were thus active, the adherents of the crown, in the colony, were
not less so. These, in many parts of the country, were equally numerous and influential. They
possessed, indeed, certain advantages in the discussion, which, in some degree, served to counterbalance
the impelling and stimulating influences which always belong to a 'mouvement' party. They carried
with them the PRESTIGE of authority, of the venerable power which time and custom seemed to
hallow; they appealed to the loyalty of the subject; they dwelt upon the dangers which came
with innovation; they denounced the ambition of the patriot leaders; they reminded the people
of the power of Great Britain--a power to save or to destroy--which had so frequently and so
successfully been exerted in their behalf in their numerous and bloody conflicts with the Indians,
and which might be brought, with such fearful emphasis, upon their own heads. They reminded
the people that the Indians were not exterminated, that they still hung in numerous hordes
about the frontiers, and that it needed but a single word from the Crown, to bring them, once
more, with tomahawk and scalping-knife, upon their defenceless homes. Already, indeed, had
the emissaries of Great Britain taken measures to this end. The savage was already shaking
off his apathy, scenting the carnage from afar, and making ready for the onset. The assurance,
that such was the case, was doing the work of numerous arguments among the timid and the exposed.
Such were the suggestions, appealing equally to their fears and gratitude, which the leading
loyalists addressed to the people. They were supported by other suggestions, scarcely less
potent, which naturally flowed from their own thoughts. Why should they dare the conflict with
Great Britain? There was no such reason for it as in the case of the northern colonies. They
had known her chiefly by benefactions; they did not conflict with her in shipping or in manufactures;
and the arguments for discontent and resistance, as urged by the patriot leaders, did not reach
them with sufficient force. What was the tax on tea, of which they drank little, and the duty
on stamps, when they had but little need for legal papers? And why should not taxes follow
protection, which Great Britain had not often withheld in the need of a favorite colony, as
South Carolina had unquestionably been? Let us do justice to this people. The loyalists--or,
as they were more commonly called, and as we shall hereafter be compelled to call them, the
Tories--were, probably, in the majority of cases, governed by principle, by a firm and settled
conviction, after deliberate examination of the case. That they might have thought otherwise,
nay, would gradually have adopted the opinions of the patriots, is not improbable, had more
time been allowed them, and had the course of the latter been more indulgent and considerate.
Unfortunately, this was not the case; and the desire to coerce where they could not easily
convince, had the effect of making a determined and deadly, out of a doubtful foe. This was
terribly proved by the after history. To this cause we may ascribe, in some degree, the terrors
of that sanguinary strife, in which, to use the language of a distinguished officer, they "pursued
each other rather like wild beasts than men."* We shall see something of this history as we
proceed in ours.

     * Letter of General Greene.  See Johnson's Greene.--

There was yet another circumstance which tended, in some degree, to give courage to the Tories.
It was the somewhat temporizing policy of the patriots. There was still a feeling of doubt,
a hesitancy, on the part of the latter, as the prospects grew stronger of a final breach with
Great Britain. There were many who still clung to the hope that the differences of the two
nations might yet be reconciled; and though the means of such reconciliation did not make themselves
obvious, they yet fondly cherished the conviction that something might turn up, at the last
moment, to prevent the absolute necessity of bloodshed. This portion of the patriots necessarily
influenced the rest; those who, looking beyond the moment, saw the true issue, and properly
regarded the declared objects of difference as pretexts which must suffice when the better
reasons might not be expressed. They dared not openly broach the idea of national independence,
which, there is very little question that the noblest of the American patriots everywhere,
though secretly, entertained from the beginning. The people were not prepared for such a revelation--such
a condition; and appearances were still to be maintained. Their proceedings, accordingly, still
wore, however loosely, a pacific aspect. Though actively preparing for war, the professions
of the patriots declared their measures to be precautionary only--a refuge, an alternative,
in the event of greater oppression. They still spoke the language of loyalty, still dealt in
vague assurances of devotion to the crown. But such professions deceived nobody, and least
of all the loyalists. They derived courage from the reluctance of the patriots to embark in
a struggle, for the fruits of which, if successful, they evidently longed. They were not less
active--nay, in the interior, they were even more active--than their opponents; had already
taken arms, and gained advantages, which nothing but decisive movements on the part of the
people along the seaboard could possibly induce them to forego. This necessity was apparent
for other reasons. In consequence of the temporizing policy already mentioned, the crown was
still in possession of most of the shows of power in and about Charleston. The royal governor
was still in the city, and in some degree exerting his authority. Fort Johnson, on James' Island,
was suffered to remain in the hands of the king's troops for more than three months after the
Provincial Congress had ordered a levy of troops, and had resolved on taking up arms. Two British
armed vessels, the Tamar and Cherokee, lay in Rebellion Roads, opposite Sullivan's Island.
This force was quite sufficient, under existing circumstances, to have destroyed the town.
But the royal leaders were not prepared for this issue; they shared the reluctance of the patriots
to begin a conflict, the issues of which were so extreme. Their policy, like that of the patriots--influencing
it, and possibly influenced by it--was equally halting and indecisive. It was sufficiently
satisfactory if, by the presence of such a force, the citizens should be overawed and kept
from action.

This condition of things could not continue. The very nature of the movement was adverse to
indecision. It needed but a first step--a first stroke--and this was to be taken by the patriots.
They brooked impatiently the humiliating position in which the city stood, controlled by an
inferior enemy; and it was resolved that Fort Johnson should be subdued. It was on this occasion
that Marion first drew his sword against the British. He was one of those Captains who, with
their companies, were dispatched on this expedition. The command was given to Col. Moultrie.
A strong resistance was expected, as, but a short time before, the garrison had been reinforced
from the armed vessels. At midnight on the fourteenth of September, 1775, the detachment crossed
to James' Island. The disembarkation was effected with delay and difficulty, occasioned by
the inadequate size and number of the boats. The forlorn hope, consisting of a detachment from
the grenadiers of Capt. Pinckney, joined by the Cadets, and led by Lieut. Mouatt, were to scale
the walls of the fort on its south bastion; Col. Moultrie with the rest of Pinckney's Grenadiers,
and Marion's Light Infantry, were to enter or force the gates over the ravelin; while Capt.
Elliott, with his grenadiers, penetrated the lower battery over the left flank. It was broad
daylight before the landing was effected; and on making the assault they were surprised by
an easy victory. The fort was abandoned. The enemy had probably been apprised of the attack.
A detachment from the ships had landed some hours before--had dismantled the fort, dismounted
the cannon, and withdrawn the garrison; retreating in safety to the ships. A gunner and three
men only, fell into the hands of the provincials. The very day that this event occurred, Lord
William Campbell, the Governor, fled to the Tamar sloop of war. His flight was no doubt hastened
by a proceeding so decisive. That evening he dispatched his secretary to Fort Johnson, which
he was not permitted to enter. He was met at the water-side by Capt. Pinckney, of whom he demanded,
in the name of the Governor, by what authority he had taken and held possession of the fortress.
The answer to this demand brought up the vessels of war, which, on the seventeenth of September,
presented themselves within point blank shot of the fort. Up to this time, but three of the
dismantled cannon had been remounted and put in order for action. With these, the provincials
prepared for battle, relying, however, less upon their cannon than upon their ability to oppose
the landing of any body of men. But the demonstration of the squadron was without fruits. They
hauled off without a shot, and resumed their former less offensive position.

Here, however, the popular leaders were not disposed to suffer them to remain. Still they hesitated
at coming to blows. They adopted a middle course, which, in such cases, is generally the worst.
They ordered that the ships should not be victualled or supplied with water from the city,
except from day to day. This produced a threat from Captain Thornborough that, unless supplied
as before, he should prevent the ingress, or departure, of any vessel from the harbor. A menace
of this kind, to have been properly met, should have been answered from the eighteen pounders
of Fort Johnson. And, but for the reluctance of several highly esteemed patriots, such would
have been the mode of answer. This temporizing policy continued to prevail until the 9th November,
1775, when the Provincial Congress resolved, "by every military operation, to oppose the passage
of any British Armament." Such were the orders issued to the officer commanding at Fort Johnson.
This fort had now been in possession of the popular party for nearly two months. It was in
some degree prepared for use. It was well manned with a portion of those brave fellows who
afterwards fought the good fight of Fort Sullivan. They would have done as good service here.
The resolution of the Province once adopted, it was communicated as well to the commanders
of the British vessels, as to the officers of the fort. There was still an open passage, through
Hog-Island channel, by which the British vessels might approach the town without incurring
any danger from the Fort. This passage it was determined to obstruct; and an armed schooner,
called the Defence, fitted up for the occasion, was ordered to cover and protect a party which
was employed to sink a number of hulks in that narrow strait. This drew upon them the fire
of the British. It was returned by the "Defence", but with little injury to either side. The
garrison at Fort Johnson endeavored to take part in this little action, but the distance was
too great for any decisive results from its fire. Some of the shots took effect, but after
a few rounds the fire was discontinued. Meanwhile, the alarm was beat in Charleston, where
the troops stood to their arms, and every heart throbbed with the expectation of a close and
bloody fight. But the time was not yet. Indecisive in itself, this brief combat was of great
importance in one point of view. It was the beginning of the game. The blow for which all parties
had been waiting, was now fairly struck. The sword had been drawn from the scabbard, not again
to be sheathed, till the struggle was concluded. The local Congress proceeded vigorously. Ships
were impressed for the purpose of war, new troops were enlisted and armed, and bills of credit
issued. The British vessels, meanwhile, became more than ever troublesome, and, carrying out
the menace of Captain Thornborough, proceeded to the seizure of all vessels within their reach,
whether going from or returning to the port. It became necessary to drive them from the roadstead.
To effect this, Col. Moultrie, with a party of newly raised Provincials and the Charleston
Artillery, took post on Haddrill's Point, and, mounting a few pieces of heavy artillery, opened
upon them with a well-directed fire, which drove them out to sea. This step was followed by
one of preparation. The fortifications at Fort Johnson and Haddrill's Point were completed--the
city was fortified--a new fort was raised on James', and another begun on Sullivan's Island.
The militia were diligently trained, the provincial troops augmented and disciplined, and all
means within the power of the Colony were put in requisition to prepare it for defence. Among
other preparations, a military post was established at the town of Dorchester, and strongly
fortified. This post was nearly at the head of navigation, on Ashley river, about twenty miles
from Charleston. Though now utterly desolate, Dorchester was, prior to the Revolution, a town
of considerable population and importance. Its abandonment may be ascribed to the Revolution,
during which it was maintained as a military post by the Americans or British. To this place
the public stores and records were in great part transferred from Charleston, as to a place
of safe-keeping. The command was given to Marion. While in this command we do not find the
occurrence of any events of importance. A couple of his original letters, dated from this post,
lie before us. They refer only to ordinary events, but contain some expressions which denote
the ardency of his patriotism, and the disappointments to which it was not unfrequently subjected
in consequence of the apathy of others. Referring to the reluctance shown by many, of whom
the utmost patriotism was expected, to rally around the flag of the country, he exclaims--in
a partial perversion of Scripture language, but without irreverence, "Tell this not in the
streets of Charleston," &c.

From this post Marion was removed to Charleston, very probably at his own solicitation. Events
were ripening in that quarter, of a nature calculated to give becoming employment to a mind
always active, and desiring nothing more than to serve his country. From Charleston, he was
dispatched to Fort Johnson, where he was busily employed in completing the defences of that
place. Weems preserves an anecdote of him, while in command of this fort, in January, 1776,
which pleasantly describes the quiet and not unamiable sort of humor in which Marion was frequently
said to indulge. While exceedingly busy in his preparations for defence, there came to him
a thoughtless young officer, who loved the cockpit much better than consisted entirely with
his duties. Christmas and New Year's Holidays were famous at that early period, for the exercise
of this cruel sport in some parts of Carolina. To obtain leave of absence, however, on any
holiday pretence, the young officer very well knew was impossible. Approaching his Commander
with a lie in his mouth, he obtained the desired permission, in order to receive the last blessing
of a dying father; and, exulting in the unworthy artifice, he hurried to Dorchester, which,
on that occasion, was to be the scene of his recreation. During his absence, Marion arrived
at the truth of the story, but said nothing. When the youth returned, which he did after two
weeks' absence, he proceeded to the marquee of his Commander, to report himself, and began
a tedious apology for having stayed, so long. Marion gently interrupted him, and, with a smile,
in the presence of all the officers, replied--"Never mind it, Lieutenant--there's no harm done--we
never missed you." The effect of this sarcasm is said to have been admirable; and to have resulted
in the complete reform of the offender, who, from being a trifling, purposeless, and unscrupulous
young man, grew considerate equally of his duties and his word, and, by a career of industry,
sobriety and modesty, made ample amends, in future days, for all the errors of the past.

With the formation of new regiments, under the resolves of the Council of Safety, Marion was
promoted to a Majority. This appointment materially enlarged the sphere of his duties. But
he was one of those remarkable men, who, without pretension, prove themselves equal to any
trust which may be imposed upon them. Without the presence of an actual enemy, he addressed
himself to the task of preparing his men for the encounter with them. He was constantly on
parade, at the drill, closely engaged in the work of training, in which business, while very
gentle, he was very exact; and, in such a degree had he improved the officers and men immediately
under his charge, that they were very soon regarded as a model for all the rest. He was called
the "architect of the Second Regiment". Weems, speaking for Col. Horry, says, "Indeed, I am
not afraid to say that Marion was the ARCHITECT of the Second Regiment, and laid the foundation
of that excellent discipline and confidence in themselves, which gained them such reputation
whenever they were brought to face their enemies." The value of this training was very soon
to be subjected to the most thorough of all possible tests. He was ordered with his Regiment,
under command of Col. Wm. Moultrie, to take post at Fort Sullivan, on the island of that name,
which stands at the entrance of Charleston harbor, and within point blank shot of the channel.
The difficulties and deficiencies of this post, furnished some admirable preparatory lessons
for the great conflict which was to follow. They imposed the necessity of diligent industry
and hard labor, equally on men and soldiers. This was one of the famous schools of Roman discipline.
Fort Sullivan, better known as Fort Moultrie--was yet to be built. When the Second Regiment
entered it, it was little more than an outline. Its shape was described upon the sand, and
the palmetto rafts lay around it, waiting to be moulded into form. The structure was an inartificial
one--a simple wall, behind which young beginners might train guns to do mischief to a veteran
enemy in front. Its form was square, with a bastion at each angle, sufficiently large, when
finished, to cover a thousand men. It was built of logs, laid one upon another in parallel
rows, at a distance of sixteen feet, bound together at frequent intervals with timber, dovetailed
and bolted into the logs. The spaces between were filled up with sand. The merlons were walled
entirely by palmetto logs, notched into one another at the angles, well bolted together and
strengthened with pieces of massy timber. Such was the plan of the work; but, with all the
diligence of the officers, and all the industry of the men, it remained unfinished at the perilous
moment when a powerful British fleet appeared before its walls. The defence was confided to
Col. Moultrie. The force under his command was four hundred and thirty-five men, rank and file,
comprising four hundred and thirteen of the Second Regiment of Infantry, and twenty-two of
the Fourth Regiment of Artillery. The whole number of cannon mounted on the fortress was thirty-one,
of these, nine were French twenty-sixes; six English eighteens; nine twelve and seven nine
pounders.*

     * Weems, in his Life of Marion, represents the cannon as
     made up principally of TWENTY-FOUR and THIRTY-SIX pounders;
     but the official accounts are as I have given them.  See
     Drayton's Memoirs, vol. 2, pp. 290-1.--

General Charles Lee, who had been dispatched by the Continental Congress, to take command of
the Army of the South, would have abandoned the fortress even before the appearance of the
enemy. He was unwilling, in such a position, to abide the conflict. He seems, naturally enough
for an officer brought up in a British Army, to have had an overweening veneration for a British
fleet, in which it is fortunate for the country that the Carolinians did not share. In the
unfinished condition of the fort, which really presented little more than a front towards the
sea, his apprehensions were justifiable, and, could the fort have been enfiladed, as the British
designed, it certainly would have been untenable. From the moment of his arrival, to the very
moment when the action was raging, his chief solicitude seems to have been to ensure the defenders
of the fortress a safe retreat. It is to their immortal honor that this mortifying measure
was unnecessary.

On the 20th of June, 1776, a day ever memorable in the annals of Carolina, the British ships
of war, nine in number,*1* commanded by Sir Peter Parker, drew up abreast of the fort, let
go their anchors, with springs upon their cables, and commenced a terrible bombardment. The
famous battle which followed makes one of the brightest pages in our history. Its events, however,
are too generally known to make it necessary that we should dwell upon them here. A few, however,
belong properly and especially to our pages. The subject of this memoir was a conspicuous sharer
in its dangers and in its honors. The fire of the enemy was promptly answered, and with such
efficiency of aim as to be long remembered by the survivors. Having but five thousand pounds
of powder, with which to maintain a conflict that raged for eleven hours, with unabated violence,
it became necessary, not only that the discharge from the fort should be timed, but that every
shot should be made to do execution. In order to do this the guns were trained by the field-officers
in person; hence, perhaps, the terrible fatality of their fire. The Bristol, 50 gun ship, Commodore
Sir Peter Parker, lost 44 men killed and thirty*2* wounded. Sir Peter himself lost an arm.
The Experiment, another 50 gun ship, had 57 killed and 30 wounded.*3* To these two vessels
in particular, the attention of the fort was directed. The words, passed along the line by
officers and men, were--"Look to the Commodore--look to the fifty gun ships."*4* The smaller
vessels suffered comparatively little. Their loss of men was small. The injury to the vessels
themselves was greater, and one of them, the Acteon, run aground, and was subsequently burnt.
The Carolinians lost but twelve men killed and twice that number wounded. One of the former
was the brave fellow Macdonald, of whom we have already spoken. When borne from the embrasure
where he received his mortal wound, he cried out to those around him--"Do not give up--you
are fighting for liberty and country." The want of powder was severely felt. But for this,
judging from the effects of the fire from the fort, the British Commodore must have struck,
or his fleet must have been destroyed. So slow, at one time, were the discharges--so great
the interval of time between them,--that the British were of opinion that the place was abandoned.
But a new supply of powder was obtained by Marion, who, with a small party, leaving the fort,
proceeded to the armed schooner Defence, lying in Stop Gap Creek, and seized upon her powder,
by which the fire was kept up until a supply of five hundred weight was received from the city.*5*
This caused a renewal of the conflict in all its fury. The garrison fought with a coolness
which would have done honor to veterans. The day was very warm, and the men partially stripped
to it. Moultrie says, "When the action begun (it being a warm day), some of the men took off
their coats and threw them upon the top of the merlons. I saw a shot take one of them and throw
it into a small tree behind the platform. It was noticed by our men, and they cried out, "look
at the coat!" A little incident that speaks volumes for their coolness. Moultrie himself and
several of his officers smoked their pipes during the action, only removing them when it became
necessary to issue orders. In the hottest fire of the battle the flag of the fort was shot
away, and fell without the fort. Jasper, with whom we have already brought the reader acquainted
as one of Marion's men, instantly sprang after it upon the beach, between the ramparts and
the enemy, and binding it to a sponge staff, restored it to its place, and succeeded in regaining
his own in safety. We shall hear more hereafter, of this gallant fellow.*6* The coolness--nay
the cavalier indifference--displayed by the Carolinians throughout the combat, is not its least
remarkable feature. There is something chivalric in such deportment, which speaks for larger
courage than belongs to ordinary valor. Mere bull-dog resolution and endurance is here lifted,
by a generous ardor of soul, into something other than a passive virtue. The elasticity of
spirit which it shows might be trained to any performance within the compass of human endowment.

     *1* Two ships of fifty guns; five of twenty-eight; 1 of
     twenty-six and a bomb-vessel.  Moultrie, vol. 1 pp. 174-5.

     *2* Weems says 100. *3* British account.

     *4* Moultrie, Memoirs, Vol. 1, NOTE, p. 177.

     *5* MS. Life of Brig.-Gen. Peter Horry, p. 21.

     *6* Gen. Horry (then a captain) thus relates the incident:
     "I commanded an eighteen pounder in the left wing of the
     fort. Above my gun on the rampart, was a large American flag
     hung on a very high mast, formerly of a ship; the men of war
     directing their fire thereat, it was, from their shot, so
     wounded, as to fall, with the colors, over the fort.
     Sergeant Jasper of the Grenadiers leapt over the ramparts,
     and deliberately walked the whole length of the fort, until
     he came to the colors on the extremity of the left, when he
     cut off the same from the mast, and called to me for a
     sponge staff, and with a thick cord tied on the colors and
     stuck the staff on the rampart in the sand. The Sergeant
     fortunately received no hurt, though exposed for a
     considerable time, to the enemy's fire.  Governor Rutledge
     [after the battle], as a reward, took his small sword from
     his side, and in presence of many officers, presented it to
     Sergeant Jasper, telling him to wear it in remembrance of
     the 28th June, and in remembrance of him.  He also offered
     Jasper a Lieutenant's commission, but as he could neither
     read nor write, he modestly refused to accept it, saying,
     'he was not fit to keep officers' company, being only bred a
     Sergeant.'"--MS. Life of Brig.-Gen. Peter Horry, pp. 19-
     20.--

Tradition ascribes to the hand and eye of Marion, the terrible effect of the last shot which
was fired on this bloody day. It was aimed at the Commodore's ship, which had already received
something more than her due share of the attention of the fort. This shot, penetrating the
cabin of the vessel, cut down two young officers who were drinking, we may suppose, to their
fortunate escape from a conflict which seemed already over--then ranging forward, swept three
sailors from the maindeck into eternity, and finally buried itself in the bosom of the sea.
This curious particular was derived from five sailors who deserted from the fleet that very night.

Chapter 6.

     1777-8-9.
     From the Battle of Fort Moultrie to that of Savannah--
     Anecdote of Jasper--His Death.

The battle of Fort Sullivan was of immense importance, not merely to Carolina, but to all the
confederated colonies. It saved the former, for three years, from the calamities of invasion;
a respite of the last value to a country so greatly divided in public feeling and opinion.
The battle preceded the declaration of Independence, and, though not generally known to have
taken place before that decisive measure was resolved upon, it came seasonably to confirm the
patriots in those principles which they had so solemnly and recently avowed. Its farther effect
was to dissipate that spell of invincibility, which, in the minds of the Americans, seemed
to hover about a British armament;--to heighten the courage of the militia, and to convince
the most sceptical, that it needed only confidence and practice, to make the American people
as good soldiers as any in the world. The Carolina riflemen were not a little elated to discover
that they could handle twenty-six pounders as efficiently as the smaller implements of death,
to which their hands were better accustomed. To the defenders of the fortress, their victory
brought imperishable laurels. They had shown the courage and the skill of veterans, and their
countrymen gloried in the reputation in which they necessarily shared. Moultrie received the
thanks of Congress, of the Commander-in-Chief, and of his fellow citizens. The fort was thenceforth
called by his name, and he was made a Brigadier-General. His Major, Marion, necessarily had
his share in these public honors, and was raised by Congress to the rank of Lieut.-Colonel
in the regular service. Two days after the battle, General Lee reviewed the garrison at Fort
Moultrie, and thanked them "for their gallant defence of the fort against a fleet of eight
men-of-war and a bomb, during a cannonade of eleven hours, and a bombardment of seven." At
the same time, Mrs. Barnard Elliott presented an elegant pair of embroidered colors to the
Second Regiment, with a brief address, in which she expressed her conviction that they would
"stand by them as long as they can wave in the air of liberty." It was in fulfilling the pledge
made by General Moultrie, on this occasion, in behalf of the regiment, that the brave Jasper
lost his life before the walls of Savannah.

The three years' respite from the horrors of war, which this victory secured to Carolina, was
not, however, left unemployed by her citizen soldiery. The progress of events around them kept
their services in constant requisition. While a part of them, in the interior, were compelled
to take arms against the Cherokee Indians, the troops of the lower country were required against
the Tories in Florida and Georgia. Governor Tonyn of the former, an active loyalist, proved
a formidable annoyance to the patriots of the latter province. Florida, under his administration,
was the secure refuge and certain retreat for all the malcontents and outlaws of the neighboring
colonies. He gave them ample encouragement, put arms into their hands, and even issued letters
of marque against the property of the colonists, in anticipation of the act for that purpose,
in the British parliament. General Lee marched upon Florida with the Virginia and North Carolina
troops. He was subsequently joined by those of South Carolina; but, owing to his own ill-advised
and improvident movements, the expedition was a total failure.* This result necessarily gave
encouragement to the Tories; and, though in too small numbers to effect any important objects
without the cooperation of a British force, they were yet sufficiently active to invite the
presence of one. They formed themselves into little squads, and, moving through the country
with celerity, pursued their marauding habits at little risk, as they sought only unsuspecting
neighborhoods, and promptly fled to the fastnesses of Florida on the approach of danger. To
direct and properly avail themselves of these parties, the British commanders in America addressed
their attention to Georgia. The infancy of that colony necessarily led them to hope for an
easy conquest in attempting it. In February, 1777, General Howe, then commanding the troops
in North Carolina and Georgia, was advised of the approach of Colonel Fuser, to the invasion
of Georgia. He hurried on immediately to prepare Savannah for defence; while Marion, with a
force of 600 men, in several vessels, provided with cannon and ammunition, was dispatched,
by the inland passage, to his assistance. Marion left Charleston on the 28th of February, but
his approach had no farther effect than to precipitate the flight of the enemy, who, meeting
with a stout opposition from Colonel Elbert, at Ogechee ferry, had already desisted from farther
advance. The British attempts on Georgia were deferred to a later period. But the loyalists
were busy, particularly that portion of them, which took the name of Scopholites, after one
Scophol, a militia Colonel, whom Moultrie describes as an "illiterate, stupid, noisy blockhead".
He proved not the less troublesome because of his stupidity.

     * Drayton's Memoirs, vol. 2, p. 336.--

Marion was more or less employed during this period, in various situations. He was never unemployed.
We find him at length in command of the fort which he had formerly contributed to defend and
render famous. He was placed in charge of the garrison at Fort Moultrie. The value of this
fort was estimated rather according to its celebrity, than its real usefulness. Subsequent
events have shown that its capacity was not great in retarding the approach of an enemy's fleet
to the city. It was the error of Sir Peter Parker--obeying an old but exploded military maxim,
not to leave an armed post of the enemy in his rear--to pause before a fortress, the conquest
of which could in no wise contribute to his success,--and defeat before which, must necessarily
endanger his final objects. It was still the impression of the Carolinians that Fort Moultrie
must be assailed as a preliminary step to the conquest of Charleston, and the post, as one
of the highest honor and danger, was conferred upon Marion.* It was not known, indeed, at what
moment the gallantry of the garrison might be put to the proof. The British were known to be
making large marine and military preparations at New York, intended, as it was generally understood,
for the south. Charleston or Savannah, were supposed indifferently to be the places of its
destination. It might be very well supposed that the enemy would seek, at the former place,
to recover those honors of war of which its gallant defenders had deprived him.

     * When the British under Prevost, were in possession of the
     neighboring islands, Moultrie writes, "we were apprehensive
     the enemy would attempt to surprise Fort Moultrie; we,
     therefore, always kept a strong garrison there under General
     Marion."--

But, any doubt as to the destination of the British fleet was soon removed. In December, 1778,
thirty-seven sail appeared before Savannah, and four thousand British regulars were disembarked.
The American force left in defence of Savannah was a feeble one, of six or seven hundred men,
under General Howe. General Howe was but little of a soldier. Instead of withdrawing this force,
he suffered it to be sacrificed. Badly posted, he was surprised, and his troops beaten and
dispersed with little difficulty. Savannah fell at once into the hands of the enemy, and the
whole colony very shortly after. General Prevost was in command of the British. Opposed to
him was Major-General Lincoln, of the Continental army. While Prevost occupied the posts of
Savannah, Ebenezer, Abercorn, and other places, he was active in pushing select parties forward
to Augusta, and other commanding points in the interior. The force under Lincoln did not enable
him to offer any active opposition to their progress. His headquarters were at Purysburg, on
the Savannah river, but a few miles from Abercorn, where Colonel Campbell lay with the main
body of the enemy. General Ashe, of the Americans, occupied the post at Brier Creek, and, thus
placed, the opposing commanders seemed disposed for a while to rest upon their arms, waiting
events and reinforcements.

It was while the second South Carolina regiment lay at Purysburg, that an adventure occurred,
which has so often been repeated in connection with the name and life of Marion, that we should
scarcely be excused from introducing it here, as properly in place in this memoir. Weems asserts
that Marion was present at this time with his regiment at Purysburg. It is impossible to say
whether he was or not. It is not improbable that he was with his regiment, and yet the weight
of evidence inclines us to the opinion that he was still at Fort Moultrie. It is not unlikely,
however, that, when the direction of the British fleet was known, and it was ascertained that
Savannah and not Charleston was its object, he immediately joined his regiment at Purysburg,
leaving Fort Moultrie in the charge of some less distinguished officer. At all events the point
is not of importance to the anecdote we have to relate. Personally, Marion had nothing to do
with it. It was only because the actors in the adventure belonged to his regiment, and were
of "Marion's men", that tradition has insisted on associating his name with theirs. It is not
for us to have it otherwise. The reader is already somewhat acquainted with the name of William
Jasper--perhaps Sergeant Jasper is the better known. This brave man possessed remarkable talents
for a scout. He could wear all disguises with admirable ease and dexterity. Garden styles him
"a perfect Proteus".* He was equally remarkable for his strategy as for his bravery; and his
nobleness and generosity were, quite as much as these, the distinguishing traits of his character.
Such was the confidence in his fidelity and skill that a roving commission was granted him,
with liberty to pick his associates from the Brigade. Of these he seldom chose more than six.
"He often went out," says Moultrie, "and returned with prisoners, before I knew that he was
gone. I have known of his catching a party that was looking for him. He has told me that he
could have killed single men several times, but he would not; he would rather let them get
off. He went into the British lines at Savannah, as a deserter, complaining, at the same time,
of our ill-usage of him; he was gladly received (they having heard of his character) and caressed
by them. He stayed eight days, and after informing himself well of their strength, situation
and intentions, he returned to us again; but that game he could not play a second time. With
his little party he was always hovering about the enemy's camp, and was frequently bringing
in prisoners."** We have seen what reason was alleged by this brave fellow for not accepting
the commission tendered to him by Governor Rutledge, for his gallantry in the battle of Fort
Moultrie. The nature of his services was no less a reason why he should reject the commission.
The fact that he seldom allowed himself a command of more than six men declared sufficiently
the degree of authority to which he thought his talents were entitled.

     * "He was a perfect Proteus, in ability to alter his
     appearance; perpetually entering the camp of the enemy,
     without detection, and invariably returning to his own, with
     soldiers he had seduced, or prisoners he had captured."

     ** Moultrie's Mem., vol. 2, p. 24.--

It was while in the exercise of his roving privileges that Jasper prepared to visit the post
of the enemy at Ebenezer. At this post he had a brother, who held the same rank in the British
service, that he held in the American. This instance was quite too common in the history of
the period and country, to occasion much surprise, or cause any suspicion of the integrity
of either party. We have already considered the causes for this melancholy difference of individual
sentiment in the country, and need not dwell upon them here. William Jasper loved his brother
and wished to see him: it is very certain, at the same time, that he did not deny himself the
privilege of seeing all around him. The Tory was alarmed at William's appearance in the British
camp, but the other quieted his fears, by representing himself as no longer an American soldier.
He checked the joy which this declaration excited in his brother's mind, by assuring him that,
though he found little encouragement in fighting for his country, "he had not the heart to
fight against her." Our scout lingered for two or three days in the British camp, and then,
by a 'detour', regained that of the Americans; reporting to his Commander all that he had seen.
He was encouraged to repeat his visit a few weeks after, but this time he took with him a comrade,
one Sergeant Newton, a fellow quite as brave in spirit, and strong in body as himself. Here
he was again well received by his brother, who entertained the guests kindly for several days.
Meanwhile, a small party of Americans were brought into Ebenezer as captives, over whom hung
the danger of "short shrift and sudden cord". They were on their way to Savannah for trial.
They had taken arms with the British, as hundreds more had done, when the country was deemed
reconquered; but, on the approach of the American army, had rejoined their countrymen, and
were now once more at the mercy of the power with which they had broken faith. "It will go
hard with them," said the Tory Jasper to his Whig brother; but the secret comment of the other
was, "it shall go hard with me first." There was a woman, the wife of one of the prisoners,
who, with her child, kept them company. William Jasper and his friend were touched by the spectacle
of their distress; and they conferred together, as soon as they were alone, as to the possibility
of rescuing them. Their plan was soon adopted. It was a simple one, such as naturally suggests
itself to a hardy and magnanimous character. The prisoners had scarcely left the post for Savannah,
under a guard of eight men, a sergeant and corporal, when they took leave of their host, and
set forth also, though in a different direction from the guard. Changing their course when
secure from observation, they stretched across the country and followed the footsteps of the
unhappy captives. But it was only in the pursuit that they became truly conscious of the difficulty,
nay, seeming impossibility, of effecting their object. The guard was armed, and ten in number;
they but two and weaponless. Hopeless, they nevertheless followed on. Two miles from Savannah
there is a famous spring, the waters of which are well known to travellers. The conjecture
that the guard might stop there, with the prisoners, for refreshment, suggested itself to our
companions; here, opportunities might occur for the rescue, which had nowhere before presented
themselves. Taking an obscure path with which they were familiar, which led them to the spot
before the enemy could arrive, they placed themselves in ambush in the immediate neighborhood
of the spring. They had not long to wait. Their conjecture proved correct. The guard was halted
on the road opposite the spring. The corporal with four men conducted the captives to the water,
while the sergeant, with the remainder of his force, having made them ground their arms near
the road, brought up the rear. The prisoners threw themselves upon the earth--the woman and
her child, near its father. Little did any of them dream that deliverance was at hand. The
child fell asleep in the mother's lap. Two of the armed men kept guard, but we may suppose
with little caution. What had they to apprehend, within sight of a walled town in the possession
of their friends? Two others approached the spring, in order to bring water to the prisoners.
Resting their muskets against a tree they proceeded to fill their canteens. At this moment
Jasper gave the signal to his comrade. In an instant the muskets were in their hands. In another,
they had shot down the two soldiers upon duty; then clubbing their weapons, they rushed out
upon the astonished enemy, and felling their first opponents each at a blow, they succeeded
in obtaining possession of the loaded muskets. This decided the conflict, which was over in
a few minutes. The surviving guard yielded themselves to mercy before the presented weapons.
Such an achievement could only be successful from its audacity and the operation of circumstances.
The very proximity of Savannah increased the chances of success. But for this the guard would
have taken better precautions. None were taken. The prompt valor, the bold decision, the cool
calculation of the instant, were the essential elements which secured success. The work of
our young heroes was not done imperfectly. The prisoners were quickly released, the arms of
the captured British put into their hands, and, hurrying away from the spot which they have
crowned with a local celebrity not soon to be forgotten, they crossed the Savannah in safety
with their friends and foes. This is not the last achievement of the brave Jasper which we
shall have occasion to record. The next, however, though not less distinguished by success,
was unhappily written in his own blood.

The campaign which followed was distinguished by several vicissitudes, but the general result
was the weakening and dispiriting of the American forces. Brigadier General Ashe was surprised
in his camp and utterly defeated, and the British army not only penetrated into Georgia, but
made its appearance at Beaufort in South Carolina. Here it was met by Moultrie in a spirited
encounter, which resulted in a drawn battle. Meanwhile, General Lincoln found the militia refractory.
They refused to submit to the articles of war, and desired to serve only under those laws by
which the militia was governed. Chagrined with this resistance, Lincoln transferred the militia
to Moultrie, and, at the head of about 2000 troops of the regular service, he marched up the
country to Augusta, proposing by this course to circumscribe the progress of the enemy in that
quarter. Taking advantage of this movement, by which the regular troops were withdrawn from
the seaboard, the British General, Prevost, immediately crossed the Savannah with the intention
of surprising Moultrie, who, with 1200 militia-men, lay at Black Swamp. But Moultrie, advised
of his enemy, retired to Coosawhatchie, where he placed his rear guard; his headquarters being
pitched on the hill, east of Tuliffinnee, two miles in advance, and on the route to Charleston.
Here the rear-guard, under Colonel Laurens, engaged the enemy's advance, and was driven before
it. Moultrie gradually retired as Prevost advanced, and the contest which followed between
the two, seemed to be which should reach Charleston first. The defenceless condition of that
city was known to the British General, whose object was to take it by 'coup de main'. Moultrie
erred in not making continued fight in the swamps and strong passes, the thick forests and
intricate defiles, which were numerous along the route of the pursuing army. His policy seems
to have been dictated by an undue estimate of the value of the city, and the importance of
its safety to the state. But for this, even an army so much inferior as his, could have effectually
checked the enemy long before the city could have been reached. Moultrie continued in advance
of Prevost, and reached Charleston a few hours before him; just in season to establish something
like order, and put the place in a tolerable state of defence. The fire from the lines arrested
the British advance. The place was summoned, and defiance returned. Night followed, and the
next morning the enemy had disappeared. His object had been surprise. He was unprepared for
the assault, having no heavy artillery, and his departure was hastened by intercepted advices
from Lincoln and Governor Rutledge, which announced to the garrison the approach of the regular
troops and the country militia. Prevost retired to the neighboring islands, and established
himself in a strong fort at Stono ferry. Here he was attacked by General Lincoln in a spirited
but unsuccessful affair, in which the latter was compelled to retreat. The attack of Lincoln
was followed by one of Moultrie, in galleys. The situation of the British became unpleasant,
and they did not wait a repetition of these assaults, but retreated along the chain of islands
on the coast, until they reached Beaufort and Savannah. Both of these places they maintained;
the latter with their main army, the former with a strong body of troops, apart from their
sick, wounded and convalescent. Here they were watched by General Lincoln, in a camp of observation
at Sheldon, until the appearance of a French fleet on the coast led to renewed activity, and
hopes, on the part of the Americans, which were destined to bitter disappointment.

Marion was certainly with his regiment at Sheldon, and when it became probable that there was
some prospect of battle, we find him at Fort Moultrie, when Prevost was in possession of the
contiguous islands. But a junction of the French and American forces, necessarily compelling
the concentration of the whole of the southern invading army at Savannah, lessened the necessity
of his remaining at a post which stood in no manner of danger.

Early in September, 1779, the French admiral, Count D'Estaign, with a fleet of twenty sail,
appeared upon the coast. As soon as this was certainly known, General Lincoln put his army
in motion for Savannah. But the French forces had disembarked before his arrival, and the impatience
and imprudence of their admiral did not suffer him to wait the coming of the American. He was
a rash man, and, as it appears, on bad terms with his subordinate officers, who were, indeed,
not subordinate.* He proceeded to summon the place. The answer to his demand was, a request
of twenty-four hours for consideration. By a singular error of judgment the French admiral
granted the time required. His only hope had been in a 'coup de main'. He had neither the time
nor the material necessary for regular approaches; nor, had he acted decisively, do these seem
to have been at all necessary. The place was not tenable at the period of his first summons.
The prompt energies of the British commander soon made it so. Instead of considering, he consumed
the twenty-four hours in working. The arrival of Lieutenant-Colonel Cruger, with a small command,
from Sunbury, and the force of Lieutenant-Colonel Maitland, from Beaufort, soon put the fortress
in such a condition of defence as to enable its commander to return his defiance to the renewed
summons of the combined armies. There seems to have been but one opinion among the Americans
as to the mistake of D'Estaign, in granting the required indulgence. Weems, speaking for General
Horry, says, "I never beheld Marion in so great a passion. I was actually afraid he would have
broken out on General Lincoln. 'My God!' he exclaimed, 'who ever heard of anything like this
before? First allow an enemy to entrench, and then fight him! See the destruction brought upon
the British at Bunker's Hill--yet our troops there were only militia; raw, half-armed clodhoppers,
and not a mortar, or carronade, not even a swivel--only their ducking-guns! What, then, are
we to expect from regulars, completely armed, with a choice train of artillery, and covered
by a breastwork.'"

     * Major-General T. Pinckney's account of the siege of
     Savannah, quoted by Garden.--

The anticipations of Marion were fully realized. When the junction of the French and American
armies was effected, it was determined to reduce the place by siege. Batteries were to be erected,
and cannon brought from the ships, a distance of several miles. Meanwhile, the works of the
besieged were undergoing daily improvements, under an able engineer. Several hundred negroes
were busy, day and night, upon the defences, stimulated, when necessary, to exertion, by the
lash. On the 4th of October the besiegers opened with nine mortars and thirty-seven pieces
of cannon from the land side, and sixteen from the water. They continued to play for several
days, with little effect, and the anxiety of the French admiral to leave the coast, at a season
of the year when it is particularly perilous to shipping to remain, determined the besiegers
to risk everything upon an assault. The morning of the 9th October was fixed upon for the attack.
The American army was paraded at one o'clock that morning, but it was near four before the
head of the French column reached the front. "The whole army then marched towards the skirt
of the wood in one long column, and as they approached the open space, was to break off into
the different columns, as ordered for the attack. But, by the time the first French column
had arrived at the open space, the day had fairly broke; when Count D'Estaign, without waiting
until the other columns had arrived at their position, placed himself at the head of his first
column, and rushed forward to the attack."* This was creditable to his gallantry, if not to
his judgment. But it was valor thrown away. "The column was so severely galled by the grape-shot
from the batteries, as they advanced, and by both grape-shot and musketry, when they reached
the abbatis, that, in spite of the efforts of the officers, it got into confusion, and broke
away to their left, toward the wood in that direction; the second and third French columns
shared, successively, the same fate, having the additional discouragement of seeing, as they
marched to the attack, the repulse and loss of their comrades who had preceded them. Count
Pulaski, who, with the cavalry, preceded the right column of the Americans, proceeded gallantly,
until stopped by the abbatis; and before he could force through it received his mortal wound."**
The American column was much more successful. It was headed by Colonel Laurens, with the Light
Infantry, followed by the Second South Carolina Regiment, of which Marion was second in command,
and the first battalion of Charleston militia. This column pressed forward, in the face of
a heavy fire, upon the Spring Hill redoubt, succeeded in getting into the ditch, and the colors
of the second regiment were planted upon the berm. But the parapet was too high to be scaled
under such a fire as proceeded from the walls, and, struggling bravely but vainly, the assailants
were, after suffering severe slaughter, driven out of the ditch. This slaughter was increased
in the effort to retain and carry off in safety the colors of the regiment.

     * Major-General Thomas Pinckney, in a letter quoted by
     Garden.

     ** Major-General Thomas Pinckney.  See Garden.--

These colors, as we have seen, were the gift of a lady. Moultrie, in the name of the regiment,
had promised to defend them to the last. The promise was faithfully remembered in this moment
of extremity. One of them was borne by Lieutenant Bush, supported by Sergeant Jasper; the other
by Lieutenant Grey, supported by Sergeant M'Donald. Bush being slightly wounded early in the
action delivered his standard to Jasper, for better security. Jasper a second time and now
fatally wounded, restored it to the former. But at the moment of taking it, Bush received a
mortal wound. He fell into the ditch with his ensign under him, and it remained in possession
of the enemy. The other standard was more fortunate. Lieutenant Grey, by whom it was borne,
was slain, but M'Donald plucked it from the redoubt where it had been planted, the moment the
retreat was ordered, and succeeded in carrying it off in safety. The repulse was decisive.
The slaughter, for so brief an engagement, had been terrible, amounting to nearly eleven hundred
men; 637 French, and 457 Americans. Of the former, the Irish Brigade, and of the latter the
2d South Carolina Regiment, particularly distinguished themselves and suffered most. The loss
of the British was slight; the assailants made no impression on their works. "Thus was this
fine body of troops sacrificed by the imprudence of the French General, who, being of superior
grade, commanded the whole.* In this battle Jasper was mortally wounded. He succeeded in regaining
the camp of the Americans. The fatal wound was received in his endeavor to secure and save
his colors." Another distinguished personage who fell in this fatal affair, was Col. Count
Pulaski, a brave and skilful captain of cavalry, better known in history for his attempt upon
the life of Stanislaus Poniatowski, King of Poland.

     * Major-General T. Pinckney.--

Chapter 7.

     From the Battle of Savannah to the Defeat of Gates
     at Camden.

The failure of the combined forces of France and America before the walls of Savannah, left
the cause of the latter, in the South, in much worse condition than before. The event served
to depress the Carolinians, and in the same degree, to elevate and encourage the enemy. The
allies withdrew to their ships, and, shortly after, from the coast. General Lincoln, with the
American army, retreated to the heights of Ebenezer, and thence to Sheldon. Proceeding from
this place to Charleston, he left Marion in command of the army. On the thirty-first of January,
1780, he writes to the latter as follows: "The state of affairs is such as to make it necessary
that we order our force to a point as much and as soon as possible. No troops will be kept
in the field except two hundred Light Infantry and the Horse (Washington's). You will therefore
please to select from the three regiments with you, two hundred of your best men, and those
who are best clothed, and organize them into corps, with proper officers. All the remainder,
with the baggage of the whole (saving such as is absolutely necessary for light troops), will
march immediately for this town. You will please take command of the light infantry until Lieut.
Col. Henderson arrives, which I expect will be in a few days. After that, I wish to see you
as soon as possible in Charleston."

In the February following, Marion was dispatched to Bacon's Bridge on Ashley river, where Moultrie
had established a camp for the reception of the militia of the neighborhood, as well as those
which had been summoned from the interior. It was to Marion that Lincoln chiefly looked for
the proper drilling of the militia. In his hands they lost the rude and inefficient character,
the inexpert and spiritless manner, which, under ordinary commanders, always distinguish them.
Feeling sure of their Captain, he, in turn, rendered them confident of themselves. Speaking
of Marion's "PATIENCE with the militia"--a phrase of great importance in this connection--Horry,
in his own memoirs, which now lie before us, adds, "No officer in the Union was better calculated
to command them, and to have done more than he did."* Lincoln knew his value. The admirable
training of the Second South Carolina Regiment had already done high honor to his skill as
a disciplinarian. He discovered the secret which regularly bred military men are slow to discern,
that, without patience, in the training of citizen soldiers for immediate service, they are
incorrigible; and patience with them, on the part of a commanding officer, is neither inconsistent
with their claims nor with their proper efficiency.

     * MS. Memoir of Gen. Horry, p. 55.--

The accumulation of troops at Bacon's Bridge was made with the view to the defence of Charleston,
now threatened by the enemy. Many concurring causes led to the leaguer of that city. Its conquest
was desirable on many accounts, and circumstances had already shown that this was not a matter
of serious difficulty. The invasion of Prevost the year before, which had so nearly proved
successful; the little resistance which had been offered to him while traversing more than
one hundred miles of country contiguous to the Capital; and the rich spoils which, on his retreat,
had been borne off by his army, betrayed at once the wealth and weakness of that region. The
possession of Savannah, where British Government had been regularly re-established, and the
entire, if not totally undisturbed control of Georgia, necessarily facilitated the invasion
of the sister province. South Carolina was now a frontier, equally exposed to the British in
Georgia, and the Tories of Florida and North Carolina. The means of defence in her power were
now far fewer than when Prevost made his attempt on Charleston. The Southern army was, in fact,
totally broken up. The Carolina regiments had seen hard service, guarding the frontier, and
contending with the British in Georgia. They were thinned by battle and sickness to a mere
handful. The Virginia and North Carolina regiments had melted away, as the term for which they
had enlisted, had expired. The Georgia regiment, captured by the British in detail, were perishing
in their floating prisons. The weakness of the patriots necessarily increased the audacity,
with the strength, of their enemies. The loyalists, encouraged by the progress of Prevost,
and the notorious inefficiency of the Whigs, were now gathering in formidable bodies, in various
quarters, operating in desultory bands, or crowding to swell the columns of the British army.
All things concurred to encourage the attempt of the enemy on Charleston. Its possession, with
that of Savannah, would not only enable them to complete their ascendency in the two provinces
to which these cities belonged, but would probably give them North Carolina also. Virginia
then, becoming the frontier, it would be easy, with the cooperation of an army ascending the
Chesapeake, to traverse the entire South with their legions, detaching it wholly from the federal
compact. Such was the British hope, and such their policy. There was yet another motive for
the siege of Charleston, considered without reference to collateral or contingent events. Esteemed
erroneously as a place of great security--an error that arose in all probability from the simple
fact of the successful defence of Fort Moultrie--it was crowded with valuable magazines. As
a trading city, particularly while the commerce of the North remained interrupted, it had become
a place of great business. It was a stronghold for privateers and their prizes, and always
contained stores and shipping of immense value.

The temptations to its conquest were sufficiently numerous. Ten thousand choice troops, with
a large and heavy train of artillery, were accordingly dispatched from New York for its investment,
which was begun in February, 1780, and conducted by the Commander-in-Chief of the British forces,
Sir Henry Clinton, in person. He conducted his approaches with a caution highly complimentary
to the besieged. The fortifications were only field works, and might have been overrun in less
than five days by an audacious enemy. The regular troops within the city were not above two
thousand men. The citizen militia increased the number to nearly four thousand. For such an
extent of lines as encircled the place, the adequate force should not have been less than that
of the enemy. The fortifications, when the British first landed their 'materiel', were in a
dilapidated and unfinished state, and, at that time, the defenders, apart from the citizens,
scarcely exceeded eight hundred men; while the small pox, making its appearance within the
walls, for the first time for twenty years--an enemy much more dreaded than the British,--effectually
discouraged the country militia from coming to the assistance of the citizens. Under these
circumstances, the conquest would have been easy to an active and energetic foe. But Sir Henry
does not seem to have been impatient for his laurels. He was willing that they should mature
gradually, and he sat down to a regular and formal investment.

It was an error of the Carolinians, under such circumstances, to risk the fortunes of the State,
and the greater part of its regular military strength, in a besieged town; a still greater
to do so in defiance of such difficulties as attended the defence. The policy which determined
the resolution was a concession to the citizens, in spite of all military opinion. The city
might have been yielded to the enemy, and the State preserved, or, which was the same thing,
the troops. The loss of four thousand men from the ranks of active warfare, was the great and
substantial loss, the true source, in fact, of most of the miseries and crimes by which the
very bowels of the country were subsequently torn and distracted.

It was the great good fortune of the State that Francis Marion was not among those who fell
into captivity in the fall of Charleston. He had marched into the city from Dorchester, when
his active services were needed for its defence; but while the investment was in progress,
and before it had been fully completed, an event occurred to him, an accident which was, no
doubt, very much deplored at the time, by which his services, lost for the present, were subsequently
secured for the country. Dining with a party of friends at a house in Tradd-street, the host,
with that mistaken hospitality which has too frequently changed a virtue to a vice, turned
the key upon his guests, to prevent escape, till each individual should be gorged with wine.
Though an amiable man, Marion was a strictly temperate one. He was not disposed to submit to
this too common form of social tyranny; yet not willing to resent the breach of propriety by
converting the assembly into a bull-ring, he adopted a middle course, which displayed equally
the gentleness and firmness of his temper. Opening a window, he coolly threw himself into the
street. He was unfortunate in the attempt; the apartment was on the second story, the height
considerable, and the adventure cost him a broken ankle. The injury was a severe and shocking
one, and, for the time, totally unfitted him for service. He left the city in a litter, while
the passage to the country still remained open for retreat, in obedience to an order of General
Lincoln for the departure of all idle mouths, "all supernumerary officers, and all officers
unfit for duty." Marion retired to his residence in St. John's parish. Here, suffering in mind
and body, he awaited with impatience the progress of events, with which, however much he might
sympathize, he could not share. His humiliation at this unavoidable but melancholy inaction,
may be imagined from what we know of his habits and his patriotism.

The siege of Charleston, in consequence of the firm bearing of the besieged, and the cautious
policy of the British Government, was protracted long after the works had been pronounced untenable.
It was yielded unwillingly to the conqueror, only after all resistance had proved in vain.
It fell by famine, rather than by the arms of the enemy. The defence was highly honorable to
the besieged. It lasted six weeks, in which they had displayed equal courage and endurance.
The consequences of this misfortune leave it somewhat doubtful, whether the determination to
defend the city to the last extremity, was not the result of a correct policy; considering
less its own loss, and that of the army, than the effect of the former upon the rustic population.
Certainly, the capture of the army was a vital misfortune to the southern States; yet the loss
of the city itself was of prodigious effect upon the scattered settlements of the country.
The character and resolve of the capital cities, in those days, were very much the sources
of the moral strength of the interior. Sparsely settled, with unfrequent opportunities of communion
with one another, the minds of the forest population turned naturally for their tone and direction
to the capital city. The active attrition of rival and conflicting minds, gives, in all countries,
to the population of a dense community, an intellectual superiority over those who live remote,
and feel none of the constant moral strifes to which the citizen is subject. In South Carolina,
Charleston had been the seat of the original 'movement', had incurred the first dangers, achieved
the first victories, and, in all public proceedings where action was desirable, had always
led off in the van. To preserve intact, and from overthrow, the seat of ancient authority and
opinion, was surely a policy neither selfish nor unwise. Perhaps, after all, the grand error
was, in not making the preparations for defence adequate to the object. The resources of the
State were small, and these had been diminished wofully in succoring her neighbors, and in
small border strifes, which the borderers might have been taught to manage for themselves.
The military force of the State, under any circumstances, could not have contended on equal
terms with the ten thousand well-appointed regulars of Sir Henry Clinton. The assistance derived
from Virginia and North Carolina was little more than nominal, calculated rather to swell the
triumph of the victor than to retard his successes.

If the movements of the British were slow, and deficient in military enterprise, where Sir
Henry Clinton commanded in person, such could not be said of them, after the conquest of Charleston
was effected. The commander-in-chief was succeeded by Earl Cornwallis, and his career was certainly
obnoxious to no such reproaches. We shall have more serious charges to bring against him. Of
the gross abuse of power, wanton tyrannies, cruel murders, and most reckless disregard of decency
and right, by which the course of the British was subsequently distinguished, we shall say
no more than will suffice to show, in what dangers, through what difficulties, and under what
stimulating causes, Francis Marion rose in arms, when everything appeared to be lost.

Charleston in possession of the enemy, they proceeded with wonderful activity to use all means
in their power, for exhausting the resources, and breaking down the spirit of the country.
Their maxim was that of habitual tyranny--"might is right". They seemed to recognize no other
standard. The articles of capitulation, the laws of nations, private treaty, the dictates of
humanity and religion, were all equally set at naught. The wealth of private families,--slaves
by thousands,--were hurried into the waists of British ships, as the legitimate spoils of war.
The latter found a market in the West India islands; the prisoners made by the fall of Charleston
were, in defiance of the articles of capitulation, crowded into prison-ships, from whence they
were only released by death, or by yielding to those arguments of their keepers which persuaded
them to enlist in British regiments, to serve in other countries. Many yielded to these arguments,
with the simple hope of escape from the horrors by which they were surrounded. When arts and
arguments failed to overcome the inflexibility of these wretched prisoners, compulsion was
resorted to, and hundreds were forced from their country, shipped to Jamaica, and there made
to serve in British regiments.* Citizens of distinction, who, by their counsel or presence,
opposed their influence over the prisoners, or proved themselves superior to their temptations,
were torn from their homes without warning, and incarcerated in their floating dungeons. Nothing
was forborne, in the shape of pitiless and pitiful persecution, to break the spirits, subdue
the strength, and mock and mortify the hopes, alike, of citizen and captive.

     * Moultrie's Memoirs, Vol. 2, 'Correspondence'.--

With those who kept the field the proceedings were more summary, if not more severe. The fall
of Charleston seems necessarily to have involved the safety of the country from the Savannah
to the Pedee. In a few weeks after the capture of the city, the British were in peaceable possession
of the space between these limits, from the seaboard to the mountains. They had few opponents--an
isolated body of continentals, a small squad of militia, for the first time drilling for future
service, or a little troop of horse--and these were quickly overcome. On these occasions the
British were generally led by Lieutenant-Colonel Tarleton. This officer acquired for himself
an odious distinction in his progress through the South in the campaigns which followed. He
was rather an active than a skilful commander. Rapid in his movements, he gave little heed
to the judicious disposition of his troops, and aiming more at impressing the fears of his
enemy, than overcoming him by science, his chief successes were the result of the panic which
his surprises and his butcheries inspired. He seems never to have been successful against an
equal and resolute foe. But, as courage and activity are, perhaps, after all, and before all,
the most necessary requisites for a soldier, Tarleton's services were inappreciable to the
invading army. In one month after its arrival, his legion was mounted and began its career
of slaughter. While yet the city was sustaining the siege, he penetrated the country, in pursuit
of those bands of militia horse, which, by direction of the American commander, still kept
the open field. On the 18th of March, he surprised a company of militia at Salkehatchie Bridge,
killed and wounded several and dispersed the rest. Five days after, another party at Pon-Pon
shared the same fortune. He was not so successful at Rantowles on the 23d of the same month,
where in a rencounter with Col. Washington, his dragoons were roughly handled, and retreated
with loss. He avenged himself, however, on Washington, in less than a month after, by surprising
him at Monk's Corner. Col. White soon after took command of the southern cavalry, and obtained
some trifling successes, but suffered himself to be surprised at Lenud's ferry on the Santee.
These events all took place prior to the surrender of the city. The activity of Tarleton, with
the general remissness, and want of ordinary military precautions on the part of the militia
which opposed itself to him, made his progress easy, and thus enabled him to cut off every
party that was embodied in the field. He was now to succeed in a much more important and much
more bloody enterprise. A Continental force from Virginia of four hundred men, under Col. Beaufort,*
had been dispatched to the relief of Charleston. Beaufort had reached Camden before he was
apprised of the surrender of that city. This event properly determined him to retreat. Earl
Cornwallis, meanwhile, had taken the field with a force of twenty-five hundred men, and was
then in rapid progress for the Santee. Hearing of the advance of Beaufort, he dispatched Tarleton
in quest of him, with a select body of infantry and cavalry, in all, seven hundred men. Beaufort
was overtaken near the Waxhaw settlements, and summoned to surrender. This person does not
seem to have been designed by nature for military operations. He halted at the summons, hesitated
awhile, sent his wagons ahead, consulted with his officers, and did little or nothing farther,
either for flight or conflict. While thus halting and hesitating he was attacked by the impetuous
Tarleton, offered a feeble resistance, unmarked by conduct or spirit, suffered the enemy to
gain his rear, and finally grounded his arms. He either did this too soon or too late. His
flag was disregarded in the flush of battle, the bearer of it cut down by the hand of Tarleton,
and the British infantry, with fixed bayonets, rushed upon the inactive Americans. Some of
Beaufort's men, seeing that their application for quarter was disregarded, resolved to die
like men, and resumed their arms. Their renewed fire provoked the massacre of the unresisting.
A terrible butchery followed. The British gave no quarter. From that day, "Tarleton's Quarters",
implying the merciless cutting down of the suppliant, grew into a proverbial phrase, which,
in the hour of victory, seemed to embitter the hostility with which the American strove to
avenge his slaughtered comrades.

     * Generally given as Buford in other documents.  Simms also
     states "the Warsaw settlements" in the original text, but
     Waxhaw is correct. According to local tradition, the mother
     of Andrew Jackson, the future president, was one of those
     who aided the survivors. Jackson himself later served, at
     the age of 13, in Davie's cavalry, as a messenger, and was
     the only member of his family to survive the war.
     --A. L., 1996.--

The defeat of Beaufort, with the only regular force remaining in the State, following so close
upon the fall of Charleston, paralyzed the hopes of the patriots. The country seemed everywhere
subdued. An unnatural and painful apathy dispirited opposition. The presence of a British force,
sufficient to overawe the neighborhood, at conspicuous points, and the awakened activity of
the Tories in all quarters, no longer restrained by the presence in arms of their more patriotic
countrymen, seemed to settle the question of supremacy. There was not only no head against
the enemy, but the State, on a sudden, appeared to have been deprived of all her distinguished
men. Moultrie and others who might have led, were prisoners of war. Governor Rutledge, a noble
spirit and famous orator--the Patrick Henry of Carolina,--had withdrawn to the North State,
to stimulate the energies of the people in that quarter and gain recruits. His example was
followed by Sumter, Horry and others,--by all, in fact, who, escaping captivity, were in condition
to fly. The progress of Cornwallis and Tarleton left mere distinction, unsupported by men,
with few places of security. Marion, meanwhile, incapable of present flight, was compelled
to take refuge in the swamp and forest. He was too conspicuous a person, had made too great
a figure in previous campaigns, and his military talents were too well known and too highly
esteemed, not to render him an object of some anxiety as well to friends as foes. Still suffering
from the hurts received in Charleston, with bloody and malignant enemies all around him, his
safety depended on his secrecy and obscurity alone. Fortunately he had "won golden opinions
from all sorts of people." He had friends among all classes, who did not permit themselves
to sleep while he was in danger. Their activity supplied the loss of his own. They watched
while he slept. They assisted his feebleness. In the moment of alarm, he was sped from house
to house, from tree to thicket, from the thicket to the swamp. His "hair-breadth 'scapes" under
these frequent exigencies, were, no doubt, among the most interesting adventures of his life,
furnishing rare material, could they be procured, for the poet and romancer. Unhappily, while
the chronicles show the frequent emergency which attended his painful condition, they furnish
nothing more. We are without details. The melancholy baldness and coldness with which they
narrate events upon which one would like to linger is absolutely humbling to the imagination;
which, kindled by the simple historical outline, looks in vain for the satisfaction of those
doubts and inquiries, those hopes and fears, which the provoking narrative inspires only to
defraud. How would some old inquisitive Froissart have dragged by frequent inquiry from contemporaneous
lips, the particular fact, the whole adventure, step by step, item by item,--the close pursuit,
the narrow escape,--and all the long train of little, but efficient circumstances, by which
the story would have been made unique, with all its rich and numerous details! These, the reader
must supply from his own resources of imagination. He must conjecture for himself the casual
warning brought to the silent thicket, by the devoted friend, the constant woman, or the humble
slave; the midnight bay of the watch dog or the whistle of the scout; or the sudden shot, from
friend or foe, by which the fugitive is counselled to hurry to his den. A thousand events arise
to the imagination as likely to have occurred to our partisan, in his hours of feebleness and
danger, from the rapid cavalry of Tarleton, or the close and keen pursuit of the revengeful
Tories. To what slight circumstances has he been indebted for his frequent escape! What humble
agents have been commissioned by Providence to save a life, that was destined to be so precious
to his country's liberties!

How long he remained in this situation is not exactly known,--probably several months. As soon
as he was able to mount his horse, he collected a few friends, and set out for North Carolina.
A Continental force was on its way from Virginia under Baron De Kalb. His purpose was to join
it. It was while on this route, and with this object, that he encountered his old friend and
long tried associate in arms, Col. P. Horry.*

     * There were two Horrys, brothers, both of whom were very
     brave and distinguished adherents of our partisan. Peter
     Horry held a captain's commission in the same regiment with
     Marion, at the battle of Fort Moultrie.  Hugh Horry was the
     particular favorite of his General.  A life of Marion,
     purporting to be in part by the former, but really composed
     entirely by the Rev. M. L. Weems, from facts furnished by
     Horry, is already well known to the public. A MS. life of
     Peter Horry is now before me, and has furnished me with
     several illustrations of the war, during this narrative.
     Both of these brothers served under Marion, to the close of
     the war, with equal courage and fidelity.--

Horry describes his ankle, at this meeting, as still "very crazy"--so much so that it required
his help and that of Marion's servant to lift him from his horse. But his spirits were good.
He was still cheerful, and possessed that rare elasticity of character which never loses its
tone under privations and disappointments. Weems, who, we are compelled to admit, very frequently
exercised the privilege of the ancient historian, of putting fine speeches into the mouth of
his hero, tells us that he jeered at the doleful expressions of his companion, Horry, who,
discussing the condition of the country, lamented that their "happy days were all gone." "Our
happy days all gone, indeed!" answered Marion--"on the contrary, they are yet to come. The
victory is still sure. The enemy, it is true, have all the trumps, and if they had but the
spirit to play a generous game, they would certainly ruin us. But they have no idea of that
game. They will treat the people cruelly, and that one thing will ruin them and save the country."
Weems, speaking for Horry, describes in ludicrous terms, their journey through North Carolina,--through
a region swarming with Tories, but, fortunately for our travellers, who were venomous without
being active. Our fugitives were without money and without credit, and "but for carrying a
knife, or a horse fleam, or a gun-flint, had no more use for a pocket than a Highlander has
for a knee-buckle. As to hard money we had not seen a dollar for years." In this resourceless
condition--a condition, which, it may be well to say in this place, continued throughout the
war, they made their way with difficulty until they joined the Continental army. Gates had
superseded De Kalb in its command, and was pressing forward, with the ambition, seemingly,
of writing a dispatch like Caesar's, announcing, in the same breath, the sight and conquest
of his enemy. Marion and his little troop of twenty men, made but a sorry figure in the presence
of the Continental General. Gates was a man of moderate abilities, a vain man, of a swelling
and ostentatious habit, whose judgment was very apt to be affected by parade, and the external
show of things. Some of his leading opinions were calculated to show that he was unfit for
a commander in the South. For example, he thought little of cavalry, which, in a plain country,
sparsely settled, was among the first essentials of success, as well in securing intelligence,
as in procuring supplies. It was not calculated therefore to raise the troop of our partisan
in his esteem, to discover that they were all good riders and well mounted. Marion, himself,
was a man equally modest in approach and unimposing in person. His followers may have provoked
the sneer of the General, as it certainly moved the scorn and laughter of his well-equipped
Continentals. We have a description of them from the pen of an excellent officer, the Adjutant
General of Gates' army. He says, "Col. Marion, a gentleman of South Carolina, had been with
the army a few days, attended by a very few followers, distinguished by small leather caps,
and the wretchedness of their attire; their number did not exceed twenty men and boys, some
white, some black, and all mounted, but most of them miserably equipped; their appearance was
in fact so burlesque, that it was with much difficulty the diversion of the regular soldiery
was restrained by the officers; and the General himself was glad of an opportunity of detaching
Col. Marion, at his own instance, towards the interior of South Carolina, with orders to watch
the motions of the enemy and furnish intelligence."*

     * Narrative of the Campaign of 1780, by Col. Otho Williams.--

From such small and insignificant beginnings flow greatness and great performances. We, who
are in possession of all the subsequent events--who see this proud, vain Commander, hurrying
on with the rapidity of madness to his own ruin--can but smile in the perusal of such a narrative,
not at the rags of Marion's men, but at the undiscerning character of those who could see,
in the mean equipment, the imperfect clothing, the mixture of man and boy, and white and black,
anything but a noble patriotism, which, in such condition, was still content to carry on a
war against a powerful enemy. The very rags and poverty of this little band, which was afterwards
to become so famous, were so many proofs of their integrity and virtue, and should have inspired
respect rather than ridicule. They were so many guarantees of good service which they were
able and prepared to render. It was in defiance of the temptations and the power of the foe,
that these men had taken the field against him, and had Gates been a wise commander, he would
have seen even through their rags and destitution, the small but steady light of patriotism;
which, enkindled throughout the State by the example of Marion, Sumter, and a few others, was
to blaze out finally into that perfect brightness before which the invader was to shrink confounded.

Gates was wise enough to take counsel of Marion, if nothing more; and even this might not have
been done, but for the suggestions of Governor Rutledge, who, at that time in the camp of the
Continentals, might very well have informed him of the value of the man whose followers inspired
only ridicule. It was with Marion that the plan was concerted, and not improbably at his suggestion,
for moving into the very heart of the State. This, subsequently, was the policy of Greene,
and had Gates adopted the deliberate caution of that commander, his successes would unquestionably
have been the same. The object of such a movement was to give an opportunity to the native
patriots to rally--to compel the British to concentrate their scattered forces, call in their
detached parties, and thus circumscribe their influence, within the State, to the places where
they still remained in force. To effect these objects, the Fabian maxims of warfare should
have been those of the American General. Few of his militia had ever seen an enemy. He had
but recently joined his troops, knew nothing of them, and they as little of him. Their march
had been a fatiguing one. Time and training were necessary pre-requisites for their improvement
and his success. Unhappily, these were the very agents with which the vanity of the unfortunate
commander made him most willing to dispense. The victory at Saratoga had spoiled him for ever,
and thinking too much of himself, he committed the next great error of a military man, of thinking
too lightly of his foe. It would be idle and perhaps impertinent, to suggest that if Marion
had been suffered to remain with him, the issue of this march might have been more fortunate.
Gates was quite too vain-glorious to listen and Marion quite too moderate to obtrude his opinions;
and yet Marion was a man of equal prudence and adroitness. He could insinuate advice, so that
it would appear to self-conceit the very creature of its own conceptions. Had Marion remained,
could Gates have listened, we are very sure there would have been no such final, fatal disaster
as suddenly stopped the misdirected progress of the Continental army. There would have been
some redeeming circumstances to qualify the catastrophe. All would not have been lost. At all
events, with Marion at their head, the militia would have fought awhile,--would have discharged
their pieces, once, twice, thrice, before they fled. They would have done for the born-leader
of militia, what they refused to do for a commander who neither knew how to esteem, nor how
to conduct them.

It was while Marion was in the camp of Gates, that a messenger from the Whigs of Williamsburg,
then newly risen in arms, summoned him to be their leader. It was in consequence of this invitation,
and not because of the awkwardness of his position there, that he determined to penetrate into
South Carolina, in advance of the American army. Such an invitation was not to be neglected.
Marion well knew its importance, and at once accepted the commission conferred upon him by
Governor Rutledge. He took leave of Gates accordingly, having received, as is reported, certain
instructions from that unhappy commander, to employ his men in the destruction of all the scows,
boats, ferry-flats and barges on the route, by which the enemy might make his escape. The fancy
of the American General already beheld the army of Lord Cornwallis in full flight. His great
solicitude seems to have been how to secure his captives. He had, strangely enough for a military
man, never taken counsel of the farm-yard proverb, which we need not here repeat for the benefit
of the reader.* With the departure of Marion, his better genius left him,--the only man, who,
in command of the militia, might have saved him from destruction. Leaving our partisan, with
his little squad, to make his way cautiously through a country infested with Tories, we follow
for the present the progress of the Continental army. On the night of the fifteenth of August,
1780, the Americans moved from Rugely's Mills. At midnight, without dreaming of an enemy, they
encountered him. The first intelligence communicated to either army of the presence of the
other, was from the fire of the British advance upon the Americans. The two armies recoiled
and lay upon their arms the rest of the night. So far the affair was indecisive. The Americans
had sustained themselves in the face of some disadvantages, chiefly the result of their leader's
imprudence. A night march of raw militia in the face of a foe, and in column of battle, was
itself an error which a sagacious commander would never have made. It is not to be denied,
that the Americans were not satisfied with their situation. Some of their officers openly declared
their discontent. But it was too late for a retrograde movement, nor is it likely, feeling
as he did and sanguine as he was, that Gates would have believed any such movement necessary.
The ground was equally unknown to both commanders; but Cornwallis had one advantage: he was
in the command of veterans, who are generally cool enough in such situations to look about
them, and make the most of their exigencies. The American line was soon formed and in waiting
for the dawn and the enemy. The first Maryland division, including the Delawares under De Kalb,
was posted on the right; the Virginia militia under Stevens on the left; the North Carolinians,
led by Caswell in the centre; and the artillery, in battery, upon the road. Both wings rested
on morasses, and the second Maryland brigade was posted as a reserve, a few hundred yards in
the rear of the first. The British formed a single line, with each wing covered and supported
by a body in reserve. They were much less numerous than the Americans, but they were picked
men, the choice of the regiments in Charleston and Camden. The American militia, of which the
greater part of Gates' army consisted, had never felt an enemy's fire. The Maryland and Delaware
troops were good soldiers, well trained and in confidence of their leaders. With the break
of day, and the advance of the American left, the action began. This division of the army consisted
of Virginia militia under Stevens. Handled with unexpected severity by the British fire, they
yielded before it and fled in panic, many of them without even discharging their pieces. The
wretched example was followed by the North Carolina militia, with the exception of a single
corps, commanded by Major Dixon. The cavalry under Armand, a foreign adventurer, broke at nearly
the same moment; and a charge of the British cavalry, happily timed, put an end to all hope
of rallying the terror-stricken fugitives. The devoted Continentals alone kept their ground
and bore the brunt of the action. They were led by the veteran De Kalb--the Commander-in-Chief
having hurried from the field in a vain attempt to bring the militia back. The artillery was
lost, the cavalry dispersed;--the regulars, numbering but nine hundred men, were required to
bear the undivided pressure of two thousand of the best troops in the British service. With
the example before them, the desertion of their General, and their own perfect isolation, they
would have been justified by the necessity of the case, in instant flight.