Even if we ignore, for the purpose of this discussion, the fact that to sustain this charge
a structure of cruel falsehood has been erected with great cunning, it is surely plain enough
that the effect of such a charge upon the minds of such non-Jews as believe it can only be
the development of a spirit of antagonism toward Jews, as Jews. In so far as the Dearborn Independent
succeeds in its efforts, it must inevitably make our Gentile population regard their Jewish
neighbors with fear and suspicion. And from such fear and suspicion emanate intolerance and
hatred and their brutal progeny. There is no essential difference between the articles which
have been appearing in Mr. Ford's paper, either in spirit or in text, and those which, in a
past so recent that its horror haunts the memory of men and women of our generation, let loose
upon tens of thousands of helpless and inoffensive people the most bestial and fiendish cruelty
and hatred ever attained by beings called human.

I can quite well remember the intense horror with which the Christian world read of the wave
of pogroms against the Jews which swept over Russia in 1891, following the inhuman enforcement
of the "May Laws." Jewish women in travail, forced to flee for their lives, hid in cemeteries,
and in those "cities of the dead" brought forth their babes. Jewish fathers took their daughters
to brothels for safe hiding. Jewish women and girls were raped. Jewish homes were looted, and
whole villages inhabited by Jews were burned down. Even women and children were brutally murdered,
simply because they were Jews and because a newspaper propaganda in all respects like that
now being carried on in this country and in England had made the Jewish people the object of
suspicion and fear and, therefore, of hatred. It was then that a Russian statesman declared
that the "Jewish question" would be solved only when one third of the Jews had perished, another
third emigrated, and the remaining third been converted to the orthodox Church!

The frightful massacre of Jews at Kishinev in 1903 likewise resulted from a newspaper propaganda
very similar to that which is now being carried on by the Dearborn Independent and the London
Morning Post. On that occasion an unexampled and unprecedented outburst of horror thrilled
the whole civilized world. John Hay, our then Secretary of State, said: "No person of ordinary
humanity can have heard without deep emotion the story of the cruel outrages inflicted upon
the Jews of Kishinev. These lamentable events have caused the profoundest impression throughout
the world." For each beetle which has made but little use of its wings will be liable to leave
offspring with a slightly diminished wing, some other organ which has been used instead of the
wing becoming proportionately developed.

It is thus seen that the conditions of existence are the indirect cause of the wings becoming rudimentary,
inasmuch as they preclude the beetles from using them; the disuse however on the part of the beetles
themselves is the direct cause.

Now let us see how Mr. Darwin deals
with the same case. Except for the specific charge of "ritual murder," with which I shall presently
deal, the campaign of Jew-baiting pursued by this journal, which produced such disastrous and
monstrous results, was the counterpart of that now being carried on by the Dearborn Independent.
Kroushevan charged that the Jews were conspiring to secure world dominion; he charged that
the economic power of the Jewish race in Russia was a peril to the nation; he charged that
Jews were responsible for Socialism and social unrest. The anti-Semitic articles appearing
in this country and in England during the past few weeks are quite like those which used to
appear in the Bessarabetz.

Of course, the crowning infamy of the campaign of hate waged by the Kishinev paper was the
charge of "ritual murder." A Christian boy, named Ribalenko, belonging to the village of Doubossar,
midway between Kishinev and Odessa, was murdered, his body being found in an orchard. The Bessarabetz
at once declared that the boy had been killed by the Jews for sacrificial purposes, thus reviving
one of the most terrible and most infamous libels ever directed against any race or sect--a
calumny that has been exposed and refuted again and again. Subsequently, after the mischief
had been done, it was proved that the boy was murdered by his uncle and the care-taker of the
orchard in which the body was found--both of them Russians and Gentiles. The murderers confessed
their guilt, the motive for the crime being gain.

The horrors of 1891 were repeated and even excelled at Kishinev in 1903 as a result of this
propaganda. It is not necessary to go into the gruesome details of the numerous nameless sex
mutilations, the awful outrages committed upon young girls and their gray-haired grandmothers,
the shockingly brutal and bestial murders, the well-authenticated cases of nails driven through
the eyes of a woman and the cutting out of the tongue of a two-year-old child; let these brief
references suffice. It is all too evident from the most reliable accounts of the massacre that
hatred born of resentment and fear had made the Gentile mobs as savage as wild beasts. They
were no longer human.

Thus far neither the Dearborn Independent nor the London Morning Post has reproduced the "ritual
murder" lie. Perhaps neither will do it. Probably not. At the same time both papers have done
their utmost to create in the minds of their readers a readiness to believe that or any other
infamy when attributed to the Jews. There is not, and there cannot be, any assurance that in
the soil thus prepared by these papers, others more ignorant or less scrupulous will not successfully
plant belief in the ancient legend of sacrificial murders committed by Jews. And even if this
never happens at all, the fact remains that in charging that the horrors of Bolshevism were
deliberately instigated by Jews, British and American anti-Semites have appealed to the same
unreasoning, instinctive, primal passion. For Bolshevism, primarily a political and economic
program though it be, impinges upon religious faith and religious authority. Thus do the anti-Semites
play with fire in close proximity to the high explosives of human nature.

It was not the ancient, insensate hatred inspired by belief that the Jews kill Christian children
in their Paschal rites which made the Kishinev pogrom possible. That added the element of savage
fanaticism to the antagonism and resentment already developed by the economic position of the
Jews. The extortions practiced by Jewish money-lenders the superior business capacity, perseverance,
and resourcefulness of the Jewish traders and shopkeepers as compared with their Gentile rivals;
the intense competition of Jewish artisans, superior to the average Russian workman in intelligence,
industry, thrift, sobriety, and ambition--all these things resulted in bitter antagonism. Upon
that economic fear and resentment religious fanaticism fastened and flourished.

Herein lies the danger of the anti-Semitic propaganda in this country and in England. It is
invoking economic fear and resentment. The non-Jew is adjured to contemplate the spectacle
of the Jews ousting the Gentiles from one industry after another, gradually assuming leadership
and control of our industry and commerce, thanks in part to superior intelligence, skill, and
diligence, but in part also to a lack of moral scrupulousness. So the Jew is presented as a
dangerous economic rival to be feared and guarded against. The Gentile is thus taught to look
upon Jewish prosperity as a sort of parasitism, and as a menace to the well-being of all non-Jews,
even where the withdrawal of Jewish enterprise and activity would mean ruin for Jew and Gentile
alike--a condition long recognized in the principal Russian cities. Now, I do not deny that
some of the worst aspects of capitalism have been developed to a special and notable extent
by some Jews. Neither do I forget that others have developed the very noblest social idealism.
The point I am now making is that hatred of the Jew, even when it is motivated by economic
fear and resentment, will inevitably nurture every other form of anti-Jewish prejudice. If
the campaign of the anti-Semites succeeds in cultivating that fear and hatred in the minds
and hearts of our people, there can be no assurance against the occurrence of pogroms here.

VIII

WHAT ANTI-SEMITISM IN AMERICA MEANS

In an article published in the Dearborn Independent, June 19, 1920, it is argued that, transplanted
in American soil, anti-Semitism will change its character and that it will not, in this country,
take the form of mass violence. Not a single fact or historical example is cited in support
of this optimistic theory. There are fine phrases about "the genius of Americanism" and the
"innate justice of the American mind," but that is all. And these fine phrases can be easily
and adequately disposed of by the simple observation that anti-Semitism, like all other forms
of race hatred, is incompatible with "the genius of Americanism" and with "innate justice."

These seem to me to be self-evident truths. Nevertheless, we have had many bitter manifestations
of race hatred in this country, not a few of which have been attended by mass violence. When
I reflect upon the savage race riots which have occurred in this country, and the numerous
lynchings of negroes by infuriated mobs, I cannot bring myself to accept the easy optimism
of the anonymous Jew-baiter. Even as I am writing these lines the morning newspaper comes to
hand with the account of the lynching of three negroes, one of them a woman, in Georgia. The
story is quite familiar in its shocking details. The three negroes, who were charged with murder,
were in the custody of the sheriff of the county, when they were seized by a mob and brutally
murdered. That this was due to the fact that they were negroes, a manifestation of race hatred,
is beyond question.

My faith that we shall be spared the shame and ignominy of pogroms rests upon other and, I
believe, more solid foundations. I have confidence that the anti-Semitic propaganda will be
met by the stout resistance of the great mass of our citizens of Gentile birth and heritage
who will fight and crush anti-Semitism in defense of Christian civilization and of American
ideals, traditions, and institutions. That seems to me to be a rational faith; it affords firm
anchorage. On the other hand, it is a stupendous and dangerous folly to believe that you can
cultivate, as part of our national psychology, anti-Jewish fear and prejudice without reaping
in due course a harvest of hatred and violence toward the Jewish people. Racial hatred is everywhere
the same.

There is no reason for believing that here in the United States we possess a special immunity
from the worst forms of anti-Semitism. It would probably be safer to say that our conditions
afford exceptional opportunities for their development. We have drawn heavily upon the Old
World for our population, which reflects the divisions and the antipathies, the hereditary
jealousies and suspicions, which for hundreds and, in some instances, thousands of years have
troubled mankind. We have not yet welded these diverse elements into anything approaching homogeneity;
our national consciousness is still undeveloped and, as a consequence of that fact, we have
as yet not developed fully those self-imposed disciplines and restraints which are attendant
upon highly developed national solidarity. I anticipated that we should find cats, pumas, lynxes, &c.,
to be really very like tigers, and was surprised to learn that the "true" tiger, though certainly
not unlike these animals, was still to be distinguished from "many
others which had since been called tigers."

He is on no account to be confounded with these, in spite of the obvious temptation to confound
him. He is "a rare animal, little known to the ancients, and badly described by the moderns."
 If as a result of vicious
propaganda serious anti-Jewish riots take place in this country the victims will not be the
rich Jewish financiers and brokers, against whom the Dearborn Independent fulminates, but innocent
and inoffensive, hard-working men and women and their children. And if ever that time comes
such men as Henry Ford must bear the major responsibility and guilt.

Let us suppose, for the argument's sake, that anti-Semitism in this country develops, as predicted
in Mr. Ford's paper, along less brutal lines; that there will be no such orgies of murder and
lust and spoliation as some other nations have had to their shame and dishonor. In that case,
how will the organized hostility to the Jews be manifested? Specifically, what is the program
of the group of anti-Semites in this country with which the Dearborn Independent is identified?
Are they prepared to announce that program, and to have it measured by the standard of the
American ideal? Or is it possible that the only "secret conspiracy" is on their side; that
the real object of this anti-Semitic agitation is to prepare the way for a political and economic
program which its authors dare not publicly avow?

When I was in England recently,[4] I gained a fairly clear and reliable idea of the political
and economic program of those bitter Jew-haters who are responsible for the organized campaign
of anti-Semitism in that country. In view of the fact that our anti-Semites, including the
Dearborn Independent, have so slavishly copied the propaganda of the British anti-Semites,
it is justifiable to assume that they are in general agreement with that program, and that
they would adopt it in this country, subject to whatever modifications may be made necessary
by the differences between the institutions of the two countries. At all events, unless and
until the actual program of the anti-Semites of this country is set forth with candor and precision,
they have no cause for complaint if it is assumed that their aims are practically identical
with those of the British anti-Jewish propagandists whose arguments they repeat in detail,
including every grotesque stupidity and every clumsy distortion of the truth.

The program of the British anti-Semites, adapted to American conditions, would involved, as
a minimum, the following measures:

1. Disfranchisement of all Jews whose parents and grandparents were not all native-born American
citizens.

2. Denial of the right to hold legislative or administrative office, either elective or appointive,
to all Jews other than those whose parents and grandparents were all born in the United States.

3. Denial of the right of naturalization to Jews on the ground that they are not assimilable.

4. Prohibition or very strict limitation of further Jewish immigration.

5. Exclusion from the legal, medical, and teaching professions of all Jews except those entitled
to full citizenship. (See 1 and 2.)

6. Exclusion of all Jews, except those entitled to full citizenship, from certain economic
rights and privileges, including the right to acquire and own land, the right to engage in
the sale of stocks, bonds, securities, or real estate, or in banking, money-lending, or insurance.

7. The right of admission to colleges and universities to be so limited as to admit only a
small percentage of Jewish students.

That this outline of a program will seem to many to be simply a fantastic jest I am quite well
aware. The fact remains, however, that it is simply a bald presentation of the program believed
in by a great many anti-Semites. I have only taken the measures that are seriously urged for
adoption in England and changed their wording to correspond to American conditions. There is
not one item in the program which I did not hear advocated with evident seriousness when I
was in England. I learned of one society organized upon a national scale, all of whose members
must "prove that their parents and grandparents were of British blood." This society is very
actively engaged in the spread of anti-Semitic propaganda. Its prospectus states that it was
"Founded to secure the re-enactment of the Act of Settlement, 1700, 1701, which secured the
government of Britain to Britons and the land of Britain to the ownership of Britons." It is
also stipulated that no such person shall be capable "to have any grant of lands, tenements,
or hereditaments from the Crown to himself, or to any other or others in trust for him." In
the light of the constitution of this British society with its large dues-paying membership,
and its demand for the re-enactment of the above-quoted provisions of the Act of Settlement,
the most drastic parts of the suggested program do not seem so fantastic, after all.

Here, then, is a program of anti-Semitism which fairly expresses the political and economic
aspirations of large groups with whom our American anti-Semites, led by the Dearborn Independent,
appear to be working in close co-operation and harmony. Whether the program fully meets with
their approval or not, it can hardly be questioned that, if their anti-Jewish agitation is
to have the result of bringing about political and economic remedies for the conditions they
assail, and not pogroms, it will be necessary to discriminate between Jews and Gentiles in
citizenship, in education, in property rights, and in economic opportunity. Precisely how these
discriminations are to be made may be open to doubt, but that they must be made is--once the
anti-Semitic position is taken--beyond all doubt.

Against that reactionary aim I set the American ideal, or what President Roosevelt called "the
historic American position of treating each man on his merits as a man, without the least reference
to his creed, his race, or his birthplace." Anti-Semitism would divide our citizenship by racial
and religious barriers; the Americanism of Washington and Lincoln and Lee and Roosevelt would
weld all into a united whole, regardless of race or religion. The way of the anti-Semite is
the way of Russia under the tsars, the way of the unspeakable despots who for centuries made
the word "Turk" a synonym for oppression and brutal reaction. I prefer the American way. I
am opposed to anti-Semitism, not alone for humanitarian reasons, but as a matter of loyalty
to America. Anti-Semitism is treason to the American ideal.

FOOTNOTES:

[4] September and October, 1920.

IX

WE NEED THE CO-OPERATION OF CHRISTIAN AND JEW

The greatest nations of the world are just emerging from the strain and agony of the most terrible
and disastrous war in the history of mankind. From a tiny spark of hatred a great conflagration
of passion spread over the world, well-nigh destroying the entire fabric of civilization. How
near we have come to that catastrophe, as a result of the war and its evil progeny, they best
know who have recently visited the countries principally involved and most vitally affected.
Even now civilization is not out of danger, but is weak and unsteady like a man beginning to
recover from a terrible fever. Infinite care and patience and wisdom must be exercised by statesmen
and peoples and by the molders of public opinion in every nation in order to make recovery
possible.

Never was there a moment when racial or religious antagonism was as dangerous and so much to
be feared as in this crisis. Never were the citizens of all lands so solemnly warned to avoid
the poison of hatred. The passionate hatreds engendered by the war must be crushed down and
they who were foes, seeking to destroy one another, must now work together for the preservation
of the civilization that is their common heritage. With the carnage and wrack and ruin of the
war still oppressing us, and our hearts still lacerated and bruised, a common peril is compelling
us to unite and to seek safety in fellowship and co-operation. Yesterday we relied upon the
destructive arts of the warrior; to-day we must rely upon the conserving arts of the healer.
Yesterday we hailed Mars; to-day we hail the Christ in whose touch is life and healing.

What perverse and malevolent genius it must be that chooses this moment to open the flood gates
and set free the pent passions of anti-Semitism! How monstrous a thing it is that from a great
historic pulpit of the Christian Church which Beecher glorified by his courageous idealism,
the brutal and un-Christian appeals of anti-Semitism should be made now when the world needs,
above all things, to be purged of the poison of hatred and strengthened by fellowship! How
great a tragedy it is that men like Mr. Ford and his associates can find nothing to inspire
them in the vast work of restoration and reconstruction; that their energies and resources
are directed to the ignoble and dangerous end of inciting in the minds of millions of our people
fear and hatred of the Jew, as Jew!

I am not insensible of, or indifferent to, the problems incidental to the presence in this
country of more than three million Jews. Neither am I insensible of, or indifferent to, the
problems incidental to our vast negro population, or to the presence of Europeans and their
slow and imperfect assimilation. Recognizing these problems clearly and fully, I am quite certain
that racial hatred and antagonism is no solvent for any one of them. The complete success of
the appeals that are being made against the Jews would not benefit the Gentiles in this country
in any particular. There never has been an organized propaganda of race antagonism and hatred,
anywhere in the world, which benefited either race. In Russia and in Rumania--to cite only
two examples--anti-Semitism has injured the Christians fully as much as it has injured the
Jews. Turkish hatred and persecution of Armenians has invariably injured the Turks quite as
much as it has injured their victims. In opposing the propaganda of anti-Semitism I am defending
equally the interest of Jew and non-Jew. I hold no brief for the Jewish "race," so-called,
or for Judaism. The only brief I hold is for the democratic and humanitarian ideals of America.
That brief I hold by reason of my citizenship, voluntarily assumed, and the freeman's oath
with which that citizenship was consecrated.

