In teaching from these books it is very important that these questions and such others as may
occur to the teacher, should be made the basis of frequent written work, and of final examinations.

The importance of written work cannot be overstated. It not only assures knowledge of material
but the power to express that knowledge correctly and in good form.

If this written work can be submitted to the teacher in printed form it will be doubly useful.

QUESTIONS

1. What classes of furniture are essential in modern composing-rooms?

2. Give a general statement of articles in each class.

3. What determines the selection of furniture for any given office?

4. What was the first thing needed in a composing-room after the type had been cast?

5. How was it made originally?

6. How is it now made?

7. What are the dimensions of the standard type case of the present time?

8. What other sizes are sometimes used?

9. What effect has the need of economy of space had upon the use of type cases?

10. What are type cases made of?

11. What difficulties were experienced?

12. How were they avoided?

13. Describe the construction of a modern type case.

14. Give some of the uses for which special cases are provided.

15. What are the two purposes of a working stand?

16. What is the proper height for a stand?

17. Should the case lie flat when in use, and why?

18. How are galleys placed for holding type, and why?

19. Describe a simple working stand.

20. How are infrequently used cases stored?

21. What should be avoided in this method of storage?

22. Describe a modern type cabinet.

23. What difficulty arose in working at the earlier forms of cabinet, and how was it avoided?

24. Describe a Polhemus cabinet.

25. What is the advantage of iron case brackets?

26. What are the advantages and disadvantages of tilting case brackets?

27. What are galley brackets?

28. What is a better article for the same purpose?

29. Compare wooden and steel case runs.

30. How are steel case runs constructed?

31. Describe and compare several methods of constructing case racks so that the case may be
used without removing it from the rack.

32. What was the old method of keeping reglets and wood furniture, and what was its disadvantage?

33. Describe some modern methods of keeping this material.

GLOSSARY OF TECHNICAL TERMS

ALLEY—The floor space between two stands or cabinets.

ANNEX BOX—A small wood or metal cup or box attached to the type case for holding special characters.

BANK—A high table with the top inclined upon which composed type is placed temporarily. See Dump.

BLANK CASE—A wooden tray without partitions, or with one partition only.

BOX—A subdivision of a type case, in which a quantity of one particular character is kept.

BRACKET—An arm or support, usually of metal, to hold cases on top of a stand, to hold galleys, etc.

CABINET—An enclosure for cases, shelves, or boxes, closed up on the sides and back. See Stand.

CALIFORNIA JOB CASE—An extensively used type case arranged with boxes to hold capitals, small
letters, figures, points, and the usual characters of a job font, complete in a single tray.

CAP CASE—The top case of a standard pair of book or news cases. The capital case, or upper case.

CASE—The printer's name for the shallow wooden tray with small compartments for holding types
and other materials.

CASE CLEANER—A frame like that of a type case with a wire bottom, used to assist in cleaning
out type cases that have become foul with dust, grit, or similar dirt. The case cleaner is
placed on top of the type case, fitting snugly over each box, and the whole turned up-side-down
to transfer the type into the wire bottom. A gentle shaking then sifts out the dirt. When the
case is turned back again the types go back into their original boxes. A vacuum cleaner, a
small bellows, or an air pump are sometimes used for cleaning type cases.

COFFIN—The box-like frame surrounding an imposing stone on its stand.

DUMP—The place in a composing room where dead matter is kept until it is distributed; sometimes
said of a standing galley where compositors place their composed lines to be assembled for
proofing, etc. See Bank.

EMPTY CASE—A case without the letters or types needed to compose lines. The case may have other
letters, but some boxes are empty.

FORM RACK—For holding printing forms that are locked in chases, before or after printing. It
usually holds them in a perpendicular position.

FOUL CASE, OR DIRTY CASE—One in which the type or other material is badly mixed or which has
material that does not properly belong there, as in hasty distribution or because of carelessness.

FRAME—Another name for the compositor's work stand or case rack.

FURNITURE—In printing-office speech this term is used to mean small pieces of wood or metal
designed to fill the blank spaces larger than leads, slugs, spaces, and quads. Furniture is
placed between pages and around forms locked in chases.

GALLEY—A shallow tray used by compositors to hold type after the lines have been set and transferred
from the composing stick.

GALLEY RACK—A place for holding a number of galleys in order.

HARRIS RULE CASE—A quarter-size case for holding assortments of brass rules. Four of these
trays may be kept in a regular full size blank case, similar to Wisconsin quarter cases. See
size of cases.

HELL-BOX—The receptacle for old, broken, or discarded types.

ITALIC CASE—A style of case to hold a complete font of capitals, small letters, points, figures,
etc. Similar to the California job case, but with more boxes on the capital letter side. See
page 15.

JOB CASE—A general term meaning a type case which holds a complete font of type; in distinction
from a case which holds only part of a font, like the ordinary news or book case.

JOB GALLEY—A short galley to place on the work stand for making up pages, small forms, etc.

LABOR-SAVING—Said of assortments of leads, rules, furniture, etc., provided in assorted sizes.
The sizes are commonly multiples of 6-point or 12-point, and several small pieces may be combined
to fill a large space, thus saving the labor necessary to cut each piece to fit its place.

LAYING TYPE—Placing a new assortment of type in its case.

LAY OF THE CASE—The particular plan or arrangement of the types in the various boxes of a case.

LEADER CASE—A small case or series of boxes for holding brass or cast-type leaders.

LETTER BOARDS—Movable shelves in racks, under imposing tables, and elsewhere, to hold standing
type matter, etc.

LOW CASE—A case with a small portion of the font in it. See Empty Case.

LOWER CASE—The bottom case of a pair of book or news cases, which rests nearest the compositor.
See page 12.

NEW YORK JOB CASE—A case for holding a font of small capitals in addition to the capitals,
small letters, figures, etc., of the usual fonts. See page 15.

REGLET—Thin strips of wood, similar to thick leads; used for making up large pages and filling
in forms.

SIZES OF CASES—There are a number of standard sizes of cases for printers' purposes, allowing
a considerable range in adapting these important articles for particular uses. The common sizes
are as follows:

Regular full-size case                            32¼ × 16¾ in.
Three-quarter size                                26¼ × 16¾ in.
Two-third case                                    22¾ × 16¾ in.
Rooker Case (formerly popular in newspaper
             composing rooms)                     28½ × 14  in.
Wood type case                                    32¼ × 23  in.
Mammoth wood-type case                            44     × 23 in.
Bettis case, for leads, rules, etc                72     × 18 in.
Bettis case, for leads, rules, border, etc        72 in. ×  7 in.
Harris case, for rules, border, etc                  in. ×  7 in.
Wisconsin quarter case                               in. ×  7 in.
“Sanspareil” half-size case                       15¼ × 14¾ in.

SORT CASE—For holding extra or special types, etc., with open sides and back.

STAND—The working frame at which a compositor sets type; in distinction from a cabinet, which
has closed sides and no back.

TRIPLE CASE—A case divided into three principal sections, each section having forty-nine boxes,
like one-half of the common capital case.

UNIT TYPE CABINET—A container for type cases similar to a sectional book case. The parts are
built in sections about 12½ inches high, holding eight or ten cases. There is a base piece
upon which the cabinet rests, and a top piece. Any number of the sections may be put together
to provide room for additional cases as needed. These cabinets have cases of different depths
to provide for fonts of different sizes; shallow cases for job fonts of small types, and other
cases of varying depths to give room for larger fonts.

TYPOGRAPHIC TECHNICAL SERIES FOR APPRENTICES

The following list of publications, comprising the TYPOGRAPHIC TECHNICAL SERIES FOR APPRENTICES,
has been prepared under the supervision of the Committee on Education of the United Typothetae
of America for use in trade classes, in course of printing instruction, and by individuals.

Each publication has been compiled by a competent author or group of authors, and carefully
edited, the purpose being to provide the printers of the United States—employers, journeymen,
and apprentices—with a comprehensive series of handy and inexpensive compendiums of reliable,
up-to-date information upon the various branches and specialties of the printing craft, all
arranged in orderly fashion for progressive study.

The publications of the series are of uniform size, 5 × 8 inches. Their general make-up, in
typography, illustrations, etc., has been, as far as practicable, kept in harmony throughout.
A brief synopsis of the particular contents and other chief features of each volume will be
found under each title in the following list.

Each topic is treated in a concise manner, the aim being to embody in each publication as completely
as possible all the rudimentary information and essential facts necessary to an understanding
of the subject. Care has been taken to make all statements accurate and clear, with the purpose
of bringing essential information within the understanding of beginners in the different fields
of study. Wherever practicable, simple and well-defined drawings and illustrations have been
used to assist in giving additional clearness to the text.

In order that the pamphlets may be of the greatest possible help for use in trade-school classes
and for self-instruction, each title is accompanied by a list of Review Questions covering
essential items of the subject matter. A short Glossary of technical terms belonging to the
subject or department treated is also added to many of the books.

These are the Official Text-books of the United Typothetae of America.

Address all orders and inquiries to COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, UNITED TYPOTHETAE OF AMERICA, CHICAGO,
ILLINOIS, U. S. A.

PART I—Types, Tools, Machines, and Materials

1. =Type: a Primer of Information= By A. A. Stewart

     Relating to the mechanical features of printing types; their sizes,
     font schemes, etc., with a brief description of their manufacture.
     44 pp.; illustrated; 74 review questions; glossary.

2. =Compositors' Tools and Materials= By A. A. Stewart

     A primer of information about composing sticks, galleys, leads,
     brass rules, cutting and mitering machines, etc. 47 pp.;
     illustrated; 50 review questions; glossary.

3.

4. =Imposing Tables and Lock-up Appliances= By A. A. Stewart

     Describing the tools and materials used in locking up forms for the
     press, including some modern utilities for special purposes. 59
     pp.; illustrated; 70 review questions; glossary.

5. =Proof Presses= By A. A. Stewart

     A primer of information about the customary methods and machines
     for taking printers' proofs. 40 pp.; illustrated; 41 review
     questions; glossary.

6. =Platen Printing Presses= By Daniel Baker

     A primer of information regarding the history and mechanical
     construction of platen printing presses, from the original hand
     press to the modern job press, to which is added a chapter on
     automatic presses of small size. 51 pp.; illustrated; 49 review
     questions; glossary.

7. =Cylinder Printing Presses= By Herbert L. Baker

     Being a study of the mechanism and operation of the principal types
     of cylinder printing machines. 64 pp.; illustrated; 47 review
     questions; glossary.

8. =Mechanical Feeders and Folders= By William E. Spurrier

     The history and operation of modern feeding and folding machines;
     with hints on their care and adjustments. Illustrated; review
     questions; glossary.

9. =Power for Machinery in Printing Houses= By Carl F. Scott

     A treatise on the methods of applying power to printing presses and
     allied machinery with particular reference to electric drive. 53
     pp.; illustrated; 69 review questions; glossary.

10. =Paper Cutting Machines= By Niel Gray, Jr.

     A primer of information about paper and card trimmers, hand-lever
     cutters, power cutters, and other automatic machines for cutting
     paper. 70 pp.; illustrated; 115 review questions; glossary.

=11. Printers' Rollers= By A. A. Stewart

     A primer of information about the composition, manufacture, and
     care of inking rollers. 46 pp.; illustrated; 61 review questions;
     glossary.

12. =Printing Inks= By Philip Ruxton

     Their composition, properties and manufacture (reprinted by
     permission from Circular No. 53, United States Bureau of
     Standards); together with some helpful suggestions about the
     everyday use of printing inks by Philip Ruxton. 80 pp.; 100 review
     questions; glossary.

13. =How Paper is Made= By William Bond Wheelwright

     A primer of information about the materials and processes of
     manufacturing paper for printing and writing. 68 pp.; illustrated;
     62 review questions; glossary.

14. =Relief Engravings= By Joseph P. Donovan

     Brief history and non-technical description of modern methods of
     engraving; woodcut, zinc plate, halftone; kind of copy for
     reproduction; things to remember when ordering engravings.
     Illustrated; review questions; glossary.

15. =Electrotyping and Sterotyping= By Harris B. Hatch and A. A. Stewart

     A primer of information about the processes of electrotyping and
     stereotyping. 94 pp.; illustrated; 129 review questions;
     glossaries.

PART II—Hand and Machine Composition

16. =Typesetting= By A. A. Stewart

     A handbook for beginners, giving information about justifying,
     spacing, correcting, and other matters relating to typesetting.
     Illustrated; review questions; glossary.

17. =Printers' Proofs= By A. A. Stewart

     The methods by which they are made, marked, and corrected, with
     observations on proofreading. Illustrated; review questions;
     glossary.

18. =First Steps in Job Composition= By Camille DeVéze

     Suggestions for the apprentice compositor in setting his first
     jobs, especially about the important little things which go to make
     good display in typography. 63 pp.; examples; 55 review questions;
     glossary.

19. =General Job Composition=

