Now it has been noticed when substances are in a very finely-divided state that they often
possess greater chemical activity than they have in lump. Let me try and illustrate what I
mean. Here I have a metal called antimony, which is easily acted upon by chlorine. I will place
this lump of antimony in a jar of chlorine, and so far as you can see very little action takes
place between the metal and the chlorine. There is an action taking place, but it is rather
slow (Fig. 20 A). Now I will introduce into the chlorine some of the same metal which I have
finely powdered. See! it catches fire immediately (Fig. 20 B). What I want you to understand
is, that although I have in both these cases precisely the same chlorine and the same metal,
nevertheless, that whilst the action of the chlorine on the lump of antimony was not very apparent,
in the case of the powdered antimony the action was very energetic. Again, there is a lump
of lead (Fig. 21 a). You would be very much astonished if the lead pipe that conveys the water
through your houses caught fire spontaneously; but let me tell you that, if your lead water-pipes
were reduced to a sufficiently fine powder, they would catch fire when exposed to the air.
I have some finely-powdered lead in this tube (Fig. 21 b), which you will notice catches fire
directly it is exposed to the atmosphere (Fig. 21 c). There it is! Only powder the lead sufficiently
fine,--that is to say, bring it into a state of minute subdivision,--and it fires by contact
with the oxygen of the air. And now apply this. We have in our diamond the element carbon,
but diamond-carbon is a hard substance, and not in a finely-divided state. We have in this
tinder the same substance as the diamond, but tinder-carbon is finely divided, and it is because
it is in a finely-divided condition that the carbon in our tinder-box catches fire so readily.
I hope I have made that part of my subject quite clear to you. I should wish you to note that
this very finely-divided carbon has rather an inclination to attract moisture. That is the
reason why our tinder is so disposed to get damp, as I told you; and, as damp tinder is very
difficult to light, this explains the meaning of those disrespectful words that I suggested
our tinder-box had often had addressed to it in the course of its active life of service.

But to proceed. What do I want now? I want a spark to fire my tinder. A spark is enough. Do
you remember the motto of the Royal Humane Society? Some of my young friends can no doubt translate
it, "Lateat scintilla forsan"--perchance a spark may lie hid. If a person rescued from drowning
has but a spark of life remaining, try and get the spark to burst into activity. That is what
the motto of that excellent society means. How am I to get this spark from the flint and steel
to set fire to my tinder? I take the steel in one hand, as you see, and I set to work to strike
it as vehemently as I can with the flint which I hold in the other (Fig. 3 A B). Spark follows
spark. See how brilliant they are! But I want one spark at least to fall on my tinder. There,
I have succeeded, and it has set fire to my tinder. One spark was enough. The spark was obtained
by the collision of the steel and flint. The sparks produced by this striking of flint against
steel were formerly the only safe light the coal-miner had to light him in his dark dreary
work of procuring coal. Here is the flint and steel lamp which originally belonged to Sir Humphry
Davy (Fig. 22). The miners could not use candles in coal-mines because that would have been
dangerous, and they were driven to employ an apparatus consisting of an iron wheel revolving
against a piece of flint for the purpose of getting as much light as the sparks would yield.
This instrument has been very kindly lent to me by Professor Dewar. I will project a picture
of the apparatus on the screen, so that those at a distance may be better able to see the construction
of the instrument.

And now follow me carefully. I take the steel and the flint, and striking them together I get
sparks. I want you to ask yourselves, Where do the sparks come from? Each spark is due to a
minute piece of iron being knocked off the steel by the blow of flint with steel. Note the
precise character of the spark. Let me sprinkle some iron filings into this large gas flame.
You will notice that the sparks of burning iron filings are very similar in appearance to the
spark I produce by the collision of my flint and steel.

But now I want to carry you somewhat further in our story. It would not do for me simply to
knock off a small piece of iron; I want when I knock it off that it should be red-hot. Stay
for a moment and think of this--iron particles knocked off--iron particles made red-hot. All
mechanical force generates heat.[A] You remember, in my last lecture, I rubbed together some
pieces of wood, and they became sufficiently hot to fire phosphorus. On a cold day you rub
your hands together to warm them, and the cabmen buffet themselves. It is the same story--mechanical
force generating heat! The bather knows perfectly well that a rough sea is warmer than a smooth
sea. Why?--because the mechanical dash of the waves has been converted into heat. Let me remind
you of the familiar phrase, "striking a light," when I rub the match on the match-box. "Forgive
me urging such simple facts by such simple illustrations and such simple experiments. The facts
I am endeavouring to bring before you are illustrations of principles that determine the polity
of the whole material universe." Friction produces heat. Here is a little toy (cracker) that
you may have seen before (Fig. 23). It is scientific in its way. A small quantity of fulminating
material is placed between two pieces of card on which a few fragments of sand have been sprinkled
(Fig. 23 a). The two ends of the paper (b b) are pulled asunder. The friction produces heat,
the heat fires the fulminate, and off it goes with a crack. And now put this question to yourselves,
What produced the friction? Force. What is more, the amount of heat produced is the exact measure
of the amount of force used. Heat is a form of force. I must urge you to realize precisely
this energy of force. When you sharpen a knife you put oil upon the hone. Why?--When the carpenter
saws a piece of wood he greases the saw. Why?--When you travel by train you see the railway-porter
running up and down the platform with a box of yellow grease with which he greases the wheels.
Why?--The answer to these questions is not far to seek--it is because you want your knife sharpened;
it is because you want the saw to cut; it is because you want the train to travel. The carpenter
finds sawing hard work, and he does not want the force of the muscles of his arm--his labour,
in short--to be converted into heat, and so he greases the saw, knowing that the more completely
he prevents friction, the more wood he will cut. It is the force of steam that makes the engine
travel. Steam costs money. The engine-driver does not want that steam-force to be converted
into heat, because every degree of heat produced means diminished speed of his train; and so
the porter greases the wheels. But as you approach the station the train must be stopped. The
steam is turned off, and the guard puts on what he calls "the brake." What is the brake? It
is a piece of wood so constructed and placed that it can be made to press upon the wheel. Considerable
friction results between the wheel and the brake;--heat is produced;--the train gradually comes
to a stop. Why? We have now the conversion of that force into heat which a minute ago was being
used for the purpose of keeping the train a-going. Given a certain force you can have heat
or motion; but you cannot have heat and motion with the same force in the same amount as if
you had them singly. In every-day life, you cannot have your pudding and eat it.

    [A] I need scarcely say, that whatever is of any value in the
    following remarks is derived from that charming book of Professor
    Tyndall's, Heat a Mode of Motion.

Heat then is generated by mechanical force; it is a mode of motion. There was an old theory
that heat was material. There was heat, for instance, you were told, in this nail. Suppose
I hammer it, it will get hot, and at the same time I shall reduce by hammering the bulk of
the iron nail. A pint pot will not hold so much as a quart pot. The nail (you were told) cannot
hold so much heat when it occupies a less bulk as it did when it occupied a larger bulk. Therefore
if I reduce the bulk of the nail I squeeze out some of the heat. That was the old theory. One
single experiment knocked it on the head. It was certain, that in water there is a great deal
more entrapped heat--"latent heat" it was called--than there is in ice. If you take two pieces
of ice and rub them together, you will find the ice melts--the solid ice changes (that is to
say) into liquid water. Where did the heat come from to melt the ice? You could not get the
heat from the ice, because it was not there, there being admittedly more latent heat in the
water than in the ice. The explanation is certain--the heat was the result of the friction.
And now let me go to my hammer and nail. I wish to see whether I can make this nail hot by
hammering. It is quite cold at the present time. I hope to make the nail hot enough by hammering
it to fire that piece of phosphorus (Fig. 24). One or two sharp blows with the hammer suffice,
and as you see the thing is done--I have fired the phosphorus. But follow the precise details
of the experiment. It was I who gave motion to the hammer. I brought that hammer on to that
nail. Where did the motion go to that I gave the hammer? It went into the nail, and it is that
very motion that made the nail hot, and it was that heat which lighted the phosphorus. It was
I who fired the phosphorus: do not be mistaken, I fired the phosphorus. It was my arm that
gave motion to the hammer. It was my force that was communicated to the hammer. It was I who
made the hammer give the motion to the nail. It was I myself that fired the phosphorus.

I want you then to realize this great fact, that when I hold the steel and strike it with the
flint, and get sparks, I first of all knock off a minute fragment of iron by the blow that
I impart to it, whilst the force I use in striking the blow actually renders the little piece
of detached iron red-hot. What a wonderful thought this is! Look at the sun, the great centre
of heat! It looks as if it were a blazing ball of fire in the heavens. Where does the heat
of the sun come from? It seems bold to suggest that the heat is produced by the impact of meteorites
on the sun. Just as I, for instance, take a hammer and heat the nail by the dash of the hammer
on it, so the dash of these meteorites on the sun are supposed to produce the heat so essential
to our life and comfort.

Let us take another step forward in the story of our tinder-box. Having produced a red-hot
spark and set fire to my tinder, I want you to see what I do next. I set to work to blow upon
my lighted tinder. You remember, by the bye, that Latin motto of our school-books--al[)e]re
flammam, nourish the flame. When I blow on the tinder my object is to nourish the flame. Here
is a pair of common kitchen bellows (Fig. 25); when the fire is low the cook blows the fire
to make it burn up. What is the object of this blowing operation? It is to supply a larger
quantity of atmospheric oxygen to the almost lifeless fire than it would otherwise obtain.
Oxygen is the spark's nourishment and life, and the more it gets the better it thrives. Oxygen
is an extremely active agent in nourishing flame. If, for instance, I take a little piece of
carbon and merely set fire to one small corner of it, and then introduce it into this jar of
oxygen, see how brilliantly it burns; you notice how rapidly the carbon is becoming consumed
(Fig. 26). In the tinder-box I blow on the tinder to supply a larger amount of oxygen to my
spark. A thing to burn under ordinary conditions must have oxygen, and the more oxygen it gets
the better it burns. It does not follow that the supply of oxygen to a burning body must necessarily
come directly from the air. Here, for instance, I have a squib. I will fire it and put it under
water (Fig. 27). You see it goes on burning whether it is in the water or out of it, because
one of the materials of which the squib is composed supplies the oxygen. The oxygen is actually
locked up inside the squib. When then I blow upon my tinder, my object is to supply more oxygen
to it than it would get under ordinary conditions. And, as you see, the more I blow, within
certain limits, the more the spark spreads, until now the whole of my tinder has become red-hot.
But my time is gone, and we must leave the rest of our story for the next lecture.

LECTURE III.

Recall for a few minutes the facts I brought before you in my last lecture. The first point
we discussed was the preparation of the tinder. I explained to you that tinder was nothing
more than carbon in a finely-divided state. The second point was, that I had to strike the
steel with the flint in such manner that a minute particle of the iron should be detached;
the force used in knocking it off being sufficient to make the small particle of iron red-hot.
This spark falling upon the tinder set fire to it. The next stage of the operation was to blow
upon the tinder, in order, as I said, to nourish the flame; in other words, to promote combustion
by an increased supply of oxygen, just as we use an ordinary pair of bellows for the purpose
of fanning a fire which has nearly gone out into a blaze.

And now comes the next point in my story of a tinder-box. Having ignited the tinder I want
to set fire to the match. Now I have here some of the old tinder-box matches, and you will
see that they are simply wooden splints with a little sulphur at the end. Why (you say) use
sulphur? For this reason--the wood is not combustible enough to be fired by the red-hot tinder.
We put therefore upon the wood a substance which is more combustible than the wood. This sulphur--which
most people call brimstone--has been known from very early times. In the middle ages it was
regarded as the "principle of fire." It is referred to by Moses and Homer and Pliny. A very
distinguished chemist, Geber, describes it as one of "the principles of nature." Having fired
my tinder, as you see, and blown upon it, I place my sulphur match in contact with the red-hot
tinder. And now I want you to notice that the sulphur match does not catch fire immediately.
It wants, in fact, a little time, and as you see a little coaxing. Now I have got it alight.
But note, it is the sulphur that at the present moment is burning. The burning sulphur is now
beginning to set fire to the wood. The whole match is well alight now! But it was the sulphur
that caught fire first, and it was the sulphur that set fire to the wood. A little time was
occupied, we said, in making the sulphur catch fire. Ask yourselves this question--Why was
it that the sulphur took a little time to catch fire? This was the reason--because before the
sulphur could catch fire it was necessary to change the solid sulphur (the condition in which
it was upon the match end) into gaseous sulphur. The solid sulphur could not catch fire. Therefore
the heat of my tinder during the interval that I was coaxing the match (as I called it) was
being exerted in converting my solid into gaseous sulphur. When the solid sulphur had had sufficient
heat applied to it to vapourize it, the sulphur gas immediately caught fire. Now understand,
that in order to convert a solid into a liquid, or a liquid into a gas, heat is always a necessity.
I must have heat to produce a gas out of a solid or a liquid. I will endeavour to make this
clear to you by an experiment. I have here, as you see, a wooden stool, and I am about to pour
a little water on this stool. I place a glass beaker on the stool, the liquid water only intervening
between the stool and the bottom of the glass. You see the glass is perfectly loose, and easily
lifted off the stool notwithstanding the layer of water. I will now pour into the beaker a
little of a very volatile liquid--i. e. a liquid that is easily converted into a gas--(bisulphide
of carbon). I wish somewhat rapidly to effect the change of this liquid bisulphide of carbon
into gaseous bisulphide of carbon, and in order to accomplish this object I must have heat.
So I take this tube which, as you see, is connected with a pair of bellows, and simply blow
on my bisulphide of carbon. This effects the change of the liquid into a gas with great rapidity.
Just as I converted my solid sulphur into a gas by the heat of the tinder, so here I am converting
this liquid bisulphide of carbon into a gas by the wind from my bellows. But my liquid bisulphide
of carbon must get heat somewhere or another in order that the change of the liquid into a
gas, that I desire should take place, may be effected; and so, seeing that the water that I
have placed between the glass and the stool is the most convenient place from which the liquid
can derive the necessary heat, it says, "I will take the heat out of the water." It does so,
but in removing the heat from the water it changes the liquid water into solid ice. And see,
already the beaker is frozen to the stool, so that I can actually lift up the stool by the
beaker (Fig. 28). Understand then why my sulphur match wanted some time and some coaxing before
it caught fire, viz. to change this solid sulphur into gaseous sulphur.

But let us go a step further: why must the solid sulphur be converted into a gas? We want a
flame, and whenever we have flame it is absolutely necessary that we should have a gas to burn.
You cannot have flame without you have gas. Let me endeavour to illustrate what I mean. I pour
into this flask a small quantity of ether, a liquid easily converted into a gas. If I apply
a lighted taper to the mouth of the flask, no gas, or practically none, being evolved at the
moment, nothing happens. But I will heat the ether so as to convert it into a gas. And now
that I have evolved a large quantity of ether gas, when I apply a lighted taper to the mouth
of the flask I get a large flame (Fig. 29). There it is! The more gas I evolve (that is, the
more actively I apply the heat) the larger is the flame. You see it is a very large flame now.
If I take the spirit lamp away, the production of gas grows less and less, until my flame almost
dies out; but you see if I again apply my heat and set more gas free, I revive my flame. I
want you to grasp this very important fact, upon which I cannot enlarge further now, that given
flame, I must have a gas to burn, and therefore heat as a power is needed before I can obtain
flame.

Well, you ask me, is that true of all flame? Where is the gas, you say, in that candle flame?
Think for a moment of the science involved in lighting a candle. What am I doing when I apply
a lighted match to this candle? The first thing I do is to melt the tallow, the melted tallow
being drawn up by the capillarity of the wick. The next thing I do is to convert the liquid
tallow into a gas. This done, I set fire to the gas. I don't suppose you ever thought so much
was involved in lighting a candle. My candle is nothing more than a portable gas-works, similar
in principle to the gas-works from which the gas that I am burning here is supplied. Whether
it is a lamp, or a gas-burner, or a candle, they are all in a true sense gas-works, and they
all pre-suppose the application of heat to some material or another for the purpose of forming
a gas which will burn.

Before I pass on, I want to refer to the beautiful burner that I have here. It is the burner
used by the Whitechapel stall-keepers on a Saturday night (Fig. 30). (Fig. a is an enlarged
drawing of the burner.) Just let me explain the science of the Whitechapel burner. First of
all you will see the man with a funnel filling this top portion with naphtha (c). Here is a
stop-cock, by turning which he lets a little naphtha run down the tube through a very minute
orifice into this small cup at the bottom of the burner (a). This cup he heats in a friend's
lamp, thereby converting the liquid naphtha, which runs into the cup, into a gas. So soon as
the gas is formed--in other words, so soon as the naphtha has been sufficiently heated--the
naphtha gas catches fire, the heat being then sufficient to maintain that little cup hot enough
to keep up a regular supply of naphtha gas. When the lamp does not burn very well, you will
often see the man poking it with a pin. The carbon given off from the naphtha is very disposed
to choke up the little hole through which the naphtha runs into the cup, and the costermonger
pushes a pin into the little hole to allow the free passage of the naphtha. That, then, is
the mechanism of this beautiful lamp of the Whitechapel traders, known as Halliday's lamp.

Now I go to another point: having obtained the gas, I must set fire to it. It is important
to note that the temperature required to set fire to different gases varies with the gas. For
instance, I will set free in this bottle a small quantity of gas, which fires at a very low
temperature. It is the vapour of carbon disulphide. See, I merely place a hot rod into the
bottle, and the gas fires at once. If I put a hot rod into this bottle of coal gas, no such
effect results, since coal gas requires a very much higher temperature to ignite it than bisulphide
of carbon gas. I want almost--not quite--actual flame to fire coal gas. But here is another
gas, about which I may have to say something directly, called marsh gas (the gas of coal-mines).
This requires a much higher temperature than even coal gas to fire it. I want you to understand
that although all gases require heat to fire them, different gases ignite at very different
temperatures. Bisulphide of carbon gas, e. g., ignites at a very low temperature, whilst marsh
gas requires a very high temperature indeed for its ignition. You will see directly that this
is a very important fact. Sulphur gas ignites fortunately at a fairly low temperature, and
that is why sulphur is so useful an addition to the wood splint by which to get fire out of
the tinder-box.

And here I wish to make a slight digression in my story. I will show you an experiment preparatory
to bringing before you the fact I am anxious now to make clear. I have before me a tube, one
half of which is brass and the other half wood. I have covered the tube, as you see, with a
tightly-fitting piece of white paper. The whole tube, wood and brass, has been treated in exactly
the same manner. Now I will set fire to some spirit in the trough I have here, and expose the
entire tube to the action of the flame. Notice this very curious result, viz. that the paper
covering the brass portion of the tube does not catch fire, whereas the paper covering the
wood is rapidly consumed (Fig. 31). You see the exact line that divides wood from brass by
the burning of the paper. Well, why is that? Now all of you know that some things conduct heat
(i. e. carry away heat) better than other substances. For instance, if you were to put a copper
rod and a glass rod into the fire, allowing a part of each to project, the copper rod that
projects out of the fire would soon become so very hot that you dare not touch it, owing to
the copper conducting the heat from the fire, whereas you would be able to take hold of the
projecting end of the glass rod long after the end of the glass exposed to the fire had melted.
The fact is, the copper carries heat well, and the glass carries heat badly. Now with the teaching
of that experiment before you, you will understand, I hope, the exact object of one or two
experiments I am about to show you. Here is a piece of coarse wire gauze--I am about to place
it over the flame of this Argand burner. You will notice that it lowers the flame for a moment,
but almost immediately the flame dashes through the gauze (Fig. 32 A). Here is another piece
of gauze, not quite so coarse as the last. I place this over the flame, and for a moment the
flame cannot get through it. There, you see it is through now, but it did not pass with the
same readiness that it did in the case of the other piece of gauze, which was coarser. Now,
when I take a piece of fine gauze, the flame does not pass through at all until the gauze is
nearly red-hot. There is plenty of gas passing all the time. If I take a still finer gauze,
I shall find that the flame won't pass even when it is almost red-hot (Fig. 32 B). Plenty of
gas is passing through, remember, all the time, but the flame does not pass through. Now why
is it that the flame is unable to pass? The reason is this--because the metal gauze has so
cooled the flame that the heat on one side is not sufficient to set fire to the gas on the
other side. I must have, you see, a certain temperature to fire my gas. When therefore I experiment
with a very fine piece of gauze, where I have a good deal of metal and a large conducting surface,
there is no possibility of the flame passing. In fact, I have so cooled the flame by the metal
gauze that it is no longer hot enough to set fire to the gas on the opposite side. I will give
you one or two more illustrations of the same fact. Suppose I put upon this gauze a piece of
camphor (camphor being a substance that gives off a heavy combustible vapour when heated),
and then heat it, you see the camphor gas burning on the under side of the gauze, but the camphor
gas on the upper side is not fired (Fig. 33). Plenty of camphor gas is being given off, but
the flame of the burning camphor on the under side is not high enough to set fire to the camphor
gas on the upper side, owing to the conducting power of the metal between the flame and the
upper gas. There is one other experiment I should like to show you. Upon this piece of metal
gauze I have piled up a small heap of gunpowder. I will place a spirit-lamp underneath the
gunpowder, as you see I am now doing, and I don't suppose the gunpowder will catch fire. I
see the sulphur of the gunpowder at the present moment volatilizing, but the flame, cooled
by the action of the metal, is not hot enough to set fire to the gunpowder.

I showed you the steel and flint lamp--if I may call it a lamp--used by coal-miners at the
time of Davy (Fig. 22). Davy set to work to invent a more satisfactory lamp than that, and
the result of his experiments was the beautiful miner's lamp which I have here (Fig. 34). I
regard this lamp with considerable affection, because I have been down many a coal-mine with
it. This is the coal-miner's safety-lamp. The old-fashioned form of it that I have here has
been much improved, but it illustrates the principle as well as, if not better than, more elaborate
varieties. It is simply an oil flame covered with a gauze shade, exactly like that gauze with
which I have been experimenting. I will allow a jet of coal gas to play upon this lamp, but
the gas, as you see, does not catch fire. You will notice the oil flame in the lamp elongates
in a curious manner. The flame of the lamp cooled by the gauze is not hot enough to set fire
to the coal gas, but the appearance of the flame warns the miner, and tells him when there
is danger. And that is the explanation of the beautiful miner's safety-lamp invented by Sir
Humphry Davy.

Now let me once more put this fact clearly before you, that whether it is the gas flame or
our farthing rushlight, whether it is our lamp or our lucifer match, if we have a flame we
must have a gas to burn, and having a gas, we must heat it to, and maintain it at, a certain
temperature. We have now reached a point where our tinder-box has presented us with flame.
A flame is indeed the consummated work of the tinder-box.

Just let me say a few words about the grand result--the consummated work of the tinder-box.
A flame is a very remarkable thing. It looks solid, but it is not solid. You will find that
the inside of a flame consists of unburnt gas--gas, that is to say, not in a state of combustion
at all. The only spot where true combustion takes place is the outer covering of the flame.
I will try to show you some experiments illustrating this. I will take a large flame for this
purpose. Here is a piece of glass tube which I have covered with ordinary white paper. Holding
the covered glass tube in our large flame for a minute or two, you observe I get two rings
of charred paper, corresponding to the outer envelope of the flame, whilst that portion of
the paper between the black rings has not even been scorched, showing you that it is only the
outer part of the flame that is burning (Fig. 35). The heat of the flame is at that part where,
as I said before, the combustible gases come into contact--into collision with the atmosphere.
So completely is this true, that if I take a tube, such as I have here, I can easily convey
the unburnt gas in the centre of the flame away from the flame, and set fire to it, as you
see, at the end of the glass tube a long distance from the flame (Fig. 36). I will place in
the centre of my flame some phosphorus which is at the present moment in a state of active
burning, and observe how instantly the combustion of the phosphorus ceases so soon as it gets
into the centre of the flame. The crucible which contains it is cooled down immediately, and
presents an entirely different appearance within the flame to what it did outside the flame.
It is a curious way, perhaps you think, to stop a substance burning by putting it into a flame.
Indeed I can put a heap of gunpowder inside a flame so that the outer envelope of burning gas
does not ignite it (Fig. 37). There you see a heap of gunpowder in the centre of our large
flame. The flame is so completely hollow that even it cannot explode the powder.

I want you, if you will, to go a step further The heat of the flame is due, as I explained
in my last lecture, to the clashing of molecules. But what is the light of my candle and gas
due to? The light is due to the solid matter in the flame, brought to a state of white heat
or incandescence by the heat of the flame. The heat is due to the clashing of the particles,
the light is due to the heated solid matter in the flame. Let me see if I can show you that.
I am setting free in this bottle some hydrogen, which I am about to ignite at the end of this
piece of glass tube (Fig. 38 A). I shall be a little cautious, because there is danger if my
hydrogen gets mixed with air. There is my hydrogen burning; but see, it gives little or no
light. But this candle flame gives light. Why? The light of the candle is due to the intensely
heated solid matter in the flame; the absence of light in the hydrogen flame depends on the
absence of solid matter. Let me hold clean white plates over both these flames. See the quantity
of black solid matter that I am able to collect from this candle flame (Fig. 38 B). But my
hydrogen yields me no soot or solid matter whatsoever (Fig. 38 A). The plate remains perfectly
clean, and only a little moisture collects upon it. The light that candle gives depends upon
the solid matter in the flame becoming intensely heated. If what I say be true, it follows
that if I take a flame which gives no light, like this hydrogen flame (Fig. 39 A), and give
it solid particles, I ought to change the non-luminous flame into a luminous one. Let us see
whether this be so or not. I have here a glass tube containing a little cotton wadding (Fig.
39 B a), and I am about to pour on the wadding a little ether, and to make the hydrogen gas
pass through the cotton wadding soaked with ether before I fire it. And now if what I have
said is correct, the hydrogen flame to which I have imparted a large quantity of solid matter
ought to produce a good light, and so it does! See, I have converted the flame which gave no
light (Fig. 39 A) into a flame which gives an excellent light merely by incorporating solid
matter with the flame (Fig. 39 B). What is more, the amount of light that a flame gives depends
upon the amount or rather the number of solid particles that it contains. The more solid particles
there are in the flame, the greater is the light. Let me give you an illustration of this.
Here is an interesting little piece of apparatus given to my predecessor in the chair of chemistry
at the London Hospital by the Augustus Harris of that day. It is one of the torches formerly
used by the pantomime fairies as they descended from the realms of the carpenters. I have an
alcohol flame at the top of the torch which gives me very little light. Here, you see, is an
arrangement by which I can shake a quantity of solid matter (lycopodium) into the non-luminous
alcohol flame. You will observe what a magnificently luminous flame I produce (Fig. 40).

I have told you that the light of a flame is due to solid matter in the flame;[B] further,
that the amount of light is due to the amount of solid matter. And now I want to show you that
the kind of light is due to the kind of solid matter in the flame. Here are some pieces of
cotton wadding, which I am about to saturate with alcoholic solutions of different kinds of
solid matter. For instance, I have in one bottle an alcoholic solution of a lithium salt, in
another of a barium, in a third of a strontium, and so on. I will set fire to all these solutions,
and you see how vastly different the colours are, the colour of the flames being dependent
on the various forms of solid matter that I have introduced into them.

    [B] I have not forgotten Frankland's experiments on this subject,
    but the lectures did not admit of dealing with exceptional cases.

Thus I have shown you that the heat of our flame is due to the clashing of the two gases, and
the light of the flame to the solid matter in the flame, and the kind of light to the kind
of solid matter.

Well, there is another point to which I desire to refer. Light is the paint which colours bodies.
You know that ordinary white light is made up of a series of beautiful colours (the spectrum),
which I show you here. If I take all these spectrum or rainbow colours which are painted on
this glass I can, as you see, recompose them into white light by rotating the disc with sufficient
rapidity that they may get mixed together on the little screen at the back of your eye. White
light then is a mixture of a number of colours.

