"You belong to a young country, Mr. Ingram, and are naturally prone to think of material life.
The necessity of living looms large before you."

"Very large, indeed, Miss Dawkins."

"Whereas with us, with some of us at least, the material aspect has given place to one in which
poetry and enthusiasm prevail.  To such among us the associations of past times are very dear.
Cheops, to me, is more than Napoleon Bonaparte."

"That is more than most of your countrymen can say, at any rate, just at present."

"I am a woman," continued Miss Dawkins.

Mr. Ingram took off his hat in acknowledgment both of the announcement and of the fact.

"And to us it is not given--not given as yet--to share in the great deeds of the present. 
The envy of your sex has driven us from the paths which lead to honour.  But the deeds of the
past are as much ours as yours."

"Oh, quite as much."

"'Tis to your country that we look for enfranchisement from this thraldom.  Yes, Mr. Ingram,
the women of America have that strength of mind which has been wanting to those of Europe.
In the United States woman will at last learn to exercise her proper mission."

Mr. Ingram expressed a sincere wish that such might be the case; and then wondering at the
ingenuity with which Miss Dawkins had travelled round from Cheops and his Pyramid to the rights
of women in America, he contrived to fall back, under the pretence of asking after the ailments
of Mrs. Damer.

And now at last they were on the sand, in the absolute desert, making their way up to the very
foot of the most northern of the two Pyramids. They were by this time surrounded by a crowd
of Arab guides, or Arabs professing to be guides, who had already ascertained that Mr. Damer
was the chief of the party, and were accordingly driving him almost to madness by the offers
of their services, and their assurance that he could not possibly see the outside or the inside
of either structure, or even remain alive upon the ground, unless he at once accepted their
offers made at their own prices.

"Get away, will you?" said he.  "I don't want any of you, and I won't have you!  If you take
hold of me I'll shoot you!"  This was said to one specially energetic Arab, who, in his efforts
to secure his prey, had caught hold of Mr. Damer by the leg.

"Yes, yes, I say!  Englishmen always take me;--me--me, and then no break him leg.  Yes--yes--yes;--I
go.  Master, say yes.  Only one leetle ten shillings!"

"Abdallah!" shouted Mr. Damer, "why don't you take this man away?  Why don't you make him understand
that if all the Pyramids depended on it, I would not give him sixpence!"

And then Abdallah, thus invoked, came up, and explained to the man in Arabic that he would
gain his object more surely if he would behave himself a little more quietly; a hint which
the man took for one minute, and for one minute only.

And then poor Mrs. Damer replied to an application for backsheish by the gift of a sixpence.
Unfortunate woman!  The word backsheish means, I believe, a gift; but it has come in Egypt
to signify money, and is eternally dinned into the ears of strangers by Arab suppliants.  Mrs.
Damer ought to have known better, as, during the last six weeks she had never shown her face
out of Shepheard's Hotel without being pestered for backsheish; but she was tired and weak,
and foolishly thought to rid herself of the man who was annoying her.

No sooner had the coin dropped from her hand into that of the Arab, than she was surrounded
by a cluster of beggars, who loudly made their petitions as though they would, each of them,
individually be injured if treated with less liberality than that first comer.  They took hold
of her donkey, her bridle, her saddle, her legs, and at last her arms and hands, screaming
for backsheish in voices that were neither sweet nor mild.

In her dismay she did give away sundry small coins--all, probably, that she had about her;
but this only made the matter worse.  Money was going, and each man, by sufficient energy,
might hope to get some of it.  They were very energetic, and so frightened the poor lady that
she would certainly have fallen, had she not been kept on her seat by the pressure around her.

"Oh, dear! oh, dear! get away," she cried.  "I haven't got any more; indeed I haven't.  Go
away, I tell you!  Mr. Damer! oh, Mr. Damer!" and then, in the excess of her agony, she uttered
one loud, long, and continuous shriek.

Up came Mr. Damer; up came Abdallah; up came M. Delabordeau; up came Mr. Ingram, and at last
she was rescued.  "You shouldn't go away and leave me to the mercy of these nasty people. 
As to that Abdallah, he is of no use to anybody."

"Why you bodder de good lady, you dem blackguard?" said Abdallah, raising his stick, as though
he were going to lay them all low with a blow.  "Now you get noting, you tief!"

The Arabs for a moment retired to a little distance, like flies driven from a sugar-bowl; but
it was easy to see that, like the flies, they would return at the first vacant moment.

And now they had reached the very foot of the Pyramids and proceeded to dismount from their
donkeys.  Their intention was first to ascend to the top, then to come down to their banquet,
and after that to penetrate into the interior.  And all this would seem to be easy of performance.
The Pyramid is undoubtedly high, but it is so constructed as to admit of climbing without difficulty.
A lady mounting it would undoubtedly need some assistance, but any man possessed of moderate
activity would require no aid at all.

But our friends were at once imbued with the tremendous nature of the task before them.  A
sheikh of the Arabs came forth, who communicated with them through Abdallah.  The work could
be done, no doubt, he said; but a great many men would be wanted to assist.  Each lady must
have four Arabs, and each gentlemen three; and then, seeing that the work would be peculiarly
severe on this special day, each of these numerous Arabs must be remunerated by some very large
number of piastres.

Mr. Damer, who was by no means a close man in his money dealings, opened his eyes with surprise,
and mildly expostulated; M. Delabordeau, who was rather a close man in his reckonings, immediately
buttoned up his breeches pocket and declared that he should decline to mount the Pyramid at
all at that price; and then Mr. Ingram descended to the combat.

The protestations of the men were fearful.  They declared, with loud voices, eager actions,
and manifold English oaths, that an attempt was being made to rob them.  They had a right to
demand the sums which they were charging, and it was a shame that English gentlemen should
come and take the bread out of their mouths.  And so they screeched, gesticulated, and swore,
and frightened poor Mrs. Damer almost into fits.

But at last it was settled and away they started, the sheikh declaring that the bargain had
been made at so low a rate as to leave him not one piastre for himself.  Each man had an Arab
on each side of him, and Miss Dawkins and Miss Damer had each, in addition, one behind.  Mrs.
Damer was so frightened as altogether to have lost all ambition to ascend.  She sat below on
a fragment of stone, with the three dragomans standing around her as guards; but even with
the three dragomans the attacks on her were so frequent, and as she declared afterwards she
was so bewildered, that she never had time to remember that she had come there from England
to see the Pyramids, and that she was now immediately under them.

The boys, utterly ignoring their guides, scrambled up quicker than the Arabs could follow them.
Mr. Damer started off at a pace which soon brought him to the end of his tether, and from that
point was dragged up by the sheer strength of his assistants; thereby accomplishing the wishes
of the men, who induce their victims to start as rapidly as possible, in order that they may
soon find themselves helpless from want of wind.  Mr. Ingram endeavoured to attach himself
to Fanny, and she would have been nothing loth to have him at her right hand instead of the
hideous brown, shrieking, one-eyed Arab who took hold of her. But it was soon found that any
such arrangement was impossible.  Each guide felt that if he lost his own peculiar hold he
would lose his prey, and held on, therefore, with invincible tenacity.  Miss Dawkins looked,
too, as though she had thought to be attended to by some Christian cavalier, but no Christian
cavalier was forthcoming.  M. Delabordeau was the wisest, for he took the matter quietly, did
as he was bid, and allowed the guides nearly to carry him to the top of the edifice.

"Ha! so this is the top of the Pyramid, is it?" said Mr. Damer, bringing out his words one
by one, being terribly out of breath.  "Very wonderful, very wonderful, indeed!"

"It is wonderful," said Miss Dawkins, whose breath had not failed her in the least, "very wonderful,
indeed!  Only think, Mr. Damer, you might travel on for days and days, till days became months,
through those interminable sands, and yet you would never come to the end of them.  Is it not
quite stupendous?"

"Ah, yes, quite,--puff, puff"--said Mr. Damer striving to regain his breath.

Mr. Damer was now at her disposal; weak and worn with toil and travel, out of breath, and with
half his manhood gone; if ever she might prevail over him so as to procure from his mouth an
assent to that Nile proposition, it would be now.  And after all, that Nile proposition was
the best one now before her.  She did not quite like the idea of starting off across the Great
Desert without any lady, and was not sure that she was prepared to be fallen in love with by
M. Delabordeau, even if there should ultimately be any readiness on the part of that gentleman
to perform the role of lover.  With Mr. Ingram the matter was different, nor was she so diffident
of her own charms as to think it altogether impossible that she might succeed, in the teeth
of that little chit, Fanny Damer.  That Mr. Ingram would join the party up the Nile she had
very little doubt; and then there would be one place left for her.  She would thus, at any
rate, become commingled with a most respectable family, who might be of material service to her.

Thus actuated she commenced an earnest attack upon Mr. Damer.

"Stupendous!" she said again, for she was fond of repeating favourite words.  "What a wondrous
race must have been those Egyptian kings of old!"

"I dare say they were," said Mr. Damer, wiping his brow as he sat upon a large loose stone,
a fragment lying on the flat top of the Pyramid, one of those stones with which the complete
apex was once made, or was once about to be made.

"A magnificent race! so gigantic in their conceptions!  Their ideas altogether overwhelm us
poor, insignificant, latter-day mortals.  They built these vast Pyramids; but for us, it is
task enough to climb to their top."

"Quite enough," ejaculated Mr. Damer.

But Mr. Damer would not always remain weak and out of breath, and it was absolutely necessary
for Miss Dawkins to hurry away from Cheops and his tomb, to Thebes and Karnac.

"After seeing this it is impossible for any one with a spark of imagination to leave Egypt
without going farther a-field."

Mr. Damer merely wiped his brow and grunted.  This Miss Dawkins took as a signal of weakness,
and went on with her task perseveringly.

