This was the point at which matters had arrived, in March 1504, when as the twilight was falling
one evening a cry was raised that there was a ship in sight; and presently a small caravel
was seen standing in towards the shore.  All ideas of mutiny were forgotten, and the crew assembled
in joyful anticipation to await, as they thought, the coming of their deliverers.  The caravel
came on with the evening breeze; but while it was yet a long way off the shore it was seen
to be lying to; a boat was lowered and rowed towards the harbour.

As the boat drew near Columbus could recognise in it Diego de Escobar, whom he remembered having
condemned to death for his share in the rebellion of Roldan.  He was not the man whom Columbus
would have most wished to see at that moment.  The boat came alongside the hulks, and a barrel
of wine and a side of bacon, the sea-compliment customary on such occasions, was handed up.
Greatly to the Admiral's surprise, however, Escobar did not come on board, but pushed his boat
off and began to speak to Columbus from a little distance.  He told him that Ovando was greatly
distressed at the Admiral's misfortunes; that he had been much occupied by wars in Espanola,
and had not been able to send a message to him before; that he greatly regretted he had no
ship at present large enough to bring off the Admiral and his people, but that he would send
one as soon as he had it.  In the meantime the Admiral was to be assured that all his affairs
in Espanola were being attended to faithfully, and that Escobar was instructed to bring back
at once any letters which the Admiral might wish to write.

The coolness and unexpectedness of this message completely took away the breath of the unhappy
Spaniards, who doubtless stood looking in bewilderment from Escobar to Columbus, unable to
believe that the caravel had not been sent for their relief.  Columbus, however, with a self-restraint
which cannot be too highly praised, realised that Escobar meant what he said, and that by protesting
against his action or trying to interfere with it he would only be putting himself in the wrong.
He therefore retired immediately to his cabin and wrote a letter to Ovando, in which he drew
a vivid picture of the distress of his people, reported the rebellion of the Porras brothers,
and reminded Ovando that he relied upon the fulfilment of his promise to send relief.  The
letter was handed over to Escobar, who rowed back with it to his caravel and immediately sailed
away with it into the night.

Before he could retire to commune with his own thoughts or to talk with his faithful brother,
Columbus had the painful duty of speaking to his people, whose puzzled and disappointed faces
must have cost him some extra pangs.  He told them that he was quite satisfied with the message
from Ovando, that it was a sign of kindness on his part thus to send them news in advance that
relief was coming, that their situation was now known in San Domingo, and that vessels would
soon be here to take them away.  He added that he himself was so sure of these things that
he had refused to go back with Escobar, but had preferred to remain with them and share their
lot until relief should come.  This had the desired effect of cheering the Spaniards; but it
was far from representing the real sentiments of Columbus on the subject.  The fact that Escobar
had been chosen to convey this strange empty message of sympathy seemed to him suspicious,
and with his profound distrust of Ovando Columbus began to wonder whether some further scheme
might not be on foot to damage him in the eyes of the Sovereigns.  He was convinced that Ovando
had meant to let him starve on the island, and that the real purpose of Escobar's visit had
been to find out what condition the Admiral was in, so that Ovando might know how to act. 
It is very hard to get at the truth of what these two men thought of each other.  They were
both suspicious, each was playing for his own hand, and Ovando was only a little more unscrupulous
than Columbus; but there can be no doubt that whatever his motives may have been Ovando acted
with abominable treachery and cruelty in leaving the Admiral unrelieved for nearly nine months.

Columbus now tried to make use of the visit of Escobar to restore to allegiance the band of
rebels that were wandering about in the neighbourhood under the leadership of the Porras brothers.
Why he should have wished to bring them back to the ships is not clear, for by all accounts
he was very well rid of them; but probably his pride as a commander was hurt by the thought
that half of his company had defied his authority and were in a state of mutiny.  At any rate
he sent out an ambassador to Porras, offering to receive the mutineers back without any punishment,
and to give them a free passage to Espanola in the vessels which were shortly expected, if
they would return to their allegiance with him.

The folly of this overture was made manifest by the treatment which it received.  It was bad
enough to make advances to the Porras brothers, but it was still worse to have those advances
repulsed, and that is what happened.  The Porras brothers, being themselves incapable of any
single-mindedness, affected not to believe in the sincerity of the Admiral's offer; they feared
that he was laying some kind of trap for them; moreover, they were doing very well in their
lawless way, and living very comfortably on the natives; so they told Columbus's ambassadors
that his offer was declined.  At the same time they undertook to conduct themselves in an amicable
and orderly manner on condition that, when the vessels arrived, one of them should be apportioned
to the exclusive use of the mutineers; and that in the meantime the Admiral should share with
them his store of provisions and trinkets, as theirs were exhausted.

This was the impertinent decision of the Porras brothers; but it did not quite commend itself
to their followers, who were fearful of the possible results if they should persist in their
mutinous conduct.  They were very much afraid of being left behind in the island, and in any
case, having attempted and failed in the main object of their mutiny, they saw no reason why
they should refuse a free pardon.  But the Porras brothers lied busily.  They said that the
Admiral was merely laying a trap in order to get them into his power, and that he would send
them home to Spain in chains; and they even went so far as to assure their fellow-rebels that
the story of a caravel having arrived was not really true; but that Columbus, who was an adept
in the arts of necromancy, had really made his people believe that they had seen a caravel
in the dusk; and that if one had really arrived it would not have gone away so suddenly, nor
would the Admiral and his brother and son have failed to take their passage in it.

To consolidate the effect of these remarkable statements on the still wavering mutineers, the
Porras brothers decided to commit them to an open act of violence which would successfully
alienate them from the Admiral. They formed them, therefore, into an armed expedition, with
the idea of seizing the stores remaining on the wreck and taking the Admiral personally.  Columbus
fortunately got news of this, as he nearly always did when there was treachery in the wind;
and he sent Bartholomew to try to persuade them once more to return to their duty--a vain and
foolish mission, the vanity and folly of which were fully apparent to Bartholomew.  He duly
set out upon it; but instead of mild words he took with him fifty armed men--the whole available
able-bodied force, in fact--and drew near to the position occupied by the rebels.

