If a man approaches a work of art with any desire to exercise authority over it and the artist,
he approaches it in such a spirit that he cannot receive any artistic impression from it at
all.  The work of art is to dominate the spectator:  the spectator is not to dominate the work
of art.  The spectator is to be receptive.  He is to be the violin on which the master is to
play.  And the more completely he can suppress his own silly views, his own foolish prejudices,
his own absurd ideas of what Art should be, or should not be, the more likely he is to understand
and appreciate the work of art in question.  This is, of course, quite obvious in the case
of the vulgar theatre-going public of English men and women.  But it is equally true of what
are called educated people.  For an educated person's ideas of Art are drawn naturally from
what Art has been, whereas the new work of art is beautiful by being what Art has never been;
and to measure it by the standard of the past is to measure it by a standard on the rejection
of which its real perfection depends.  A temperament capable of receiving, through an imaginative
medium, and under imaginative conditions, new and beautiful impressions, is the only temperament
that can appreciate a work of art.  And true as this is in the case of the appreciation of
sculpture and painting, it is still more true of the appreciation of such arts as the drama.
For a picture and a statue are not at war with Time.  They take no count of its succession.
In one moment their unity may be apprehended.  In the case of literature it is different. 
Time must be traversed before the unity of effect is realised.  And so, in the drama, there
may occur in the first act of the play something whose real artistic value may not be evident
to the spectator till the third or fourth act is reached.  Is the silly fellow to get angry
and call out, and disturb the play, and annoy the artists?  No.  The honest man is to sit quietly,
and know the delightful emotions of wonder, curiosity, and suspense.  He is not to go to the
play to lose a vulgar temper. He is to go to the play to realise an artistic temperament. 
He is to go to the play to gain an artistic temperament.  He is not the arbiter of the work
of art.  He is one who is admitted to contemplate the work of art, and, if the work be fine,
to forget in its contemplation and the egotism that mars him--the egotism of his ignorance,
or the egotism of his information.  This point about the drama is hardly, I think, sufficiently
recognised.  I can quite understand that were 'Macbeth' produced for the first time before
a modern London audience, many of the people present would strongly and vigorously object to
the introduction of the witches in the first act, with their grotesque phrases and their ridiculous
words. But when the play is over one realises that the laughter of the witches in 'Macbeth'
is as terrible as the laughter of madness in 'Lear,' more terrible than the laughter of Iago
in the tragedy of the Moor.  No spectator of art needs a more perfect mood of receptivity than
the spectator of a play.  The moment he seeks to exercise authority he becomes the avowed enemy
of Art and of himself.  Art does not mind.  It is he who suffers.

