Copyright, 1906, 1907, 1908, by THE CENTURY COMPANY, EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE, APPLETON'S MAGAZINE,
THE YOUTH'S COMPANION, THE LADIES' WORLD, THE DELINEATOR, HAMPTON'S BROADWAY MAGAZINE, T. Y.
CROWELL & COMPANY.

Norwood Press

J. S. Gushing Co.--Berwick & Smith Co.

Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 CHAPTER                                                          PAGE
 The Vagrants of the Barren                                          1
 MacPhairrson's Happy Family                                        22
 On Big Lonely                                                      53
 From Buck to Bear and Back                                         70
 In the Deep of the Snow                                            81
 The Gentling of Red McWha                                         112
 Melindy and the Lynxes                                            144
 Mrs. Gammit's Pig                                                 156
 The Blackwater Pot                                                177
 The Iron Edge of Winter                                           201
 The Grip in Deep Hole                                             208
 The Nest of the Mallard                                           221
 Mrs. Gammit and the Porcupines                                    230
 The Battle in the Mist                                            262
 Melindy and the Spring Bear                                       271

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

 "Red McWha's big form shot past."                      Frontispiece

 "One of these monstrous shapes neglected to
 vanish."                                                           18

 "'It's--Mandy Ann!'"                                               66

 "Where anything from a baby's rattle to a bag of
 fertilizer could be purchased."                                    99

 "He was roused by a sudden shot."                                 185

 "He realized that he was caught by the foot."                     201

The Vagrants of the Barren

With thick smoke in his throat and the roar of flame in his ears, Pete Noël awoke, shaking
as if in the grip of a nightmare. He sat straight up in his bunk. Instantly he felt his face
scorching. The whole cabin was ablaze. Leaping from his bunk, and dragging the blankets with
him, he sprang to the door, tore it open, and rushed out into the snow.

But being a woodsman, and alert in every sense like the creatures of the wild themselves, his
wits were awake almost before his body was, and his instincts were even quicker than his wits.
The desolation and the savage cold of the wilderness had admonished him even in that terrifying
moment. As he leaped out in desperate flight, he had snatched with him not only the blankets,
but his rifle and cartridge-belt from where they stood by the head of the bunk, and also his
larrigans and great blanket coat from where they lay by its foot. He had been sleeping, according
to custom, almost fully clothed.

Outside in the snow he stood, blinking through scorched and smarting lids at the destruction
of his shack. For a second or two he stared down at the things he clutched in his arms, and
wondered how he had come to think of them in time. Then, realizing with a pang that he needed
something more than clothes and a rifle, he flung them down on the snow and made a dash for
the cabin, in the hope of rescuing a hunk of bacon or a loaf of his substantial woodsman's
bread. But before he could reach the door a licking flame shot out and hurled him back, half
blinded. Grabbing up a double handful of snow, he buried his face in it to ease the smart.
Then he shook himself, coolly carried the treasures he had saved back to a safe distance from
the flames, and sat down on the blankets to put on his larrigans.

His feet, clothed only in a single pair of thick socks, were almost frozen, while the rest
of his body was roasting in the fierce heat of the conflagration. It wanted about two hours
of dawn. There was not a breath of air stirring, and the flames shot straight up, murky red
and clear yellow intertwisting, with here and there a sudden leaping tongue of violet white.
Outside the radius of the heat the tall woods snapped sharply in the intense cold. It was so
cold, indeed, that as the man stood watching the ruin of his little, lonely home, shielding
his face from the blaze now with one hand then with the other, his back seemed turning to ice.

The man who lives alone in the great solitude of the forest has every chance to become a philosopher.
Pete Noël was a philosopher. Instead of dwelling upon the misfortunes which had smitten him,
he chose to consider his good luck in having got out of the shack alive. Putting on his coat,
he noted with satisfaction that its spacious pockets contained matches, tobacco, his pipe,
his heavy clasp-knife, and his mittens. He was a hundred miles from the nearest settlement,
fifty or sixty from the nearest lumber-camp. He had no food. The snow was four feet deep, and
soft. And his trusty snowshoes, which would have made these distances and these difficulties
of small account to him, were helping feed the blaze. Nevertheless, he thought, things might
have been much worse. What if he had escaped in his bare feet? This thought reminded him of
how cold his feet were at this moment. Well, the old shack had been a good one, and sheltered
him well enough. Now that it would shelter him no longer, it should at least be made to contribute
something more to his comfort. Piling his blankets carefully under the shelter of a broad stump,
he sat down upon them. Then he filled and lighted his pipe, leaned back luxuriously, and stretched
out his feet to the blaze. It would be time enough for him to "get a move on" when the shack
was quite burned down. The shack was home as long as it lasted.

When the first mystic greyness, hard like steel and transparent like glass, began to reveal
strange vistas among the ancient trees, the fire died down. The shack was a heap of ashes and
pulsating, scarlet embers, with here and there a flickering, half-burned timber, and the red-hot
wreck of the tiny stove sticking up in the ruins. As soon as the ruins were cool enough to
approach, Pete picked up a green pole, and began poking earnestly among them. He had all sorts
of vague hopes. He particularly wanted his axe, a tin kettle, and something to eat. The axe
was nowhere to be found, at least in such a search as could then be made. The tins, obviously,
had all gone to pieces or melted. But he did, at least, scratch out a black, charred lump about
the size of his fist, which gave forth an appetizing smell. When the burnt outside had been
carefully scraped off, it proved to be the remnant of a side of bacon. Pete fell to his breakfast
with about as much ceremony as might have sufficed a hungry wolf, the deprivation of a roof-tree
having already taken him back appreciably nearer to the elemental brute. Having devoured his
burnt bacon, and quenched his thirst by squeezing some half-melted snow into a cup of birch-bark,
he rolled his blankets into a handy pack, squared his shoulders, and took the trail for Conroy's
Camp, fifty miles southwestward.

It was now that Pete Noël began to realize the perils that confronted him. Without his snowshoes,
he found himself almost helpless. Along the trail the snow was from three to four feet deep,
and soft. There had been no thaws and no hard winds to pack it down. After floundering ahead
for four or five hundred yards he would have to stop and rest, half reclining. In spite of
the ferocious cold, he was soon drenched with sweat. After a couple of hours of such work,
he found himself consumed with thirst. He had nothing to melt the snow in; and, needless to
say, he knew better than to ease his need by eating the snow itself. But he hit upon a plan
which filled him with self-gratulation. Lighting a tiny fire beside the trail, under the shelter
of a huge hemlock, he took off his red cotton neckerchief, filled it with snow, and held it
to the flames. As the snow began to melt, he squeezed the water from it in a liberal stream.
But, alas! the stream was of a colour that was not enticing. He realized, with a little qualm,
that it had not occurred to him to wash that handkerchief since--well, he was unwilling to
say when. For all the insistence of his thirst, therefore, he continued melting the snow and
squeezing it out, till the resulting stream ran reasonably clear. Then patiently he drank,
and afterward smoked three pipefuls of his rank, black tobacco as substitute for the square
meal which his stomach was craving.

All through the biting silent day he floundered resolutely on, every now and then drawing his
belt a little tighter, and all the while keeping a hungry watch for game of some kind. What
he hoped for was rabbit, partridge, or even a fat porcupine; but he would have made a shift
to stomach even the wiry muscles of a mink, and count himself fortunate. By sunset he came
out on the edge of a vast barren, glorious in washes of thin gold and desolate purple under
the touch of the fading west. Along to eastward ran a low ridge, years ago licked by fire,
and now crested with a sparse line of ghostly rampikes, their lean, naked tops appealing to
the inexorable sky. This was the head of the Big Barren. With deep disgust, and something like
a qualm of apprehension, Pete Noël reflected that he had made only fifteen miles in that long
day of effort. And he was ravenously hungry. Well, he was too tired to go farther that night;
and in default of a meal, the best thing he could do was sleep. First, however, he unlaced
his larrigans, and with the thongs made shift to set a clumsy snare in a rabbit track a few
paces back among the spruces. Then, close under the lee of a black wall of fir-trees standing
out beyond the forest skirts, he clawed himself a deep trench in the snow. In one end of this
trench he built a little fire, of broken deadwood and green birch saplings laboriously hacked
into short lengths with his clasp-knife. A supply of this firewood, dry and green mixed, he
piled beside the trench within reach. The bottom of the trench, to within a couple of feet
of the fire, he lined six inches deep with spruce-boughs, making a dry, elastic bed.

By the time these preparations were completed, the sharp-starred winter night had settled down
upon the solitude. In all the vast there was no sound but the occasional snap, hollow and startling,
of some great tree overstrung by the frost, and the intimate little whisper and hiss of Pete's
fire down in the trench. Disposing a good bunch of boughs under his head, Pete lighted his
pipe, rolled himself in his blankets, and lay down with his feet to the fire.

There at the bottom of his trench, comforted by pipe and fire, hidden away from the emptiness
of the enormous, voiceless world outside, Pete Noël looked up at the icy stars, and at the
top of the frowning black rampart of the fir-trees, touched grimly with red flashes from his
fire. He knew well--none better than he--the savage and implacable sternness of the wild. He
knew how dreadful the silent adversary against whom he had been called, all unprepared, to
pit his craft. There was no blinking the imminence of his peril. Hitherto he had always managed
to work, more or less, with nature, and so had come to regard the elemental forces as friendly.
Now they had turned upon him altogether and without warning. His anger rose as he realized
that he was at bay. The indomitable man-spirit awoke with the anger. Sitting up suddenly, over
the edge of the trench his deep eyes looked out upon the shadowy spaces of the night with challenge
and defiance. Against whatever odds, he declared to himself, he was master. Having made his
proclamation in that look, Pete Noël lay down again and went to sleep.

After the fashion of winter campers and of woodsmen generally, he awoke every hour or so to
replenish the fire; but toward morning he sank into the heavy sleep of fatigue. When he aroused
himself from this, the fire was stone grey, the sky overhead was whitish, flecked with pink
streamers, and rose-pink lights flushed delicately the green wall of the fir-trees leaning
above him. The edges of the blankets around his face were rigid and thick with ice from his
breathing. Breaking them away roughly, he sat up, cursed himself for having let the fire out,
then, with his eyes just above the edge of the trench, peered forth across the shining waste.
As he did so, he instinctively shrank back into concealment. An eager light flamed into his
eyes, and he blessed his luck that the fire had gone out. Along the crest of the ridge, among
the rampikes, silhouetted dark and large against the sunrise, moved a great herd of caribou,
feeding as they went.

Crouching low in his trench, Pete hurriedly did up his blankets, fixed the pack on his back,
then crawled through the snow into the shelter of the fir-woods. As soon as he was out of sight,
he arose, recovered the thongs of his larrigans from the futile snare, and made his way back
on the trail as fast as he could flounder. That one glance over the edge of his trench had
told his trained eye all he needed to know about the situation.

The caribou, most restless, capricious, and far-wandering of all the wilderness kindreds, were
drifting south on one of their apparently aimless migrations. They were travelling on the ridge,
because, as Pete instantly inferred, the snow there had been partly blown away, partly packed,
by the unbroken winds. They were far out of gunshot. But he was going to trail them down even
through that deep snow. By tireless persistence and craft he would do it, if he had to do it
on his hands and knees.

Such wind as there was, a light but bitter air drawing irregularly down out of the north-west,
blew directly from the man to the herd, which was too far off, however, to catch the ominous
taint and take alarm. Pete's first care was to work around behind the herd till this danger
should be quite eliminated. For a time his hunger was forgotten in the interest of the hunt;
but presently, as he toiled his slow way through the deep of the forest, it grew too insistent
to be ignored. He paused to strip bark from such seedlings of balsam fir as he chanced upon,
scraping off and devouring the thin, sweetish pulp that lies between the bark and the mature
wood. He gathered, also, the spicy tips of the birch-buds, chewing them up by handfuls and
spitting out the residue of hard husks. And in this way he managed at least to soothe down
his appetite from angry protest to a kind of doubtful expectancy.

At last, after a couple of hours' hard floundering, the woods thinned, the ground sloped upward,
and he came out upon the flank of the ridge, a long way behind the herd, indeed, but well around
the wind. In the trail of the herd the snow was broken up, and not more than a foot and a half
in depth. On a likely-looking hillock he scraped it away carefully with his feet, till he reached
the ground; and here he found what he expected--a few crimson berries of the wintergreen, frozen,
but plump and sweet-fleshed. Half a handful of these served for the moment to cajole his hunger,
and he pressed briskly but warily along the ridge, availing himself of the shelter of every
rampike in his path. At last, catching sight of the hindmost stragglers of the herd, still
far out of range, he crouched like a cat, and crossed over the crest of the ridge for better
concealment.

On the eastern slope the ridge carried numerous thickets of underbrush. From one to another
of these Pete crept swiftly, at a rate which should bring him, in perhaps an hour, abreast
of the leisurely moving herd. In an hour, then, he crawled up to the crest again, under cover
of a low patch of juniper scrub. Confidently he peered through the scrub, his rifle ready.
But his face grew black with bitter disappointment. The capricious beasts had gone. Seized
by one of their incomprehensible vagaries--Pete was certain that he had not alarmed them--they
were now far out on the white level, labouring heavily southward.

Pete set his jaws resolutely. Hunger and cold, each the mightier from their alliance, were
now assailing him savagely. His first impulse was to throw off all concealment and rush straight
down the broad-trodden trail. But on second thought he decided that he would lose more than
he would gain by such tactics. Hampered though they were by the deep, soft snow, he knew that,
once frightened, they could travel through it much faster than they were now moving, and very
much faster than he could hope to follow. Assuredly, patience was his game. Slipping furtively
from rampike to rampike, now creeping, now worming his way like a snake, he made good time
down to the very edge of the level. Then, concealment no more possible, and the rear of the
herd still beyond gunshot, he emerged boldly from the covert of a clump of saplings and started
in pursuit. At the sight of him, every antlered head went up in the air for one moment of wondering
alarm; then, through a rolling white cloud the herd fled onward at a speed which Pete, with
all his knowledge of their powers, had not imagined possible in such a state of the snow. Sullen,
but not discouraged, he plodded after them.

Noël was now fairly obsessed with the one idea of overtaking the herd. Every other thought,
sense, or faculty was dully occupied with his hunger and his effort to keep from thinking of
it. Hour after hour he plodded on, following the wide, chaotic trail across the white silence
of the barren. There was nothing to lift his eyes for, so he kept them automatically occupied
in saving his strength by picking the easiest steps through the ploughed snow. He did not notice
at all that the sun no longer sparkled over the waste. He did not notice that the sky had turned
from hard blue to ghostly pallor. He did not notice that the wind, now blowing in his teeth,
had greatly increased in force. Suddenly, however, he was aroused by a swirl of fine snow driven
so fiercely that it crossed his face like a lash. Lifting his eyes from the trail, he saw that
the plain all about him was blotted from sight by a streaming rout of snow-clouds. The wind
was already whining its strange derisive menace in his face. The blizzard had him.

As the full fury of the storm swooped upon him, enwrapping him, and clutching at his breath,
for an instant Pete Noël quailed. This was a new adversary, with whom he had not braced his
nerves to grapple. But it was for an instant only. Then his weary spirit lifted itself, and
he looked grimly into the eye of the storm. The cold, the storm, the hunger, he would face
them all down, and win out yet. Lowering his head, and pulling a flap of his blanket coat across
his mouth to make breathing easier, he plunged straight forward with what seemed like a new
lease of vigour.

Had the woods been near, or had he taken note of the weather in time, Pete would have made
for the shelter of the forest at once. But he knew that, when last he looked, the track of
the herd had been straight down the middle of the ever-widening barren. By now he must be a
good two miles from the nearest cover; and he knew well enough that, in the bewilderment of
the storm, which blunted even such woodcraft as his, and blurred not only his vision, but every
other sense as well, he could never find his way. His only hope was to keep to the trail of
the caribou. The beasts would either lie down or circle to the woods. In such a storm as this,
as he knew well enough, no animal but man himself could hunt, or follow up the trail. There
was no one but man who could confront such a storm undaunted. The caribou would forget both
their cunning and the knowledge that they were being hunted. He would come upon them, or they
would lead him to shelter. With an obstinate pride in his superiority to the other creatures
of the wilderness, he scowled defiantly at the storm, and because he was overwrought with hunger
and fatigue, he muttered to himself as he went, cursing the elements that assailed him so relentlessly.

For hours he floundered on doggedly, keeping the trail by feeling rather than by sight, so
thick were the cutting swirls of snow. As the drift heaped denser and denser about his legs,
the terrible effort, so long sustained, began to tell on him, till his progress became only
a snail's pace. Little by little, in the obstinate effort to conserve strength and vitality,
his faculties all withdrew into themselves, and concentrated themselves upon the one purpose--to
keep going onward. He began to feel the lure of just giving up. He began to think of the warmth
and rest he could get, the release from the mad chaos of the wind, by the simple expedient
of burrowing deep into the deep snow. He knew well enough that simple trick of the partridge,
when frost and storm grow too ferocious for it. But his wiser spirit would not let him delude
himself. Had he had a full stomach, and food in his pockets, he might, perhaps, safely have
emulated this cunning trick of the partridge. But now, starving, weary, his vitality at the
last ebb, he knew that if he should yield to the lure of the snow, he would be seen no more
till the spring sun should reveal him, a thing of horror to the returning vireos and blackbirds,
on the open, greening face of the barren. No, he would not burrow to escape the wind. He laughed
aloud as he thought upon the madness of it; and went butting and plunging on into the storm,
indomitable.

Suddenly, however, he stopped short, with a great sinking at his heart. He felt cautiously
this way and that, first with his feet, fumbling through the deep snow, and then with his hands.
At last he turned his back abruptly to the wind, cowered down with his head between his arms
to shut out the devilish whistling and whining, and tried to think how or when it had happened.
He had lost the trail of the herd!

All his faculties stung to keen wakefulness by this appalling knowledge, he understood how
it happened, but not where. The drifts had filled the trail, till it was utterly blotted off
the face of the plain; then he had kept straight on, guided by the pressure of the wind. But
the caribou, meanwhile, had swerved, and moved off in another direction. Which direction? He
had to acknowledge to himself that he had no clue to judge by, so whimsical were these antlered
vagrants of the barren. Well, he thought doggedly, let them go! He would get along without
them. Staggering to his feet, he faced the gale again, and thought hard, striving to remember
what the direction of the wind had been when last he observed it, and at the same time to recall
the lay of the heavy-timbered forest that skirted this barren on two sides.

At length he made up his mind where the nearest point of woods must be. He saw it in his mind's
eye, a great promontory of black firs jutting out into the waste. He turned, calculating warily,
till the wind came whipping full upon his left cheek. Sure that he was now facing his one possible
refuge, he again struggled forward. And as he went, he pictured to himself the whole caribou
herd, now half foundered in the drift, labouring toward the same retreat. Once more, crushing
back hunger and faintness, he summoned up his spirit, and vowed that if the beasts could fight
their way to cover, he could. Then his woodcraft should force the forest to render him something
in the way of food that would suffice to keep life in his veins.

For perhaps half an hour this defiant and unvanquishable spirit kept Pete Noël going. But as
the brief northern day began to wane, and a shadow to darken behind the thick, white gloom
of the storm, his forces, his tough, corded muscles and his tempered nerves, again began to
falter. He caught himself stumbling, and seeking excuse for delay in getting up. In spite of
every effort of his will, he saw visions--thick, protecting woods close at one side or the
other, or a snug log camp, half buried in the drifts, but with warm light flooding from its
windows. Indignantly he would shake himself back into sanity, and the delectable visions would
vanish. But while they lasted they were confusing, and presently when he aroused himself from
one that was of particularly heart-breaking vividness, he found that he had let his rifle drop!
It was gone hopelessly. The shock steadied him for some minutes. Well, he had his knife. After
all, that was the more important of the two. He ploughed onward, once more keenly awake, and
grappling with his fate.

The shadows thickened rapidly; and at last, bending with the insane riot of the storm, began
to make strange, monstrous shapes. Unravelling these illusions, and exorcising them, kept Pete
Noël occupied. But suddenly one of these monstrous shapes neglected to vanish. He was just
about to throw himself upon it, in half delirious antagonism, when it lurched upward with a
snort, and struggled away from him. In an instant Pete was alive in every faculty, stung with
an ecstasy of hope. Leaping, floundering, squirming, he followed, open knife in hand. Again
and yet again the foundered beast, a big caribou bull, buried halfway up the flank, eluded
him. Then, as his savage scramble at last overtook it, the bull managed to turn half about,
and thrust him violently in the left shoulder with an antler-point. Unheeding the hurt, Noël
clutched the antler with his left hand, and forced it inexorably back. The next moment his
knife was drawn with practised skill across the beast's throat.

Like most of our eastern woodsmen, Pete Noël was even finicky about his food, and took all
his meat cooked to a brown. He loathed underdone flesh. Now, however, he was an elemental creature,
battling with the elements for his life. And he knew, moreover, that of all possible restoratives,
the best was at his hand. He drove his blade again, this time to the bull's heart. As the wild
life sighed itself out, and vanished, Pete crouched down like an animal, and drank the warm,
red fluid streaming from the victim's throat. As he did so, the ebbed tide of warmth, power,
and mastery flooded back into his own veins. He drank his fill; then, burrowing half beneath
the massive body, he lay down close against it to rest and consider.

Assured now of food to sustain him on the journey, assured of his own ability to master all
other obstacles that might seek to withstand him, Pete Noël made up his mind to sleep, wrapping
himself in his blankets under the shelter of the dead bull. Then the old hunter's instinct
began to stir. All about him, in every momentary lull of the wind, were snortings and heavy
breathings. He had wandered into the midst of the exhausted herd. Here was a chance to recoup
himself, in some small part, for the loss of his cabin and supplies. He could kill a few of
the helpless animals, hide them in the snow, and take the bearings of the spot as soon as the
weather cleared. By and by he could get a team from the nearest settlement, and haul out the
frozen meat for private sale when the game warden chanced to have his eyes shut.

Getting out his knife again, he crept stealthily toward the nearest heavy breathing. Before
he could detect the beast in that tumultuous gloom, he was upon it. His outstretched left hand
fell upon a wildly heaving flank. The frightened animal arose with a gasping snort, and tried
to escape; but utterly exhausted, it sank down again almost immediately, resigned to this unknown
doom which stole upon it out of the tempest and the dark. Pete's hand was on it again the moment
it was still. He felt it quiver and shrink beneath his touch. Instinctively he began to stroke
and rub the stiff hair as he slipped his treacherous hand forward along the heaving flank.
The heavings grew quieter, the frightened snortings ceased. The exhausted animal seemed to
feel a reassurance in that strong, quiet touch.

When Pete's hand had reached the unresisting beast's neck, he began to feel a qualm of misgiving.
His knife was in the other hand, ready for use there in the howling dark; but somehow he could
not at once bring himself to use it. It would be a betrayal. Yet he had suffered a grievous
loss, and here, given into his grasp by fate, was the compensation. He hesitated, arguing with
himself impatiently. But even as he did so, he kept stroking that firm, warm, living neck;
and through the contact there in the savage darkness, a sympathy passed between the man and
the beast. He could not help it. The poor beasts and he were in the same predicament, together
holding the battlements of life against the blind and brutal madness of storm. Moreover, the
herd had saved him. The debt was on his side. The caress which had been so traitorous grew
honest and kind. With a shamefaced grin Pete shut his knife, and slipped it back into his pocket.

With both hands, now, he stroked the tranquil caribou, rubbing it behind the ears and at the
base of the antlers, which seemed to give it satisfaction. Once when his hand strayed down
the long muzzle, the animal gave a terrified start and snort at the dreaded man smell so violently
invading its nostrils. But Pete kept on soothingly and firmly; and again the beast grew calm.
At length Pete decided that his best place for the night, or until the storm should lift, would
be by the warmth of this imprisoned and peaceable animal. Digging down into the snow beyond
the clutches of the wind, he rolled himself in his blankets, crouched close against the caribou's
flank, and went confidently to sleep.

Aware of living companionship, Noël slept soundly through the clamour of the storm. At last
a movement against his side disturbed him. He woke to feel that his strange bedfellow had struggled
up and withdrawn. The storm was over. The sky above his upturned face was sharp with stars.
All about him was laboured movement, with heavy shuffling, coughing, and snorting. Forgetful
of their customary noiselessness, the caribou were breaking gladly from their imprisonment.
Presently Pete was alone. The cold was still and of snapping intensity; but he, deep in his
hollow, and wrapped in his blankets, was warm. Still drowsy, he muffled his face and went to
sleep again for another hour.

When he roused himself a second time he was wide awake and refreshed. It was just past the
edge of dawn. The cold gripped like a vice. Faint mystic hues seemed frozen for ever into the
ineffable crystal of the air. Pete stood up, and looked eastward along the tumbled trail of
the herd. Not half a mile away stood the forest, black and vast, the trail leading straight
into it. Then, a little farther down toward the right he saw something that made his heart
leap exultantly. Rising straight up, a lavender and silver lily against the pallid saffron
of the east, soared a slender smoke. That smoke, his trained eyes told him, came from a camp
chimney; and he realized that the lumbermen had moved up to him from the far-off head of the
Ottanoonsis.

MacPhairrson's Happy Family

I

It was over a little footbridge one had to pass to visit MacPhairrson and his family, a little,
lofty, curiously constructed footbridge, spanning a narrow but very furious torrent. At the
middle of the bridge was a gate--or, rather, a door--of close and strong wire mesh; and at
this point, door and bridge together were encircled by a chevaux-de-frise of woodwork with
sharp, radiating points of heavy telegraph wire. With the gate shut, nothing less than a pair
of wings in good working order could carry one over to the steep little island in mid-torrent
which was MacPhairrson's home and citadel.

Carried caressingly in the hollow of his left arm, the Boy held a brown burlap bag, which wriggled
violently at times and had to be soothed into quiescence. When the Boy arrived at the door
in the bridge, which he found locked, he was met by two strange hosts who peered at him wisely
through the meshes of the door. One of these was a large black and tan dog, with the long body,
wavy hair, drooping silken ears, and richly feathered tail of a Gordon setter, most grotesquely
supported, at a height of not more than eight inches from the ground, by the little bow-legs
of a dachshund. This freakish and sinister-looking animal gazed at the visitor with eyes of
sagacious welcome, tongue hanging amiably half out, and tail gently waving. He approved of
this particular Boy, though boys in general he regarded as nuisances to be tolerated rather
than encouraged. The other host, standing close beside the dog as if on guard, and scrutinizing
the visitor with little, pale, shrewdly non-committal eyes, was a half-grown black and white pig.

Through the gate the Boy murmured familiar greetings to its warders while he pulled a wooden
handle which set an old brown cow-bell above the door jangling hoarsely. The summer air was
full to brimming over with sound--with the roar of the furious little torrent beneath, with
the thunder of the sheet of cream and amber water falling over the face of the dam some fifty
yards above, with the hiss and shriek of the saws in the big sawmill perched beside the dam.
Yet through all the interwoven tissue of noise the note of the cow-bell made itself heard in
the cabin. From behind the cabin arose a sonorous cry of hong-ka, honk-a-honk, and the snaky
black head of a big Canada goose appeared inquiringly around the corner. On one end of the
hewn log which served as doorstep a preternaturally large and fat woodchuck sat bolt upright
and stared to see who was coming. A red fox, which had been curled up asleep under MacPhairrson's
one rose bush, awoke, and superciliously withdrew to the other side of the island, out of sight,
disapproving of all visitors on principle. From the shade of a thick spruce bush near the bridge-end
a moose calf lumbered lazily to her feet, and stood staring, her head low down and her big
ears waving in sleepy interrogation. From within the cabin came a series of harsh screeches
mixed with discordant laughter and cries of "Ebenezer! Ebenezer! Oh, by Gee! Hullo!" Then the
cabin door swung wide, and in the doorway appeared MacPhairrson, leaning on his crutches, a
green parrot on his shoulder, and beside his crippled feet two big white cats.

MacPhairrson, the parrot, and the cats, all together stared hard at the door on the bridge,
striving to make out through the meshes who the visitor might be. The parrot, scrutinizing
fiercely with her sinister black and orange eyes, was the first to discover. She proclaimed
at once her discovery and her approval by screeching, "Boy! Boy! Oh, by Gee! Hullo!" and clambering
head-first down the front of MacPhairrson's coat. As MacPhairrson hobbled hastily forward to
admit the welcome guest, the parrot, reaching out with beak and claw, transferred herself to
the moving crutch, whence she made a futile snap at one of the white cats. Foiled in this amiable
attempt, she climbed hurriedly up the crutch again and resumed MacPhairrson's shoulder, in
time to greet the Boy's entrance with a cordial "Oh, by Gee! Hullo!"

MacPhairrson (he spelled his name scrupulously MacPherson, but, like all the other dwellers
in the Settlement, pronounced it MacPhairrson, with a punctilious rolling of the r) was an
old lumberman. Rheumatism, brought on by years of toiling thigh-deep in the icy waters when
the logs were running in the freshets, had gripped him so relentlessly that one of his legs
was twisted to almost utter uselessness. With his crutches, however, he could get about after
his fashion; and being handy with his fingers and versatile of wit, he managed to make a living
well enough at the little odd jobs of mechanical repairing which the Settlement folk, and the
mill hands in particular, brought to his cabin. His cabin, which was practically a citadel,
stood on a steep cone of rock, upthrust from the bed of the wild little river which worked
the mill. On the summit of a rock a few square rods of soil gave room for the cabin, half a
dozen bushes, and some sandy, sun-warmed turf. In this retreat, within fifty yards of the busy
mill, but fenced about by the foaming torrent and quite inaccessible except by the footbridge,
MacPhairrson lived with the motley group of companions which men called his Happy Family.

Happy, no doubt, they were, in spite of the strait confines of their prison, for MacPhairrson
ruled them by the joint forces of authority and love. He had, moreover, the mystic understanding
which is essential if one would be really intimate with the kindreds we carelessly call dumb.
So it was that he achieved a fair degree of concord in his Family. All the creatures were amiable
towards him, because they loved him; and because they wholesomely feared him, they were amiable
in the main towards each other. There were certain members of the Family who might be described
as perennial. They were of the nature of established institutions. Such were Stumpy, the freak-legged
dachshund-setter; James Edward, the wild gander; Butters, the woodchuck; Melindy and Jim, the
two white cats; Bones, the brown owl, who sat all day on the edge of a box in the darkest corner
of the cabin; and Ananias-and-Sapphira, the green parrot, so named, as MacPhairrson was wont
to explain, because she was so human and he never could quite make her out. Ebenezer, the pig,
was still too young to be promoted to permanence; but he had already shown such character,
intelligence, and self-respecting individuality that MacPhairrson had vowed he should never
deteriorate into pork. Ebenezer should stay, even though he should grow so big as to be inconvenient.

But with Susan, the moose calf, and Carrots, the unsociable young fox, it was different. MacPhairrson
realized that when Susan should come to her full heritage of stature, he would hardly have
room for her on the island. He would then send to the Game Commissioner at Fredericton for
a permit, and sell the good soul to the agent for some Zoölogical Garden, where she would be
appreciated and cared for. As for Carrots, his conduct was irreproachable, absolutely without
blot or blemish, but MacPhairrson knew that he was quite unregenerate at heart. The astute
little beast understood well enough the fundamental law of the Family, "Live and let live,"
and he knew that if he should break that law, doom would descend upon him in an eye-wink. But
into his narrowed, inscrutable eyes, as he lay with muzzle on dainty, outstretched black paws
and watched the movements of James Edward, the gander, or Butters, the fat woodchuck, a savage
glint would come, which MacPhairrson unerringly interpreted. Moreover, while his demeanour
was impeccable, his reserve was impenetrable, and even the tolerant and kindly MacPhairrson
could find nothing in him to love. The decree, therefore, had gone forth; that is, it had been
announced by MacPhairrson himself, and apparently approved by the ever attentive Stumpy and
Ebenezer, that Carrots should be sold into exile at the very first opportunity.

When the Boy came through the little bridge gate, the greetings between him and MacPhairrson
were brief and quiet. They were fellows both in the taciturn brotherhood of the woods. To Stumpy
and Ebenezer, who nosed affectionately at his legs, he paid no attention beyond a careless
touch of caress. Even to Ananias-and-Sapphira, who had hurriedly clambered from MacPhairrson's
shoulder to his and begun softly nipping at his ear with her dreaded beak, he gave no heed
whatever. He knew that the evil-tempered bird loved him as she loved his master and would be
scrupulously careful not to pinch too hard.

As the little procession moved gravely and silently up from the bridge to the cabin, their
silence was in no way conspicuous, for the whole air throbbed with the rising and falling shriek
of the saws, the trampling of the falls, and the obscurely rhythmic rush of the torrent around
the island base. They were presently joined by Susan, shambling on her ungainly legs, wagging
her big ears, and stretching out her long, ugly, flexible, overhanging nose to sniff inquiringly
at the Boy's jacket. A comparatively new member of MacPhairrson's family, she was still full
of curiosity about every one and everything, and obviously considered it her mission in life
to acquire knowledge. It was her firm conviction that the only way to know a thing was to smell it.

A few steps from the door James Edward, the wild gander, came forward with dignity, slightly
bowing his long, graceful black neck and narrow snaky head as he moved. Had the Boy been a
stranger, he would now have met the first touch of hostility. Not all MacPhairrson's manifest
favour would have prevented the uncompromising and dauntless gander from greeting the visitor
with a savage hiss and uplifted wings of defiance. But towards the Boy, whom he knew well,
his dark, sagacious eye expressed only tolerance, which from him was no small condescension.

On the doorstep, as austerely ungracious in his welcome as James Edward himself, sat Butters,
the woodchuck, nursing some secret grudge against the world in general, or, possibly, against
Ananias-and-Sapphira in particular, with whom he was on terms of vigilant neutrality. When
the procession approached, he forsook the doorstep, turned his fat, brown back upon the visitor,
and became engrossed in gnawing a big cabbage stalk. He was afraid that if he should seem good-natured
and friendly, he might be called upon to show off some of the tricks which MacPhairrson, with
inexhaustible patience, had taught him. He was not going to turn somersaults, or roll over
backward, or walk like a dancing bear, for any Boy alive!

This ill humour of Butters, however, attracted no notice. It was accepted by both MacPhairrson
and his visitor as a thing of course. Moreover, there were matters of more moment afoot. That
lively, squirming bag which the Boy carried so carefully in the hollow of his left arm was
exciting the old woodsman's curiosity. The lumbermen and mill hands, as well as the farmer-folk
of the Settlement for miles about, were given to bringing MacPhairrson all kinds of wild creatures
as candidates for admission to his Happy Family. So whenever any one came with something alive
in a bag, MacPhairrson would regard the bag with that hopeful and eager anticipation with which
a child regards its Christmas stocking.

When the two had entered the cabin and seated themselves, the Boy in the big barrel chair by
the window, and MacPhairrson on the edge of his bunk, not three feet away, the rest of the
company gathered in a semicircle of expectation in the middle of the floor. That is, Stumpy
and Ebenezer and the two white cats did so, their keen noses as well as their inquisitive eyes
having been busied about the bundle. Even James Edward came a few steps inside the door, and
with a fine assumption of unconcern kept himself in touch with the proceedings. Only Susan
was really indifferent, lying down outside the door--Susan, and that big bunch of fluffy brown
feathers on the barrel in the corner of the cabin.

The air fairly thrilled with expectation as the boy took the wriggling bag on his knee and
started to open it. The moment there was an opening, out came a sharp little black nose pushing
and twisting eagerly for freedom. The nose was followed in an instant by a pair of dark, intelligent,
mischievous eyes. Then a long-tailed young raccoon squirmed forth, clambered up to the Boy's
shoulder, and turned to eye the assemblage with bright defiance. Never before in his young
life had he seen such a remarkable assemblage; which, after all, was not strange, as there
was surely not another like it in the world.

The new-comer's reception, on the whole, was not unfriendly. The two white cats, to be sure,
fluffed their tails a little, drew back from the circle, and went off to curl up in the sun
and sleep off their aversion to a stranger. James Edward, too, his curiosity satisfied, haughtily
withdrew. But Stumpy, as acknowledged dean of the Family, wagged his tail, hung out his pink
tongue as far as it would go, and panted a welcome so obvious that a much less intelligent
animal than the young raccoon could not have failed to understand it. Ebenezer was less demonstrative,
but his little eyes twinkled with unmistakable good-will. Ananias-and-Sapphira was extraordinarily
interested. In a tremendous hurry she scrambled down MacPhairrson's arm, down his leg, across
the floor, and up the Boy's trousers. The Boy was a little anxious.

"Will she bite him?" he asked, preparing to defend his pet.

"I reckon she won't," answered MacPhairrson, observing that the capricious bird's plumage was
not ruffled, but pressed down so hard and smooth and close to her body that she looked much
less than her usual size. "Generally she ain't ugly when she looks that way. But she's powerful
interested, I tell you!"

The little raccoon was crouching on the Boy's right shoulder. Ananias-and-Sapphira, using beak
and claws, scrambled nimbly to the other shoulder. Then, reaching far around past the Boy's
face, she fixed the stranger piercingly with her unwinking gaze, and emitted an ear-splitting
shriek of laughter. The little coon's nerves were not prepared for such a strain. In his panic
he fairly tumbled from his perch to the floor, and straightway fled for refuge to the broad
back of the surprised and flattered pig.

"The little critter's all right!" declared MacPhairrson, when he and the Boy were done laughing.
"Ananias-an'-Sapphira won't hurt him. She likes all the critters she kin bully an' skeer. An'
Stumpy an' that comical cuss of a Ebenezer, they be goin' to look out fer him."

II

About a week after this admission of the little raccoon to his Family, MacPhairrson met with
an accident. Coming down the long, sloping platform of the mill, the point of one of his crutches
caught in a crack, and he plunged headlong, striking his head on a link of heavy "snaking"
chain. He was picked up unconscious and carried to the nearest cabin. For several days his
stupor was unbroken, and the doctor hardly expected him to pull through. Then he recovered
consciousness--but he was no longer MacPhairrson. His mind was a sort of amiable blank. He
had to be fed and cared for like a very young child. The doctor decided at last that there
was some pressure of bone on the brain, and that operations quite beyond his skill would be
required. At his suggestion a purse was made up among the mill hands and the Settlement folk,
and MacPhairrson, smiling with infantile enjoyment, was packed off down river on the little
tri-weekly steamer to the hospital in the city.

As soon as it was known around the mill--which stood amidst its shanties a little apart from
the Settlement--that MacPhairrson was to be laid up for a long time, the question arose: "What's
to become of the Family?" It was morning when the accident happened, and in the afternoon the
Boy had come up to look after the animals. After that, when the mill stopped work at sundown,
there was a council held, amid the suddenly silent saws.

"What's to be done about the orphants?" was the way Jimmy Wright put the problem.

Black Angus MacAllister, the Boss--so called to distinguish him from Red Angus, one of the
gang of log-drivers--had his ideas already pretty well formed on the subject, and intended
that his ideas should go. He did not really care much about any one else's ideas except the
Boy's, which he respected as second only to those of MacPhairrson where the wild kindreds were
concerned. Black Angus was a huge, big-handed, black-bearded, bull-voiced man, whose orders
and imprecations made themselves heard above the most piercing crescendos of the saws. When
his intolerant eyes fixed a man, what he had to say usually went, no matter what different
views on the subject his hearer might secretly cling to. But he had a tender, somewhat sentimental
streak in his character, which expressed itself in a fondness for all animals. The horses and
oxen working around the mill were all well cared for and showed it in their condition; and
the Boss was always ready to beat a man half to death for some very slight ill-usage of an animal.

"A man kin take keer o' himself," he would say in explanation, "an' the dumb critters can't.
It's our place to take keer of 'em."

"Boys," said he, his great voice not yet toned down to the quiet, "I say, let's divvy up the
critters among us, jest us mill hands an' the Boy here, an' look out fer 'em the best we know
how till MacPhairrson gits well!"

He looked interrogatively at the Boy, and the Boy, proud of the importance thus attached to
him, answered modestly--

"That's just what I was hoping you'd suggest, Mr. MacAllister. You know, of course, they can't
stay on together there alone. They wouldn't be a Happy Family long. They'd get to fighting
in no time, and about half of 'em would get killed quick."

There was a moment of deliberative silence. No smoking was allowed in the mill, but the hands
all chewed. Jimmy Wright, marking the bright face of a freshly sawed deal about eight feet
away, spat unerringly upon its exact centre, then giving a hitch to his trousers, he remarked--

"Let the Boss an' the Boy settle it. They onderstand it the best."

"That's right, Jimmy! We'll fix it!" said Black Angus. "Now, for mine, I've got a fancy for
the parrot an' the pig. That there Ananias-and-Sapphira, she's a bird an' no mistake. An' the
pig--MacPhairrson calls him Ebenezer--he's that smart ye'd jest kill yerself laffin' to see
him. An', moreover, he's that clean--he's clean as a lady. I'd like to have them two around
my shanty. An' I'm ready to take one more if necessary."

"Then I think you'll have to take the coon too, Mr. MacAllister," said the Boy. "He and Ebenezer
just love each other, an' they wouldn't be happy separated."

"All right. The coon fer me!" responded the Boss. "Which of the critters will you take yerself?"

"I'll wait and see which the rest of the boys want," replied the Boy. "I like them all, and
they all know me pretty well. I'll take what's left."

"Well, then," said Jimmy Wright, "me for Susan. That blame moose calf's the only one of the
critters that I could ever git along with. She's a kind of a fool, an' seems to like me!" And
he decorated the bright deal once more.

"Me an' my missus, we'll be proud to take them two white cats!" put in grey old Billy Smith.
"She sez, sez she, they be the han'somest cats in two counties. Mebbe they won't be so lonesome
with us as they'd be somewheres else, bein's as our shanty's so nigh MacPhairrson's bridge
they kin see for themselves all the time there ain't no one on to the island any more!"

"Stumpy's not spoken for!" reminded the Boy. The dog was popular, and half a dozen volunteered
for him at once.

"Mike gits the dawg!" decided the Boss, to head off arguments.

"Then I'll take the big gander," spoke up Baldy Pallen, one of the disappointed applicants
for Stumpy. "He knows as much as any dawg ever lived."

"Yes, I reckon he kin teach ye a heap, Baldy!" agreed the Boss. A laugh went round at Baldy's
expense. Then for a few seconds there were no more applications.

"No one seems to want poor Butters and Bones!" laughed the Boy. "They're neither of them what
you'd call sociable. But Bones has his good points. He can see in the dark; and he's a great
one for minding his own business. Butters has a heap of sense; but he's too cross to show it,
except for MacPhairrson himself. Guess I'd better take them both, as I understand their infirmities."

"An' ain't there a young fox?" inquired the Boss.

"Oh, Carrots; he can just stay on the island," answered the Boy. "If some of you'll throw him
a bite to eat every day, he'll be all right. He can't get into any mischief. And he can't get
away. He stands on his dignity so, nobody'd get any fun out of having him!"

These points decided, the council broke up and adjourned to MacPhairrson's island, carrying
several pieces of rope, a halter, and a couple of oat-bags. The members of the Family, vaguely
upset over the long absence of their master, nearly all came down to the bridge in their curiosity
to see who was coming--all, indeed, but the fox, who slunk off behind the cabin; Butters, who
retired to his box; and Bones, who remained scornfully indifferent in his corner. The rest
eyed the crowd uneasily, but were reassured by seeing the Boy with them. In fact, they all
crowded around him, as close as they could, except Stumpy, who went about greeting his acquaintances,
and James Edward, who drew back with lifted wings and a haughty hiss, resolved to suffer no
familiarities.

Jimmy Wright made the first move. He had cunningly brought some salt in his pocket. With the
casual remark that he wasn't going to put it on her tail, he offered a handful to the non-committal
Susan. The ungainly creature blew most of it away with a windy snort, then changed her mind
and greedily licked up the few remaining grains. Deciding that Jimmy was an agreeable person
with advantages, she allowed him to slip the halter on her neck and lead her unprotesting over
the bridge.

Then Black Angus made overtures to Ebenezer, who carried the little raccoon on his back. Ebenezer
received them with a mixture of dignity and doubt, but refused to stir an inch from the Boy's
side. Black Angus scratched his head in perplexity.

"'Tain't no use tryn' to lead him, I reckon!" he muttered.

"No, you'll have to carry him in your arms, Mr. MacAllister," laughed the Boy. "Good thing
he ain't very big yet. But here, take Ananias-and-Sapphira first. If she'll be friends with
you, that'll mean a lot to Ebenezer." And he deftly transferred the parrot from his own shoulder,
where she had taken refuge at once on his arrival, to the lofty shoulder of the Boss.

The bird was disconcerted for an instant. She "slicked" down her feathers till she looked small
and demure, and stretched herself far out as if to try a jump for her old perch. But, one wing
being clipped, she did not dare the attempt. She had had enough experience of those sickening,
flopping somersaults which took the place of flight when only one wing was in commission. Turning
from the Boy, she eyed MacAllister's nose with her evil, unwinking stare. Possibly she intended
to bite it. But at this moment MacAllister reached up his huge hand fearlessly to stroke her
head, just as fearlessly as if she were not armed with a beak that could bite through a boot.
Greatly impressed by this daring, she gurgled in her throat, and took the great thumb delicately
between her mandibles with a daintiness that would not have marred a rose-petal. Yes, she concluded
at once, this was a man after her own heart, with a smell to his hands like that of MacPhairrson
himself. Dropping the thumb with a little scream of satisfaction, she sidled briskly up and
down MacAllister's shoulder, making herself quite at home.

"My, but she's taken a shine to you, Mr. MacAllister!" exclaimed the Boy. "I never saw her
do like that before."

The Boss grinned proudly.

"Ananias-an'-Sapphira be of the female sect, bain't she?" inquired Baldy Pallen, with a sly
look over the company.

"Sure, she's a she!" replied the Boy. "MacPhairrson says so!"

"That accounts fer it!" said Baldy. "It's a way all shes have with the Boss. Jest look at her now!"

"Now for Ebenezer!" interrupted the Boss, to change the subject. "You better hand him to me,
an' maybe he'll take it as an introduction."

Solemnly the Boy stooped, shoving the little raccoon aside, and picked the pig up in his arms.
Ebenezer was amazed, having never before been treated as a lap-dog, but he made no resistance
beyond stiffening out all his legs in a way that made him most awkward to handle. Placed in
the Boss's great arms, he lifted his snout straight up in the air and emitted one shrill squeal;
but the sight of Ananias-and-Sapphira, perched coolly beneath his captor's ear, in a measure
reassured him, and he made no further protest. He could not, however, appear reconciled to
the inexplicable and altogether undignified situation, so he held his snout rigidly as high
aloft as he could and shut his little eyes tight, as if anticipating some further stroke of fate.

Black Angus was satisfied so far. He felt that the tolerance of Ebenezer and the acceptance
of Ananias-and-Sapphira added distinctly to his prestige.

"Now for the little coon!" said he, jocularly. But the words were hardly out of his mouth when
he felt sharp claws go up his leg with a rush, and the next instant the little raccoon was
on his shoulder, reaching out its long, black nose to sniff solicitously at Ebenezer's legs
and assure itself that everything was all right.

"Jumping Jiminy! Oh, by Gee!" squealed Ananias-and-Sapphira, startled at the sudden onset,
and nipped the intruder smartly on the leg till he squalled and whipped around to the other
shoulder.

"Now you've got all that's coming to you, I guess, Mr. MacAllister," laughed the Boy.

"Then I reckon I'd better be lightin' out fer home with it!" answered Black Angus, hugely elated.
Turning gently, so as not to dislodge the passengers on his shoulder, he strode off over the
bridge and up the sawdust-muffled street towards his clapboard cottage, Ebenezer's snout still
held rigidly up in air, his eyes shut in heroic resignation, while Ananias-and-Sapphira, tremendously
excited by this excursion into the outer world, kept shrieking at the top of her voice: "Ebenezer,
Ebenezer, Ebenezer! Oh, by Gee! I want Pa!"

As soon as the noisy and picturesque recessional of Black Angus had vanished, Baldy Pallen
set out confidently to capture the wild gander, James Edward. He seemed to expect to tuck him
under his arm and walk off with him at his ease. Observing this, the Boy looked around with
a solemn wink. Old Billy Smith and the half-dozen onlookers who had no responsibility in the
affair grinned and waited. As Baldy approached, holding out a hand of placation, and "chucking"
persuasively as if he thought James Edward was a hen, the latter reared his snaky black head
and stared in haughty surprise. Then he gave vent to a strident hiss of warning. Could it be
possible that this impudent stranger contemplated meddling with him? Yes, plainly it was possible.
It was certain, in fact. The instant he realized this, James Edward lowered his long neck,
darted it out parallel with the ground, spread his splendid wings, and rushed at Baldy's legs
with a hiss like escaping steam. Baldy was startled and bewildered. His legs tweaked savagely
by the bird's strong, hard bill, and thumped painfully by the great, battering, windy wings,
he sputtered: "Jumpin' Judas!" in an embarrassed tone, and retreated behind Billy Smith and
the Boy.

A roar of delighted laughter arose as James Edward backed away in haughty triumph, and strolled
carelessly up towards the cabin. There were cries of "Ketch him quick, Baldy!" "Try a leetle
coaxin'!" "Don't be so rough with the gosling, Baldy!" "Jest whistle to him, an' he'll folly
ye!" But, ignoring these pleasantries, Baldy rubbed his legs and turned to the Boy for guidance.

"Are you sure you want him now?" inquired the latter.

"Course I want him!" returned Baldy with a sheepish grin. "I'll coax him round an' make friends
with him all right when I git him home. But how'm I goin' to git him? I'm afeared o' hurtin'
him, he seems that delicate, and his feelin's so sensitive like!"

"We'll have to surround him, kind of. Just wait, boys!" said the Boy. And running into the
cabin, past the deliberate James Edward, he reappeared with a heavy blanket.

The great gander eyed his approach with contemptuous indifference. He had come to regard the
Boy as quite harmless. When, therefore, the encumbering folds of the blanket descended, it
was too late to resist. In a moment he was rolled over in the dark, bundled securely, picked
up, and ignominiously tucked under Baldy Pallen's arm.

"Now you've got him, don't let go o' him!" admonished the Boy, and amid encouraging jeers Baldy
departed, carrying the bundle victoriously. He had not more than crossed the bridge, however,
when the watchers on the island saw a slender black head wriggle out from one end of the bundle,
dart upward behind his left arm, and seize the man viciously by the ear. With a yell Baldy
grabbed the head, and held it securely in his great fist till the Boy ran to his rescue. When
James Edward's bill was removed from Baldy's bleeding ear, his darting, furious head tucked
back into the blanket, the Boy said--

"Now, Baldy, that was just your own fault for not keeping tight hold. You can't blame James
Edward for biting you!"

"Sure, no!" responded Baldy, cheerfully. "I don't blame him a mite. I brag on the spunk of
him. Him an' me'll git on all right."

James Edward gone, the excitement was over. The Boy picked up the two big white cats, Melindy
and Jim, and placed them in the arms of old Billy Smith, where they settled themselves, looking
about with an air of sleepy wisdom. From smallest kittenhood the smell of a homespun shirt
had stood to them for every kind of gentleness and shelter, so they saw no reason to find fault
with the arms of Billy Smith. By this time old Butters, the woodchuck, disturbed at the scattering
of the Family, had retired in a huff to the depths of his little barrel by the doorstep. The
Boy clapped an oat-bag over the end of the barrel, and tied it down. Then he went into the
cabin and slipped another bag over the head of the unsuspecting Bones, who fluffed all his
feathers and snapped his fierce beak like castanets. In two minutes he was tied up so that
he could neither bite nor claw.

"That was slick!" remarked Red Angus, who had hitherto taken no part in the proceedings. He
and the rest of the hands had followed in hope of further excitement.

"Well, then, Angus, will you help me home? Will you take the barrel, and see that Butters doesn't
gnaw out on the way?"

Red Angus picked up the barrel and carried it carefully in front of him, head up, that the
sly old woodchuck might not steal a march on him. Then the Boy picked up Bones in his oat-bag,
and closed the cabin door. As the party left the island with loud tramping of feet on the little
bridge, the young fox crept slyly from behind the cabin, and eyed them through cunningly narrowed
slits of eyes. At last he was going to have the island all to himself; and he set himself to
dig a burrow directly under the doorstep, where that meddlesome MacPhairrson had never permitted
him to dig.

III

It was in the green zenith of June when MacPhairrson went away. When he returned, hobbling
up with his tiny bundle, the backwoods world was rioting in the scarlet and gold of young October.
He was quite cured. He felt singularly well. But a desperate loneliness saddened his home-coming.
He knew his cabin would be just as he had left it, there on its steep little foam-ringed island;
and he knew the Boy would be there, with the key, to admit him over the bridge and welcome
him home. But what would the island be without the Family? The Boy, doubtless, had done what
he could. He had probably taken care of Stumpy, and perhaps of Ananias-and-Sapphira. But the
rest of the Family must inevitably be scattered to the four winds. Tears came into his eyes
as he thought of himself and Stumpy and the parrot, the poor lonely three, there amid the sleepless
clamour of the rapids, lamenting their vanished comrades. A chill that was more than the approaching
autumn twilight could account for settled upon his heart.

Arriving at the little bridge, however, his heart warmed again, for there was the Boy waving
at him, and hurrying down to the gate to let him in. And there at the Boy's heels was Stumpy,
sure enough. MacPhairrson shouted, and Stumpy, at the sound of the loud voice, went wild, trying
to tear his way through the gate. When the gate opened, he had to brace himself against the
frame, before he could grasp the Boy's hand, so extravagant and overwhelming were the yelping
Stumpy's caresses. Gladly he suffered them, letting the excited dog lick his hands and even
his face; for, after all, Stumpy was the best and dearest member of the Family. Then, to steady
him, he gave him his bundle to carry up to the cabin, and proudly Stumpy trotted on ahead with
it. MacPhairrson's voice trembled as he tried to thank the Boy for bringing Stumpy back to
him--trembled and choked.

"I can't help it!" he explained apologetically as soon as he got his voice again. "I love Stumpy
best, of course! You kept the best fer me! But, Jiminy Christmas, Boy, how I miss the rest on 'em!"

"I didn't keep Stumpy!" explained the Boy as the two went up the path. "It was Mike Sweeny
took care of him for you. He brought him round this morning because he had to get off to the
woods cruising. I took care of Bones--we'll find him on his box inside--and of cross old Butters.
Thunder, how Butters has missed you, MacPhairrson! He's bit me twice, just because I wasn't
you. There he is, poking his nose out of his barrel."

The old woodchuck thought he had heard MacPhairrson's voice, but he was not sure. He came out
and sat up on his fat haunches, his nostrils quivering with expectation. Then he caught sight
of the familiar limping form. With a little squeal of joy he scurried forward and fell to clutching
and clawing at his master's legs till MacPhairrson picked him up. Whereupon he expressed his
delight by striving to crowd his nose into MacPhairrson's neck. At this moment the fox appeared
from hiding behind the cabin, and sat up, with ears cocked shrewdly and head to one side, to
take note of his master's return.

"Lord, how Carrots has growed!" exclaimed MacPhairrson, lovingly, and called him to come. But
the fox yawned in his face, got up lazily, and trotted off to the other side of the island.
MacPhairrson's face fell.

"He's got no kind of a heart at all," said the Boy, soothing his disappointment.

"He ain't no use to nobody," said MacPhairrson. "I reckon we'd better let him go." Then he
hobbled into the cabin to greet Bones, who ruffled up his feathers at his approach, but recognized
him and submitted to being stroked.

Presently MacPhairrson straightened up on his crutches, turned, and gulped down a lump in his
throat.

"I reckon we'll be mighty contented here," said he, "me an' Stumpy, an' Butters, an' Bones.
But I wisht as how I might git to have Ananias-an'-Sapphira back along with us. I'm goin' to
miss that there bird a lot, fer all she was so ridiculous an' cantankerous. I s'pose, now,
you don't happen to know who's got her, do you?"

"I know she's got a good home!" answered the Boy, truthfully. "But I don't know that I could
tell you just where she is!"

At just this minute, however, there came a jangling of the gate bell, and screeches of--

"Oh, by Gee! Jumpin' Jiminy! Oh, Boy! I want Pa!"

MacPhairrson's gaunt and grizzled face grew radiant. Nimbly he hobbled to the door, to see
the Boy already on the bridge, opening the gate. To his amazement, in strode Black Angus the
Boss, with the bright green glitter of Ananias-and-Sapphira on his shoulder screeching varied
profanities--and whom at his heels but Ebenezer and the little ring-tailed raccoon. In his
excitement the old woodsman dropped one of his crutches. Therefore, instead of going to meet
his visitors, he plumped down on the bench outside his door and just waited. A moment later
the quaint procession arrived. MacPhairrson found Black Angus shaking him hugely by the hand,
Ebenezer, much grown up, rooting at his knees with a happy little squeal, and Ananias-and-Sapphira,
as of old, clambering excitedly up his shirt-front.

"There, there, easy now, old pard," he murmured to the pig, fondling the animal's ears with
one hand, while he gave the other to the bird, to be nibbled and nipped ecstatically, the raccoon
meanwhile looking on with bright-eyed, non-committal interest.

"Angus," said the old woodsman presently, by way of an attempt at thanks, "ye're a wonderful
hand with the dumb critters--not that one could rightly call Ananias-an'-Sapphira dumb, o'
course--'n' I swear I couldn't never have kep' 'em lookin' so fine and slick all through the
summer. I reckon----"

But he never finished that reckoning. Down to his bridge was coming another and a larger procession
than that of Black Angus. First, and even now entering through the gate, he saw Jimmy Wright
leading a lank young moose cow, whom he recognized as Susan. Close behind was old Billy Smith
with the two white cats, Melindy and Jim, in his arms; and then Baldy Fallen, with a long blanket
bundle under his arm. Behind them came the rest of the mill hands, their faces beaming welcome.
MacPhairrson, shaking all over, with big tears in his eyes, reached for his fallen crutch and
stood up. When the visitors arrived and gave him their hearty greetings, he could find no words
to answer. Baldy laid his bundle gently on the ground and respectfully unrolled it. Out stepped
the lordly James Edward and lifted head and wings with a troubled honk-a, honka. As soon as
he saw MacPhairrson, he came up and stood close beside him, which was as much enthusiasm as
the haughty gander could bring himself to show. The cats meanwhile were rubbing and purring
against their old master's legs, while Susan sniffed at him with a noisy, approving snort.
MacPhairrson's throat, and then his whole face, began to work. How different was this home-coming
from what he had expected! Here, wonder of wonders, was his beloved Family all gathered about
him! How good the boys were! He must try to thank them all. Bracing himself with one crutch,
he strove to express to them his immeasurable gratitude and gladness. In vain, for some seconds,
he struggled to down the lump in his throat. Then, with a titanic effort, he blurted out: "Oh,
hell, boys!" and sat down, and hid his wet eyes in Stumpy's shaggy hair.

On Big Lonely

It was no doubt partly pride, in having for once succeeded in evading her grandmother's all-seeing
eye, that enabled Mandy Ann to carry, at a trot, a basket almost as big as herself--to carry
it all the way down the hill to the river, without once stumbling or stopping to take breath.
The basket was not only large, but uneasy, seeming to be troubled by internal convulsions,
which made it tip and lurch in a way that from time to time threatened to upset Mandy Ann's
unstable equilibrium. But being a young person of character, she kept right on, ignoring the
fact that the stones on the shore were very sharp to her little bare feet.

At last she reached the sunshiny cove, with shoals of minnows flickering about its amber shallows,
which was the goal of her flight. Here, tethered to a stake on the bank, lay the high-sided
old bateau, which Mandy Ann had long coveted as a perfectly ideal play-house. Its high prow
lightly aground, its stern afloat, it swung lazily in the occasional puffs of lazy air. Mandy
Ann was only four years old, and her red cotton skirt just came to her dimpled grimy little
knees, but with that unfailing instinct of her sex she gathered up the skirt and clutched it
securely between her breast and the rim of the basket. Then she stepped into the water, waded
to the edge of the old bateau and climbed aboard.

The old craft was quite dry inside, and filled with a clean pungent scent of warm tar. Mandy
Ann shook out her red skirt and her yellow curls, and set down the big covered basket on the
bottom of the bateau. The basket continued to move tempestuously.

"Oh, naughty! naughty!" she exclaimed, shaking her chubby finger at it. "Jest a minute, jest
a teenty minute, an' we'll see!"

Peering over the bow, Mandy Ann satisfied herself that the bateau, though its bottom grated
on the pebbles, was completely surrounded by water. Then sitting down on the bottom, she assured
herself that she was hidden by the boat's high flaring sides from the sight of all interfering
domestic eyes on shore. She felt sure that even the eyes of her grandmother, in the little
grey cottage back on the green hill, could not reach her in this unguessed retreat. With a
sigh of unutterable content she made her way back into the extreme stern of the bateau, lugging
the tempestuous basket with her. Sitting down flat, she took the basket in her lap and loosened
the cover, crooning softly as she did so. Instantly a whiskered, brown snub-nose, sniffing
and twitching with interrogation, appeared at the edge. A round brown head, with little round
ears and fearless bright dark eyes, immediately popped over the edge. With a squeak of satisfaction
a fat young woodchuck, nearly full-grown, clambered forth and ran up on Mandy Ann's shoulder.
The bateau, under the influence of the sudden weight in the stern, floated clear of the gravel
and swung softly at the end of its rope.

Observing that the bateau was afloat, Mandy Ann was delighted. She felt doubly secure, now,
from pursuit. Pulling a muddy carrot from her pocket she held it up to the woodchuck, which
was nuzzling affectionately at her curls. But the smell of the fresh earth reminded the little
animal of something which he loved even better than Mandy Ann--even better, indeed, than a
juicy carrot. He longed to get away, for a little while, from the loving but sometimes too
assiduous attention with which his little mistress surrounded him--to get away and burrow to
his heart's content in the cool brown earth, full of grass-roots. Ignoring the carrot, he clambered
down in his soft, loose-jointed fashion, from Mandy Ann's shoulder, and ran along the gunwale
to the bow. When he saw that he could not reach shore without getting into the water, which
he loathed, he grumbled squeakingly, and kept bobbing his round head up and down, as if he
contemplated making a jump for it.

At these symptoms Mandy Ann, who had been eyeing him, called to him severely. "Naughty!" she
cried. "Come back this very instant, sir! You'd jes' go an' tell Granny on me! Come right back
to your muzzer this instant!" At the sound of her voice the little animal seemed to think better
of his rashness. The flashing and rippling of the water daunted him. He returned to Mandy Ann's
side and fell to gnawing philosophically at the carrot which she thrust under his nose.

This care removed, Mandy Ann took an irregular bundle out of the basket. It was tied up in
a blue-and-white handkerchief. Untying it with extreme care, as if the contents were peculiarly
precious, she displayed a collection of fragments of many-coloured glass and gay-painted china.
Gloating happily over these treasures, which flashed like jewels in the sun, she began to sort
them out and arrange them with care along the nearest thwart of the bateau. Mandy Ann was making
what the children of the Settlement knew and esteemed as a "Chaney House." There was keen rivalry
among the children as to both location and furnishing of these admired creations; and to Mandy
Ann's daring imagination it had appeared that a "Chaney House" in the old bateau would be something
surpassing dreams.

For an hour or more Mandy Ann was utterly absorbed in her enchanting task. So quiet she was
over it that every now and then a yellow-bird or a fly-catcher would alight upon the edge of
the bateau to bounce away again with a startled and indignant twitter. The woodchuck, having
eaten his carrot, curled up in the sun and went to sleep.

Mandy Ann's collection was really a rich assortment of colour. Every piece in it was a treasure
in her eyes. But much as she loved the bits of painted china, she loved the glass better. There
were red bits, and green of many shades, and blue, yellow, amber, purple and opal. Each piece,
before arranging it in its allotted place on the thwart, she would lift to her eyes and survey
the world through it. Some near treetops, and the blue sky piled with white fleeces of summer
clouds, were all of the world she could see from her retreat; but viewed through different
bits of glass these took on an infinite variety of wonder and delight. So engrossed she was,
it quite escaped her notice that the old bateau was less steady in its movements than it had
been when first she boarded it. She did not even observe the fact that there were no longer
any treetops in her fairy-tinted pictures. At last there sounded under the keel a strange gurgle,
and the bateau gave a swinging lurch which sent half the treasures of the "Chaney House" clattering
upon the bottom or into Mandy Ann's lap. The woodchuck woke up frightened and scrambled into
the shelter of its mistress's arms.

Much surprised, Mandy Ann knelt upright and looked out over the edge of the bateau. She was
no longer in the little sheltered cove, but far out on the river. The shores, slipping smoothly
and swiftly past, looked unfamiliar to her. Where she expected to see the scattered cottages
of the Settlement, a huge bank covered with trees, cut off the view. While she was so engrossed
with her coloured glass, a puff of wind, catching the high sides of the bateau, had caused
it to tug at its tether. The rope, carelessly fastened by some impatient boy, had slipped its
hold; and the bateau had been swept smoothly out into the hurrying current. Half a mile below,
the river rounded a woody point, and the drifting bateau was hidden from the sight of any one
who might have hurried to recover it.

At the moment, Mandy Ann was not frightened. Her blue eyes danced with excitement as she tossed
back her tousled curls. The river, flowing swiftly but smoothly, flashed and rippled in the
noon sun in a friendly fashion, and it was most interesting to see how fast the shores slipped
by. There was no suggestion of danger; and probably, at the back of her little brain, Mandy
Ann felt that the beautiful river, which she had always loved and never been allowed to play
with, would bring her back to her Granny as gently and unexpectedly as it had carried her away.
Meanwhile, she felt only the thrilling and utterly novel excitement of the situation. As the
bateau swung in an occasional oily eddy she laughed gaily at the motion, and felt as proud
as if she were doing it herself. And the woodchuck, which had been very nervous at first, feeling
that something was wrong, was so reassured by its mistress's evident satisfaction that it curled
up again on the bottom and hastened to resume its slumber.

In a little while the river curved again, sweeping back to its original course. Suddenly, in
the distance, the bright spire of the Settlement church came into view, and then the familiar
cottages. Mandy Ann's laughing face grew grave, as she saw how very, very far away they looked.
They took on, also, from the distance, a certain strangeness which smote her heart. This wonderful
adventure of hers ceased to have any charm for her. She wanted to go back at once. Then her
grandmother's little grey house on the slope came into view. Oh, how terribly little and queer
and far away it looked. And it was getting farther and farther away every minute. A frightened
cry of "Granny! Granny! Take me home!" broke from her lips. She stood up, and made her way
hurriedly to the other end of the bateau, which, being upstream, was nearer home. As her weight
reached the bow, putting it deeper into the grip of the current, the bateau slowly swung around
till it headed the other way. Mandy Ann turned and hurried again to the point nearest home.
Whereupon the bateau calmly repeated its disconcerting manoeuvre. All at once the whole truth
of the situation burst upon Mandy Ann's comprehension. She was lost. She was being carried
away so far that she would never, never get back. She was being swept out into the terrible
wilds that she had heard stories about. Her knees gave away in her terror. Crouching, a little
red tumbled heap, on the bottom of the bateau, she lifted up her voice in shrill wailings,
which so frightened the woodchuck that he came and crept under her skirt.

Below the Settlement the river ran for miles through a country of ever-deepening desolation,
without cabin or clearing near its shores, till it emptied itself into the yet more desolate
lake known as "Big Lonely," a body of forsaken water about ten miles long, surrounded by swamps
and burnt-lands. From the foot of Big Lonely the river raged away over a mile of thundering
ledges, through a chasm known to the lumbermen as "The Devil's Trough." The fury of this madness
having spent itself between the black walls of the canyon, the river continued rather sluggishly
its long course toward the sea. A few miles below the Settlement the river began to get hurried
and turbulent, chafing white through rocky rapids. When the bateau plunged into the first of
these, Mandy Ann's wailing and sobbing stopped abruptly. The clamour of the white waves and
the sight of their lashing wrath fairly stupefied her. She sat up on the middle thwart, with
the shivering woodchuck clutched to her breast, and stared about with wild eyes. On every side
the waves leaped up, black, white, and amber, jumping at the staggering bateau. But appalling
as they looked to Mandy Ann, they were not particularly dangerous to the sturdy, high-sided
craft which carried her. The old bateau had been built to navigate just such waters. Nothing
could upset it, and on account of its high, flaring sides, no ordinary rapids could swamp it.
It rode the loud chutes triumphantly, now dipping its lofty nose, now bumping and reeling,
but always making the passage without serious mishap. All through the rapids Mandy Ann would
sit silent, motionless, fascinated with horror. But in the long, comparatively smooth reaches
she would recover herself enough to cry softly upon the woodchuck's soft brown fur, till that
prudent little animal, exasperated at the damp of her caresses, wriggled away and crawled into
his hated basket.

At last, when the bateau had run a dozen of these noisy "rips," Mandy Ann grew surfeited with
terror, and thought to comfort herself. Sitting down again upon the bottom of the bateau, she
sadly sought to revive her interest in the "Chaney House." She would finger the choicest bits
of painted porcelain, and tell herself how pretty they were. She would choose a fragment of
scarlet or purple glass, hold it up to her pathetic, tear-stained face, and try to interest
herself in the coloured landscape that filed by. But it was no use. Even the amber glass had
lost its power to interest her. And at length, exhausted by her terror and her loneliness,
she sank down and fell asleep.

It was late afternoon when Mandy Ann fell asleep, and her sleep was the heavy semi-torpor coming
after unrelieved grief and fear. It was unjarred by the pitching of the fiercer rapids which
the bateau presently encountered. The last mile of the river's course before joining the lake
consisted of deep, smooth "dead-water"; but, a strong wind from the north-west having sprung
up toward the end of the day, the bateau drove on with undiminished speed. On the edge of the
evening, when the sun was just sinking into the naked tops of the rampikes along the western
shore, the bateau swept out upon the desolate reaches of Big Lonely, and in the clutch of the
wind hastened down mid-lake to seek the roaring chutes and shrieking vortices of the "Devil's
Trough."

                  *       *       *       *       *

Out in the middle of the lake, where the heavy wind had full sweep, the pitching and thumping
of the big waves terrified the poor little woodchuck almost to madness; but they made no impression
on the wearied child, where she lay sobbing tremulously in her sleep. They made a great impression,
however, on a light birch canoe, which was creeping up alongshore in the teeth of the wind,
urged by two paddles. The paddlers were a couple of lumbermen, returning from the mouth of
the river. All the spring and early summer they had been away from the Settlement, working
on "the drive" of the winter's logging, and now, hungry for home, they were fighting their
way doggedly against wind and wave. There was hardly a decent camping-ground on all the swamp-cursed
shores of Big Lonely, except at the very head of the lake, where the river came in, and this
spot the voyagers were determined to make before dark. They would then have clear poling ahead
of them next day, to get them home to the Settlement in time for supper.

The man in the bow, a black-bearded, sturdy figure in a red shirt, paddled with slow, unvarying
strokes, dipping his big maple paddle deep and bending his back to it, paying no heed whatever
to the heavy black waves which lurched at him every other second and threatened to overwhelm
the bow of his frail craft. He had none of the responsibility. His part was simply to supply
power, steady, unwavering power, to make head against the relentless wind. The man in the stern,
on the other hand, had to think and watch and meet every assault, as well as thrust the canoe
forward into the tumult. He was a gaunt, long-armed young giant, bareheaded, with shaggy brown
hair blown back from his red-tanned face. His keen grey eyes noted and measured every capricious
lake-wave as it lunged at him, and his wrist, cunning and powerful, delicately varied each
stroke to meet each instant's need. It was not enough that the canoe should be kept from broaching-to
and swamping or upsetting. He was anxious that it should not ship water, and wet certain treasures
which they were taking home to the backwoods from the shops of the little city down by the
sea. And while his eyes seemed to be so engrossingly occupied in the battle with the waves
of Big Lonely, they were all the time refreshing themselves with a vision--the vision of a
grey house on a sunny hill-top, where his mother was waiting for him, and where a little yellow-haired
girl would scream "Daddie, oh, Daddie!" when she saw him coming up the road.

The dogged voyagers were within perhaps two miles of the head of the lake, with the sun gone
down behind the desolate rampikes, and strange tints of violet and rose and amber, beautiful
and lonely, touching the angry turbulence of the waves, when the man in the bow, whose eyes
were free to wander, caught sight of the drifting bateau. It was a little ahead of them, but
farther out in the lake.

"Ain't that old Joe's bateau out yonder, Chris?" he queried, his trained woodsman's eye recognizing
the craft by some minute detail of build or blemish.

"I reckon it be!" answered Chris, after a moment's scrutiny. "He's let her git adrift. Water
must be raisin' sudden!"

"She'll be a fine quality o' kindlin' wood in another hour, the rate she's travelling" commented
the other with mild interest. But the young giant in the stern was more concerned. He was sorry
that old Joe should lose his boat.

"Darned old fool, not to tie her!" he growled. "Ef 'twarn't fer this wind ag'in' us, we could
ketch it an' tow it ashore fer him. But we can't."

"Wouldn't stop fer it ef 't had a bag o' gold into it!" grunted the other, slogging on his
paddle with renewed vigour as he looked forward to the camp-ground still so far ahead. He was
hungry and tired, and couldn't even take time to fill his pipe in that hurly-burly.

Meanwhile the bateau had swept down swiftly, and passed them at a distance of not more than
a hundred yards. It was with a qualm of regret that Chris saw it go by, to be ground to splinters
in the yelling madness of the Devil's Trough. After it had passed, riding the waves bravely
like the good old craft that it was, he glanced back after it in half-humorous regret. As he
did so, his eye caught something that made him look again. A little furry brown creature was
peering over the gunwale at the canoe. The gunwale tipped toward him at that instant and he
saw it distinctly. Yes, it was a woodchuck, and no mistake. And it seemed to be making mute
appeal to him to come and save it from a dreadful doom. Chris hesitated, looking doubtfully
at his companion's heaving back. It looked an unresponsive back. Moreover, Chris felt half
ashamed of his own compassionate impulse. He knew that he was considered foolishly softhearted
about animals and children and women, though few men cared to express such an opinion to him
too frankly. He suspected that, in the present case, his companion would have a right to complain
of him. But he could not stand the idea of letting the little beast--which had so evidently
appealed to him for succour--go down into the horrors of the Devil's Trough. His mind was made up.

"Mart," he exclaimed, "I'm goin' to turn. There's somethin' aboard that there old bateau that
I want." And he put the head of the canoe straight up into a big wave.

"The devil there is!" cried the other, taking in his paddle and looking around in angry protest.
"What is it?"

"Paddle, ye loon! Paddle hard!" ordered Chris. "I'll tell ye when we git her 'round."

Thus commanded, and the man at the stern paddle being supreme in a canoe, the backwoodsman
obeyed with a curse. It was no time to argue, while getting the canoe around in that sea. But
as soon as the canoe was turned, and scudding with frightened swoops down the waves in pursuit
of the fleeing bateau, he saw, and understood.

"Confound you, Chris McKeen, if 'tain't nothin' but a blankety blank woodchuck!" he shouted,
making as if to back water and try to turn the canoe again.

Chris's grey eyes hardened. "Look a' here, Mart Babcock," he shouted, "don't you be up to no
foolishness. Ye kin cuss all ye like--but either paddle as I tell ye or take in yer paddle
an' set quiet. I'm runnin' this 'ere canoe."

Babcock took in his paddle, cursing bitterly.

"A woodchuck! A measly woodchuck!" he shouted, with unutterable contempt expressed in every
word. "I know'd ye was a fool, Chris McKeen, but I didn't know ye was so many kinds of a mush-head
of a fool!"

"Course it's a woodchuck!" agreed Chris, surging on his paddle. "Do ye think I'd let the leetle
critter go down the 'Trough,' jest so's ye could git your bacon an' tea an hour sooner? I always
did like woodchucks, anyways."

"I'll take it out o' yer hide fer this when we git ashore; you wait!" stormed Babcock, courageously.
He knew it would be some time before they could get ashore, and so he would have a chance to
forget his threat.

"That's all right, Mart!" assented McKeen. "My hide'll be all here waitin' on ye. But fer now
you jest git ready to do ez I tell ye, an' don't let the canoe bump ez we come up alongside
the bateau. It's goin' to be a mite resky, in this sea, gittin' hold of the leetle critter.
I'm goin' to take it home for Mandy Ann."

As the canoe swept down upon the swooping and staggering bateau, Babcock put out his paddle
in readiness to fend or catch as he might be directed. A moment later Chris ran the canoe past
and brought her up dexterously under the lee of the high-walled craft. Babcock caught her with
a firm grip, at the same time holding her off with the paddle, and glanced in, while Chris's
eyes were still occupied. His dark face went white as cotton.

"My God, Chris! Forgive me! I didn't know!" he groaned.

"It's--Mandy Ann!" exclaimed her father, in a hushed voice, climbing into the bateau and catching
the child into his arms.

From Buck to Bear and Back

The sunny, weather-beaten, comfortable little house, with its grey sheds and low grey barn
half enclosing its bright, untidy farmyard, stood on the top of the open hill, where every
sweet forest wind could blow over it night and day.

Fields of oats, buckwheat, and potatoes came up all about it over the slopes of the hill; and
its only garden was a spacious patch of cabbages and "garden sass" three or four hundred yards
down toward the edge of the forest, where a pocket of rich black loam had specially invited
an experiment in horticulture.

Like most backwoods farmers, Sam Coxen had been wont to look with large scorn on such petty
interests as gardening; but a county show down at the Settlement had converted him, and now
his cabbage patch was the chief object of his solicitude. He had proud dreams of prizes to
be won at the next show--now not three weeks ahead.

It was his habit, whenever he harnessed up the team for a drive into the Settlement, to turn
his head the last thing before leaving and cast a long, gratified look down over the cabbage
patch, its cool, clear green standing out sharply against the yellow-brown of the surrounding
fields. On this particular morning he did not turn for that look till he had jumped into the
wagon and gathered up the reins. Then, as he gazed, a wave of indignation passed over his good-natured
face.

There, in the middle of the precious cabbages, biting with a sort of dainty eagerness at first
one and then another, and wantonly tearing open the crisp heads with impatient strokes of his
knife-edged fore hoofs, was a tall wide-antlered buck.

Sam Coxen dropped the reins, sprang from the wagon, and rushed to the bars which led from the
yard to the back field; and the horses--for the sake of his dignity he always drove the pair
when he went into the Settlement--fell to cropping the short, fine grass that grew behind the
well. In spite of having grown up in the backwoods, Sam was lacking in backwoods lore. He was
no hunter, and he cared as little as he knew, about the wild kindreds of the forest. He had
a vague, general idea that all deer were "skeery critters"; and if any one had told him that
the buck, in mating season, was not unlikely to develop a fine militant spirit, he would have
laughed with scorn.

Climbing upon the bars, he yelled furiously at the marauder, expecting to see him vanish like
a red streak. But the buck merely raised his beautiful head and stared in mild surprise at
the strange, noisy figure on the fence. Then he coolly slashed open another plump cabbage,
and nibbled at the firm white heart.

Very angry, Coxen yelled again with all the power of healthy lungs, and waved his arms wildly
over his head. But the vaunted authority of the human voice seemed in some inexplicable way
to miss a connexion with the buck's consciousness. The waving of those angry arms, however,
made an impression upon him. He appeared to take it as a challenge, for he shook his beautiful
antlers and stamped his forefeet defiantly--and shattered yet another precious cabbage.

Wrath struggled with astonishment in Sam Coxen's primitive soul. Then he concluded that what
he wanted was not only vengeance, but a supply of deer's meat to compensate for the lost cabbages.

Rushing into the house, he snatched down his old muzzle-loader from the pegs where it hung
on the kitchen wall. After the backwoods fashion, the gun was kept loaded with a general utility
charge of buckshot and slugs, such as might come handy in case a bear should try to steal the
pig. Being no sportsman, Coxen did not even take the trouble to change the old percussion-cap,
which had been on the tube for six months. It was enough for him that the weapon was loaded.

Down the other slope of the hill, where the buck could not see him, Coxen hurried at a run,
and gained the cover of the thick woods. Then, still running, he skirted the fields till the
cabbage patch came once more in sight, with the marauder still enjoying himself in the midst of it.

At this point the long-dormant instinct of the hunter began to awake in Sam Coxen. Everything
that he had ever heard about stalking big game flashed into his mind, and he wanted to apply
it all at once. He noted the direction of the wind, and was delighted to find that it came
to his nostrils straight from the cabbage patch.

He went stealthily, lifting and setting down his heavy-booted feet with a softness of which
he had never guessed himself capable. He began to forget his indignation and think only of
the prospect of bagging the game--so easily do the primeval instincts spring to life in a man's
brain. Presently, when within about a hundred yards of the place where he hoped to get a fair
shot, Coxen redoubled his caution. He went crouching, keeping behind the densest cover. Then,
growing still more crafty, he got down and began to advance on all fours.

Now it chanced that Sam Coxen's eyes were not the only ones which had found interest in the
red buck's proceedings. A large black bear, wandering just within the shelter of the forest,
had spied the buck in the open, and being curious, after the fashion of his kind, had sat down
in a thicket to watch the demolition of the cabbages.

He had no serious thought of hunting the big buck, knowing that he would be hard to catch and
troublesome if caught. But he was in that investigating, pugnacious, meddlesome mood which
is apt to seize an old male bear in the autumn.

When the bear caught sight of Sam Coxen's crawling, stealthy figure, not two paces from his
hiding-place, his first impulse was to vanish, to melt away like a big, portentous shadow into
the silent deeps of the wood. His next, due to the season, was to rush upon the man and smite him.

Then he realized that he himself was not the object of the man's stealthy approach. He saw
that what the hunter was intent upon was that buck out in the field. In 1776 Gibbon published
his "Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire," which after more than a hundred years stands the ablest
history of the subject in our language.

In the same year Adam Smith issued "An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations,"
which had a great effect on legislation respecting commerce, trade, and finance. During this period,
also, Sir William Blackstone became prominent as a writer on law,
and Edmund Burke, the distinguished orator and statesman, wrote his
"Reflections on the French Revolution."

The poets, Burns, Byron, Shelley, and Keats, with Sheridan, the orator and dramatist, and Sterne,
the humorist, belong to this reign; so, too, does the witty satirist, Sydney Smith, and Sir
Walter Scott, whose works, like those of Shakespeare, have "made
the dead past live again."

Then again, Maria Edgeworth and Jane Austen have left admirable pictures of the age in their
stories of Irish and English life. Coleridge and Wordsworth began to attract attention toward
the last of this period, and to be much read by those who loved the
poetry of thought and the poetry of nature; while, early in the next
reign, Charles Lamb published his delightful "Essays of Elia."

In art we have the first English painters and engravers.

Hogarth, who died a few years after the beginning of the reign, was celebrated for the coarse but
perfect representations of low life and street scenes; and his series of Election pictures with
his "Beer Lane" and "Gin Alley" are valuable for the insight into
the history of the times.

The chief portrait painters were Reynolds, Lawrence, and Gainsborough,
the last of whom afterwards became noted for his landscapes.

They were followed by Wilkie, whose pictures of "The Rent Day," "The Reading of the Will," and many
others, tell a story of interest to every one who looks at them.

Last came Turner, who in some respects surpassed all former artists in his power of reproducing
scenes in nature.

At the same time, Bewick, whose cuts used to be the delight of every child that read "Aesop's
Fables," gave a new impulse to wood engraving, while Flaxman rose to be the leading English sculptor,
and Wedgwood introduced useful and beautiful articles of pottery.

In common-school education little advance had been made for many generations.

In the country the great mass of the people were nearly as ignorant as they were in the darkest
part of the Middle Ages. Hardly a peasant over forty years of age could be found who could read
a verse in the Bible, and not one in ten could write his name.

There were no cheap books or newspapers, and no proper system of public instruction. The poor
seldom left the counties in which they were born. They knew nothing of what was going on in
the world.

Their education was wholly of the practical kind which comes from work and things, not from books
and teachers; yet many of them with only these simple helps found out two secrets which the
highest culture sometimes misses,--how to be useful and how to be
happy.[1]

[1] See Wordsworth's poem "Resolution and Independence."

The ordinary means of travel were still very imperfect. Stage-coaches had been in use for more
than a hundred and fifty years. They crawled along at the rate of about three miles an hour.
Mail coaches began to run in 1784. They attained a speed of six miles an hour, and later of
ten. This was considered entirely satisfactory.

The close of George III's reign marks the beginning of the present age. It was indicated in many ways,
and among others by the declining use of sedan chairs, which had been the fashion for upwards
of a century, and by the change in dress. Gentlemen were leaving off the picturesque costumes
of the past,--the cocked hats, elaborate wigs, silk stockings, ruffles, velvet coats, and swords,--and
gradually putting on the plain democratic garb, sober in cut and
color, by which we know them to-day.

567. Last Days of George III.

George III died (1820) at the age of eighty-two. During ten years he had been blind, deaf,
and crazy, having lost his reason not very long after the jubilee,
which celebrated the fiftieth year of his reign (1809).

Once, in a lucid interval, he was found by the Queen singing a hymn
and playing an accompaniment on the harpsichord.

He then knelt and prayed aloud for her, for his family, and for the nation; and in closing,
for himself, that it might please God to avert his heavy calamity, or grant him resignation
to bear it.

Then he burst into tears, and his reason again fled.[1] In consequence of the incapacity of
the King, his eldest son, the Prince of Wales, was appointed regent (1811), and on the King's
death came to the throne as George IV.

[1] See Thackeray's "Four Georges."

568. Summary.

The long reign of George III covered sixty very eventful years. During that time England lost
her possessions in America, but gained India and prepared the way for getting possession of New
Zealand and Australia. During that period, also, Ireland was united to Great Britain. The
wars with France, which lasted more than twenty years, ended in the great naval victory of Trafalgar
and the still greater victory on the battlefield of Waterloo. In consequence of these wars, with
that of the American Revolution, the National Debt of Great Britain
rose to a height which rendered the burden of taxation well-nigh insupportable.

The

second war with the United States in 1812 made America independent on the sea, and eventually
compelled England to give up her assumed right to search American vessels. The two greatest reforms
of the period were the abolition of the slave trade and the mitigation of the laws against
debt and crime; the chief material improvement was the extension of canals and the application
of steam to manufacturing and to navigation. The "Industrial Revolution" transformed the North
of England.

GEORGE IV--1820-1830

569. Accession and Character of George IV.

George IV, eldest son of the late King, came to the throne in his fifty-eighth year; but, owing
to his father's insanity, he had virtually been King for nearly ten
years (S567).

His habits of life had made him a selfish, dissolute spendthrift, who, like Charles II, cared
only for pleasure.

Though while Prince of Wales he had received for many years an income
upwards of 100,000 pounds, which was largely increased at a later
period, yet he was always hopelessly in debt.

Parliament (1795) appropriated over 600,000 pounds to relieve him
from his most pressing creditors, but his wild extravagance soon involved
him in difficulties again, so that had it not been for help given
by the long-suffering taxpayers, His Royal Highness must have become
as bankrupt in purse as he was in character.

After his accession matters became worse rather than better.

At his coronation, which cost the nation over 200,000 pounds, he appeared in hired jewels,
which he forgot to return, and which Parliament had to pay for. Not only did he waste the
nation's money more recklessly than ever, but he used whatever political influence he had
to opposesuch measures of reform as the times demanded.

570. Discontent; the "Manchester Massacre" (1819).

When (1811) George, then Prince of Wales, became regent (S567), he desired to form a Whig ministry,
not because he cared for Whig principles (S479), but solely because he would thereby be acting
in opposition to his father's wishes.

Finding his purpose impracticable, he accepted Tory rule (S479), and a Cabinet (S534) was formed
with Lord Liverpool as Prime Minister. It had for its main object the continued exclusion
of Catholics from representation in Parliament (S478).

Lord Liverpool was a dull, well-meaning man, who utterly failed to comprehend the real tendency of
the age. He was the son of a commoner who had been raised to the peerage. He had always had
a reputation for honest obstinacy, and for little else. After he became Premier, a prominent
French lady, who was visiting England, asked him one day, "What has become of that VERY stupid
man, Mr. Jenkinson?" "Madame," answered the unfortunate Prime Minister, "he is now Lord Liverpool."[1]

[1]
Earl's "English Premiers," Vol.

II.

From such a Cabinet or Government, which continued in power for fifteen years, nothing but
trouble could be expected. The misery of the country was great. Food was selling at famine prices.
Thousands were on the verge of starvation, and tens of thousands did not get enough to eat.
Trade was seriously depressed, and multitudes were unable to obtain work. Under these circumstances,
the suffering masses undertook to hold public meetings to discuss the cause and cure of these
evils; but as violent speeches against the Government were often
made at the meetings, the authorities dispersed them on the ground
that they were seditious and tended to riot and rebellion.

Many large towns at this period had no voice in legislation. At Birmingham, which was one of this
class, the citizens had met and chosen, though without legal authority, a representative to Parliament.
Machester, another important manufacturing town, now determined to do the same thing. The people
were warned not to assemble, but they persisted in doing so, on the ground that peaceful discussion,
with the election of a representative, was no violation of law.

The meeting was held in St. Peter's Fields, and, through the blundering of a magistrate, it ended
in an attack by a body of troops, by which many people were wounded an a number killed (1819).

571.
The Six Acts (1819); the Conspiracy.

The bitter feeling caused by the "Manchester Massacre," or "Peterloo," as it was called, was still
further aggravated by the passage of the Six Acts (1819). The object of these severe coercive measures
was to make it impossible for men to take any public action demanding political reform. They
restricted freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and the right of the people to assemble for
the purpose of open discussion of the course taken by the Government. These harsh laws coupled
with other repressive measures taken by the Tories (S479), who were still in power, led to
the "Cato Street Conspiracy." Shortly after the accession of George IV a few desperate men banded
together, and meeting in a stable in Cato Street, London, formed a plot to murder Lord Liverpool
and his entire cabinet at dinner at which all the ministers were to be present.

The plot was discovered, and the conspirators were speedily disposed of by the gallows or transportation,
but nothing was done to relieve the suffering which had provoked the intended crime. No new conspiracy
was attempted, but in the course of the next ten years a silent revolution took place, which, as
we shall see later, obtained for the people that fuller representation in Parliament which they
had hitherto vainly attempted to get (S582).

572. Queen Caroline.

While he was Prince of Wales, George IV had, contrary to law, privately married Mrs. Fitzherbert
(1785),[1] a Roman Catholic lady of excellent character, and possessed
of great beauty.

Ten years later, partly through royal compulsion and partly to get money to pay off some of his
numerous debts, the Prince married his cousin, the Princess Caroline of Brunswick. The union
proved a source of unhappiness to both. The Princess lacked both discretion and delicacy,
and her husband, who disliked her from the first, was reckless and brutal toward her.

[1] By the Royal Marriage Act of 1772, no descendant of George II could make a legal marriage
without the consent of the reigning sovereign, unless twenty-five years of age, and unless the
marriage was not objected to by Parliament.

He separated from her in a year's time, and as soon as she could, she withdrew to the Continent.
When he became King he excluded Queen Caroline's name from the Prayer Book, and next applied
to Parliament for a divorce on the ground of the Queen's unfaithfulness to her marriage vows.

Henry Brougham, afterwards Lord Brougham, acted as the Queen's counsel. No sufficient evidence
was brought against her, and the ministry declined to take further action. It was decided,
however, that she could not claim the honor of coronation, to which, as Queen Consort, she had a
right sanctioned by custom but not secured by law. When the King
was crowned (1821), no place was provided for her.

By the advice of her counsel, she presented herself at the entrance of Westminster Abbey as
the coronation ceremony was about to begin; but, by order of her husband, admission was refused,
and she retired to die, heartbroken, a few days after.

573. Three Great Reforms.

Seven years later (1828) the Duke of Wellington, a Tory (S479) in politics, became Prime Minister.
His sympathies in all matters of legislation were with the King, but he made a virtue of necessity,
and for the time acted with those who demanded reform. The Corporation Act (S472), which was
originally passed in the reign of Charles II, and had for its object the exclusion of Dissenters
(S472) from all town or corporate offices, was now repealed; henceforth a man might become a
mayor, alderman, or town officer, without belonging to the Church
of England.

At the same time the Test Act (S477), which had also been passed in Charles II's reign to keep
both Catholics and Dissenters out of government offices, whether civil or military, was repealed.
As a matter of fact "the teeth of both acts had long been drawn" by by an annual Indemnity
Act (1727).[1]

[1] This act virtually suspended the operation of the Corporation Act (S472) and the Test Act
against dissenters so that they could obtain civil offices from which
these two acts had excluded them.

In 1829 a still greater reform was carried. For a long period the Catholic Association had been
laboring to obtain the abolition of the laws which had been on the
statute books for over a century and a half, by which Catholics were
excluded from the right to sit in Parliament.

These laws, it will be remembered, were enacted at the time of the alleged Popish Plot, and in
consequence of the perjured evidence given by Titus Oates (S478).[2]
The King, and the Tory party marshaled by the Duke of Wellington,
strenuously resisted the repeal of these statutes; but finally the
Duke became convinced that further opposition was useless.

He therefore suddenly changed about and solely, as he declared, to avert civil war, took the
lead in securing the success of a measure which he heartily hated.

[2] See Sidney Smith's "Peter Plymley's Letters."

But at the same time that Catholics were admitted to both Houses of
Parliament, an act was passed raising the property qualification of
a very large class of small Irish landholders from 2 pounds to 10
pounds.

This measure deprived many thousands of their right to vote. The law was enacted on the pretext that
the small Irish landholders would be influenced by their landlord
or their priest.

Under the new order of things, Daniel O'Connell, an Irish gentleman
of an old and honorable family, and a man of distinguished ability,
came forward as leader of the Catholics.

After much difficulty he succeeded in taking his seat in the House of Commons (1829). He henceforth
devoted himself, though without avail, to the repeal of the act uniting
Ireland with England (S562), and to the restoration of an independent
Irish Parliament.

574.

The New Police (1829).

Although London had now a population of a million and a half, it still had no effective police.
The guardians of the peace at that date were infirm old men, who spent their time dozing in
sentry boxes, and had neither the strength nor energy to be of service in any emergency. The young
fellows of fashion considered these venerable constables as legitimate game. They often amused
themselves by upsetting the sentry boxes with their occupants, leaving the latter helpless in the
street, kicking and struggling like turtles turned on their backs, and as powerless to get on
their feet again.

During the last year of the reign Sir Robert Peel got a bill passed (1829) which oganized a new
and thoroughly efficient police force, properly equipped and uniformed. Great was the outcry
against this innovation, and the "men in blue" were hooted at, not only by London "roughs,"
but by respectable citizens, as "Bobbies" or "Peelers," in derisive allusion to their founder.
But the "Bobbies," who carry no visible club, were not to be jeered out of existence. They
did their duty like men, and have continued to do it in a way which long since gained for them the
good will of all who care for the preservation of law and order.

575. Death of the King (1830).

George IV died soon after the passage of the new Police Bill (1830). Of him it may well be said,
though in a very different sense from that in which the expression was originally used, that "nothing
in his life became him like the leaving of it." During his ten years' reign he had squandered enormous
sums of money in gambling and dissipation, and had done his utmost to block the wheels of political
progress.

How far this son of an insane father (S567) was responsible,
it may not be for us to judge. Walter Scott, who had a kind word for
almost every one, and especially for any one of the Tory party (S479),
did not fail to say something in praise of the generous good nature
of his friend George IV. The sad thing is that his voice seems to
have been the only one. In a whole nation the rest were silent; or,
if they spoke, it was neither to commend nor to defend, but to condemn.

576.
Summary.

The legislative reforms of George IV's reign are its chief
features. The repeal of the Test and Corporation acts and the grant
to Catholics of the right to reenter Parliament were tardy measures
of justice. Neither the King nor his ministers deserve any credit
for them, but, none the less, they accomplished great and permanent
good.

WILLIAM IV--1830-1837

577. Accession and Character of William
IV.

As George IV left no heir, his brother William, a man of sixty-five,
now came to the throne. He had passed most of his life on shipboard,
having been placed in the navy when a mere lad. He was somewhat rough
in his manner, and cared nothing for the ceremony and etiquette that
were so dear to both George III and George IV. His faults, however,
were on the surface. He was frank, hearty, and a friend to the people,
to whom he was familiarly known as the "Sailor King."

578. Need of
Reform in Parliamentary Representation.

From the beginning of this
reign it was evident that the great question which must soon come
up for settlement was that of parliamentary representation. Large
numbers of the people of England had now no voice in the government.
This unfortunate state of things was chiefly the result of the great
changes which had taken place in the growth of the population of the
Midlands (or the central portion of England) and the North (S563).

Since
the introduction of steam (S563) the rapid increase of manufactures
and commerce had built up Birmingham, Leeds, Sheffield, Manchester,
and other large towns in the iron, coal, pottery and manufacturing
districts. (See Industrial Map of England, p.10.) These important
towns could not send a member to Parliament; while, on the other hand,
many places in the south of England which did send members had long
ceased to be of any importance. Furthermore, the representation was
of the most haphazard description. In one section no one could vote
except substantial property holders, in another none but town officers,
while in a third every man who had a tenement big enough to boil a
pot in, and hence called a "Pot-walloper," possessed the right.

To
this singular state of things the nation had long been indifferent.
During the Middle Ages the inhavitants often had no desire either
to go to Parliament themselves or to send others. The expense of the
journey was great, the compensation was small, and unless some important
matter of special interest to the people was at stake, they preferred
to stay at home. On this account it was often almost as difficult
for the sheriff to get a distant county member up to the House of
Commons in London as it would have been to carry him there a prisoner
to be tried for his life.

Now, however, everything was changed; the
rise of political parties (S479), the constant and heavy taxation,
the jealousy of the increase of royal authority, the influence and
honor of the position of a Parliamentary representative, all conspired
to make men eager to obtain their full share in the management of
the government.

This new interest had begun as far back as the civil
wars of the seventeenth century, and when Cromwell came to power he
effected many much-needed reforms. But after the restoration of the
Stuarts (S467), the Protector's wise measures were repealed or neglected.


It was a weary day for the little one, in spite of her responsibilities. Muffled up and mittened,
she was able, under her mother's directions, to carry a little water to the stock in a small
tin kettle, making many journeys. And she was able to keep the fire going. But the hours crept
slowly, and she was so consumed with impatience that all her usual amusements lost their savour.
Not even the rare delight of being allowed to cut pictures out of some old illustrated papers
could divert her mind from its dazzling anticipations. But before Christmas could come, must
come her father; and from noon onward she would keep running to the door every few minutes
to peer expectantly down the trail. She was certain that, at the worst, he could not by any
possibility be delayed beyond supper-time, for he was needed to get supper--or, rather, as
Lidey expressed it, to help her get supper for mother! Lidey was not hungry, to be sure, but
she was getting mortally tired of unmitigated bread and butter and molasses.

Supper-time, however, came and went, and no sign of Dave's return. On the verge of tears, Lidey
munched a little of the now distasteful food. Her mother, worn out with the pain, which had
at last relaxed its grip, fell into a heavy sleep. There was no light in the cabin except the
red glow from the open draught of the stove, and the intense, blue-white moonlight streaming
in through the front window. The child's impatience became intolerable.

Flinging open the door for the hundredth time, she gazed out eagerly across the moonlit snow
and down the trail. The cloudless moon, floating directly above it, transfigured that narrow
and lonely road into a path to wonderland. In the mystic radiance--blue-white, but shot with
faint, half-imagined flashes of emerald and violet--Lidey could see no loneliness whatever.
The monstrous solitude became to her eyes a garden of silver and crystal. As she gazed, it
lured her irresistibly.

With a sudden resolve she noiselessly closed the door, lit the lamp, and began to put on her
wraps, stealing about on tiptoe that she might not awaken her mother. She was quite positive
that, by this time, her father must be almost home. As her little brain dwelt upon this idea,
she presently brought herself to see him, striding swiftly along in the moonlight just beyond
the turn of the trail. If she hurried, she could meet him before he came out upon the clearing.
The thought possessed her. Stealing a cautious glance at her mother's face to be sure her sleep
was sound, she slipped out into the shine. A moment more and her tiny figure, hooded and muffled
and mittened, was dancing on moccasined feet across the snow.

At the entrance to the trail, Lidey felt the first qualm of misgiving. The path of light, to
be sure, with all its fairy-book enticement, lay straight before her. But the solemn woods,
on either side of the path, were filled with great shadows and a terrible stillness. At this
point Lidey had half a mind to turn back. But she was already a young person of positive ideas,
not lightly to be swerved from a purpose; and her too vivid imagination still persisted in
showing her that picture of her father, speeding towards her just beyond the turn of the trail.
She even thought that she could hear his steps upon the daunting stillness. With her heart
quivering, yet uplifted by an exaltation of hope, she ran on, not daring to glance again into
the woods. To sustain her courage she kept thinking of the look of gay astonishment that would
flash into her father's face as he met her running towards him--just around the turn of the trail!

The turn was nearly a quarter of a mile distant, but the child reached it at last. With a little
cry of confident relief she rushed forward. The long trail--now half in shadow from the slight
change in its direction--stretched out empty before her. In the excess of her disappointment
she burst into tears and sat down on the snow irresolutely.

Her first impulse--after she had cried for a minute, and wiped her eyes with the little mittens,
which promptly stiffened in the stinging frost--was to face about and run for home as fast
as she could. But when she turned and glanced behind her, the backward path appeared quite
different. When she no longer faced the moonlight, the world took on an unfriendly, sinister
look. There were unknown terrors all along that implacable blue-white way through the dread
blackness of the woods. Sobbing with desolation, she turned again towards the moon. Ahead,
for all her fears, the trail still held something of the glamour and the dazzle. Ahead, too,
as she reminded herself, was surely her father, hastening to meet her, only not quite so near
as she had imagined. Summoning back her courage, and comforting her lonely spirit with thoughts
of what Santa Claus was going to bring her, she picked herself up and continued her journey
at a hurried little walk.

She had not gone more than a few steps, when a strange, high sound, from somewhere far behind
her, sent her heart into her throat and quickened her pace to a run.

Again came that high, long-drawn, quavering sound; and the child's heart almost stopped beating.
If only she could see her father coming! She had never heard any sound just like that; it was
not savage, nor very loud, but somehow it seemed to carry a kind of horror on its floating
cadence. It reminded her, very faintly, of the howling of some dogs that she had heard in the
Settlement. She was not afraid of dogs. But she knew there were no dogs in the forest.

Just as she was beginning to lose her breath and slacken her pace, that terrible cry came wavering
again through the trees, much louder now and nearer. It lent new strength to her tired little
feet, and she fled on faster than ever, her red lips open and her eyes wide. Another slight
turn of the trail, and it ran once more directly towards the moon, stretching on and on till
it narrowed from sight. And nowhere in the shining track was Dave to be seen. Lidey had now,
however, but one thought in her quivering brain, and that was to keep running and get to her
father before those dreadful voices could overtake her. She knew they were coming up swiftly.
They sounded terribly near. When she had gone about two hundred yards beyond the last bend
of the trail, she noticed, a few steps ahead of her, a tiny clearing, and at its farther edge
the gable of a little hut rising a couple of feet above the snow. She knew the place. She had
played in it that summer, while Dave was cutting the coarse hay on the clearing. It was a place
that had been occupied by lonely trappers and lumber prospectors. Being a work of men's hands,
it gave the child a momentary sense of comfort, of companionship in the dreadful wild. She
paused, uncertain whether to continue along the trail or to seek the shelter of the empty hut.

When the crunching of her own little footsteps stopped, however, she was instantly aware of
the padding of other feet behind her. Looking back, she saw a pack of grey beasts just coming
around the turn. They were something like dogs. But Lidey knew they were not dogs. She had
seen pictures of them--awful pictures. She had read stories of them which had frozen her blood
as she read. Now, her very bones seemed to melt within her. They were wolves! For a moment
her throat could form no sound. Then--"Father!" she screamed despairingly, and rushed for the hut.

As she reached it, the wolves were hardly a dozen paces behind. The door stood half open, but
drifted full of snow to within little more than a foot of the top. Into the low opening the
child dived head first, like a rabbit, crept behind the door, and fell upon the snow, gasping,
too horror-stricken to make any outcry.

A step from the hut door the wolves halted abruptly. The half-buried hut, and the dark hole
leading into it--these were things they did not understand, except that they recognized them
as belonging to man. Anything belonging to man was dangerous. In that dark hole they suspected
a trap. The leader went up to it, and almost poked his nose into it, sniffing. But he backed
away sharply as if he had met with a blow on the snout, and his nostrils wrinkled in savage
enmity. The man smell was strong in the hut. It seemed very like a trap.

Lying flat on her stomach behind the door, Lidey stared out through the narrow crack with eyes
that seemed starting from her head. Out there in the clear glitter of the moonlight she saw
the wolves go prowling savagely to and fro, and heard their steps as they cautiously circled
the hut, seeking another entrance. They kept about five or six feet distant from it at first,
so suspicious were they of that man smell that had greeted the leader's first attempt at investigation.
When they had prowled about the hut for several minutes, they all sat down on their haunches
before the door and seemed to deliberate. The child felt their dreadful eyes piercing her through
and through, as they searched her out through the crack and penetrated her vain hiding.

Suddenly, while the eyes of all the pack were flaming upon her, she saw the leader come swiftly
forward and thrust his fierce snout right against the crack of the door. In a sort of madness
she struck at it with her little, mittened hand. The wolf, apparently still disconcerted by
the man smell that greeted his nostrils, sprang back warily. Then the whole pack drew a foot
or two closer to the open doorway. Ravenous though they were, they were not yet assured that
the hut was not a trap. They were not yet quite ready to crawl in and secure their prey. But
gradually they were edging nearer. A few moments more and the leader, no less crafty than savage,
would creep in. Already he had accustomed himself to the menace of that scent. Now, he did
creep in, as far as the middle of his body, investigating. His red jaws and long, white teeth
appeared around the edge of the door. At the sight Lidey's voice returned to her. Shrinking
back against the farthest wall, she gave shriek after shriek that seemed to tear the dreadful
stillness. In the madness of her terror she hardly noticed that the wolf's head was suddenly
withdrawn.

III

When Dave Patton set out for the Settlement, he found the snow-shoeing so good, the biting
air so bracing, and his own heart so light with hope and health, that he was able to make the
journey in something less than a day and a half. Out of this time he had allowed himself four
hours for sleep, in an old lumber camp beside the trail. At the Settlement, which boasted several
miscellaneous stores, where anything from a baby's rattle to a bag of fertilizer or a bedroom
suite could be purchased, he had no difficulty in gathering such gay-coloured trifles, together
with more lasting gifts, as he thought would meet Lidey's anticipations. When he went to his
wife's people, he found that all had something to add to his Santa Claus pack, for Mary as
well as for the little one; and he hugged himself with elation at the thought of what a Christmas
there was going to be in the lonely wilderness cabin. He had bought two or three things for
his wife; and when he shouldered his pack, slinging it high and strapping it close that it
might not flop with his rapid stride, he found the burden no light one. But the lightness of
his heart made compensation.

That night he took but two hours' sleep in the old lumber camp, aiming to reach home soon after
noon. In the morning, however, things began to go wrong. First the pack, as packs sometimes
will for no visible reason, developed a kink that galled his shoulders obstinately. Again and
again he paused and tried to readjust it. But in vain. Finally he had to stop, undo the bundle,
and rearrange every article in it, before he could induce it to "carry" smoothly.

Half an hour later, as he turned a step off the trail to get a drink at a bubbling spring,
that kept open all through the bitterest winter, he caught his snowshoe on a buried branch
and fell forward, breaking the frame. In his angry impatience he attempted no more than a temporary
repair of the damage, such as he thought might see him to the end of his journey. But the poor
makeshift broke down before he had gone a mile. There was nothing for him to do but to stop
long enough to make a good job of it, which he did by chopping out a piece of ash, whittling
down a couple of thin but tough strips, and splicing the break securely with the strong "salmon
twine" that he always carried. Even so, he realized that to avoid further delay he would have
to go cautiously and humour the mend. And soon he had to acknowledge to himself that it would
be long after supper-time, long after Lidey's bed-time, before he could get home.

As the moon rose, he was accompanied by his shadow, a gigantic and grotesque figure that danced
fantastically along the snow before him. As the moon climbed the icy heaven, the shadow shortened
and acquired more sobriety of demeanour. Plodding doggedly onward, too tired to think, Dave
amused himself with the antics of the shadow, which seemed responsible for a portion of the
crisp music that came from his snowshoes.

From this careless reverie Dave was suddenly aroused by a ghost of sound that drifted towards
him through the trees. It was a long, wailing cry, which somehow stirred the roots of his hair.
He did not recognize it. But he felt that it was nothing human. It came from somewhere between
himself and home, however; and he instinctively quickened his steps, thinking with satisfaction
of the snug and well-warmed cabin that sheltered his dear ones.

Presently the long cry sounded again, nearer and clearer now, and tremulous. Dave had heard
wolves before, in Labrador and in the West. Had he not been quite sure that wolves were unknown
in this part of the country, he would have sworn that the sound was the hunting cry of a wolf-pack.
But the idea was impossible. He had no sooner made up his mind to this, however, than the cry
was repeated once more. Thereupon Dave reluctantly changed his mind. That the sound meant wolves
was not only possible, but certain. It filled him with resentment to think that those ravening
marauders had come into the country.

It was soon manifest to Dave's initiated ears that the wolves were coming directly towards
him. But he gathered, too, that they were in pursuit of some quarry. Dave had the eastern woodsman's
contempt for wolves, unless in a very large pack; and he soon decided that this pack was a
small one. He did not think that it would dare to face him. Nevertheless, he recognized the
remote possibility of their being so hungry as to forget their dread of man. That in such case
his axe would be an all-sufficient defence he did not doubt. But he was in a fierce hurry to
get home. He did not want to be stopped and forced into any fight. For a moment he thought
of turning off through the woods and giving these night foragers a wide berth. Then he remembered
his uncertain snowshoes. The snow would be very soft off the trail, and there would be the
chance of breaking the shoe again. Who was he, to be turned out of his path by a bunch of wild
curs? It was the snow-shoe that settled it. He set his jaws grimly, unslung his axe, and pressed
forward. The clamour of the pack was now so near and loud that it quite drowned one single,
piercing cry of "Father!" that would otherwise have reached his ears. There was a new note
in the howling, too, which Dave's ear interpreted as meaning that the quarry was in sight.
Then the noise stopped abruptly, save for an impatient yelp or two.

"Whatever it be they're after, it's took to cover," said Dave to himself. "An' in the old shanty,
too!" he added, as he saw the little patch of clearing open before him.

Realizing that the wolves had something to occupy fully their attention, he now crept noiselessly
forward just within the edge of the wood. Peering forth from behind the cover of a drooping
hemlock branch, he saw the roof of the hut, the half-open doorway nearly choked with snow,
and the wolves prowling and sniffing around it, but keeping a couple of yards away.

"Scairt of a trap!" he thought to himself with a grin, and cursed his luck that he had not
his rifle with him.

"A couple o' them thick, grey pelts," he thought--"what a coat they'd make for the little one!"

There were six wolves, and big ones--enough to make things look pretty ugly for one man with
only an axe. Dave was glad they had something to keep them from turning their attention to
him. He watched them for a few moments, then decided to go around by the other side of the
clearing and avoid trouble.

He drew back as silently as a lynx. Where the woods overhead were thick, the snow was soft,
with no crispness on the surface; and instead of the crunching that his steps made on the trail,
here the snow made no sound under his feet but a sort of thick sigh.

Dave had taken several paces in retreat, when an idea flashed up that arrested him. Why were
the wolves so wary about entering the hut, when their quarry was certainly inside? Their dread
of a trap was not, of itself, quite enough to explain their caution. The thought gave him a
qualm of uneasiness. He would return and have another look at them! Then his impatience got
the better of him. Mary and the little one were waiting and watching for him at home. He retreated
another pace or two. What should he be doing, wasting his time over a parcel of wolves that
had got a fox cornered in the old shanty? Dave felt sure it was a fox. But no! He could not
escape the conviction--much as he wished to--that if the fugitive were a fox, or any other
animal of the north-eastern woods, it would not take six hungry wolves much more than six seconds
to get over their suspicions and go in after him. What if it should be some half-starved old
Indian, working his way into the Settlement after bad luck with his hunting and his trapping!
Whoever it was, he had no gun, or there would have been shooting before this. Dave saw that
he must go back and look into the matter. But he was angry at this new delay. Cursing the wolves,
and the Indian who didn't know enough to take care of himself, Dave stole back to his covert
behind the hemlock branch, and peered forth once more, no longer interested, but aggrieved.

The wolves were now sitting on their haunches around the hut door. Their unusual behaviour
convinced him that there was a man inside. Well, there was no getting around the fact that
he was in for a fight. He only hoped that the chap inside was some good, and would have "somethin'
to say fer himself, darn him!" Dave gently lowered the bundle from his back, and threw off
his thick coat to allow his arms freer play.

It was at this moment that the leader of the pack made up his mind to crawl into the hut.

As the wolf's head entered the low opening, Dave gripped his axe, thrust aside the hemlock
branch, and silently darted forth into the clearing. He did not shout, for he wanted to take
his enemies, as far as possible, unawares. He had but a score of yards to go. So intent were
they upon their leader's movements that Dave was almost upon them ere they heeded the sound
of his coming. Then they looked around. Three shrank back, startled at the tall and threatening
shape. But two sprang at his throat with snapping jaws. The first met the full sweep of his
axe, in the chest and dropped in a heap. The second dodged a short blow and warily drew back
again. Then, from within the darkness of the hut, came those screams of the madness of terror.

For one beat Dave's heart stopped. He knew the voice!

The big wolf was just backing out. He turned, jerking himself around like a loosed spring,
as he saw Dave towering over him. But he was not in time. The axe descended, sheering his haunches
across, and he stretched out, working his great jaws convulsively. Dave saw that the jaws had
no blood upon them, and his own blood returned to his heart. He had come in time. The screams
within the hut died into piteous sobs.

Across Dave's mind flamed a vision of the agony of horror that Lidey had been suffering since
first those howlings fell upon his ears. His heart-break transformed itself into a mad rage
of vengeance. As he turned, with a hoarse shout, upon the rest of the pack, he felt a hot breath
on his neck, and bare fangs snapped savagely within an inch of his throat. His assailant sprang
back in time to escape the deadly sweep of the axe, but at the same instant the other three
were leaping in. One of these caught a glancing blow, which drove him off, snarling. But the
other two were so close that there was no time for Dave to recover. Instinctively he jabbed
a short back-stroke with the end of the axe-handle, and caught one of his assailants in the
belly. Sickened, and daunted by this unexpected form of reprisal, the brute hunched itself
with a startled yelp and ran off with its tail between its legs. At the same moment, dropping
the axe, Dave caught the other wolf fairly by the throat. The gripping hand was a kind of weapon
that the beast had never learned to guard against, and it was taken at a disadvantage. With
a grunt of fury and of effort Dave closed his grip inexorably, braced himself, and swung the
heavy brute off its feet. Whirling it clear around his head, he let go. The animal flew sprawling
and twisting through the air, and came down on its back ten feet away. When it landed, there
was no more fight left in it. Before Dave could reach it with his axe it was up and away in
a panic after its two remaining fellows.

Breathing heavily from his effort and from the storm of emotion still surging in his breast,
Dave turned to the hut door and called--

"Lidey! Lidey! Are you there?"

"Popsie! Oh, popsie, dear! I thought you weren't goin' to come!" cried a quivering little voice.
And the child crept out into the moonlight.

"Oh, popsie!" she sobbed, hiding her eyes in his neck as he crushed her to his heart, "they
were goin' to eat me up, an' I thought you wouldn't ever come!"

IV

With the bundle on his back and Lidey in his arms, Dave strode homeward, his weariness forgotten.
His first anxiety about his wife was somewhat eased when he learned that Lidey had left her
asleep; for he remembered that a heavy sleep always marked the end of one of her attacks. He
only hoped that the sleep would hold her until they got home, for his heart sank at the thought
of her terror if she should wake and find Lidey gone. As they came out on the edge of the clearing,
and saw that all was quiet in the cabin, Dave said--

"We won't tell mother nothin' about the wolves to-night, sweetie, eh? It 'ld jest git her all
worked up, an' she couldn't stand it when she's sick. We won't say nothin' about that till
to-morrow!"

"Yes!" murmured Lidey, "she'd be awful scairt!"

They were then about halfway up the slope, when from the cabin came a frightened cry of "Lidey!
Lidey!" The door was flung open, the lamplight streamed out in futile contest with the moonlight,
and Mrs. Patton appeared. Her face was white with fear. As she saw Dave and the little one
hurrying towards her, both hands went to her heart in the extremity of her relief, and she
sank back into a chair before the door.

Dave kicked off his snow-shoes with a dexterous twist, stepped inside, slammed the door, and
with a laugh and a kiss deposited Lidey in her mother's lap.

"She jest run down to meet me!" explained Dave, truthfully but deceptively.

"Oh, girlie, how you frightened me!" cried the woman, divided between tears and smiles. "I
woke up, Dave, an' found her gone; an' bein' kind o' bewildered, I couldn't understand it!"

She clung to his hand, while he looked tenderly down into her face.

"Poor little woman!" he murmured, "you've had a bad turn ag'in, Lidey tells me. Better now, eh?"

"I'm plumb all right ag'in, Dave, now you're back," she answered, squeezing his hand hard.
"But land's sakes, Dave, how ever did you git all that blood on your pants?"

"Oh," said the man, lightly, "that's nothin.' Tell you about it bime-by. I'm jest starvin'
now. Let's have supper quick, and then give old Mr. Sandy Claus a chance. Tomorrow we're going
to have the greatest Christmas ever was, us three!"

The Gentling of Red McWha

I

It was heavy sledding on the Upper Ottanoonsis trail. The two lumbermen were nearing the close
of the third day of the hard four days' haul in from the Settlements to the camp. At the head
of the first team, his broad jaw set and his small grey eyes angry with fatigue, trudged the
big figure of Red McWha, choosing and breaking a way through the deep snow. With his fiery
red head and his large red face, he was the only one of his colouring in a large family so
dark that they were known as the "Black McWhas," and his temper seemed to have been chronically
soured by the singularity of his type. But he was a good woodsman and a good teamster, and
his horses followed confidently at his heels like dogs. The second team was led by a tall,
gaunt-jawed, one-eyed lumberman named Jim Johnson, but invariably known as "Walley." From the
fact that his blind eye was of a peculiar blankness, like whitish porcelain, he had been nicknamed
"Wall-Eye"; but, owing to his general popularity, combined with the emphatic views he held
on that particular subject, the name had been mitigated to Walley.

The two were hauling in supplies for Conroy's Camp, on Little Ottanoonsis Lake. Silently, but
for the clank and creak of the harness, and the soft "thut, thut" of the trodden snow, the
little procession toiled on through the soundless desolation. Between the trees--naked birches
and scattered, black-green firs--filtered the lonely, yellowish-violet light of the fading
winter afternoon. When the light had died into ghostly grey along the corridors of the forest,
the teams rounded a turn of the trail, and began to descend the steep slope which led down
to Joe Godding's solitary cabin on the edge of Burnt Brook Meadows. Presently the dark outline
of the cabin came into view against the pallor of the open clearing.

But there was no light in the window. No homely pungency of wood-smoke breathed welcome on
the bitter air. The cabin looked startlingly deserted.

"Whoa!" commanded McWha, sharply, and glanced round at Johnson with an angry misgiving in his
eyes. The teams came to a stop with a shiver of all their bells.

Then, upon the sudden stillness, arose the faint sound of a child's voice, crying hopelessly.

"Something wrong down yonder!" growled McWha, his expectations of a hot supper crumbling into dust.

As he spoke, Walley Johnson sprang past him and went loping down the hill with long, loose
strides like a moose.

Red McWha followed very deliberately with the teams. He resented anything emotional. And he
was prepared to feel himself aggrieved.

When he reached the cabin door the sound of weeping had stopped. Inside he found Walley Johnson
on his knees before the stove, hurriedly lighting a fire. Wrapped in his coat, and clutching
his arm as if afraid he might leave her, stood a tiny, flaxen-haired child, perhaps five years
old. The cabin was cold, almost as cold as the snapping night outside. Along the middle of
the floor, with bedclothes from the bunk heaped awkwardly upon it in the little one's efforts
to warm it back to responsive life, sprawled rigidly the lank body of Joe Godding.

Red McWha stared for a moment in silence, then stooped, examined the dead man's face, and felt
his breast.

"Deader'n a herring!" he muttered.

"Yes! the poor old shike-poke!" answered Johnson, without looking up from his task.

"Heart?" queried McWha, laconically.

Johnson made no reply till the flame caught the kindling and rushed inwards from the open draught
with a cordial roar. Then he stood up.

"Don' know about that," said he. "But he's been dead these hours and hours! An' the fire out!
An' the kid most froze! A sick man like he was, to've kept the kid alone here with him that
way!" And he glanced down at the dead figure with severe reprobation.

"Never was much good, that Joe Godding!" muttered McWha, always critical.

As the two woodsmen discussed the situation, the child, a delicate-featured, blue-eyed girl,
was gazing up from under her mop of bright hair, first at one, then at the other. Walley Johnson
was the one who had come in answer to her long wailing, who had hugged her close, and wrapped
her up, and crooned over her in his pity, and driven away the terrors. But she did not like
to look at him, though his gaunt, sallow face was strong and kind.

People are apt to talk easy generalities about the intuition of children! As a matter of fact,
the little ones are not above judging quite as superficially and falsely as their elders. The
child looked at her protector's sightless eye, then turned away and sidled over to McWha with
one hand coaxingly outstretched. McWha's mouth twisted sourly. Without appearing to see the
tiny hand, he deftly evaded it. Stooping over the dead man, he picked him up, straightened
him out decently on his bunk, and covered him away from sight with the blankets.

"Ye needn't be so crusty to the kid, when she wants to make up to ye!" protested Walley, as
the little one turned back to him with a puzzled look in her tearful blue eyes.

"It's all alike they be, six, or sixteen, or sixty-six!" remarked McWha, sarcastically, stepping
to the door. "I don't want none of 'em! Ye kin look out for 'er! I'm for the horses."

"Don't talk out so loud," admonished the little one. "You'll wake Daddy. Poor Daddy's sick!"

"Poor lamb!" murmured Johnson, folding her to his great breast with a pang of pity. "No; we
won't wake daddy. Now tell me, what's yer name?"

"Daddy called me Rosy-Lilly!" answered the child, playing with a button on Johnson's vest.
"Is he gettin' warmer now? He was so cold, and he wouldn't speak to Rosy-Lilly."

"Rosy-Lilly it be!" agreed Johnson. "Now we jest won't bother daddy, him bein' so sick! You
an' me'll git supper."

The cabin was warm now, and on tiptoe Johnson and Rosy-Lilly went about their work, setting
the table, "bilin' the tea," and frying the bacon. When Red McWha came in from the barn, and
stamped the snow from his feet, Rosy-Lilly said "Hush!" laid her finger on her lip, and glanced
meaningly at the moveless shape in the bunk.

"We mus' let 'im sleep, Rosy-Lilly says," decreed Johnson, with an emphasis which penetrated
McWha's unsympathetic consciousness, and elicited a non-committal grunt.

When supper was ready, Rosy-Lilly hung around him for a minute or two before dragging her chair
up to the table. She evidently purposed paying him the compliment of sitting close beside him
and letting him cut her bacon for her. But finding that he would not even glance at her, she
fetched a deep sigh, and took her place beside Johnson. When the meal was over and the dishes
had been washed up, she let Johnson put her to bed in her little bunk behind the stove. She
wanted to kiss her father for good-night, as usual; but when Johnson insisted that to do so
might wake him up, and be bad for him, she yielded tearfully; and they heard her sobbing herself
to sleep.

For nearly an hour the two men smoked in silence, their steaming feet under the stove, their
backs turned towards the long, unstirring shape in the big bunk. At last Johnson stood up and
shook himself.

"Well," he drawled, "I s'pose we mus' be doin' the best we kin fer poor old Joe."

"He ain't left us no ch'ice!" snapped McWha.

"We can't leave him here in the house," continued Johnson, irresolutely.

"No, no!" answered McWha. "He'd ha'nt it, an' us, too, ever after, like as not. We got to give
'im lumberman's shift, till the Boss kin send and take 'im back to the Settlement for the parson
to do 'im up right an' proper."

So they rolled poor Joe Godding up in one of the tarpaulins which covered the sleds, and buried
him deep in the snow, under the big elm behind the cabin, and piled a monument of cordwood
above him, so that the foxes and wild cats could not disturb his lonely sleep, and surmounted
the pile with a rude cross to signify its character. Then, with lighter hearts, they went back
to the cabin fire, which seemed to burn more freely now that the grim presence of its former
master had been removed.

"Now what's to be done with the kid--with Rosy-Lilly?" began Johnson.

Red McWha took his pipe from his mouth, and spat accurately into the crack of the grate to
signify that he had no opinion on that important subject.

"They do say in the Settlements as how Joe Godding hain't kith nor kin in the world, savin'
an' exceptin' the kid only," continued Johnson.

McWha nodded indifferently.

"Well," went on Johnson, "we can't do nawthin' but take her on to the camp now. Mebbe the Boss'll
decide she's got to go back to the Settlement, along o' the fun'ral. But mebbe he'll let the
hands keep her, to kinder chipper up the camp when things gits dull. I reckon when the boys
sees her sweet face they'll all be wantin' to be guardeens to her."

McWha again spat accurately into the crack of the grate.

"I ain't got no fancy for young 'uns in camp, but ye kin do ez ye like, Walley Johnson," he
answered grudgingly. "Only I want it understood, right now, I ain't no guardeen, an' won't
be, to nawthin' that walks in petticoats! What I'm thinkin' of is the old cow out yonder, an'
them hens o' Joe's what I seen a-roostin' over the cowstall."

"Them's all Rosy-Lilly's, an' goes with us an' her to camp to-morrer," answered Johnson with
decision. "We'll tell the kid as how her daddy had to be took away in the night because he
was so sick, an' couldn't speak to nobody, an' we was goin' to take keer o' her till he gits
back! An' that's the truth," he added, with a sudden passion of tenderness and pity in his tone.

At this hint of emotion McWha laughed sarcastically. Then knocking out his pipe, he proceeded
to fill the stove for the night, and spread his blanket on the floor beside it.

"If ye wants to make the camp a baby-farm," he growled, "don't mind me!"

II

Under the dominion of Rosy-Lilly fell Conroy's camp at sight, capitulating unconditionally
to the first appeal of her tearful blue eyes, and little, hurt red mouth. Dan Logan, the Boss,
happened to know just how utterly alone the death of her father had left the child, and he
was the first to propose that the camp should adopt her. Fully bearing out the faith which
Walley Johnson had so confidently expressed back in the dead man's cabin, Jimmy Brackett, the
cook, on whom would necessarily devolve the chief care of this new member of his family, jumped
to the proposal of the Boss with enthusiastic support.

"We'll every mother's son o' us be guardeen to her!" he declared, with the finality appropriate
to his office as autocrat second only to the Boss himself. Every man in camp assented noisily,
saving only Red McWha; and he, as was expected of him, sat back and grinned.

From the first, Rosy-Lilly made herself at home in the camp. For a few days she fretted after
her father, whenever she was left for a moment to her own devices; but Jimmy Brackett was ever
on hand to divert her mind with astounding fairy-tales during the hours when the rest of the
hands were away chopping and hauling. Long after she had forgotten to fret, she would have
little "cryin' spells" at night, remembering her father's good-night kiss. But a baby's sorrow,
happily, is shorter than its remembrance; and Rosy-Lilly soon learned to repeat her phrase:
"Poor Daddy had to go 'way-'way-off," without the quivering lip and wistful look which made
the big woodsmen's hearts tighten so painfully beneath their homespun shirts. Conroy's Camp
was a spacious, oblong cabin of "chinked" logs, with a big stove in the middle. The bunks were
arranged in a double tier along one wall, and a plank table (rude, but massive) along the other.
Built on at one end, beside the door, was the kitchen, or cookhouse, crowded, but clean and
orderly, and bright with shining tins. At the inner end of the main room a corner was boarded
off to make a tiny bedroom, no bigger than a cupboard. This was the Boss's private apartment.
It contained two narrow bunks--one for the Boss himself, who looked much too big for it; and
one for the only guest whom the camp ever expected to entertain, the devoted missionary-priest,
who, on his snowshoes, was wont to make the round of the widely scattered camps once or twice
in a winter. This guest-bunk the Boss at once allotted to Rosy-Lilly, but on the strict condition
that Johnson should continue to act as nurse and superintend Rosy-Lilly's nightly toilet.

Rosy-Lilly had not been in the camp a week before McWha's "ugliness" to her had aroused even
the Boss's resentment, and the Boss was a just man. Of course, it was generally recognized
that McWha was not bound, by any law or obligation, to take any notice of the child, still
less to "make a fuss over her," with the rest of the camp. But Jimmy Brackett expressed the
popular sentiment when he growled, looking sourly at the back of McWha's unconscious red head
bowed ravenously over his plate of beans--

"If only he'd do something, so's we c'ld lick some decency inter 'im!"

There was absolutely nothing to be done about it, however; for Red McWha was utterly within
his rights.

Rosy-Lilly, as we have seen, was not yet five years old; but certain of the characteristics
of her sex were already well developed within her. The adulation of the rest of the camp, poured
out at her tiny feet, she took graciously enough, but rather as a matter of course. It was
all her due. But what she wanted was that that big, ugly, red-headed man, with the cross grey
eyes and loud voice, should be nice to her. She wanted him to pick her up, and set her on his
knee, and whittle wonderful wooden dogs and dolls and boats and boxes for her with his jack-knife,
as Walley Johnson and the others did. With Walley she would hardly condescend to coquet, so
sure she was of his abject slavery to her whims; and, moreover, as must be confessed with regret,
so unforgiving was she in her heart toward his blank eye. She merely consented to make him
useful, much as she might a convenient and altogether doting but uninteresting grandmother.
To all the other members of the camp--except the Boss, whom she regarded with some awe--she
would make baby-love impartially and carelessly. But it was Red McWha whose notice she craved.

When supper was over, and pipes filled and lighted, some one would strike up a "chantey"--one
of those interminable, monotonous ballad-songs which are peculiar to the lumber camps.

These "chanteys," however robust their wordings or their incidents, are always sung in a plaintive
minor which goes oddly with the large-moulded virility of the singers. Some are sentimental,
or religious, to the last degree, while others reek with an indecency of speech that would
shroud the Tenderloin in blushes. Both kinds are equally popular in the camps, and both are
of the most astounding naïveté. Of the worst of them, even, the simple-minded woodsmen are
not in the least ashamed. They seem unconscious of their enormity. Nevertheless, it came about
that, without a word said by any one, from the hour of Rosy-Lilly's arrival in camp, all the
indecent "chanteys" were dropped, as if into oblivion, from the woodsmen's repertoire.

During the songs, the smoking, and the lazy fun, Rosy-Lilly would slip from one big woodsman
to another, an inconspicuous little figure in the smoke-gloomed light of the two oil-lamps.
Man after man would snatch her up to his knee, lay by his pipe, twist her silky, yellow curls
about his great blunt fingers, and whisper wood-folk tales or baby nonsense into her pink little
ear. She would listen solemnly for a minute or two, then wriggle down and move on to another
of her admirers. But before long she would be standing by the bench on which sat Red McWha,
with one big knee usually hooked high above the other, and his broad back reclined against
the edge of a bunk. For a few minutes the child would stand there smiling with a perennial
confidence, waiting to be noticed. Then she would come closer, without a word from her usually
nimble little tongue, lean against McWha's knee, and look up coaxingly into his face. If McWha
chanced to be singing, for he was a "chanter" of some note, he would appear so utterly absorbed
that Rosy-Lilly would at last slip away, with a look of hurt surprise in her face, to be comforted
by one of her faithful. But if McWha were not engrossed in song, it would soon become impossible
for him to ignore her. He would suddenly look down at her with his fierce eyes, knit his shaggy
red brows, and demand harshly: "Well, Yaller Top, an' what d'you want?"

From the loud voice and angry eye the child would retreat in haste, clear to the other end
of the room, and sometimes a big tear would track its way down either cheek. After such an
experiment she would usually seek Jimmy Brackett, who would console her with some sticky sweetmeat,
and strive to wither McWha with envenomed glances. McWha would reply with a grin, as if proud
of having routed the little adventurer so easily. He had discovered that the name "Yaller Top"
was an infallible weapon of rebuff, as Rosy-Lilly considered it a term of indignity. To his
evil humour there was something amusing in abashing Rosy-Lilly with the title she most disliked.
Moreover, it was an indirect rebuke to the "saft" way the others acted about her.

If Rosy-Lilly felt rebuffed for the moment by McWha's rudeness, she seemed always to forget
it the next time she saw him. Night after night she would sidle up to his knee, and sue for
his notice; and night after night she would retire discomfited. But on one occasion the discomfiture
was McWha's. She had elicited the customary rough demand--

"Well, Yaller Top, what d'you want?"

But this time she held her ground, though with quivering lips.

"Yaller Top ain't my name 'tall," she explained with baby politeness. "It's Rosy-Lilly; 'n'
I jes' thought you might want me to sit on yer knee a little, teeny minit."

Much taken aback, McWha glanced about the room with a loutish grin. Then he flushed angrily,
as he felt the demand of the sudden silence. Looking down again, with a scowl, at the expectant
little face of Rosy-Lilly, he growled: "Well, not as I knows of!" and rose to his feet, thrusting
her brusquely aside.

"Ain't he uglier'n hell?" murmured Bird Pigeon to Walley Johnson, spitting indignantly on the
stove-leg. "He'd 'a' cuffed the kid ef he da'st, he glared at her that ugly!"

"Like to see 'im try it!" responded Johnson through his teeth, with a look to which his blank
eye lent mysterious menace.

The time soon came, however, when McWha resumed his old seat and his old attitude on the bench.
Rosy-Lilly avoided him for two evenings, but on the third the old fascination got the better
of her pique. McWha saw her coming, and, growing self-conscious, he hurriedly started up a
song with the full strength of his big voice.

The song was a well-known one, and nothing in it to redden the ear of a maiden; but it was
profane with that rich, ingenious amplitude of profanity which seems almost instinctive among
the lumbermen--a sort of second mother-tongue to them. Had it been any one but McWha who started
it, nothing would have been said; but, as it was, Walley Johnson took alarm on the instant.
To his supersensitive watchfulness, McWha was singing that song "jest a purpose to be ugly
to the kid." The fact that "the kid" would hardly understand a word of it, did not occur to
him. Rising up from his bench behind the stove he shouted out across the smoky room: "Shet
up that, Red!"

The song stopped. Every one looked inquiringly at Johnson. For several moments there was silence,
broken only by an uneasy shuffling of feet. Then McWha got up slowly, his eyebrows bristling,
his angry eyes little pin-points. First he addressed himself to Johnson.

"What the ---- business is't o' yourn what I sing?" he demanded, opening and shutting his big
fingers.

"I'll show ye what," began Johnson, in a tense voice. But the Boss interrupted. Dave Logan
was a quiet man, but he ruled his camp. Moreover, he was a just man, and Johnson had begun
the dispute.

"Chuck that, Walley!" he snapped, sharp as a whip. "If there's to be any row in this here camp,
I'll make it myself, an' don't none o' you boys forgit it!"

McWha turned upon him in angry appeal.

"You're Boss, Dave Logan, an' what you sez goes, fer's I'm concerned," said he. "But I ax you,
as Boss, be this here camp a camp, er a camp-meetin'? Walley Johnson kin go straight to hell;
but ef you sez we 'ain't to sing nawthin' but hymns, why, o' course, it's hymns for me--till
I kin git away to a camp where the hands is men, an' not wet-nurses!"

"That's all right, Red!" said the Boss. "I kin make allowances for yer gittin' riled, considerin'
the jolt Walley's rude interruption give ye! He hadn't no right to interrupt, nor no call to.
This ain't no camp-meetin'. The boys have a right to swear all they like. Why, 'twouldn't be
noways natural in camp ef the boys couldn't swear! somethin'd hev to bust before long. An'
the boys can't be expected to go a-tiptoe and talk prunes an' prisms, all along o' a little
yaller-haired kid what's come to brighten up the old camp fer us. That wouldn't be sense! But
all we've got to mind is jest this--nothin' vile! That's all, boys. We'll worry along without
that!"

When the Boss spoke, he liked to explain himself rather fully. When he ceased, no one had a
word to say. Every one was satisfied but Johnson; and he was constrained to seem so. There
was an oppressive silence for some seconds. It was broken by the soft treble of Rosy-Lilly,
who had been standing before the Boss and gazing up into his face with awed attention throughout
the harangue.

"What did you say, Dave?" she piped, her hands clasped behind her back.

"Somethin' as shall never tech you, Rosy-Lilly!" declared Johnson, snatching up the child and
bearing her off to bed, amid a roar of laughter which saved Dave Logan the embarrassment of
a reply.

For a time, now, Rosy-Lilly left McWha alone, so markedly that it looked as if Walley Johnson
or Jimmy Brackett had admonished her on the subject. She continued, indeed, to cast at him
eyes of pleading reproach, but always from a distance, and such appeals rolled off McWha's
crude perception like water off a musk rat's fur. He had nothing "agin her," as he would have
put it, if only she would keep out of his way. But Rosy-Lilly, true to her sex, was not vanquished
by any means, or even discouraged. She was only biding her time. Bird Pigeon, who was something
of a beau in the Settlements, understood this, and stirred the loyal wrath of Walley Johnson
by saying so.

"There ain't nawthin' about Red McWha to make Rosy-Lilly keer shucks fer 'im, savin' an' except
that she can't git him!" said Bird. "She's that nigh bein' a woman a'ready, if she be but five
year old!"

Johnson fixed him with his disconcerting eye, and retorted witheringly--

"Ye thinks ye knows a pile about women, Bird Pigeon. But the kind ye knows about ain't the
kind Rosy-Lilly's agoin' to be!"

Nearly a week went by before Rosy-Lilly saw another chance to assail McWha's forbidding defences.
This time she made what her innocent heart conceived to be a tremendous bid for the bad-tempered
woodsman's favour. Incidentally, too, she revealed a secret which the Boss and Walley Johnson
had been guarding with guilty solicitude ever since her coming to the camp.

It chanced that the Boss and Johnson together were kept away from camp one night till next
morning, laying out a new "landing" over on Fork's Brook. When it came time for Rosy-Lilly
to be put to bed, the honour fell, as a matter of course, to Jimmy Brackett. Rosy-Lilly went
with him willingly enough, but not till after a moment of hesitation, in which her eyes wandered
involuntarily to the broad, red face of McWha behind its cloud of smoke.

As a nursemaid, Jimmy Brackett flattered himself that he was a success--till the moment came
when Rosy-Lilly was to be tucked into her bunk. Then she stood and eyed him with solemn question.

"What's wrong, me honey-bug?" asked Brackett, anxiously.

"You hain't heard me my prayers!" replied Rosy-Lilly, with a touch of severity in her voice.

"Eh? What's that?" stammered Brackett, startled quite out of his wonted composure.

"Don't you know little girls has to say their prayers afore they goes to bed?" she demanded.

"No!" admitted Brackett, truthfully, wondering how he was going to get out of the unexpected
situation.

"Walley Johnson hears me mine!" continued the child, her eyes very wide open as she weighed
Brackett's qualifications in her merciless little balance.

Here, Brackett was misguided enough to grin, bethinking him that now he "had the laugh" on
the Boss and Walley. That grin settled it.

"I dess you don't know how to hear me say 'em, Jimmy!" she announced inexorably. And picking
up the skirt of her blue homespun "nightie," so that she showed her little red woollen socks
and white deer-hide moccasins, she tripped forth into the big, noisy room.

At the bright picture she made, her flax-gold hair tied in a knob on top of her head that it
might not get tangled, the room fell silent instantly, and every eye was turned upon her. Nothing
abashed by the scrutiny, she made her way sedately down the room and across to McWha's bench.
Unable to ignore her, and angry at the consciousness that he was embarrassed, McWha eyed her
with a grim stare. But Rosy-Lilly put out her hands to him confidingly.

"I'm goin' to let you hear me my prayers," she said, her clear, baby voice carrying every syllable
to the furthest corner of the room.

An ugly light flamed into McWha's eyes, and he sprang to his feet, brushing the child rudely aside.

"That's some o' Jimmy Brackett's work!" he shouted. "It's him put 'er up to it, curse him!"

The whole room burst into a roar of laughter at the sight of his wrath. Snatching his cap from
its peg, he strode furiously out to the stable, slamming the door behind him.

In their delight over McWha's discomfiture the woodsmen quite forgot the feelings of Rosy-Lilly.
For a second or two she stood motionless, her lips and eyes wide open with amazement. Then,
hurt as much by the laughter of the room as by McWha's rebuff, she burst into tears, and stood
hiding her face with both hands, the picture of desolation.

When the men realized that she thought they were laughing at her, they shut their mouths with
amazing promptitude, and crowded about her. One after another picked her up, striving to console
her with caresses and extravagant promises. She would not uncover her eyes, however, for any
one, and her heart-broken wailing was not hushed till Brackett thrust his way through the crowd,
growling inarticulate blasphemies at them all, and bore her back to her room. When he emerged
twenty minutes later no one asked him about Rosy-Lilly's prayers. As for Rosy-Lilly, her feelings
were this time so outraged that she would no longer look at McWha.

III

The long backwoods winter was now drawing near its end, and the snow in the open spaces was
getting so soft at midday as to slump heavily and hinder the work of the teams. Every one was
working with feverish haste to get the logs all out to the "landings," on the river banks before
the hauling should go to pieces. At night the tired lumbermen would tumble into their bunks
as soon as supper was over, too greedy of sleep to think of songs or yarns. And Rosy-Lilly
began to feel a little aggrieved at the inadequate attention which she was now receiving from
all but Jimmy Brackett and the ever-faithful Johnson. She began to forgive McWha, and once
more to try her baby wiles upon him. But McWha was as coldly unconscious as a stone.

One day, however, Fate concluded to range herself on Rosy-Lilly's side. A dead branch, hurled
through the air by the impact of a falling tree, struck Red McWha on the head, and he was carried
home to the cabin unconscious, bleeding from a long gash in his scalp. The Boss, something
of a surgeon in his rough and ready way, as bosses need to be, washed the wound and sewed it
up. Then he handed over his own bunk to the wounded man, declaring optimistically that McWha
would come round all right, his breed being hard to kill.

It was hours later when McWha began to recover consciousness, and just then, as it happened,
there was no one near him but Rosy-Lilly. Smitten with pity, the child was standing beside
the bunk, murmuring: "Poor! poor! I so sorry!" and slowly shaking her head and lightly patting
the big, limp hand where it lay outside the blanket.

McWha half opened his eyes, and their faint glance fell on the top of Rosy-Lilly's head as
she bent over his hand. With a wry smile he shut them again, but to his surprise, he felt rather
gratified. Then Jimmy Brackett came in and whisked the child away. "'S if he thought I'd bite
'er!" mused McWha, somewhat inconsistently.

For a long time he lay wondering confusedly. At last he opened his eyes wide, felt his bandaged
head, and called for a drink of water in a voice which he vainly strove to make sound natural.
To his surprise he was answered by Rosy-Lilly, so promptly that it was as if she had been listening
for his voice. She came carrying the tin of water in both little hands, and, lifting it very
carefully, she tried to hold it to his lips. Neither she nor McWha was quite successful in
this, however. While they were fumbling over it, Jimmy Brackett hurried in, followed by the
Boss, and Rosy-Lilly's nursing was superseded. The Boss had to hold him up so that he could
drink; and when he had feverishly gulped about a quart, he lay back on his pillow with a huge
sigh, declaring weakly that he was all right.

"Ye got off mighty easy, Red," said the Boss, cheerfully, "considerin' the heft o' the knot
'at hit ye. But you McWhas was always hard to kill."

McWha's hand was drooping loosely over the edge of the bunk. He felt the child's tiny fingers
brushing it again softly and tenderly. Then he felt her lips upon it, and the sensation was
so novel that he quite forgot to reply to the Boss's pleasantry.

That night McWha was so much better that when he insisted on being removed to his own bunk
on the plea that he "didn't feel at home in a cupboard like," the Boss consented. Next day
he wanted to go back to work, but the Boss was derisively inexorable, and for two days McWha
was kept a prisoner.

During this time Jimmy Brackett, with severe and detailed admonition, kept Rosy-Lilly from
again obtruding upon the patient's leisure; and McWha had nothing to do but smoke and whittle.
He whittled diligently, but let no one see what he was making. Then, borrowing a small tin
cup from the cook, he fussed over the stove with some dark, smelly decoction of tobacco-juice
and ink. Rosy-Lilly was consumed with curiosity, especially when she saw him apparently digging
beads off an Indian tobacco-pouch which he always carried. But she did not go near enough to
get enlightened as to his mysterious occupation.

On the following day McWha went to work again, but not till after breakfast, when the others
had long departed. Rosy-Lilly, with one hand twisted in her little apron, was standing in the
doorway as he passed out. She glanced up at him with the most coaxing smile in her whole armoury
of allurements. McWha would not look at her, and his face was as sullenly harsh as ever; but
as he passed he slipped something into her hand. To her speechless delight, it proved to be
a little dark-brown wooden doll, daintily carved, and with two white beads, with black centres,
cunningly set into its face for eyes.

Rosy-Lilly hugged the treasure to her breast. Her first proud impulse was to run to Jimmy Brackett
with it. But a subtler instinct withheld her. The gift had been bestowed in such a surreptitious
way that she felt it to be somehow a kind of secret. She carried it away and hid it in her
bunk, where she would go and look at it from time to time throughout the day. That night she
brought it forth, but with several other treasures, so that it quite escaped comment. She said
nothing about it to McWha, but she played with it when he could not help seeing it. And thereafter
her "nigger-baby" was always in her arms.

This compliment, however, was apparently all lost on McWha, who had again grown unconscious
of her existence. And Rosy-Lilly, on her part, no longer strove to win his attention. She was
content either with the victory she had won, or with the secret understanding which, perforce,
now existed between them. And things went on smoothly in the camp, with every one now too occupied
to do more than mind his own business.

It chanced this year that the spring thaws were early and unusually swift, warm rains alternating
with hot, searching sunshine which withered and devoured the snow. The ice went out with a
rush in the rapidly rising Ottanoonsis; and from every brookside "landing" the logs came down
in black, tumbling swarms. Just below Conroy's Camp the river wallowed round a narrow bend,
tangled with slate ledges. It was a nasty place enough at low water, but in freshet a roaring
terror to all the river-men. When the logs were running in any numbers, the bend had to be
watched with vigilance lest a jam should form, and the waters be dammed back, and the lumber
get "hung up" all over the swamps of the upper reaches.

And here, now, in spite of the frantic efforts of Dave Logan and his crew, the logs suddenly
began to jam. Pitching downward as if propelled by a pile-driver, certain great timbers drove
their ends between the upstanding strata of the slate, and held against the torrent till others
came and wedged them securely. The jam began between two ledges in midstream, where no one
could get near it. In a few minutes the interlocked mass stretched from bank to bank, with
the torrent spurting and spouting through it in furious milk-white jets. Log after log was
chopped free by the axemen along the shore, but the mass remained unshaken. Meanwhile the logs
were gathering swiftly behind, ramming down and solidifying the whole structure, and damming
back the flood till its heavy thunder diminished to the querulous rattling of a mill-race.
In a short time the river was packed solid from shore to shore for several hundred yards above
the brow of the jam; and above that again the waters were rising at a rate which threatened
in a few hours to flood the valley and sweep away the camp itself.

At this stage of affairs the Boss, axe in hand, picked his way across the monstrous tangle
of the face of the jam between the great white jets, till he gained the centre of the structure.
Here his practised eye, with the aid of a perilous axe-stroke here and there,--strokes which
might possibly bring the whole looming mass down upon him in a moment,--presently located the
timbers which held the structure firm, "the key-logs," as the men call them. These he marked
with his axe. Then, returning to the shore, he called for two volunteers to dare the task of
cutting these key-logs away.

Such a task is the most perilous that a lumberman, in all his daring career, can be called
upon to perform. So perilous is it that it is always left to volunteers. Dave Logan had some
brilliant feats of jam-breaking to his credit, from the days before he was made a Boss; and
now, when he called for volunteers, every unmarried man in camp responded, with the exception,
of course, of Walley Johnson, whose limited vision unfitted him for such a venture. The Boss
chose Bird Pigeon and Andy White, because they were not only "smart" axemen, but also adepts
in the river-men's games of "running logs."

With a jaunty air the two young men spat on their hands, gripped their axes, and sprang out
along the base of the jam. Every eye in camp was fixed upon them with a fearful interest as
they plied their heavy blades. It was heroic, of a magnificence of valour seldom equalled on
any field, the work of these two, chopping coolly out there in the daunting tumult, under that
colossal front of death. Their duty was nothing less than to bring the toppling brow of the
jam down upon them, yet cheat Fate at the last instant, if possible, by leaping to shore before
the chaos quite overwhelmed them.

Suddenly, while the two key-logs were not yet half cut through, the trained eye of the Boss
detected a settling near the top of the jam. His yell of warning tore through the clamour of
the waters. At the instant came a vast grumbling, like underground thunder, not loud apparently,
yet dulling all other sounds. The two choppers sprang wildly for shore, as the whole face of
the jam seemed to crumble in a breath.

At this moment a scream of terror was heard--and every heart stopped. Some thirty yards or
so upstream, and a dozen, perhaps, from shore, stood Rosy-Lilly, on a log. While none were
observing her she had gleefully clambered out over the solid mass, looking for spruce-gums.
But now, when the logs moved, she was so terror-stricken that she could not even try to get
ashore. She just fell down upon her log, and clung to it, screaming.

A groan of horror went up. The awful grinding of the break-up was already under way. To every
trained eye it was evident that there was no human possibility of reaching the child, much
less of saving her. To attempt it would be such a madness as to jump into the hopper of a mill.
The crowd surged to the edge--and sprang back as the nearest logs bounded up at them. Except
Walley Johnson. He leaped wildly out upon the nearest logs, fell headforemost, and was dragged
back, fighting furiously, by a dozen inexorable hands.

Just as Johnson went down, there arose a great bellowing cry of rage and anguish; then Red
McWha's big form shot past, leaping far out upon the logs. Over the sickening upheaval he bounded
this way and that, with miraculous sure-footedness. He reached the pitching log whereon Rosy-Lilly
still clung. He clutched her by the frock. He tucked her under one arm like a rag-baby. Then
he turned, balancing himself for an instant, and came leaping back towards shore.

A great shout of wonder and joy went up--to be hushed in a second as a log reared high in McWha's
path and hurled him backwards. Right down into the whirl of the dreadful grist he sank. But
with a strength that seemed more than human he recovered himself, climbed forth dripping, and
came on again with those great, unerring leaps. This time there was no shout. The men waited
with dry throats. They saw that his ruddy face had gone white as chalk. Within two feet of
shore a log toward which he had jumped was jerked aside just before he reached it, and, turning
in the air as he fell, so as to save the child, he came down across it on his side with stunning
violence. As he fell the Boss and Brackett and two of the others sprang out to meet him. They
reached him somehow, and covered with bruises which they did not feel, succeeded in dragging
him, with his precious burden, up from the grinding hell to safety. When his feet touched solid
ground he sank unconscious, but with his arm so securely gripped about the child that they
had difficulty in loosing his hold.

Rosy-Lilly, when they picked her up, was quivering with terror, but unharmed. When she saw
McWha stretched out upon the bank motionless, with his eyes shut and his white lips half open,
she fought savagely to be put down. She ran and flung herself down beside her rescuer, caught
his big white face between her tiny hands, and fell to kissing him. Presently McWha opened
his eyes, and with a mighty effort rose upon one elbow. A look of embarrassment passed over
his face as he glanced at the men standing about him. Then he looked down at Rosy-Lilly, grinned
with a shamefaced tenderness, and pulled her gently towards him.

"I'm right--glad--ye--" he began with painful effort. But before he could complete the sentence
his eyes changed, and he fell back with a clicking gasp.

Jimmy Brackett, heedless of her wailing protests, snatched up Rosy-Lilly, and carried her back
to the camp.

Melindy and the Lynxes

The deep, slow-gathering snows of mid-February had buried away every stump in the pasture lot
and muffled from sight all the zigzag fences of the little lonely clearing. The Settlement
road was simply smoothed out of existence. The log cabin, with its low roof and one chimney,
seemed half sunken in the snow which piled itself over the lower panes of its three tiny windows.

The log barn, and the lean-to, which served as wood-shed and wagon-house, showed little more
than the black edges of their snow-covered roofs over the glittering and gently billowing white
expanse.

In the middle of the yard the little well-house, shaped like the top of a "grandfather's clock,"
carried a thick, white, crusted cap, and was encircled with a streaky, irregular mass of ice,
which had gradually accumulated almost up to the brim of the watering-trough. From the cabin
door to the door of the barn, and over most of the yard space, but particularly in front of
the sunward-facing lean-to, the snow was trodden down and littered with chips and straw.

Here in the mocking sunshine huddled four white sheep, while half a dozen hens and a red Shanghai
cock scratched in the litter beside them. The low door of the barn was tightly closed to protect
the cow and horse from the bitter cold--which the sheep, with their great fleeces, did not
seem to mind.

Inside the cabin, where an old-fashioned, high-ovened kitchen stove, heated to the point where
a dull red glow began to show itself in spots, kept the close air at summer temperature, a
slim girl with fluffy, light hair and pale complexion stood by the table, vigorously mixing
a batter of buckwheat flour for pancakes. Her slender young arms were streaked with flour,
as was her forehead also, from her frequent efforts to brush her hair out of her eyes by quick
upward dashes of her forearm.

On the other side of the stove, so close to it that her rugged face was reddened by the heat,
sat a massive old woman in a heavy rocking-chair, knitting. She knitted impetuously, impatiently,
as if resenting the employment of her vigorous old fingers upon so mild a task.

Through a clear space in one pane of the window beside her--a space where the heat within had
triumphed over the frost without--she cast restless, keen eyes out across the yard to the place
where the road, the one link between the cabin and the settlement, lay smothered from sight.

"It's one week to-day, Melindy," she announced in a voice of accusing indignation, "since there's
been a team got through; and it's going to be another before they'll get the road broke out!"

"Like as not, Granny," responded the girl, beating the batter with an impatience that belied
the cheerfulness of her tone. "But what does it matter, anyway? We're all right here for a month!"

As she spoke, however, her eyes, too, gazed out wistfully over the buried road. She was wearying
for the sound of bells and for a drive into the Settlement.

Meanwhile, from the edge of the woods on the other side of the cabin, hidden from the keen
eyes within by the roofs of the barn and the shed, came two great, grey, catlike beasts, creeping
belly to the snow.

Their broad, soft-padded paws were like snow shoes, bearing them up on the wind-packed surface.
Their tufted ears stood straight up, alert for any unwonted sound. Their absurd stub tails,
not four inches long, and looking as if they had been bitten off, twitched with eagerness.
Their big round eyes, of a pale greenish yellow, and with the pupils narrowed to upright, threadlike
black slits by the blinding glare, glanced warily from side to side with every step they took.

The lynxes had the keenest dislike to crossing the open pasture in this broad daylight, but
they had been driven by hunger to the point where the customs and cautions of their wary kind
are recklessly thrown aside. Hunger had driven the pair to hunt together, in the hope of together
pulling down game too powerful for one to master alone. Hunger had overcome their savage aversion
to the neighbourhood of man, and brought them out in the dark of night to prowl about the barn
and sniff longingly the warm smell of the sheep, steaming through the cracks of the clumsy door.

Watching from under the snow-draped branches, they had observed that only in the daytime were
the sheep let out from their safe shelter behind the clumsy door. And now, forgetting everything
but the fierce pangs that urged them, the two savage beasts came straight down the rolling
slope of the pasture towards the barn.

A few minutes later there came from the yard a wild screeching and cackling of the hens, followed
by a trampling rush and agonized bleating. The old woman half rose from her chair, but sank
back instantly, her face creased with a spasm of pain, for she was crippled by rheumatism.
The girl dropped her big wooden spoon on the floor and rushed to the window that looked out
upon the yard. Her pale face went paler with horror, then flushed with wrath and pity; and
a fierce light flashed into her wide blue eyes.

"It's lynxes!" she cried, snatching up the wooden spoon and darting for the door. "And they've
got one of the sheep! Oh, oh, they're tearing it!"

"Melindy!" shouted the old woman, in a voice of strident command--such a compelling voice that
the girl stopped short in spite of herself. "Drop that fool spoon and get the gun!"

The girl dropped the spoon as if it had burned her fingers, and looked irresolutely at the
big duck-gun hanging on the log wall. "I can't fire it!" she exclaimed, shaking her head. "I'd
be scared to death of it!"

But even as the words left her mouth, there came another outburst of trampling and frantic
clamour from the yard. She snatched up the little, long-handled axe which leaned beside the
door-post, threw the door wide open, and with a pitying cry of "Oh! oh!" flew forth to the
rescue of her beloved sheep.

"Did you ever see the like of that?" muttered the old woman, her harsh face working with excitement
and high approbation. "Scairt to death of a gun--and goes out to fight lynxes all by herself!"

And with painful effort she began hitching herself and the big chair across the floor, seeking
a position where she could both reach the gun and command a view through the wide-open door.

When Melindy, her heart aflame with pity for the helpless ewes, rushed out into the yard, she
saw one woolly victim down, kicking silently on the bloodstained snow, while a big lynx, crouched
upon its body, turned upon her a pair of pale eyes that blazed with fury at the interruption
to his feast.

The other sheep were foundered helplessly in the deep snow back of the well--except one. This
one, which had evidently been headed off from the flock, and driven round to the near side
of the watering-trough before its savage enemy overtook it, was not half a dozen paces from
the cabin door. It was just stumbling forward upon its nose, with a despairing baa-a-a! while
the second and larger lynx, clinging upon its back, clutched hungrily for its throat through
the thick, protecting wool.

On ordinary occasions the girl was as timid as her small, pale face and gentle blue eyes made
her look. At this crisis, however, a sort of fury of compassion swept all fear from her heart.

Like the swoop of some strange bird, her skirts streaming behind her, she flung herself upon
the great cat, and aimed a lightning blow at his head with her axe. In her frail grip the axe
turned, so that the brute caught the flat of it instead of the edge.

Half-stunned, he lost his hold and fell with a startled pfiff on the snow, while his victim,
bleeding, but not mortally hurt, ran bleating towards the rest of the flock, where they floundered,
stupidly helpless, in three feet of soft snow.

The next moment the baffled lynx recovered himself, and faced the girl with so menacing a snarl
that she hesitated to follow up her advantage, but paused, holding the axe in readiness to
repel attack.

For a few seconds they faced each other so, the girl and the beast. Then the pale, beast eyes
shifted under the steady, dominating gaze of the blue human ones; and at last, with a spitting
growl, which ended in a hoarse screech of rage, the big cat bounded aside and whisked behind
the well-house. The next moment it was again among the sheep, where they huddled incapable
of a struggle.

Again the girl sprang to the rescue; and now, because of that one flash of fear which had deprived
her of her first advantage, her avenging wrath was fiercer and more resolute than before. This
time, as she darted upon the enemy, she gave an involuntary cry of rage, piercing and unnatural.
At this unexpected sound the lynx, desperate though he was with rage and hunger, lost his courage.

Seeing the girl towering almost over him, he doubled back with a mighty leap, just avoiding
the vengeful sweep of the axe, and darted back to the front of the shed, where his mate was
now ravenously feasting on her easy prey.

Although the first victim was now past all suffering, being no more a motive for heroism than
so much mutton, the girl's blood was too hot with triumphant indignation to let her think of
such an unimportant point as that. She was victor. She had outfaced and routed the foe. She
had saved one victim. She would avenge the other.

With the high audacity of those who have overcome fear, she now, with a hysterical cry of menace,
ran at the two lynxes, to drive them from their prey.

The situation which she now confronted, however, was altogether changed from what had gone
before. The two lynxes were together, strong in that alliance which they had formed for purpose
of battle. They were fairly mad with famine--or, indeed, they would never have ventured on
the perilous domains of man.

Moreover, they were in possession of what they held to be their lawful prey--a position in
defence of which all the hunting tribes of the wild will fight against almost any odds. As
they saw their strange adversary approaching, the hair stood straight up along their backs,
their little tails puffed to bottle brushes, their ears lay flat back on their heads, and they
screeched defiance in harsh unison. Then, as if by one impulse, they turned from their prey
and crept stealthily towards her.

They did not like that steady light in her blue eyes, but they felt by some instinct that she
was young and unstable of nerve. At this unexpected move on their part the girl stopped short,
suddenly undecided whether to fight or flee.

At once the lynxes stopped also, and crouched flat, tensely watching, their claws dug deep
into the hard-trodden snow so as to give them purchase for an instant, powerful spring in any
direction.

In the meantime, however, the crippled old woman within doors had not been idle. Great of spirit,
and still mighty of sinew for all her ailment, she had managed to work the weight of the heavy
chair and her own solid bulk all the way across the cabin floor. Being straight in front of
the door, she had seen almost all that happened; and her brave old berserk heart was bursting
with pride in the courage of this frail child, whom she had hitherto regarded with a kind of
affectionate scorn.

The Griffises of Nackawick and Little River had always been sizable men, men of sinew and bulk,
and women tall and ruddy; and this small, blue-eyed girl had seemed to her, in a way, to wrong
the stock. But she was quick to understand that the stature of the spirit is what counts most
of all.

Now, in this moment of breathless suspense, when she saw Melindy and the two great beasts thus
holding each other eye to eye in a life and death struggle of wills, her heart was convulsed
with a wild fear. In the spasm of it she succeeded in lifting herself almost erect, and so
gained possession of the big duck-gun, which her son Jake, now away in the lumber woods, always
kept loaded and ready for use. As she cocked it and settled back into her chair, she called
in a piercing voice--

"Don't stir one step, Melindy! I'm going to shoot!"

The girl never stirred a muscle, although she turned pale with terror of the loud noise which
was about to shock her ears. The two lynxes, however, turned their heads, and fixed the pale
glare of their eyes upon the figure seated in the doorway.

The next moment came a spurt of red flame, a belch of smoke, a tremendous report that seemed
as if it must have shattered every pane of glass in the cabin windows. The bigger of the two
lynxes turned straight over backward and lay without a quiver, smashed by the heavy charge
of buckshot with which Jake had loaded the gun. The other, grazed by a scattering pellet, sprang
into the air with a screech, then turned and ran for her life across the snow, stretching out
like a terrified cat.

With a proud smile the old woman stood the smoking gun against the wall and straightened her
cap. For perhaps half a minute Melindy stood rigid, staring at the dead lynx. Then, dropping
her axe, she fled to the cabin, flung herself down with her face in her grandmother's lap,
and broke into a storm of sobs.

The old woman gazed down upon her with some surprise, and stroked the fair, fluffy head lovingly
as she murmured: "There, there! There's nothing to take on about! Though you be such a little
mite of a towhead, you've got the grit, you've got the grit, Melindy Griffis. It's proud of
you I am, and it's proud your father'll be when I tell him about it."

Then, as the girl's weeping continued, and her slender shoulders continued to twist with her
sobs, the rugged old face that bent above her grew tenderly solicitous.

"There, there!" she murmured again. "'Tain't good for you to take on so, deary. Hadn't you
better finish beating up the pancakes before the batter spiles?"

Thus potently adjured, although she knew as well as her grandmother that there was no immediate
danger of the batter spoiling, the girl got up, dashed the back of her hand across her eyes
with a little laugh, closed the door, got out another spoon from the table drawer, and cheerfully
resumed her interrupted task of mixing pancakes. And the sheep, having slowly extricated themselves
from the deep snow behind the well-house, huddled together, with heads down, in the middle
of the yard, fearfully eyeing the limp body which lay before the shed.

Mrs. Gammit's Pig

"I've come to borry yer gun!" said Mrs. Gammit, appearing suddenly, a self-reliant figure,
at the open door of the barn where Joe Barron sat mending his harness. She wore a short cotton
homespun petticoat and a dingy waist; while a limp pink cotton sunbonnet, pushed far back from
her perspiring forehead, released unmanageable tufts of her stiff, iron-grey hair.

"What be you awantin' of a gun, Mrs. Gammit?" inquired the backwoodsman, looking up without
surprise. He had not seen Mrs. Gammit, to be sure, for three months; but he had known all the
time that she was there, on the other side of the ridge, one of his nearest neighbours, and
not more than seven or eight miles away as the crow flies.

"It's the bears!" she explained. "They do be gittin' jest a leetle mite too sassy, down to
my place. There ain't no livin' with 'em. They come rootin' round in the garden, nights. An'
they've et up the white top-knot hen, with the whole settin' of eggs, that was to hev' hatched
out next Monday. An' they've took the duck. An' last night they come after the pig."

"They didn't git him, did they?" inquired Joe Barron sympathetically.

"No, siree!" responded Mrs. Gammit with decision. "An' they ain't agoin' to! They scairt him
though, snuffin' round outside the pen, trying to find the way in.--I've hearn tell they was
powerful fond of pork.--He set up sich a squealin' it woke me; an' I yelled at 'em out of the
winder. I seen one big black chap lopin' off behind the barn. I hadn't nothin' but the broom
fer a weapon, so he got away from me. I'll git him to-night, though, I reckon, if I kin have
the loan of your gun."

"Sartain," assented the woodsman, laying down the breech-strap he was mending. "Did you ever
fire a gun?" he inquired suddenly, as he was starting across the yard to fetch the weapon from
his cabin.

"I can't rightly say I hev'," answered Mrs. Gammit, with a slight note of scorn in her voice.
"But from the kind of men I've seen as kin, I reckon it ain't no great trick to larn."

Joe Barron laughed, and went for the weapon. He had plenty of confidence in his visitor's ability
to look out for herself, and felt reasonably sure that the bears would be sorry for having
presumed upon her unprotected state. When he returned with the gun--an old, muzzle-loading
duck-gun, with a huge bore--she accepted it with careless ease and held it as if it were a
broom. But when he offered her the powder-horn and a little bag of buckshot, she hesitated.

"What be them for?" she inquired.

Joe Barren looked serious.

"Mrs. Gammit," said he, "I know you kin do most anything a man kin do--an' do it better, maybe!
A woman like you don't have to apologize for nothin'. But you was not brung up in the woods,
an' you can't expect to know all about a gun jest by heftin' it. Folks that's been brung up
in town, like you, have to be told how to handle a gun. This here gun ain't loaded. And them
'ere's the powder an' buckshot to load her with. An' here's caps," he added, producing a small,
brown tin box of percussion caps from his trousers pocket.

Mrs. Gammit felt abashed at her ignorance, but gratified, at the same time, by the reproach
of metropolitanism. This implication of town-bred incompetency was most flattering to the seven
frame houses and one corner store of Burd Settlement, whence she hailed.

"I reckon you'd better show me how to load the thing, Mr. Barron," she agreed quite humbly.
And her keen grey eyes took in every detail, as the woodsman rammed home the powder hard, wadded
down the charge of buckshot lightly, and pointed out where she must put the percussion cap
when she should be ready to call upon the weapon for its services.

"Then," said he in conclusion, as he lifted the gun to his shoulder and squinted along the
barrel, "of course you know all the rest. Jest shet one eye, an' git the bead on him fair,
an' let him have it--a leetle back of the fore-shoulder, fer choice! An' that b'ar ain't agoin'
to worry about no more pork, nor garden sass. An' recollect, Mrs. Gammit, at this time of year,
when he's fat on blueberries, he'll make right prime pork himself, ef he ain't too old and rank."

As Mrs. Gammit strode homeward through the hot, silent woods with the gun--still carrying it
as if it were a broom--she had no misgivings as to her fitness to confront and master the most
redoubtable of all the forest kindreds. She believed in herself--and not only her native Burd
Settlement, but the backwoods generally held that she had cause to. A busy woman always, she
had somehow never found time to indulge in the luxury of a husband; but the honorary title
of "Mrs." had early been conferred upon her, in recognition of her abundant and confident personality
and her all-round capacity for taking care of herself. To have called her "Miss" would have
been an insult to the fitness of things. When, at the age of sixty, she inherited from an only,
and strictly bachelor, brother a little farm in the heart of the wilderness, some forty miles
in from the Settlement, no one doubted her ability to fill the rôle of backwoodsman and pioneer.
It was vaguely felt that if the backwoods and Mrs. Gammit should fail to agree on any important
point, so much the worse for the backwoods.

And indeed, for nearly two years and a half everything had gone swimmingly. The solitude had
never troubled Mrs. Gammit, to whom her own company was always congenial--and, as she felt,
the only company that one could depend upon. Then she had her two young steers, well broken
to the yoke; the spotted cow, with one horn turned up and the other down; the grey and yellow
cat, with whom she lived on terms of mutual tolerance; a turkey-cock and two turkey hens, of
whom she expected much; an assortment of fowls, brown, black, white, red, and speckled; one
fat duck, which had so far been nothing but a disappointment to her; and the white pig, which
was her pride. No wonder she was never lonely, with all these good acquaintances to talk to.
Moreover, the forces of the wild, seeming to recognize that she was a woman who would have
her way, had from the first easily deferred to her. The capricious and incomprehensible early
frosts of the forest region had spared her precious garden patch; cut-worm and caterpillar
had gone by the other way; the pip had overlooked her early chickens; and as for the customary
onslaughts of wildcat, weasel, fox, and skunk, she had met them all with such triumphant success
that she began to mistake her mere good luck for the quintessence of woodcraft. In fact, nothing
had happened to challenge her infallibility, nothing whatever, until she found that the bears
were beginning to concern themselves about her.

To be sure, there was only one bear mixed up in the matter; but he chanced to be so diligent,
interested, and resourceful, that it was no wonder he had got himself multiplied many times
over in Mrs. Gammit's indignant imagination. When she told Joe Barron "that the bears was gittin'
so sassy there wasn't no livin' with 'em," she had little notion that what she referred to
was just one, solitary, rusty, somewhat moth-eaten animal, crafty with experience and years.
This bear, as it chanced, had had advantages in the way of education not often shared by his
fellow-roamers of the wilderness. He had passed several seasons in captivity in one of the
settlements far south of the Quah-Davic Valley. Afterwards, he had served an unpleasant term
in a flea-ridden travelling menagerie, from which a railway smash-up had given him release
at the moderate cost of the loss of one eye. During his captivity he had acquired a profound
respect for men, as creatures who had a tendency to beat him over the nose and hurt him terribly
if he failed to do as they wished, and who held in eye and voice the uncomprehended but irresistible
authority of fate. For women, however, he had learned to entertain a casual scorn. They screamed
when he growled, and ran away if he stretched out a paw at them. When, therefore, he had found
himself once more in the vast responsible freedom of the forest, and reviving with some difficulty
the half-forgotten art of shifting for himself, he had given a wide berth to the hunters' shacks
and the cabins of lumbermen and pioneers. But when, on the other hand, he had come upon Mrs.
Gammit's clearing, and realized, after long and cautious investigations, that its presiding
genius was nothing more formidable than one of those petticoated creatures who trembled at
his growl, he had licked his chops with pleasant anticipation. Here, at last, was his opportunity,--the
flesh-pots of servitude, with freedom.

Nevertheless, the old bear was prudent. He would not presume too quickly, or too far, upon
the harmlessness of a petticoat, and--as he had observed from a dense blackberry thicket on
the other side of the fence, while she was at work hoeing her potatoes--there was an air about
Mrs. Gammit which seemed to give her petticoats the lie. He had watched her for some time before
he could quite satisfy himself that she was a mere woman. Then he had tried some nocturnal
experiments on the garden, sampling the young squashes which were Mrs. Gammit's peculiar pride,
and finding them so good that he had thought surely something would happen. Nothing did happen,
however, because Mrs. Gammit slept heavily; and her indignation in the morning he had not been
privileged to view.

After this he had grown bolder--though always under cover of night. He had sampled everything
in the garden--the abundance of his foot-prints convincing Mrs. Gammit that there was also
an abundance of bears. From the garden, at length, he had ventured to the yard and the barn.
In a half-barrel, in a corner of the shed, he had stumbled upon the ill-fated white top-knot
hen, faithfully brooding her eggs. Undeterred by her heroic scolding, and by the trifling annoyance
of her feathers sticking in his teeth, he had made a very pleasant meal of her. And still he
had heard nothing from Mrs. Gammit, who, for all her indignation, could not depart from her
custom of sound sleeping. If he had taken the trouble to return in the morning, he might have
perceived that the good lady was far from pleased, and that there was likely to be something
doing before long if he continued to take such liberties with her. And then, as we have seen,
he had found the duck--but her loss Mrs. Gammit had taken calmly enough, declaring it to be
nothing more than a good riddance to bad rubbish.

It was not until the return of moonlight nights that the bear had discovered the white pig,
and thus come face to face, at last, with a thoroughly aroused Mrs. Gammit. True to his kind,
he did like pork; but absorbed in the easier adventures of the garden and the shed, he had
not at first noted the rich possibilities of the pig-pen, which occupied one corner of the
barn, under the loft. Suspicious of traps, he would not, at first, enter the narrow opening
of the stable door, the wide main doors being shut. He had preferred rather to sniff around
outside at the corner of the barn, under the ragged birch-tree in which the big turkey-cock
had his perch. The wakeful and wary old bird, peering down upon him with suspicion, had uttered
a sharp qwit, qwit, by way of warning to whom it might concern; while the white pig, puzzled
and worried, had sat up in the dark interior of the pen and stared out at him in silence through
the cracks between the boards. At last, growing impatient, the bear had caught the edge of
a board with his claws, and tried to tear it off. Nothing had come except some big splinters;
but the effort, and the terrifying sound that accompanied it, had proved too much for the self-control
of the white pig. An ear-splitting succession of squeals had issued from the dark interior
of the pen, and the bear had backed off in amazement.

Before he could recover himself and renew his assault, the window of the cabin had gone up
with a skittering slam. The white pig's appeal for help had penetrated Mrs. Gammit's solid
slumbers, and she had understood the situation. "Scat! you brute!" she had yelled frantically,
thrusting head and shoulders so far out through the window that she almost lost her balance
in the effort to shake both fists at once.

The bear, not understanding the terms of her invective, had sat up on his haunches and turned
his one eye mildly upon the bristling tufts of grey hair which formed a sort of halo around
Mrs. Gammit's virginal nightcap. Then Mrs. Gammit, realizing that the time for action was come,
had rushed downstairs to the kitchen, seized the first weapon she could lay hands upon--which
chanced to be the broom--flung open the kitchen door, and dashed across the yard, screaming
with indignation.

It was certainly an unusual figure that she made in the radiant moonlight, her sturdy, naked
legs revolving energetically beneath her sparse nightgown, and the broom whirling vehemently
around her head. For a moment the bear had contemplated her with wonder. Then his nerves had
failed him. Doubtless, this was a woman--but not quite like the ordinary kind. It was better,
perhaps, to be careful. With a reluctant grunt he had turned and fled, indifferent to his dignity.
And he had thought best not to stop until he found himself quite beyond the range of Mrs. Gammit's
disconcerting accents, which rang harsh triumph across the solemn, silvered stillness of the
forest.

It was, of course, this imminent peril to the pig which had roused Mrs. Gammit to action and
sent her on that long tramp over the ridges to borrow Joe Barron's gun. In spite of her easy
victory in this particular instance, she had appreciated the inches of that bear, and realized
that in case of any further unpleasantnesses with him a broom might not prove to be the most
efficient of weapons. With the gun, however, and her distinct remembrance of Joe Barron's directions
for its use, she felt equal to the routing of any number of bears--provided, of course, they
would not all come on together. As the idea flashed across her mind that there might be a pack
of bears to face, she felt uneasy for a second, and even thought of bringing the pig into the
house for the night, and conducting her campaign from the bedroom window. Then she remembered
she had never heard of bears hunting in packs, and her little apprehension vanished. In fact,
she now grew quite eager for night to bring the fray.

It was a favourite saw of Mrs. Gammit's that "a watched pot takes long to bile"; and her experience
that night exemplified it. With the kitchen door ajar, she sat a little back from the window.
Herself hidden, she had a clear view across the bright yard. Very slowly the round moon climbed
the pallid summer sky, changing the patterns of the shadows as she rose. But the bear came
not. Mrs. Gammit began to think, even to fear, that her impetuosity of the night before had
frightened him away. At last her reveries grew confused. She sat up very straight, and blinked
very hard, to make sure that she was quite awake. Just as she had got herself most perfectly
reassured on this point, her head sank gently forward upon the window-sill, and she slept deeply,
with her cheek against the cold, brown barrel of the gun.

Yes, the bear had hesitated long that night. And he came late. The moon had swung past her
zenith, and was pointing her black shadows across the yard in quite another direction when
he came. By this time he had recovered confidence and made up his mind that Mrs. Gammit was
only a woman. After sniffing once more at the cracks to assure himself that the pig was still
there, he went around to the stable door and crept cautiously in.

As his clumsy black shape appeared in the bright opening, the pig saw it. It filled his heart
with a quite justifiable horror, which found instant poignant expression. Within those four
walls the noise was so startlingly loud that, in spite of himself, the bear drew back--not
intending to retreat, indeed, but only to consider. As it chanced, however, seeing out of only
one eye, he backed upon the handle of a hay rake which was leaning against the wall. The rake
very properly resented this. It fell upon him and clutched at his fur like a live thing. Startled
quite out of his self-possession, he retreated hurriedly into the moonlight, for further consideration
of these unexpected phenomena. And as he did so, across the yard the kitchen door was flung
open, and Mrs. Gammit, with the gun, rushed forth.

The bear had intended to retire behind the barn for a few moments, the better to weigh the
situation. But at the sight of Mrs. Gammit's fluttering petticoat he began to feel annoyed.
It seemed to him that he was being thwarted unnecessarily. At the corner of the barn, just
under the jutting limb of the birch-tree, he stopped, turned, and sat up on his haunches with
a growl. The old turkey-cock, stretching his lean neck, glared down upon him with a terse qwit!
qwit! of disapproval.

When the bear stopped, in that resolute and threatening attitude, Mrs. Gammit instinctively
stopped too. Not, as she would have explained had there been any one to explain to, that she
was "one mite scairt," but that she wanted to try Joe Barren's gun. Raising the gun to her
shoulder, she shut one eye, looked carefully at the point of the barrel with the other, and
pulled the trigger. Nothing whatever happened. Lowering the weapon from her shoulder she eyed
it severely, and perceived that she had forgotten to cock it. At this a shade of embarrassment
passed over her face, and she glanced sharply at the bear to see if he had noticed her mistake.
Apparently, he had not. He was still sitting there, regarding her unpleasantly with his one
small eye.

"Ye needn't think ye're agoin to git off, jest because I made a leetle mistake like that!"
muttered Mrs. Gammit, shutting her teeth with a snap, and cocking the gun as she raised it
once more to her shoulder.

Now, as it chanced, Joe Barren had neglected to tell her which eye to shut, so, not unnaturally,
Mrs. Gammit shut the one nearest to the gun--nearest to the cap which was about to go off.
She also neglected to consider the hind-sight. It was enough for her that the muzzle of the
gun seemed to cover the bear. Under these conditions she got a very good line on her target,
but her elevation was somewhat at fault. She pulled the trigger.

This time it was all right. There was a terrific, roaring explosion, and she staggered backwards
under the savage kick of the recoil. Recovering herself instantly, and proud of the great noise
she had made, she peered through the smoke, expecting to see the bear topple over upon his
nose, extinguished. Instead of that, however, she observed a convulsive flopping of wings in
the birch-tree above the bear's head. Then, with one reproachful "gobble" which rang loud in
Mrs. Gammit's ears, the old turkey-cock fell heavily to the ground. He would have fallen straight
upon the bear, but that the latter, his nerves completely upset by so much disturbance, was
making off at fine speed through the bushes.

The elation on Mrs. Gammit's face gave way to consternation. Then she reddened to the ears
with wrath, dashed the offending gun to the ground, and stamped on it. She had done her part,
that she knew, but the wretched weapon had played her false. Well, she had never thought much
of guns, anyway. Henceforth she would depend on herself.

The unfortunate turkey-cock now lay quite still. Mrs. Gammit crossed the yard and bent over
the sprawling body in deep regret. She had had a certain affection for the noisy and self-sufficient
old bird, who had been "company" for her as he strutted "gobbling" about the yard with stiff-trailed
wings while his hens were away brooding their chicks. "Too bad!" she muttered over him, by
way of requiem; "too bad ye had to go an' git in the road o' that blame gun!" Then, suddenly
bethinking herself that a fowl was more easily plucked while yet warm, she carried the limp
corpse, head downward, across the yard, fetched a basket from the kitchen, sat down on the
doorstep in the moonlight, and began sadly stripping the victim of his feathers. He was a fine,
heavy bird. As she surveyed his ample proportions Mrs. Gammit murmured thoughtfully: "I reckon
as how I'm goin' to feel kinder sick o' turkey afore I git this all et up!"

On the following day Mrs. Gammit carefully polished the gun with a duster, removing all trace
of the indignities she had put upon it, and stood it away behind the dresser. She had resolved
to conduct the rest of the campaign against the bears in her own way and with her own weapons.
The way and the weapons she now proceeded to think out with utmost care.

Being a true woman and a true housewife, it was perhaps inevitable that she should think first,
and, after due consideration given to everything else, including pitchforks and cayenne pepper,
that she should think last and finally, of the unlimited potentialities of boiling water. To
have it actually boiling, at the critical moment, would of course be impracticable; but with
a grim smile she concluded that she could manage to have it hot enough for her purpose. She
had observed that this bear which was after the pig had learned the way into the pen. She felt
sure that, having found from experience that loud noises did not produce bodily injuries, he
would again come seeking the pig, and this time with more confidence than ever.

On this point, thanks to her ignorance of bears in general, she was right. Most bears would
have been discouraged. But this bear in particular had learned that when men started out to
be disagreeable to bears, they succeeded only too well. He had realized clearly that Mrs. Gammit
had intended to be disagreeable to him. There was no mistaking her intentions. But she had
not succeeded. Ergo, she was not, as he had almost feared, a man, but really and truly a woman.
He came back the next night fully determined that no squeals, or brooms, or flying petticoats,
or explosions, should divert him from his purpose and his pork. He came early; but not, as
it chanced, too early for Mrs. Gammit, who seemed somehow to have divined his plans and so
taken time by the forelock.

The pen of the white pig, as we have already noted, was in a corner of the barn, and under
one end of the loft. Immediately above the point where the bear would have to climb over, in
order to get into the pen, Mrs. Gammit removed several of the loose boards which formed the
flooring of the loft. Beside this opening, at an early hour, she had ensconced herself in secure
ambuscade, with three pails of the hottest possible hot water close beside her. The pails were
well swathed in blankets, quilts, and hay, to keep up the temperature of their contents. And
she had also a pitchfork "layin' handy," wherewith to push the enemy down in case he should
resent her attack and climb up to expostulate.

Mrs. Gammit had not time to grow sleepy, or even impatient, so early did the bear arrive. The
white pig, disturbed and puzzled by the unwonted goings-on above his head, had refused to go
to bed. He was wandering restlessly up and down the pen, when, through the cracks, he saw an
awful black shadow darken the stable door. He lost not a second, but lifted his voice at once
in one of those ear-piercing appeals which had now twice proved themselves so effective.

The bear paused but for a moment, to cast his solitary eye over the situation. Mrs. Gammit
fairly held her breath. Then, almost before she could realize what he was doing, he was straight
beneath her, and clambering into the pen. The white pig's squeals redoubled, electrifying her
to action. She snatched a steaming bucket from its wrappings, and dashed it down upon the vaguely
heaving form below.

On the instant there arose a strange, confused, terrific uproar, from which the squeals of
the white pig stood out thin and pathetic. Without waiting to see what she had accomplished,
Mrs. Gammit snatched up the second bucket, and leaned forward to deliver a second stroke. Through
a cloud of steam she saw the bear reaching wildly for the wall of the pen, clawing frantically
in his eagerness to climb over and get away. She had given him a lesson, that was clear; but
she was resolved to give him a good one while she was about it. Swinging far forward, she launched
her terrible missile straight upon his huge hind-quarters just as they went over the wall.
But at the same moment she lost her balance. With an indignant yell she plunged downward into
the pen.

It was like Mrs. Gammit, however, that even in this dark moment her luck should serve her.
She landed squarely on the back of the pig. This broke her fall, and, strangely enough, did
not break the pig. The latter, quite frenzied by the accumulation of horrors heaped upon him,
bounced frantically from beneath her indiscreet petticoats, and dashed himself from one side
of the pen to the other with a violence that threatened to wreck both pig and pen.

Somewhat breathless, but proudly conscious that she had won a splendid victory, Mrs. Gammit
picked herself up and shook herself together. The bear had vanished. She eyed with amazement
the continued gyrations of the pig.

"Poor dear!" she muttered presently, "some o' the bilin' water must 'ave slopped on to him!
Oh, well, I reckon he'll git over it bime-by. Anyhow, it's a sight better'n being all clawed
an' et up by a bear, I reckon!"

Mrs. Gammit now felt satisfied that this particular bear would trouble her no more, and she
had high hopes that his experience with hot water would serve as a lesson to all the other
bears with whom she imagined herself involved. The sequel fulfilled her utmost expectations.
The bear, smarting from his scalds and with all his preconceived ideas about women overthrown,
betook himself in haste to another and remoter hunting-ground. A good deal of his hair came
off, in patches, and for a long time he had a rather poor opinion of himself.

When, for over a week, there had been no more raids upon barn or chicken-roost, and no more
bear-tracks about the garden, Mrs. Gammit knew that her victory had been final, and she felt
so elated that she was even able to enjoy her continuing diet of cold turkey. When they thus honored
me, they did not know that John A. Roebling addressed to me the letter in which he first suggested
(and, so far as I am aware, he was the first engineer to suggest),
the feasibility of a bridge between the two cities, so constructed
as to preserve unimpaired the freedom of navigation.

This letter, dated June 19, 1857, I caused to be printed in the New
York Journal of Commerce, where it attracted great attention because
it came from an engineer who had already demonstrated, by successfully
building suspension bridges over the Schuylkill, the Ohio and the
Niagara rivers, that he spoke with the voice of experience and authority.

This letter was the first step towards the construction of the work, which, however, came about
in a manner different from his expectations, and was finally completed
on a plan more extensive than he had ventured to describe.

It has been charged that the original estimates of cost have been
far exceeded by the actual outlay.

If this were true, the words of praise which I have uttered for the
engineers, who designed and executed this work, ought rather to have
been a sentence of censure and condemnation.

Hence, the invitation which came to me unsought, seemed rather to be an appeal from the grave
for such vindication as it was within my power to make, and which could not come with equal
force from any other quarter.

Engineers are of two kinds: the creative and the constructive.

The power to conceive great works demands imagination and faith. The creative engineer, like
the poet, is born, not made. If to the power to conceive, is added the ability to execute, then
have we one of those rare geniuses who not only give a decided impulse to civilization, but
add new glory to humanity. Such men were Michael Angelo, Leonardo da Vinci, Watt, Wedgwood, Brunel,
Stephenson and Bessemer; and such a man was John A. Roebling. It was his striking peculiarity,
that while his conceptions were bold and original, his execution was always exact, and within
the limits of cost which he assigned to the work of his brain. He had made bridges a study,
and had declared in favor of the suspension principle for heavy traffic, when the greatest living
authorities had condemned it as costly and unsafe.

When he undertook to build a suspension bridge for railway use, he did so in the face of the
deliberate judgment of the profession, that success would be impossible. Stephenson had condemned
the suspension principle and approved the tubular girder for railway traffic. But it was the
Nemesis of his fate, that when he came out to approve the location of the great tubular bridge
at Montreal, he should pass over the Niagara River in a railway train, on a suspension bridge,
which he had declared to be an impracticable undertaking.

When Roebling suggested the Bridge over the East River, his ideas were limited to the demands
of the time, and controlled by the necessity for a profitable investment. He had no expectation
that the two cities would embark in the enterprise. Indeed, in one of his letters so late as April
14, 1860, he says, "As to the corporations of New York and Brooklyn undertaking the job, no
such hope may be entertained in our time." In eight years thereafter, these cities had undertaken
the task upon a scale of expense far exceeding his original ideas of a structure, to be built
exclusively by private capital for the sake of profit.

How came this miracle to pass? The war of the rebellion occurred, delaying for a time the further
consideration of Roebling's ideas. This war accustomed the nation to expenditures on a scale of which
it had no previous conception. It did more than expend large sums of money. Officials became
corrupt and organized themselves for plunder. In the city of New York, especially, the government
fell into the hands of a band of thieves, who engaged in a series
of great and beneficial public works, not for the good they might
do, but for the opportunity which they would afford to rob the public
treasury.

They erected court-houses and armories; they opened roads, boulevards and parks; and they organized
two of the grandest devices for transportation which the genius of man has ever conceived; a rapid
transit railway for New York, and a great highway between New York and Brooklyn. The Bridge
was commenced, but the Ring was driven into exile by the force of public indignation, before
the rapid transit scheme, since executed on a different route by private capital, was undertaken.
The collapse of the Ring brought the work on the Bridge to a stand-still.

It

was a timely event. The patriotic New Yorker might well have exclaimed, just before this great deliverance,
in the words of the Consul of ancient Rome, in Macaulay's stirring poem,

"And if they once may win the bridge, What hope to save the town?"

Meanwhile, the elder Roebling had died, leaving behind him his estimates and the general plans of the
structure, to cost, independent of land damages and interest, about $7,000,000. This great work which,
if not "conceived in sin," was "brought forth in iniquity," thus became the object of great suspicion,
and of a prejudice which has not been removed to this day. I know that to many I make a startling
announcement, when I state the incontrovertible fact, that no money was ever stolen by the Ring
from the funds of the Bridge; that the whole money raised has been honestly expended; that the
estimates for construction have not been materially exceeded; and
that the excess of cost over the estimates is due to purchases of
land which were never included in the estimates; to interest paid
on the city subscriptions; to the cost of additional height and breadth
of the Bridge; and the increase in strength rendered necessary by
a better comprehension of the volume of traffic between the two cities.

The items covered by the original estimate of $7,000,000 have thus been raised to $9,000,000, so that
$2,000,000 represents the addition to the original estimates.

For this excess, amounting to less than thirty per cent., there is actual value in the Bridge
in dimension and strength, whereby its working capacity has been greatly increased. The carriage-ways,
as originally designed, would have permitted only a single line of vehicles in each direction.
The speed of the entire procession, more than a mile long, would, therefore, have been limited
by the rate of the slowest; and every accident causing stoppage to a single cart would have
stopped everything behind it for an indefinite period. It is not too much to say that the removal
of this objection, by widening the carriage-ways, has multiplied manifold the practical usefulness
of the Bridge.

The statement I have made is due to the memory not only of John A. Roebling, but also of Henry
C. Murphy, that great man who devoted his last years to this enterprise; and who, having,
like Moses, led the people through the toilsome way, was permitted
only to look, but not to enter upon the promised land.

This testimony is due also to the living trustees and to the engineers who have controlled and directed
this large expenditure in the public service, the latter, in the conscientious discharge of
professional duty; and the former, with no other object than the welfare of the public, and without
any other possible reward than the good opinion of their fellow-citizens.

I do not make this statement without a full sense of the responsibility
which it involves, and I realize that its accuracy will shortly be
tested by the report of experts who are now examining the accounts.

But it will be found that I have spoken the words of truth and soberness. When the Ring absconded
I was asked by William C. Havemeyer, then the Mayor of New York, to become a trustee, in order
to investigate the expenditures, and to report as to the propriety of going on with the work.
This duty was performed without fear or favor. The methods by which the Ring proposed to benefit
themselves were clear enough, but its members fled before they succeeded in reimbursing themselves
for the preliminary expenses which they had defrayed. With their flight a new era commenced,
and during the three years when I acted as a trustee, I am sure that no fraud was committed,
and that none was possible. Since that time the Board has been controlled by trustees, some
of whom are thorough experts in bridge building, and the others men of such high character
that the suggestion of malpractice is improbable to absurdity.

The Bridge has not only been honestly built, but it may be safely asserted that it could not
now be duplicated at the same cost.

Much money might, however, have been saved if the work had not been delayed through want of means,
and unnecessary obstacles interposed by mistaken public officials. Moreover, measured by its
capacity, and the limitations imposed on its construction by its relation to the interests
of traffic and navigation, it is the cheapest structure ever erected by the genius of man. This will
be made evident by a single comparison with the Britannia Tubular Bridge erected by Stephenson
over the Menai Straits. He adopted the tubular principle, because he believed that the suspension
principle could not be made practical for railway traffic, although
he had to deal with spans not greater than 470 feet.

He built a structure that contained 10,540 tons of iron, and cost 601,000 pounds sterling,
or about $3,000,000. Fortunately he has left a calculation on record as to the possible extension
of the tubular girder, showing that it would reach the limits in
which it could bear only its own weight (62,000 tons), at 1,570 feet.

Now, for a span of 1,595-1/2 feet, the Brooklyn Bridge contains but 6,740 tons of material, and
will sustain seven times its own weight. Its cost is $9,000,000, whereas a tubular bridge for the
same span would contain ten times the weight of metal, and though costing twice as much money,
would be without the ability to do any useful work.

Roebling, therefore, solved the problem which had defied Stephenson; and upon his design has
been built a successful structure, at half the cost of a tubular bridge that would have fallen
when loaded in actual use.

It is impossible to furnish any more striking proof of the genius which originated, and of the
economy which constructed this triumph of American engineering.

We have thus a monument to the public spirit of the two cities, created by an expenditure as honest
and as economical as the management which gave us the Erie Canal, the Croton Aqueduct, and the Central
Park.

Otherwise, it would have been a monument to the eternal infamy of the trustees and of the engineers
under whose supervision it has been erected, and this brings me to the final consideration which I
feel constrained to offer on this point.

During all these years of trial, and false report, a great soul lay
in the shadow of death, praying only to stay long enough for the completion
of the work to which he had devoted his life.

I say a great soul, for in the spring-time of youth, with friends and fortune at his command,
he gave himself to his country, and for her sake braved death on many a well-fought battle-field.
When restored to civil life, his health was sacrificed to the duties which had devolved upon
him, as the inheritor of his father's fame, and the executor of his father's plans. Living only
for honor, and freed from the temptations of narrow means, how is it conceivable that such
a man--whose approval was necessary to every expenditure--should, by conniving with jobbers,
throw away more than the life which was dear to him, that he might
fulfill his destiny, and leave to his children the heritage of a good
name and the glory of a grand achievement?

And now what is to be the outcome of this great expenditure upon the
highway which unites the two cities, for which Dr. Storrs and I have
the honor to speak to-day?

That Brooklyn will gain in numbers and in wealth with accelerated
speed is a foregone conclusion.

Whether this gain shall in any wise be at the expense of New York, is a matter in regard to which
the great metropolis does not concern herself. Her citizens are content with the knowledge that
she exists and grows with the growth of the whole country, of whose progress and prosperity she
is but the exponent and the index. Will the Bridge lead, as has been forcibly suggested, and
in some quarters hopefully anticipated, to the further union of the two cities under one name
and one government? This suggestion is in part sentimental and in part practical. So far as
the union in name is concerned, it is scarcely worth consideration, for in any comparison which
our national or local pride may institute between this metropolis
and the other great cities of the world, its environment, whether
in Long Island, Staten Island, or New Jersey, will always be included.

In considering the population of London, no one ever separates the city proper from the surrounding
parts. They are properly regarded as one homogeneous aggregation of human beings.

It is only when we come to consider the problem of governing great masses that the serious elements
of the question present themselves, and must be determined before a satisfactory answer can
be given. The tendency of modern civilization is towards the concentration of population in
dense masses. This is due to the higher and more diversified life, which can be secured by association
and co-operation on a large scale, affording not merely greater comfort and often luxury, but
actually distributing the fruits of labor on a more equitable basis than is possible in sparsely
settled regions and among feeble communities.

The great improvements of our day in labor-saving machinery, and its application to agriculture,
enable the nation to be fed with a less percentage of its total force thus applied, and leave
a larger margin of population free to engage in such other pursuits as are best carried on in
large cities.

The disclosures of the last census prove the truth of this statement. At the first census in 1790
the population resident in cities was 3.3 per cent. of the total population. This percentage
slowly gained at each successive census, until in 1840 it had reached 8.5 per cent. In fifty years
it had thus gained a little over five per cent. But in 1850 it rose to 12.5 per cent.; in 1860
it was 16.1 per cent.; in 1870 it was 20.9 per cent., having in this one decade gained as much
as in the first fifty years of our political existence. In 1880 the population resident in cities
was 22.5 per cent. of the whole population.

With this rapid growth of urban population, have grown the contemporaneous complaints of corrupt
administration and bad municipal government.

The outcry may be said to be universal, for it comes from both sides of the Atlantic; and the
complaints appear to be in direct proportion to the size of cities. It is obvious, therefore,
that the knowledge of the art of local government has not kept pace with the growth of population.
I am here by your favor to speak for the city of New York, and I should be the last person to
throw any discredit on its fair fame; but I think I only give voice to the general feeling, when
I say that the citizens of New York are satisfied neither with the structure of its government,
nor with its actual administration, even when it is in the hands of intelligent and honest officials.
Dissatisfied as we are, no man has been able to devise a system which commends itself to the general
approval, and it may be asserted that the remedy is not to be found in devices for any special
machinery of government. Experiments without number have been tried, and suggestions in infinite
variety have been offered, but to-day no man can say that we have approached any nearer to the
idea of good government, which is demanded by the intelligence and the wants of the community.

If,
therefore, New York has not yet learned to govern itself, how can it be expected to be better
governed by adding half a million to its population, and a great
territory to its area, unless it be with the idea that a "little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump."

Is Brooklyn that leaven? If not, and if possibly "the salt has lost its savor, wherewith shall
it be salted?" Brooklyn is now struggling with this problem, it remains to be seen with what
success; but meanwhile it is idle to consider the idea of getting rid of our common evils
by adding them together.

Besides it is a fundamental axiom in politics, approved by the experience of older countries,
as well as of our own, that the sources of power should never be far removed from those who
are to feel its exercise. It is the violation of this principle which produces chronic revolution
in France, and makes the British rule so obnoxious to the Irish people. This evil is happily avoided
when a natural boundary circumscribes administration within narrow limits. While, therefore, we rejoice
together at the new bond between New York and Brooklyn, we ought to rejoice the more, that
it destroys none of the conditions which permit each city to govern itself, but rather urges them
to a generous rivalry in perfecting each its own government, recognizing the truth, that there
is no true liberty without law, and that eternal vigilance, which is the only safeguard of
liberty, can best be exercised within limited areas.

It would be a most fortunate conclusion, if the completion of this
Bridge should arouse public attention to the absolute necessity of
good municipal government, and recall the only principle upon which
it can ever be successfully founded.

There is reason to hope that this result will follow, because the erection of this structure
shows how a problem, analogous to that which confronts us in regard to the city government,
has been met and solved in the domain of physical science.
The men who controlled this enterprise at the outset were not all
of the best type; some of them, as we have seen, were public jobbers. But what was now his
utmost, he realized, would very soon be far beyond his powers. Well, there was nothing to do
but to keep on trying. Around and around, and again and again around the terrible, smooth,
deliberate circuit he went, sparing himself every ounce of effort that he could, and always
shutting his eyes as the log beside him plunged out into the sluice. Gradually, then, he felt
himself becoming stupefied by the ceaselessly recurring horror, with the prolonged suspense
between. He must sting himself back to the full possession of his faculties by another burst
of fierce effort. Fiercely he caught at log after log, without a let-up, till, luck having
favoured him for once, he found himself on the inner instead of the outer edge of the procession.
Then an idea flashed into his fast-clouding brain, and he cursed himself for not having thought
of it before. At the very centre of the eddy, of course, there must be a sort of core of stillness.
By a vehement struggle he attained it and avoided crossing it. Working gently and warily he
kept the log right across the axis of the eddy, where huddled a crowd of chips and sticks.
Here the log turned slowly, very slowly, on its own centre; and for a few seconds of exquisite
relief Henderson let himself sink into a sort of lethargy. He was roused by a sudden shot,
and the spat of a heavy bullet into the log about three inches before his head. Even through
the shaking thunder of the cataract he thought he recognized the voice of his own heavy Colt;
and the idea of that tried weapon being turned against himself filled him with childish rage.
Without lifting his head he lay and cursed, grinding his teeth impotently. A few seconds later
came another shot, and this time the ball went into the log just before his right arm. Then
he understood, and woke up. Pichot was a dead shot. This was his intimation that Henderson
must get out into the procession again. At the centre of the eddy he was not sufficiently entertaining
to his executioners. The idea of being shot in the head had not greatly disturbed him--he had
felt as if it would be rather restful, on the whole. But the thought of getting a bullet in
his arm, which would merely disable him and deliver him over helpless to the outdraught, shook
him with something near a panic. He fell to paddling with all his remaining strength, and drove
his log once more into the horrible circuit. The commendatory remarks with which Pichot greeted
this move went past his ears unheard.

Up to this time there had been a strong sun shining down into the pot, and the trees about
its rim had stood unstirred by any wind. Now, however, a sudden darkness settled over everything,
and sharp, fitful gusts drew in through the cleft, helping to push the logs back. Henderson
was by this time so near fainting from exhaustion that his wits were losing their clearness.
Only his horror of the fatal exit, the raving sluice, the swaying white spray-curtain, retained
its keenness. As to all else he was growing so confused that he hardly realized the way those
great indrawing gusts, laden with spray, were helping him. He was paddling and steering and
manoeuvring for the inner circuit almost mechanically now. When suddenly the blackness about
him was lit with a blue glare, and the thunder crashed over the echoing pot with an explosion
that outroared the falls, he hardly noted it. When the skies seemed to open, letting down the
rain in torrents, with a wind that almost blew it level, it made no difference to him. He went
on paddling dully, indifferent to the bumping of the logs against his shoulders.

But to this fierce storm, which almost bent double the trees around the rim of the pot, Red
Pichot and Mitchell were by no means so indifferent. About sixty or seventy yards below the
falls they had a snug retreat which was also an outlook. It was a cabin built in a recess of
the wall of the gorge, and to be reached only by a narrow pathway easy of defence. When the
storm broke in its fury Pichot sprang to his feet.

"Let's git back to the Hole," he cried to his companion, knocking the fire out of his pipe.
"We kin watch just as well from there, an' see the beauty slide over when his time comes."

Pichot led the way off through the straining and hissing trees, and Mitchell followed, growling
but obedient. And Henderson, faint upon his log in the raving tumult, knew nothing of their going.

They had not been gone more than two minutes when a drenched little dark face, with black hair
plastered over it in wisps, peered out from among the lashing birches and gazed down anxiously
into the pot. At the sight of Henderson on his log, lying quite close to the edge, and far
back from the dreadful cleft, the terror in the wild eyes gave way to inexpressible relief.
The face drew back; and an instant later a bare-legged child appeared, carrying the pike-pole
which Pichot had tossed into the bushes. Heedless of the sheeting volleys of the rain and the
fierce gusts which whipped her dripping homespun petticoat about her knees, she clambered skilfully
down the rock wall to the ledge whereon Pichot had stood. Bracing herself carefully, she reached
out with the pike-pole, which, child though she was, she evidently knew how to use.

Henderson was just beginning to recover from his daze, and to notice the madness of the storm,
when he felt something strike sharply on the log behind him. He knew it was the impact of a
pike pole, and he wondered, with a kind of scornful disgust, what Pichot could be wanting of
him now. He felt the log being dragged backwards, then held close against the smooth wall of
the pot. A moment more and his bonds were being cut--but laboriously, as if with a small knife
and by weak hands. Then he caught sight of the hands, which were little and brown and rough,
and realized, with a great burst of wonder and tenderness, that old Baisley's "Sis," by some
miracle of miracles, had come to his rescue. In a few seconds the ropes fell apart, and he
lifted himself, to see the child stooping down with anxious adoration in her eyes.

"Sis!" he cried. "You!"

"Oh, Mr. Henderson, come quick!" she panted. "They may git back any minit." And clutching him
by the shoulder, she tried to pull him up by main strength. But Henderson needed no urging.
Life, with the return of hope, had surged back into nerve and muscle; and in hardly more time
than it takes to tell it, the two had clambered side by side to the rim of the pot and darted
into the covert of the tossing trees.

No sooner were they in hiding than Henderson remembered his rifle and slipped back to get it
His enemies had not discovered it. It had fallen into the moss, but the well-oiled, perfect-fitting
chamber had kept its cartridges dry. With that weapon in his hands Henderson felt himself once
more master of the situation. Weariness and apprehension together slipped from him, and one
purpose took complete possession of him. He would settle with Red Pichot right there, on the
spot where he had been taught the terrible lesson of fear. He felt that he could not really
feel himself a man again unless he could settle the whole score before the sun of that day
should set.

The rain and wind were diminishing now; the lightning was a mere shuddering gleam over the
hill-tops beyond the river; and the thunder no longer made itself heard above the trampling
of the falls. Henderson's plans were soon laid. Then he turned to Sis, who stood silent and
motionless close at his side, her big, alert, shy eyes watching like a hunted deer's the trail
by which Red Pichot might return. She was trembling in her heart at every moment that Henderson
lingered within that zone of peril. But she would not presume to suggest any move.

Suddenly Henderson turned to her and laid an arm about her little shoulders.

"You saved my life, kid!" he said, softly. "How ever did you know I was down there in that hell?"

"I jest knowed it was you, when I seen Red Pichot an' Bug Mitchell a-trackin' some one," answered
the child, still keeping her eyes on the trail, as if it was her part to see that Henderson
was not again taken unawares. "I knowed it was you, Mister Henderson, an' I followed 'em; an'
oh, I seen it all, I seen it all, an' I most died because I hadn't no gun. But I'd 'ave killed
'em both, some day, sure, ef--ef they hadn't went away! But they'll be back now right quick."

Henderson bent and kissed her wet black head, saying, "Bless you, kid! You an' me'll always
be pals, I reckon!"

At the kiss the child's face flushed, and, for one second forgetting to watch the trail, she
lifted glowing eyes to his. But he was already looking away.

"Come on," he muttered. "This ain't no place for you an' me yet."

Making a careful circuit through the thick undergrowth, swiftly but silently as two wildcats,
the strange pair gained a covert close beside the trail by which Pichot and Mitchell would
return to the rim of the pot. Safely ambuscaded, Henderson laid a hand firmly on the child's
arm, resting it there for two or three seconds, as a sign of silence.

Minute after minute went by in the intense stillness. At last the child, whose ears were even
keener than Henderson's, caught her breath with a little indrawing gasp and looked up at her
companion's face. Henderson understood; and every muscle stiffened. A moment later and he,
too, heard the oncoming tread of hurried footsteps. Then Pichot went by at a swinging stride,
with Mitchell skulking obediently at his heels.

Henderson half raised his rifle, and his face turned grey and cold like steel. But it was no
part of his plan to shoot even Red Pichot in the back. From the manner of the two ruffians
it was plain that they had no suspicion of the turn which affairs had taken. To them it was
as sure as two and two make four that Henderson was still on his log in the pot, if he had
not already gone over into the cauldron. As they reached the rim Henderson stepped out into
the trail behind them, his gun balanced ready like a trapshooter's.

As Pichot, on the very brink, looked down into the pot and saw that his victim was no longer
there, he turned to Mitchell with a smile of mingled triumph and disappointment.

But, on the instant, the smile froze on his face. It was as if he had felt the cold, grey gaze
of Henderson on the back of his neck. Some warning, certainly, was flashed to that mysterious
sixth sense which the people of the wild, man or beast, seem sometimes to be endowed with.
He wheeled like lightning, his revolver seeming to leap up from his belt with the same motion.
But in the same fraction of a second that his eyes met Henderson's they met the white flame-spurt
of Henderson's rifle--and then, the dark.

As Pichot's body collapsed, it toppled over the rim into Blackwater Pot and fell across two
moving logs. Mitchell had thrown up his hands straight above his head when Pichot fell, knowing
instantly that that was his only hope of escaping the same fate as his leader's.

One look at Henderson's face, however, satisfied him that he was not going to be dealt with
on the spot, and he set his thick jaw stolidly. Then his eyes wandered down into the pot, following
the leader whom, in his way, he had loved if ever he had loved any one or anything. Fascinated,
his stare followed the two logs as they journeyed around, with Pichot's limp form, face upwards,
sprawled across them. They reached the cleft, turned, and shot forth into the raving of the
sluice, and a groan of horror burst from "Bug's" lips. By this Henderson knew what had happened,
and, to his immeasurable self-scorn, a qualm of remembered fear caught sickeningly at his heart.
But nothing of this betrayed itself in his face or voice.

"Come on, Mitchell!" he said, briskly. "I'm in a hurry. You jest step along in front, an' see
ye keep both hands well up over yer head, or ye'll be savin' the county the cost o' yer rope.
Step out, now."

He stood aside, with Sis at his elbow, to make room. As Mitchell passed, his hands held high,
a mad light flamed up into his sullen eyes, and he was on the point of springing, like a wolf,
at his captor's throat. But Henderson's look was cool and steady, and his gun held low. The
impulse flickered out in the brute's dull veins. But as he glanced at Sis he suddenly understood
that it was she who had brought all this to pass. His black face snarled upon her like a wolf's
at bay, with an inarticulate curse more horrible than any words could make it. With a shiver
the child slipped behind Henderson's back and hid her face.

"Don't be skeered o' him, kid, not one little mite," said Henderson, gently. "He ain't agoin'
to trouble this earth no more. An' I'm goin' to get yer father a job, helpin' me, down somewheres
near Greensville--because I couldn't sleep nights knowin' ye was runnin' round anywheres near
that hell-hole yonder!"

The Iron Edge of Winter

The glory of the leaves was gone; the glory of the snow was not yet come; and the world, smitten
with bitter frost, was grey like steel. The ice was black and clear and vitreous on the forest
pools. The clods on the ploughed field, the broken hillocks in the pasture, the ruts of the
winding backwoods road, were hard as iron and rang under the travelling hoof. The silent, naked
woods, moved only by the bleak wind drawing through them from the north, seemed as if life
had forgotten them.

Suddenly there came a light thud, thud, thud, with a pattering of brittle leaves; and a leisurely
rabbit hopped by, apparently on no special errand. At the first of the sounds, a small, ruddy
head with bulging, big, bright eyes had appeared at the mouth of a hole under the roots of
an ancient maple. The bright eyes noted the rabbit at once, and peered about anxiously to see
if any enemy were following. There was no danger in sight.

Within two or three feet of the hole under the maple the rabbit stopped, sat up as if begging,
waved its great ears to and fro, and glanced around inquiringly with its protruding, foolish
eyes. As it sat up, it felt beneath its whitey fluff of a tail something hard which was not
a stone, and promptly dropped down again on all fours to investigate. Poking its nose among
the leaves and scratching with its fore-paws, it uncovered a pile of beech-nuts, at which it
began to sniff. The next instant, with a shrill, chattering torrent of invective, a red squirrel
whisked out from the hole under the maple, and made as if to fly in the face of the big, good-natured
trespasser. Startled and abashed by this noisy assault, the rabbit went bounding away over
the dead leaves and disappeared among the desolate grey arches.

The silence was effectually dispelled. Shrieking and scolding hysterically, flicking his long
tail in spasmodic jerks, and calling the dead solitudes to witness that the imbecile intruder
had uncovered one of his treasure-heaps, the angry squirrel ran up and down the trunk for at
least two minutes. Then, his feelings somewhat relieved by this violent outburst, he set himself
to gathering the scattered nuts and bestowing them in new and safer hiding-places.

In this task he had little regard for convenience, and time appeared to be no object whatever.
Some of the nuts he took over to a big elm fifty paces distant, and jammed them one by one,
solidly and conscientiously, into the crevices of the bark. Others he carried in the opposite
direction, to the edge of the open where the road ran by. These he hid under a stone, where
the passing wayfarer might step over them, indeed, but would never think of looking for them.
While he was thus occupied, an old countryman slouched by, his heavy boots making a noise on
the frozen ruts, his nose red with the harsh, unmitigated cold. The squirrel, mounted on a
fence stake, greeted him with a flood of whistling and shrieking abuse; and he, not versed
in the squirrel tongue, muttered to himself half enviously: "Queer how them squur'ls can keep
so cheerful in this weather." The tireless little animal followed him along the fence rails
for perhaps a hundred yards, seeing him off the premises and advising him not to return, then
went back in high feather to his task. When all the nuts were once more safely hidden but two
or three, these latter he carried to the top of a stump close beside the hole in the maple,
and proceeded to make a meal. The stump commanded a view on all sides; and as he sat up with
a nut between his little, hand-like, clever fore-paws, his shining eyes kept watch on every
path by which an enemy might approach.

Having finished the nuts, and scratched his ears, and jumped twice around on the stump as if
he were full of erratically acting springs, he uttered his satisfaction in a long, vibrant
chir-r-r-r, and started to re-enter his hole in the maple-roots. Just at the door, however,
he changed his mind. For no apparent reason he whisked about, scurried across the ground to
the big elm, ran straight up the tall trunk, and disappeared within what looked like a mass
of sticks perched among the topmost branches.

The mass of sticks was a deserted crow's nest, which the squirrel, not content with one dwelling,
had made over to suit his own personal needs. He had greatly improved upon the architecture
of the crows, giving the nest a tight roof of twigs and moss, and lining the snug interior
with fine dry grass and soft fibres of cedar-bark. In this secure and softly swaying refuge,
far above the reach of prowling foxes, he curled himself up for a nap after his toil.

He slept well, but not long; for the red squirrel has always something on his mind to see to.
In less than half an hour he whisked out again in great excitement, jumped from branch to branch
till he was many yards from his own tree, and then burst forth into vehement chatter. He must
have dreamed that some one was rifling his hoards, for he ran eagerly from one hiding-place
to another and examined them all suspiciously. As he had at least two-score to inspect, it
took him some time; but not till he had looked at every one did he seem satisfied. Then he
grew very angry, and scolded and chirruped, as if he thought some one had made a fool of him.
That he had made a fool of himself probably never entered his confident and self-sufficient
little head.

While indulging this noisy volubility he was seated on the top of his dining-stump. Suddenly
he caught sight of something that smote him into silence and for the space of a second turned
him to stone. A few paces away was a weasel, gliding toward him like a streak of baleful light.
For one second only he crouched. Then his faculties returned, and launching himself through
the air he landed on the trunk of the maple and darted up among the branches.

No less swiftly the weasel followed, hungry, bloodthirsty, relentless on the trail. Terrified
into folly by the suddenness and deadliness of this peril, the squirrel ran too far up the
tree and was almost cornered. Where the branches were small there was no chance to swing to
another tree. Perceiving this mistake, he gave a squeak of terror, then bounded madly right
over his enemy's head, and was lucky enough to catch foothold far out on a lower branch. Recovering
himself in an instant, he shot into the next tree, and thence to the next and the next. Then,
breathless from panic rather than from exhaustion, he crouched trembling behind a branch and
waited.

The weasel pursued more slowly, but inexorably as doom itself. He was not so clever at branch-jumping
as his intended prey, but he was not to be shaken off. In less than a minute he was following
the scent up the tree wherein the squirrel was hiding; and again the squirrel dashed off in
his desperate flight. Twice more was this repeated, the squirrel each time more panic-stricken
and with less power in nerve or muscle. Then wisdom forsook his brain utterly. He fled straight
to his elm and darted into his nest in the swaying top. The weasel, running lithely up the
ragged trunk, knew that the chase was at an end. From this cul de sac the squirrel had no escape.

But Fate is whimsical in dealing with the wild kindreds. She seems to delight in unlooked-for
interventions. While the squirrel trembled in his dark nest, and the weasel, intent upon the
first taste of warm blood in his throat, ran heedlessly up a bare stretch of the trunk, there
came the chance which a foraging hawk had been waiting for. The hawk, too, had been following
this breathless chase, but ever baffled by intervening branches. Now he swooped and struck.
His talons had the grip of steel. The weasel, plucked irresistibly from his foothold, was carried
off writhing to make the great bird's feast. And the squirrel, realizing at last that the expected
doom had been somehow turned aside, came out and chattered feebly of his triumph.

The Grip in Deep Hole

The roar of the falls, the lighter and shriller raging of the rapids, had at last died out
behind the thick masses of the forest, as Barnes worked his way down the valley. The heat in
the windless underbrush, alive with insects, was stifling. He decided to make once more for
the bank of the stream, in the hope that its character might by this time have changed, so
as to afford him an easier and more open path. Pressing aside to his left, he presently saw
the green gloom lighten before him. Blue sky and golden light came low through the thinning
trees, and then a gleam of unruffled water. He was nearing the edge now; and because the underbrush
was so thick about him he began to go cautiously.

All at once, he felt his feet sinking; and the screen of thick bushes before him leaned away
as if bowed by a heavy gust. Desperately he clutched with both hands at the undergrowth and
saplings on either side; but they all gave way with him. In a smother of leafage and blinding,
lashing branches he sank downwards--at first, as it seemed, slowly, for he had time to think
many things while his heart was jumping in his throat. Then, shooting through the lighter bushy
companions of his fall, and still clutching convulsively at those upon which he had been able
to lay his grasp, he plunged feet first into a dark water.

The water was deep and cold. Barnes went down straight, and clear under, with a strangled gasp.
His feet struck, with some force, upon a tangled, yielding mass, from which he rose again with
a spring. His head shot up above the surface, above the swirl of foam, leafage, and débris;
and splutteringly he gulped his lungs full of air. But before he could clear his eyes or his
nostrils, or recover his self-possession, he was stealthily dragged down again. And with a
pang of horror he realized that he was caught by the foot.

A powerful swimmer, Barnes struck out mightily with his arms and came to the surface again
at once, rising beyond the shoulders. But by so much the more was he violently snatched back
again, strangling and desperate, before he had time to empty his lungs and catch breath. This
time the shock sobered him, flashing the full peril of the situation before his startled consciousness.
With a tremendous effort of will he stopped his struggling, and contented himself with a gentle
paddling to keep upright. This time he came more softly to the surface, clear beyond the chin.
The foam and débris and turbulence of little waves seethed about his lips, and the sunlight
danced confusingly in his streaming eyes; but he gulped a fresh lungful before he again went under.

Paddling warily now, he emerged again at once, and, with arms outspread, brought himself to
a precarious equilibrium, his mouth just above the surface so long as he held his head well
back. Keeping very still, he let his bewildered wits clear, and the agitated surface settle
to quiet.

He was in a deep, tranquil cove, hardly stirred by an eddy. Some ten paces farther out from
shore the main current swirled past sullenly, as if weary from the riot of falls and rapids.
Across the current a little space of sand-beach, jutting out from the leafy shore, shone golden
in the sun. Up and down the stream, as far as his extremely restricted vision would suffer
him to see, nothing but thick, overhanging branches, and the sullen current. Very cautiously
he turned his head--though to do so brought the water over his lips--and saw behind him just
what he expected. The high, almost perpendicular bank was scarred by a gash of bright, raw,
reddish earth, where the brink had slipped away beneath his weight.

Just within reach of his hand lay, half submerged, the thick, leafy top of a fallen poplar
sapling, its roots apparently still clinging to the bank. Gently he laid hold of it, testing
it, in the hope that it might prove solid enough to enable him to haul himself out. But it
came away instantly in his grasp. And once more, in this slight disturbance of his equilibrium,
his head went under.

Barnes was disappointed, but he was now absolutely master of his self-possession. In a moment
he had regained the only position in which he could breathe comfortably. Then, because the
sun was beating down too fiercely on the top of his head, he carefully drew the bushy top of
the poplar sapling into such a position that it gave him shade. As its roots were still aground,
it showed no tendency to float off and forsake him in his plight.

A very little consideration, accompanied by a cautious investigation with his free foot, speedily
convinced Barnes, who was a practical woodsman, that the trap in which he found himself caught
could be nothing else than a couple of interlaced, twisted branches, or roots, of some tree
which had fallen into the pool in a former caving-in of the bank. In that dark deep wherein
his foot was held fast, his mind's eye could see it all well enough--the water-soaked, brown-green,
slimy, inexorable coil, which had yielded to admit the unlucky member, then closed upon the
ankle like the jaws of an otter trap. He could feel that grip--not severe, but uncompromisingly
firm, clutching the joint. As he considered, he began to draw comfort, however, from the fact
that his invisible captor had displayed a certain amount of give and take. This elasticity
meant either that it was a couple of branches slight enough to be flexible that held him, or
that the submerged tree itself was a small one, not too steadfastly anchored down. He would
free himself easily enough, he thought, as soon as he should set himself about it coolly and
systematically.

Taking a long breath he sank his head under the surface, and peered downward through the amber-brown
but transparent gloom. Little gleams of brighter light came twisting and quivering in from
the swirls of the outer current. Barnes could not discern the bottom of the pool, which was
evidently very deep; but he could see quite clearly the portion of the sunken tree in whose
interwoven branches he was held. A shimmering golden ray fell just on the spot where his foot
vanished to the ankle between two stout curves of what looked like slimy brown cable or sections
of a tense snake body.

It was, beyond question, a nasty-looking trap; and Barnes could not blink the fact that he
was in a tight place. He lifted his face above the surface, steadied himself carefully, and
breathed deeply and quietly for a couple of minutes, gathering strength for a swift and vigorous
effort. Then, filling his lungs very moderately, the better to endure a strain, he stooped
suddenly downward, deep into the yellow gloom, and began wrenching with all his force at those
oozy curves, striving to drag them apart. They gave a little, but not enough to release the
imprisoned foot. Another moment, and he had to lift his head again for breath.

After some minutes of rest, he repeated the choking struggle, but, as before, in vain. He could
move the jaws of the trap just enough to encourage him a little, but not enough to gain his
release. Again and again he tried it, again and again to fail just as he imagined himself on
the verge of success; till at last he was forced, for the moment, to acknowledge defeat, finding
himself so exhausted that he could hardly keep his mouth above water. Drawing down a stiffish
branch of the sapling, he gripped it between his teeth and so held himself upright while he
rested his arms. This was a relief to nerves as well as muscles, because it made his balance,
on which he depended for the chance to breathe, so much the less precarious.

As he hung there pondering, held but a bare half-inch above drowning, the desperateness of
the situation presented itself to him in appalling clearness. How sunny and warm and safe,
to his woods-familiar eyes, looked the green forest world about him. No sound broke the mild
tranquillity of the solitude, except, now and then, an elfish gurgle of the slow current, or
the sweetly cheerful tsic-a-dee-dee of an unseen chicadee, or, from the intense blue overhead,
the abrupt, thin whistle of a soaring fish-hawk. To Barnes it all seemed such a safe, friendly
world, his well-understood intimate since small boyhood. Yet here it was, apparently, turned
smooth traitor at last, and about to destroy him as pitilessly as might the most scorching
desert or blizzard-scourged ice-field. A silent rage burned suddenly through all his veins--which
was well, since the cold of that spring-fed river had already begun to finger stealthily about
his heart. A delicate little pale-blue butterfly, like a periwinkle-petal come to life, fluttered
over Barnes's grim, upturned face, and went dancing gaily out across the shining water, joyous
in the sun. In its dancing it chanced to dip a hair's-breadth too low. The treacherous, bright
surface caught it, held it; and away it swept, struggling in helpless consternation against
this unexpected doom. Before it passed out of Barnes's vision a great trout rose and gulped
it down. Its swift fate, to Barnes's haggard eyes, seemed an analogue in little to his own.

But it was not in the woodsman's fibre to acknowledge himself actually beaten, either by man
or fate, so long as there remained a spark in his brain to keep his will alive. He presently
began searching with his eyes among the branches of the poplar sapling for one stout enough
to serve him as a lever. With the right kind of a stick in his hand, he told himself, he might
manage to pry apart the jaws of the trap and get his foot free. At last his choice settled
upon a branch that he thought would serve his turn. He was just about to reach up and break
it off, when a slight crackling in the underbrush across the stream caught his ear.

His woodsman's instinct kept him motionless as he turned his eyes to the spot. In the thick
leafage there was a swaying, which moved down along the bank, but he could not see what was
causing it. Softly he drew over a leafy branch of the sapling till it made him a perfect screen,
then he peered up the channel to find out what the unseen wayfarer was following.

A huge salmon, battered and gashed from a vain struggle to leap the falls, was floating, belly-upward,
down the current, close to Barnes's side of the stream. A gentle eddy caught it, and drew it
into the pool. Sluggishly it came drifting down toward Barnes's hidden face. In the twigs of
the poplar sapling it came to a halt, its great scarlet gills barely moving as the last of
life flickered out of it.

Barnes now understood quite well that unseen commotion which had followed, along shore, the
course of the dying salmon. It was no surprise to him whatever when he saw a huge black bear
emerge upon the yellow sandspit and stand staring across the current. Apparently, it was staring
straight at Barnes's face, upturned upon the surface of the water. But Barnes knew it was staring
at the dead salmon. His heart jumped sickeningly with sudden hope, as an extravagant notion
flashed into his brain. Here was his rescuer--a perilous one, to be sure--vouchsafed to him
by some whim of the inscrutable forest-fates.

He drew down another branchy twig before his face, fearful lest his concealment should not
be adequate. But in his excitement he disturbed his balance, and with the effort of his recovery
the water swirled noticeably all about him. His heart sank. Assuredly, the bear would take
alarm at this and be afraid to come for the fish.

But to his surprise the great beast, which had seemed to hesitate, plunged impetuously into
the stream. Nothing, according to a bear's knowledge of life, could have made that sudden disturbance
in the pool but some fish-loving otter or mink, intent upon seizing the booty. Indignant at
the prospect of being forestalled by any such furtive marauder, the bear hurled himself forward
with such force that the spray flew high into the branches, and the noise of his splashing
was a clear notification that trespassers and meddlers had better keep off. That salmon was
his, by right of discovery; and he was going to have it.

The bear, for all the seeming clumsiness of his bulk, was a redoubtable swimmer; and almost
before Barnes had decided clearly on his proper course of action those heavy, grunting snorts
and vast expulsions of breath were at his ear. Enormously loud they sounded, shot thus close
along the surface of the water. Perforce, Barnes made up his mind on the instant.

The bunch of twigs which had arrested the progress of the floating salmon lay just about an
arm's length from Barnes's face. Swimming high, his mighty shoulders thrusting up a wave before
him which buried Barnes's head safely from view, the bear reached the salmon. Grabbing it triumphantly
in his jaws, he turned to make for shore again.

This was Barnes's moment. Both arms shot out before him. Through the suffocating confusion
his clutching fingers encountered the bear's haunches. Sinking into the long fur, they closed
upon it with a grip of steel. Then, instinctively, Barnes shut his eyes and clenched his teeth,
and waited for the shock, while his lungs felt as if they would burst in another moment.

But it was no long time he had to wait--perhaps two seconds, while amazement in the bear's
brain translated itself through panic into action. Utterly horrified by this inexplicable attack,
from the rear and from the depths, the bear threw himself shoulder high from the water, and
hurled himself forward with all his strength. Barnes felt those tremendous haunches heaving
irresistibly beneath his clutching fingers. He felt himself drawn out straight, and dragged
ahead till he thought his ankle would snap. Almost he came to letting go, to save the ankle.
But he held, on, as much with his will as with his grip. Then, the slimy thing in the depths
gave way. He felt himself being jerked through the water--free. His fingers relaxed their clutch
on the bear's fur--and he came to the surface, gasping, blinking, and coughing.

For a moment or two he paddled softly, recovering his breath and shaking the water from nostrils
and eyes. He had an instant of apprehensiveness, lest the bear should turn upon him and attack
him at a disadvantage; and by way of precaution he gave forth the most savage and piercing
yell that his labouring lungs were capable of. But he saw at once that on this score he had
nothing to fear. It was a well-frightened bear, there swimming frantically for the sandspit;
while the dead salmon, quite forgotten, was drifting slowly away on the sullen current.

Barnes's foot was hurting fiercely, but his heart was light. Swimming at leisure, so as to
just keep head against the stream, he watched the bear scuttle out upon the sand. Once safe
on dry land, the great beast turned and glanced back with a timid air to see what manner of
being it was that had so astoundingly assailed him. Man he had seen before--but never man swimming
like an otter; and the sight was nothing to reassure him. One longing look he cast upon the
salmon, now floating some distance away; but that, to his startled mind, was just a lure of
this same terrifying and perfidious creature whose bright grey eyes were staring at him so
steadily from the surface of the water. He turned quickly and made off into the woods, followed
by a loud, daunting laugh which spurred his pace to a panicky gallop.

When he was gone, Barnes swam to the sandspit. There he wrung out his dripping clothes, and
lay down in the hot sand to let the sun soak deep into his chilled veins.

The Nest of the Mallard

When the spring freshet went down, and the rushes sprang green all about the edges of the shallow,
marshy lagoons, a pair of mallards took possession of a tiny, bushy island in the centre of
the broadest pond. Moved by one of those inexplicable caprices which keep most of the wild
kindreds from too perilous an enslavement to routine, this pair had been attracted by the vast,
empty levels of marsh and mere, and had dropped out from the ranks of their northward-journeying
comrades. Why should they beat on through the raw, blustering spring winds to Labrador, when
here below them was such a nesting-place as they desired, with solitude and security and plenty.
The flock went on, obeying an ancestral summons. With heads straight out before, and rigid,
level necks--with web feet folded like fans and stretched straight out behind, rigid and level--they
sped through the air on short, powerful, swift-beating wings at the rate of sixty or seventy
miles an hour. Their flight, indeed, and their terrific speed were not unlike those of some
strange missile. The pair who had dropped behind paid no heed to their going; and in two minutes
they had faded out against the pale saffron morning sky.

These two were the only mallards in this whole wide expanse of grass and water. Other kinds
of ducks there were, in plenty, but the mallards at this season kept to themselves. The little
island which they selected for their peculiar domain was so small that no other mating couples
intruded upon its privacy. It was only about ten feet across; but it bore a favourable thicket
of osier-willow, and all around it the sedge and bulrush reared an impenetrable screen. Its
highest point was about two feet above average water level; and on this highest point the mallard
duck established her nest.

The nest was a mere shallow pile of dead leaves and twigs and dry sedges, scraped carelessly
together. But the inside was not careless. It was a round smooth hollow, most softly lined
with down from the duck's own breast. When the first pale, greenish-tinted egg was laid in
the nest, there was only a little of this down; but the delicate and warm lining accumulated
as the pale green eggs increased in number.

In the construction of the nest and the accumulation of the eggs no interest whatever was displayed
by the splendid drake. He never, unless by chance, went near it. But as a lover the lordly
fellow was most gallant and ardent. While his mate was on the nest laying, he was usually to
be seen floating on the open mere beyond the reed-fringe, pruning his plumage in the cold pink
rays of the first of the sunrise.

It was plumage well worth pruning, this of his, and fully justified his pride in it. The shining,
silken, iridescent dark green of the head and neck; the snowy, sharply defined, narrow collar
of white, dividing the green of the neck from the brownish ash of the back and the gorgeous
chestnut of the breast; the delicate pure grey of the belly finely pencilled with black lines;
the rich, glossy purple of the broad wing-bars shot with green reflections; the jaunty, recurved
black feathers of the tail; the smart, citron-yellow of the bill and feet;--all these charms
were ample excuse for his coxcombry and continual posings. They were ample excuse, too, for
the admiration bestowed upon him by his mottled brown mate, whose colours were obviously designed
not for show but for concealment. When sitting on her nest, she was practically indistinguishable
from the twigs and dead leaves that surrounded her.

Having laid her egg, the brown duck would cover the precious contents of the nest with twigs
and leaves, that they might not be betrayed by their conspicuous colour. Then she would steal,
silently as a shadow, through the willow stems to the water's edge, and paddle cautiously out
through the rushes to the open water. On reaching her mate all this caution would be laid aside,
and the two would set up an animated and confidential quacking. They would sometimes sail around
each other slowly in circles, with much arching of necks and quaint stiff bowing of heads;
and sometimes they would chase each other in scurrying, napping rushes along the bright surface
of the water. Both before and after these gay exercises they would feed quietly in the shallows,
pulling up water-weed sprouts and tender roots, or sifting insects and little shellfish from
the mud by means of the sensitive tips and guttered edges of their bills. The mallard pair
had few enemies to dread, their island being so far from shore that no four-footed marauder,
not even the semi-amphibious mink himself, ever visited it. And the region was one too remote
for the visits of the pot-hunter. In fact, there was only one foe against whom it behoved them
to be on ceaseless guard. This was that bloodthirsty and tireless slayer, the goshawk, or great
grey henhawk. Where that grim peril was concerned, the brown duck would take no risks. For
the sake of those eggs among the willow stems, she held her life very dear, never flying more
than a short circle around the island to stretch her wings, never swimming or feeding any distance
from the safe covert of the rushes.

But with the glowing drake it was different. High spirited, bold for all his wariness, and
magnificently strong of wing, from sheer restlessness he occasionally flew high above the ponds.
And one day, when some distance from home, the great hawk saw him and swooped down upon him
from aërial heights.

The impending doom caught the drake's eye in time for him to avoid the stroke of that irresistible
descent. His short wings, with their muscles of steel, winnowed the air with sudden, tremendous
force, and he shot ahead at a speed which must have reached the rate of a hundred miles an
hour. When the swooping hawk had rushed down to his level, he was nearly fifty yards in the lead.

In such a case most of the larger hawks would have given up the chase, and soared again to
abide the chance for a more fortunate swoop. But not so the implacable goshawk. His great pinions
were capable not only of soaring and sailing and swooping, but of the rapid and violent flapping
of the short-winged birds; and he had at his command a speed even greater than that of the
rushing fugitive. As he pursued, his wings tore the air with a strident, hissing noise; and
the speed of the drake seemed as nothing before that savage, inescapable onrush. Had the drake
been above open water, he would have hurled himself straight downward, and seized the one chance
of escape by diving; but beneath him at this moment there was nothing but naked swamp and sloppy
flats. In less than two minutes the hiss of the pursuing wings was close behind him. He gave
a hoarse squawk, as he realized that doom had overtaken him. Then one set of piercing talons
clutched his outstretched neck, cutting clean through his wind-pipe; and another set bit deep
into the glossy chestnut of his breast.

For several days the widowed duck kept calling loudly up and down the edges of the reeds--but
at a safe distance from the nest. When she went to lay, she stayed ever longer and longer on
the eggs, brooding them. Three more eggs she laid after the disappearance of her mate, and
then, having nine in the nest, she began to sit; and the open water beyond the reed fringes
saw her no more.

At first she would slip off the nest for a few minutes every day, very stealthily, to feed
and stretch and take a noiseless dip in the shallow water among the reeds; but as time went
on she left the eggs only once in two days. Twice a day she would turn the eggs over carefully,
and at the same time change their respective positions in the nest, so that those which had
been for some hours in the centre, close to her hot and almost naked breast, might take their
turn in the cooler space just under her wings. By this means each egg got its fair share of
heat, properly distributed, and the little life taking shape within escaped the distortion
which might have been caused by lying too long in one position. Whenever the wary brown mother
left the nest, she covered the eggs with down, now, which kept the warmth in better than leaves
could. And whenever she came back from her brief swim, her dripping feathers supplied the eggs
with needed moisture.

It is a general law that the older an egg is the longer it takes to hatch. The eggs of the
mallard mother, of course, varied in age from fifteen days to one before she began to sit.
This being the case, at the end of the long month of incubation they would have hatched at
intervals covering in all, perhaps, a full day and a half; and complications would have arisen.
But the wise mother had counteracted the working of the law by sitting a little while every
day. Therefore, as a matter of fact, the older eggs got the larger share of the brooding, in
exact proportion; and the building of the little lives within the shells went on with almost
perfect uniformity.

During the long, silent month of her patient brooding, spring had wandered away and summer
had spread thick green and yellow lily blooms all over the lonely meres. A bland but heavy
heat came down through the willow tops, so that the brown duck sometimes panted at her task,
and sat with open bill, or with wings half raised from the eggs. Then, one night, she heard
faint tappings and peepings beneath her. Sturdy young bills began chipping at the inside of
the shells, speedily breaking them. Each duckling, as he chipped the shell just before the
tip of his beak, would turn a little way around in his narrow quarters; till presently the
shell would fall apart, neatly divided into halves; and the wet duckling, tumbling forth, would
snuggle up against the mother's hot breast and thighs to dry. Whenever this happened, the wise
mother would reach her head beneath, and fit the two halves of shell one within the other,
or else thrust them out of the nest entirely, lest they should get slipped over another egg
and smother the occupant. Sometimes she fitted several sets of the empty shells together, that
they might take up less room; and altogether she showed that she perfectly understood her business.
Then, late in the morning, when the green world among the willows and rushes was still and
warm and sweet, she led her fluffy, sturdy brood straight down to the water, and taught them
to feed on the insects that clung to the bulrush stalks.

Mrs. Gammit and the Porcupines

"I hain't come to borry yer gun, Mr. Barron, but to ax yer advice."

Mrs. Gammit's rare appearances were always abrupt, like her speech; and it was without surprise--though
he had not seen her for a month or more--that Joe Barron turned to greet her.

"It's at yer sarvice, jest as the gun would be ef ye wanted it, Mrs. Gammit--an' welcome! But
come in an' set down an' git cooled off a mite. 'Tain't no place to talk, out here in the bilin'
sun."

Mrs. Gammit seated herself on the end of the bench, just inside the kitchen door, twitched
off her limp, pink cotton sunbonnet, and wiped her flushed face with the sleeve of her calico
waist. Quite unsubdued by the heat and moisture of the noonday sun, under which she had tramped
nine miles through the forest, her short, stiff, grey hair stood up in irregular tufts above
her weather-beaten forehead. Her host, sitting sidewise on the edge of the table so that he
could swing one leg freely and spit cleanly through the open window, bit off a contemplative
quid of "blackjack" tobacco, and waited for her to unfold the problems that troubled her.

Mrs. Gammit's rugged features were modelled to fit an expression of vigorous, if not belligerent,
self-confidence. She knew her capabilities, well-tried in some sixty odd years of unprotected
spinsterhood. Merit alone, not matrimony, it was, that had crowned this unsullied spinsterhood
with the honorary title of "Mrs." Her massive and energetic nose was usually carried somewhat
high, in a not unjustifiable scorn of such foolish circumstance as might seek to thwart her will.

But to-day these strenuous features found themselves surprised by an expression of doubt, of
bewilderment, almost one might say of humility. At her little clearing in the heart of the
great wilderness things had been happening which, to her amazement, she could not understand.
Hitherto she had found an explanation, clear at least to herself, for everything that befell
her in these silent backwoods which other folks seemed to find so absurdly mysterious. Armed
with her self-confidence she had been able, hitherto, to deal with every situation that had
challenged her, and in a manner quite satisfactory to herself, however the eternal verities
may have smiled at it. But now, at last, she was finding herself baffled.

Joe Barron waited with the patience of the backwoodsman and the Indian, to whom, as to Nature
herself, time seems no object, though they always somehow manage to be on time. Mrs. Gammit
continued to fan her hot face with her sunbonnet, and to ponder her problems, while the lines
deepened between her eyes. A big black and yellow wasp buzzed angrily against the window-pane,
bewildered because it could not get through the transparent barrier. A little grey hen, with
large, drooping comb vividly scarlet, hopped on to the doorsill, eyed Mrs. Gammit with surprise
and disapprobation, and ran away to warn the rest of the flock that there was a woman round
the place. That, as they all knew by inheritance from the "shooings" which their forefathers
had suffered, meant that they would no longer be allowed in the kitchen to pick up crumbs.

At last Mrs. Gammit spoke--but with difficulty, for it came hard to her to ask advice of any one.

"I sp'ose now, mebbe, Mr. Barron, you know more about the woods critters'n what I do?" she
inquired, hopefully but doubtfully.

The woodsman lifted his eyebrows in some surprise at the question.

"Well, now, if I don't I'd oughter," said he, "seein' as how I've kinder lived round amongst
'em all my life. If I know anything, it's the backwoods an' all what pertains to that same!"

"Yes, you'd oughter know more about them than I do!" assented Mrs. Gammit, with a touch of
severity which seemed to add "and see that you do!" Then she shut her mouth firmly and fell
to fanning herself again, her thoughts apparently far away.

"I hope 'tain't no serious trouble ye're in!" ventured her host presently, with the amiable
intention of helping her to deliver her soul of its burden.

But, manlike, he struck the wrong note.

"Do you suppose," snapped Mrs. Gammit, "I'd be traipsin' over here nine mile thro' the hot
woods to ax yer advice, Mr. Barron, if 'twarn't serious?" And she began to regret that she
had come. Men never did understand anything, anyway.

At this sudden acerbity the woodsman stroked his chin with his hand, to hide the ghost of a
smile which flickered over his lean mouth.

"Jest like a woman, to git riled over nawthin'!" he thought. "Sounds kinder nice an' homey,
too!" But aloud, being always patient with the sex, he said coaxingly--

"Then it's right proud I am that ye should come to me about it, Mrs. Gammit. I reckon I kin
help you out, mebbe. What's wrong?"

With a burst of relief Mrs. Gammit declared her sorrow.

"It's the aigs," said she, passionately. "Fer nigh on to a month, now, I've been alosin' of
'em as fast as the hens kin git 'em laid. An' all I kin do, I cain't find out what's atakin' 'em."

Having reached the point of asking advice, an expression of pathetic hopefulness came into
her weather-beaten face. Under quite other conditions it might almost have been possible for
Mrs. Gammit to learn to lean on a man, if he were careful not to disagree with her.

"Oh! Aigs!" said the woodsman, relaxing slightly the tension of his sympathy. "Well, now, let's
try an' git right to the root of the trouble. Air ye plumb sure, in the first place, that the
hens is really layin' them aigs what ye don't git?"

Mrs. Gammit stiffened.

"Do I look like an eejut?" she demanded.

"Not one leetle mite, you don't!" assented her host, promptly and cordially.

"I was beginning to think mebbe I did!" persisted the injured lady.

"Everybody knows," protested the woodsman, "as how what you don't know, Mrs. Gammit, ain't
hardly wuth knowin'."

"O' course, that's puttin' it a leetle too strong, Mr. Barron," she answered, much mollified.
"But I do reckon as how I've got some horse sense. Well, I thought as how them 'ere hens might
'ave stopped layin' on the suddint; so I up an' watched 'em. Land's sakes, but they was alayin'
fine. Whenever I kin take time to stan' right by an' watch 'em lay, I git all the aigs I know
what to do with. But when I don't watch 'em, clost--nary an aig. Ye ain't agoin' to persuade
me a hen kin jest quit layin' when she's a mind ter, waitin' tell ye pass her the compliment
o' holdin' out yer hand fer the aig!"

"There's lots o' hens that pervarted they'll turn round an' eat their own aigs!" suggested
the woodsman, spitting thoughtfully through the open window. The cat, coiled in the sun on
a log outside, sprang up angrily, glared with green eyes at the offending window, and scurried
away to cleanse her defiled coat.

"Them's not my poultry!" said Mrs. Gammit with decision. "I thought o' that, too. An' I watched
'em on the sly. But they hain't a one of 'em got no sech onnateral tricks. When they're through
layin', they jest hop off an' run away acacklin', as they should." And she shook her head heavily,
as one almost despairing of enlightenment. "No, ef ye ain't got no more idees to suggest than
that, I might as well be goin'."

"Oh, I was jest kinder clearin' out the underbrush, so's to git a square good look at the situation,"
explained Barron. "Now, I kin till ye somethin' about it. Firstly, it's a weasel, bein' so
sly, an' quick, an' audashus! Ten to one, it's a weasel; an' ye've got to trap it. Secondly,
if 'tain't a weasel, it's a fox, an' a mighty cute fox, as ye're goin' to have some trouble
in aketchin'. An' thirdly--an' lastly--if 'tain't neither weasel nor fox, it's jest bound to
be an extra cunnin' skunk, what's takin' the trouble to be keerful. Generally speakin', skunks
ain't keerful, because they don't have to be, nobody wantin' much to fool with 'em. But onc't
in a while ye'll come across't one that's as sly as a weasel."

"Oh, 'tain't none o' them!" said Mrs. Gammit, in a tone which conveyed a poor opinion of her
host's sagacity and woodcraft. "I've suspicioned the weasels, an' the foxes, an' the woodchucks,
but hain't found a sign o' any one of 'em round the place. An' as fer skunks--well, I reckon,
I've got a nose on my face." And to emphasize the fact, she sniffed scornfully.

"To be sure! An' a fine, handsome nose it is, Mrs. Gammit!" replied the woodsman, diplomatically.
"But what you don't appear to know about skunks is that when they're up to mischief is jest
the time when you don't smell 'em. Ye got to bear that in mind!"

Mrs. Gammit looked at him with suspicion.

"Be that reelly so?" demanded she, sternly.

"True's gospel!" answered Barron. "A skunk ain't got no smell unless he's a mind to."

"Well," said she, "I guess it ain't no skunk, anyhow. I kind o' feel it in my bones 'tain't
no skunk, smell or no smell."

The woodsman looked puzzled. He had not imagined her capable of such unreasoning obstinacy.
He began to wonder if he had overrated her intelligence.

"Then I give it up, Mrs. Gammit," said he, with an air of having lost all interest in the problem.

But that did not suit his visitor at all. Her manner became more conciliatory. Leaning forward,
with an almost coaxing look on her face, she murmured--

"I've had an idee as how it might be--mind, I don't say it is, but jest it might be----" and
she paused dramatically.

"Might be what?" inquired Barron, with reviving interest.

"Porkypines!" propounded Mrs. Gammit, with a sudden smile of triumph.

Joe Barron neither spoke nor smiled. But in his silence there was something that made Mrs.
Gammit uneasy.

"Why not porkypines?" she demanded, her face once more growing severe.

"It might be porkypines as took them aigs o' yourn, Mrs. Gammit, an' it might be bumbly-bees!"
responded Barron. "But 'tain't likely!"

Mrs. Gammit snorted at the sarcasm.

"Mebbe," she sneered, "ye kin tell me why it's so impossible it could be porkypines. I seen
a big porkypine back o' the barn, only yestiddy. An' that's more'n kin be said o' yer weasels,
an' foxes, an' skunks, what ye're so sure about, Mr. Barron."

"A porkypine ain't necessarily after aigs jest because he's back of a barn," said the woodsman.
"An' anyways, a porkypine don't eat aigs. He hain't got the right kind o' teeth fer them kind
o' vittles. He's got to have something he kin gnaw on, somethin' substantial an' solid--the
which he prefers a young branch o' good tough spruce, though it do make his meat kinder strong.
No, Mrs. Gammit, it ain't no porkypine what's stealin' yer aigs, take my word fer it. An' the
more I think o' it the surer I be that it's a weasel. When a weasel learns to suck aigs, he
gits powerful cute. Ye'll have to be right smart, I'm telling ye, to trap him."

During this argument of Barron's his obstinate and offended listener had become quite convinced
of the justice of her own conclusions. The sarcasm had settled it. She knew, now, that she
had been right all along in her suspicion of the porcupines. And with this certainty her indignation
suddenly disappeared. It is such a comfort to be certain. So now, instead of flinging his ignorance
in his face, she pretended to be convinced--remembering that she needed his advice as to how
to trap the presumptuous porcupine.

"Well, Mr. Barron," said she, with the air of one who would take defeat gracefully, "supposin'
ye're right--an' ye'd oughter know--how would ye go about ketchin' them weasels?"

Pleased at this sudden return to sweet reasonableness, the woodsman once more grew interested.

"I reckon we kin fix that!" said he, confidently and cordially. "I'll give ye three of my little
mink traps. There's holes, I reckon, under the back an' sides o' the shed, or barn, or wherever
it is that the hens have their nests?"

"Nat'rally!" responded Mrs. Gammit. "The thieves ain't agoin' to come in by the front doors,
right under my nose, be they?"

"Of course," assented the woodsman. "Well, you jest set them 'ere traps in three o' them holes,
well under the sills an' out o' the way. Don't go fer to bait'em, mind, or Mr. Weasel'll git
to suspicionin' somethin', right off. Jest sprinkle bits of straw, an' hayseed, an' sech rubbish
over 'em, so it all looks no ways out o' the ordinary. You do this right, Mrs. Gammit; an'
first thing ye know ye'll have yer thief. I'll git the traps right now, an' show ye how to
set 'em."

And as Mrs. Gammit walked away with the three steel traps under her arm, she muttered to herself--

"Yes, Joe Barron, an' I'll show ye the thief. An' he'll have quills on him, sech as no weasel
ain't never had on him, I reckon."

On her return, Mrs. Gammit was greeted by the sound of high excitement among the poultry. They
were all cackling wildly, and craning their necks to stare into the shed as if they had just
seen a ghost there. Mrs. Gammit ran in to discover what all the fuss was about. The place was
empty; but a smashed egg lay just outside one of the nests, and a generous tuft of fresh feathers
showed her that there had been a tussle of some kind. Indignant but curious, Mrs. Gammit picked
up the feathers, and examined them with discriminating eyes to see which hen had suffered the loss.

"Lands sakes!" she exclaimed presently, "ef 'tain't the old rooster! He's made a fight fer
that 'ere aig! Lucky he didn't git stuck full o' quills!"

Then, for perhaps the hundredth time, she ran fiercely and noisily behind the barn, in the
hope of surprising the enemy. Of course she surprised nothing which Nature had endowed with
even the merest apology for eyes and ears; and a cat-bird in the choke-cherry bushes squawked
at her derisively. Stealth was one of the things which Mrs. Gammit did not easily achieve.
Staring defiantly about her, her eyes fell upon a dark, bunchy creature in the top of an old
hemlock at the other side of the fence. Seemingly quite indifferent to her vehement existence,
and engrossed in its own affairs, it was crawling out upon a high branch and gnawing, in a
casual way, at the young twigs as it went.

"Ah, ha! What did I tell ye? I knowed all along as how it was a porkypine!" exclaimed Mrs.
Gammit, triumphantly, as if Joe Barron could hear her across eight miles of woods. Then, as
she eyed the imperturbable animal on the limb above her, her face flushed with quick rage,
and snatching up a stone about the size of her fist she hurled it at him with all her strength.

In a calmer moment she would never have done this--not because it was rude, but because she
had a conviction, based on her own experience, that a stone would hit anything rather than
what it was aimed at. And in the present instance she found no reason to change her views on
the subject. The stone did not hit the porcupine. It did not, even for one moment, distract
his attention from the hemlock twigs. Instead of that, it struck a low branch, on the other
side of the tree, and bounced back briskly upon Mrs. Gammit's toes.

With a hoarse squeak of surprise and pain the good lady jumped backwards, and hopped for some
seconds on one foot while she gripped the other with both hands. It was a sharp and disconcerting
blow. As the pain subsided a concentrated fury took its place. The porcupine was now staring
down at her, in mild wonder at her inexplicable gyrations. She glared up at him, and the tufts
of grey hair about her sunbonnet seemed to rise and stand rigid.

"Ye think ye're smart!" she muttered through her set teeth. "But I'll fix ye fer that! Jest
you wait!" And turning on her heel she stalked back to the house. The big, brown teapot was
on the back of the stove, where it had stood since breakfast, with a brew rust-red and bitter-strong
enough to tan a moose-hide. Not until she had reheated it and consumed five cups, sweetened
with molasses, did she recover any measure of self-complacency.

That same evening, when the last of the sunset was fading in pale violet over the stump pasture
and her two cow-bells were tonk-tonking softly along the edge of the dim alder swamp, Mrs.
Gammit stealthily placed the traps according to the woodsman's directions. Between the massive
logs which formed the foundations of the barn and shed, there were openings numerous enough,
and some of them spacious enough, almost, to admit a bear--a very small, emaciated bear. Selecting
three of these, which somehow seemed to her fancy particularly adapted to catch a porcupine's
taste, she set the traps, tied them, and covered them lightly with fine rubbish so that, as
she murmured to herself when all was done, "everythin' looked as nat'ral as nawthin'." Then,
when her evening chores were finished, she betook herself to her slumbers, in calm confidence
that in the morning she would find one or more porcupines in the trap.

Having a clear conscience and a fine appetite, in spite of the potency of her tea Mrs. Gammit
slept soundly. Nevertheless, along toward dawn, in that hour when dream and fact confuse themselves,
her nightcapped ears became aware of a strange sound in the yard. She snorted impatiently and
sat up in bed. Could some beneficent creature of the night be out there sawing wood for her?
It sounded like it. But she rejected the idea at once. Rubbing her eyes with both fists, she
crept to the window and looked out.

There was a round moon in the sky, shining over the roof of the barn, and the yard was full
of a white, witchy radiance. In the middle of it crouched two big porcupines, gnawing assiduously
at a small wooden tub. The noise of their busy teeth on the hard wood rang loud upon the stillness,
and a low tonk-a-tonk of cow-bells came from the pasture as the cows lifted their heads to listen.

The tub was a perfectly good tub, and Mrs. Gammit was indignant at seeing it eaten. It had
contained salt herrings; and she intended, after getting the flavour of fish scoured out of
it, to use it for packing her winter's butter. She did not know that it was for the sake of
its salty flavour that the porcupines were gnawing at it, but leaped to the conclusion that
their sole object was to annoy and persecute herself.

"Shoo! Shoo!" she cried, snatching off her nightcap and flapping it at them frantically. But
the animals were too busy to even look up at her. The only sign they gave of having heard her
was to raise their quills straight on end so that their size apparently doubled itself all at once.

Mrs. Gammit felt herself wronged. As she turned and ran downstairs she muttered, "First it's
me aigs--an' now it's me little tub--an' Lordy knows what it's goin' to be next!" Then her
dauntless spirit flamed up again, and she snapped, "But there ain't agoin' to be no next!"
and cast her eyes about her for the broom.

Of course, at this moment, when it was most needed, that usually exemplary article was not
where it ought to have been--standing beside the dresser. Having no time to look for it, Mrs.
Gammit snatched up the potato-masher, and rushed forth into the moonlight with a gurgling yell,
resolved to save the tub.

She was a formidable figure as she charged down the yard, and at ordinary times the porcupines
might have given way. But when a porcupine has found something it really likes to eat, its
courage is superb. These two porcupines found the herring-tub delicious beyond anything they
had ever tasted. Reluctantly they stopped gnawing for a moment, and turned their little twinkling
eyes upon Mrs. Gammit in sullen defiance.

Now this was by no means what she had expected, and the ferocity of her attack slackened. Had
it been a lynx, or even a bear, her courage would probably not have failed her. Had it been
a man, a desperado with knife in hand and murder in his eyes, she would have flown upon him
in contemptuous fury. [13] It is impossible to avoid using the word "Austria" to designate these
territories, though it is probably incorrect. Officially the word "Austria" is not found,
and though the sovereign is emperor of Austria, an Austrian empire appears not to exist; the
territories are spoken of in official documents as "the kingdoms and lands represented in
the Reichsrath." The Hungarians and the German party in Austria have expressed their desire
that the word Austria should be used, but it has not been gratified. On the other hand, expressions
such as "Austrian citizens," "Austrian law" are found. The reason
of this peculiar use is probably twofold.

On the one hand, a reluctance to confess that Hungary is no longer in any sense a part of Austria;
on the other hand, the refusal of the Czechs to recognize that their
country is part of Austria.

Sometimes the word Erbländer, which properly is applied only to the older ancestral dominions
of the house of Habsburg, is used for want of a better word.

[14] The documents are printed in Baron de Worms, op. cit.

[15] It is printed in the Europaischer Geschichtskalender (1868).

[16] See Wirth, Geschichte der Handelskrisen (Frankfort, 1885); and an interesting article by
Schäffle in the Zeitschrift f. Staatswissenschaft (Stuttgart, 1874).

[17] For Dalmatia, see T. G. Jackson, Dalmatia &c., (Oxford, 1889).

[18] On this see Menger, Der Ausgleich mit Böhmen (Vienna, 1891), where the documents are printed.

AUSTRIAN
SUCCESSION, WAR OF THE (1740-1748).

This war began with the invasion of Silesia by Frederick II. of Prussia in 1740, and was ended
by the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle (Aachen) in 1748. After 1741 nearly all the powers of Europe were
involved in the struggle, but the most enduring interest of the war lies in the struggle of
Prussia and Austria for Silesia. Southwest Germany, the Low Countries and Italy were, as usual,
the battle-grounds of France and Austria. The constant allies of France and Prussia were Spain and
Bavaria; various other powers at intervals joined them. The cause of Austria was supported
almost as a matter of course by England and Holland, the traditional enemies of France. Of
Austria's allies from time to time Sardinia and Saxony were the most important.

1.

Frederick's Invasion of Silesia, 1740.--Prussia in 1740 was a small, compact and thoroughly organized
power, with an army 100,000 strong. The only recent war service of this army had been in the
desultory Rhine campaign of 1733-35. It was therefore regarded as one of the minor armies of Europe,
and few thought that it could rival the forces of Austria and France. But it was drilled to a perfection
not hitherto attained, and the Prussian infantry soldier was so well trained and equipped
that [v.03 p.0040] he could fire five shots to the Austrian's three,
though the cavalry and artillery were less efficient.

But the initial advantage of Frederick's army was that it had, undisturbed by wars, developed
the standing army theory to full effect. While the Austrians had to wait for drafts to complete
the field forces, Prussian regiments could take the field at once, and thus Frederick was able
to overrun Silesia almost unopposed. His army was concentrated quietly upon the Oder, and without
declaration of war, on the 16th of December 1740, it crossed the
frontier into Silesia.

The Austrian generals could do no more than garrison a few fortresses, and with the small remnant
of their available forces fell back to the mountain frontier of Bohemia and Moravia. The Prussian army
was soon able to go into winter quarters, holding all Silesia and
investing the strong places of Glogau, Brieg and Neisse. She picked it up, loosed the deadly grip upon its leg, and slammed the offending
trap across the barn with such violence that it bounced up and fell into the swill-barrel.
Her feelings thus a little relieved, she examined Red Top-knot's leg with care. It was hopelessly
shattered and mangled.

"Ye cain't never scratch with that ag'in, ye cain't!" muttered Mrs. Gammit, compassionately.
"Poor dear, ther ain't nawthin' fer it but to make vittles of ye now! Too bad! Too bad! Ye
was always sech a fine layer an' a right smart setter!" And carrying the victim to the block
on which she was wont to split kindling wood, she gently but firmly chopped her head off.

Half an hour later, as Mrs. Gammit returned from the pasture with a brimming pail of milk,
again she heard a commotion under the barn. But she would not hurry, lest she should spill
the milk. "Whatever it be, it'll be there when I git there!" she muttered philosophically;
and kept on to the cool cellar with her milk. But as soon as she had deposited the pail she
turned and fairly ran in her eagerness. The speckled hen was cackling vain-gloriously; and
as Mrs. Gammit passed the row of nests in the shed she saw a white egg shining. But she did
not stop to secure it.

As she entered the barn, a little yellowish brown animal, with a sharp, triangular nose and
savage eyes like drops of fire, ran at her with such fury that for an instant she drew back.
Then, with a roar of indignation at its audacity, she rushed forward and kicked at it. The
kick struck empty air; but the substantial dimensions of the foot seemed to daunt the daring
little beast, and it slipped away like a darting flame beneath the sill of the barn. The next
moment, as she stooped to look at the nearest of the two traps, another slim yellow creature,
larger than the first, leaped up, with a vicious cry, and almost reached her face. But, fortunately
for her, it was held fast by both hind legs in the trap, and fell back impotent.

Startled and enraged, Mrs. Gammit kicked at it, where it lay darting and twisting like a snake.
Naturally, she missed it; but it did not miss her. With unerring aim it caught the toe of her
heavy cowhide shoe, and fixed its teeth in the tough leather. Utterly taken by surprise, Mrs.
Gammit tried to jump backwards. But instead of that, she fell flat on her back, with a yell.
Her sturdy heels flew up in the air, while her petticoats flopped back in her face, bewildering
her. The weasel, however, had maintained his dogged grip upon the toe of her shoe; so something
had to give. That something was the cord which anchored the trap. It broke under the sudden
strain. Trap and weasel together went flying over Mrs. Gammit's prostrate head. They brought
up with a stupefying slam against the wall of the pig-pen, making the pig squeal apprehensively.

Disconcerted and mortified, Mrs. Gammit scrambled to her feet, shook her petticoats into shape,
and glanced about to see if the wilderness in general had observed her indiscretion. Apparently,
nothing had noticed it. Then, with an air of relief, she glanced down at her vicious little
antagonist. The weasel lay stunned, apparently dead. But she was not going to trust appearances.
Picking trap and victim up together, on the end of a pitchfork, she carried them out and dropped
them into the barrel of rain water at the corner of the house. He had lost his ships, and their
commander, in his despair, committed suicide. The French Emperor could no longer hope to bridge
"the ditch," as he derisively called the boisterous Channel, whose waves rose like a wall
between him and the island which he hated (S14). A few years later, Napoleon, who had taken
possession of Spain and placed his brother on the throne, was driven from that country by
Sir Arthur Wellesly, destined to be better known as the Duke of Wellington,
and the crown was restored to the Spanish nation.

558. Second War with the United States, 1812-1815.

The United States
waged its first war with Great Britain to gain an independent national
existence; in 1812 it declared a second war to secure its rights upon
the sea.

All athrill with excitement, Mrs. Gammit hurried through her morning's chores, and allowed
herself no breakfast except half a dozen violent cups of tea "with sweetenin'." Then, satisfied
that the weasel in the rain-barrel was by this time securely and permanently dead, she fished
it out, and reset the trap in its place under the barn. The other trap she discovered in the
swill-barrel, after a long search. Relieved to find it unbroken, she cleaned it carefully and
put it away to be returned, in due time, to its owner. She would not set it again--and, indeed,
she would have liked to smash it to bits, as a sacrifice to the memory of poor Red Top-knot.

"I hain't got no manner o' use fer a porkypine trap what'll go out o' its way to ketch hens,"
she grumbled.

The silent summer forenoon, after this, wore away without event. Mrs. Gammit, working in her
garden behind the house, with the hot, sweet scent of the flowering buckwheat-field in her
nostrils and the drowsy hum of bees in her ears, would throw down her hoe about once in every
half-hour and run into the barn to look hopefully at the traps. But nothing came to disturb
them. Neither did anything come to disturb the hens, who attended so well to business that
at noon Mrs. Gammit had seven fresh eggs to carry in. When night came, and neither weasels
nor porcupines had given any further sign of their existence, Mrs. Gammit was puzzled. She
was one of those impetuous women who expect everything to happen all at once. When milking
was over, and her solitary, congenial supper, she sat down on the kitchen doorstep and considered
the situation very carefully.

What she had set herself out to do, after the interview with Joe Barron, was to catch a porcupine
in one of his traps, and thus, according to her peculiar method of reasoning, convince the
confident woodsman that porcupines did eat eggs! As for the episode of the weasel, she resolved
that she would not say anything to him about it, lest he should twist it into a confirmation
of his own views. As for those seven eggs, so happily spared to her, she argued that the capture
of the weasel, with all its attendant excitement, had served as a warning to the porcupines
and put them on their guard. Well, she would give them something else to think about. She was
now all impatience, and felt unwilling to await the developments of the morrow, which, after
all, might refuse to develop! With a sudden resolution she arose, fetched the gnawed and battered
remains of the herring-tub from their concealment behind the kitchen door, and propped them
up against the side of the house, directly beneath her bedroom window.

At first her purpose in this was not quite clear to herself. But the memory of her triumph
of the previous night was tingling in her veins, and she only knew she wanted to lure the porcupines
back, that she might do something to them. And first, being a woman, that something occurred
to her in connexion with hot water. How conclusive it would be to wait till the porcupines
were absorbed in their consumption of the herring-tub, and then pour scalding water down upon
them. After all, it was more important that she should vanquish her enemies than prove to a
mere man that they really were her enemies. What did she care, anyway, what that Joe Barron
thought? Then, once more, a doubt assailed her. What if he were right? Not that she would admit
it, for one moment. But just supposing! Was she going to pour hot water on those porcupines,
and scald all the bristles off their backs, if they really didn't come after her eggs? Mrs.
Gammit was essentially just and kind-hearted, and she came to the conclusion that the scheme
might be too cruel.

"Ef it be you uns as takes the aigs," she murmured thoughtfully, "a kittle o' bilin' water
to yer backs ain't none too bad fer ye! But ef it be only my old herrin'-tub ye're after, then
bilin' water's too ha'sh!"

In the end, the weapon she decided upon was the big tin pepper-pot, well loaded.

Through the twilight, while the yard was all in shadow, Mrs. Gammit sat patient and motionless
beside her open window. The moon rose, seeming to climb with effort out of the tangle of far-off
treetops. The faint, rhythmic breathing of the wilderness, which, to the sensitive ear, never
ceases even in the most profound calm, took on the night change, the whisper of mystery, the
furtive suggestion of menace which the daylight lacks. Sitting there in ambush, Mrs. Gammit
felt it all, and her eager face grew still and pale and solemn like a statue's. The moonlight
crept down the roofs of the barn and shed and house, then down the walls, till only the ground
was in shadow. And at last, through this lower stratum of obscurity, Mrs. Gammit saw two squat,
sturdy shapes approaching leisurely from behind the barn.

She held her breath. Yes, it was undoubtedly the porcupines. Undaunted by the memory of their
previous discomfiture, they came straight across the yard, and up to the house, and fell at
once to their feasting on the herring-tub. The noise of their enthusiastic gnawing echoed strangely
across the attentive air.

Very gently, with almost imperceptible motion, Mrs. Gammit slid her right hand, armed with
the pepper-pot, over the edge of the window-sill. The porcupines, enraptured with the flavour
of the herring-tub, never looked up. Mrs. Gammit was just about to turn the pepper-pot over,
when she saw a third dim shape approaching, and stayed her hand. It was bigger than a porcupine.
She kept very still, breathing noiselessly through parted lips. Then the moonlight reached
the ground, the shadows vanished, and she saw a big wildcat stealing up to find out what the
porcupines were eating.

Seeing the feasters so confident and noisy, yet undisturbed, the usually cautious wildcat seemed
to think there could be no danger near. Had Mrs. Gammit stirred a muscle, he would have marked
her; but in her movelessness her head and hand passed for some harmless natural phenomenon.
The wildcat crept softly up, and as he drew near, the porcupines raised their quills threateningly,
till nothing could be seen of their bodies but their blunt snouts still busy on the herring-tub.
At a distance of about six feet the big cat stopped, and crouched, glaring with wide, pale
eyes, and sniffing eagerly. Mrs. Gammit was amazed that the porcupines did not at once discharge
a volley at him and fill him full of quills for his intrusion.

The wildcat knew too much about porcupines to dream of attacking them. It was what they were
eating that interested him. They seemed to enjoy it so much. He crept a few inches nearer,
and caught a whiff of the herring-tub. Yes, it was certainly fish. A true cat, he doted on
fish, even salt fish. He made another cautious advance, hoping that the porcupines might retire
discreetly. But instead of that they merely stopped gnawing, put their noses between their
forelegs, squatted flat, and presented an unbroken array of needle points to his dangerous
approach.

The big cat stopped, quite baffled, his little short tail, not more than three inches long,
twitching with anger. He could not see that the tub was empty; but he could smell it, and he
drew in his breath with noisy sniffling. It filled him with rage to be so baffled; for he knew
it would be fatal to go any nearer, and so expose himself to a deadly slap from the armed tails
of the porcupines.

Just what he would have attempted, however, in his eagerness, will never be known. For at this
point, Mrs. Gammit's impatience overcame her curiosity. With a gentle motion of her wrist she
turned the pepper-pot over, and softly shook it. The eyes of the wildcat were fixed upon that
wonderful, unattainable herring-tub, and he saw nothing else. But Mrs. Gammit in the vivid
moonlight saw a fine cloud of pepper sinking downwards slowly on the moveless air.

Suddenly the wildcat pawed at his nose, drew back, and grew rigid with what seemed an effort
to restrain some deep emotion. The next moment he gave vent to a loud, convulsive sneeze, and
began to spit savagely. He appeared to be not only very angry, but surprised as well. When
he fell to clawing frantically at his eyes and nose with both paws, Mrs. Gammit almost strangled
with the effort to keep from laughing. But she held herself in, and continued to shake down
the pungent shower. A moment more, and the wildcat, after an explosion of sneezes which almost
made him stand on his head, gave utterance to a yowl of consternation, and turned to flee.
As he bounded across the yard he evidently did not see just where he was going, for he ran
head first into the wheelbarrow, which straightway upset and kicked him. For an instant he
clawed at it wildly, mistaking it for a living assailant. Then he recovered his wits a little,
and scurried away across the pasture, sneezing and spitting as he went.

Meanwhile the porcupines, with their noses to the ground and their eyes covered, had been escaping
the insidious attack of the pepper. But at last it reached them. Mrs. Gammit saw a curious
shiver pass over the array of quills.

Now it was contrary to all the most rigid laws of the porcupine kind to uncoil themselves in
the face of danger. At the same time, it was impossible to sneeze in so constrained an attitude.
Their effort was heroic, but self-control at last gave way. As it were with a snap, one of
the globes of quills straightened itself out, and sneezed and sneezed and sneezed. Then the
other went through the same spasmodic process, while Mrs. Gammit, leaning halfway out of the
window, squealed and choked with delight. But the porcupines were obstinate, and would not
run away. Very slowly they turned and retired down the yard, halting every few feet to sneeze.
With tears streaming down her cheeks Mrs. Gammit watched their retreat, till suddenly some
of the vagrant pepper was wafted back to her own nostrils, and she herself was shaken with
a mighty sneeze. This checked her mirth on the instant. Her face grew grave, and drawing back
with a mortified air she slammed the window down.

"Might 'a' knowed I'd be aketchin' cold," she muttered, "settin' in a draught this time o' night."

Not until she had thoroughly mastered the tickling in her nostrils did she glance forth again.
Then the porcupines were gone, and not even an echo of their far-off sneezes reached her ears.

In the days that followed, neither weasel, wildcat, nor porcupine came to Mrs. Gammit's clearing,
and the daily harvest of strictly fresh eggs was unfailing. At the end of a week, the good
lady felt justified in returning the traps to Joe Barron, and letting him know how mistaken
he had been.

"There, Mr. Barron," said she, handing him the three traps, "I'm obleeged to you, an' there's
yer traps. But there's one of 'em ain't no good."

"Which one be it?" asked the woodsman as he took them.

"I've marked it with a bit of string," replied Mrs. Gammit.

"What's the matter with it? I don't see nawthin' wrong with it!" said Barron, examining it
critically.

"Tain't no good! You take my word fer it! That's all I've got to say!" persisted Mrs. Gammit.

"Oh, well, seem' as it's you sez so, Mrs. Gammit, that's enough," agreed the woodsman, civilly.
"But the other is all right, eh? What did they ketch?"

"Well, they ketched a big weasel!" said Mrs. Gammit, eyeing him with challenge.

A broad smile went over Barron's face.

"I knowed it," he exclaimed. "I knowed as how it was a weasel."

"An' I knowed as how ye'd say jest them very words," retorted Mrs. Gammit. "But ye don't know
everythin', Joe Barron. It wa'n't no weasel as was takin' them there aigs!"

"What were it then?" demanded the woodsman, incredulously.

"It was two big porkypines an' a monstrous big wildcat," answered Mrs. Gammit in triumph.

"Did ye ketch 'em at it?" asked the woodsman, with a faint note of sarcasm in his voice. But
the sarcasm glanced off Mrs. Gammit's armour. She regarded the question as a quite legitimate one.

"No, I kain't say as I did, exackly," she replied. "But they come anosin' round, an' to teach
'em a lesson to keep ther noses out o' other people's hens' nests I shook a little pepper over
'em. I tell ye, they took to the woods, asneezin' that bad I thought ye might 'a' heard 'em
all the way over here. Ye'd 'ave bust yerself laffin', ef ye could 'a' seed 'em rootin'. An'
since then, Mr. Barron, I git all the aigs I want. Don't ye talk to me o' weasels--the skinny
little rats. They ain't wuth noticin', no more'n a chipmunk."

The Battle in the Mist

In the silver-grey between dawn and sunrise the river was filled with mist from bank to bank.
It coiled and writhed and rolled, here thinning, there thickening, as if breathed upon irregularly
by innumerable unseen mouths. But there was no wind astir; and the brown-black, glistening
current beneath the white folds was glassy smooth save where the occasional big swirls boiled
up with a swishing gurgle, or the running wave broke musically around an upthrust shoulder
of rock or a weedy snag. Shakespeare is reported to have written the "Merry Wives of Windsor" for
her amusement, and in his "Midsummer Night's Dream" he addresses her as the "fair vestal in
the West." The translators of the Bible spoke of her as "that bright Occidental Star," and the
common people loved to sing and shout the praises of their "good Queen Bess." After her death
at Richmond, when her body was being conveyed down the Thames to
Westminster, one extravagant eulogist declared that the very fishes
that followed the funeral barge "wept out their eyes and swam blind
after!"

390. Grandeur of the Age; More's "Utopia."

The reign of Elizabeth was, in fact, Europe's grandest age. It was a time when everything was
bursting into life and color. The world had suddenly grown larger; it had opened toward the
east in the revival of classical learning; it had opened toward the
west, and disclosed a continent of unknown extent and unimaginable
resources.

About twenty years after Cabot had discovered the mainland of America (S335), Sir Thomas More
(SS339, 351) wrote a remarkable work of fiction, in Latin (1516), called "Utopia" (the Land
of Nowhere). In it he pictured an ideal commonwealth, where all men were equal; where none were
poor; where perpetual peace prevailed; where there was absolute freedom of thought; where all
were contented and happy. It was, in fact, the Golden Age come back to earth again.

More's book, now translated into English (1551), suited such a time, for Elizabeth's reign was
one of adventure, of poetry, of luxury, of rapidly increasing wealth. When men looked across
the Atlantic, their imaginations were stimulated, and the most extravagant hopes did not appear
too good to be true. Courtiers and adventurers dreamed of fountains of youth in Florida, of silver
mines in Brazil, of rivers in Virginia, whose pebbles were precious stones.[1] Thus all were
dazzled with visions of sudden riches and of renewed life.

[1] "Why, man, all their dripping-pans [in Virginia] are pure gould; ... all the prisoners
they take are feterd in gold; and for rubies and diamonds, they goe forth on holydayes and
gather 'hem by the sea-shore, to hang on their children's coates."--"Eastward Hoe," a play
by John Marston and others, "as it was playd in the Blackfriers [Theatre]
by the Children of her Maiesties Revels."

(1603?)

391. Change in Mode of Life.

England, too, was undergoing transformation. Once, a nobleman's residence had been simply a square
stone fortress, built for safety only; but now that the Wars of the Roses had destroyed the old
feudal barons (SS299, 316), there was no need of such precaution. Men were no longer content to
live shut up in somber strongholds, surrounded with moats of stagnant
water, or in meanly built houses, where the smoke curled around the
rafters for want of chimneys by which to escape, while the wind whistled
through the unglazed latticed windows.

Mansions and stately manor houses like Hatfield, Knowle, parts of Haddon Hall, and the "Bracebridge
Hall" of Washington Irving,[2] rose instead of castles, and hospitality, not exclusion, became
the prevailing custom. The introduction of chimneys brought the cheery comfort of the English
fireside, while among the wealthy, carpets, tapestry, and silver plate took the place of floors strewed
with rushes, of bare walls, and of tables covered with pewter or
woooden dishes.

[2] Aston Hall, Birmingham, is the original of Irving's
"Bracebridge Hall." It came a little later than Elizabeth's time,
but is Elizabethan in style.

392. An Age of Adventure and of Daring.

But
they were not all of straw, for that was a period of daring enterprise,
of explorers, sea rovers, and freebooters. Sir Walter Raleigh planted
the first English colony in America, which the maiden Queen named
Virginia, in honor of herself. It proved unsuccessful, but he said,
"I shall live to see it an English nation yet"; and he did.

Frobisher
explored the coasts of Labrador and Greenland. A long summer passed in proximity to the pioneer's cabin had enabled him
to find out that eggs were good. He hastened his steps, and with a sliding scramble, which
attracted the attention of the men in the canoe, he arrived at the water's edge. But to his
indignant astonishment he was not the first to arrive.

The mink was just ahead. He reached the egg, laid one paw upon it in possession, and turned
with a snarl of defiance as the raccoon came down the bank. The latter paused to note the threatening
fangs and malign eyes of his slim rival. Then, with that brisk gaiety which the raccoon carries
into the most serious affairs of his life, and particularly into his battles, he ran to the
encounter. The men in the canoe, eagerly interested, stole nearer to referee the match.

Quick as the raccoon was, his snake-like adversary was quicker. Doubling back upon himself,
the mink avoided that confident and dangerous rush, and with a lightning snap fixed hold upon
his enemy's neck. But it was not, by half an inch, the hold he wanted; and his long, deadly
teeth sank not, as he had planned, into the foe's throat, but into the great tough muscles
a little higher up. He dared not let go to try for the deadlier hold, but locked his jaws and
whipped his long body over the other's back, hoping to evade his antagonist's teeth.

The raccoon had lost the first point, and his large eyes blazed with pain and anger. But his
dauntless spirit was not in the least dismayed. Shaking the long, black body from his back,
he swung himself half round and caught his enemy's slim loins between his jaws. It was a cruelly
punishing grip, and under the stress of it the mink lashed out so violently that the two, still
holding on with locked jaws, rolled over into the water, smashing the egg as they fell. The
canoe, now close beside them, they heeded not at all.

"Two to one on the mink!" whispered the traveller in the bow of the canoe, delightedly. But
the steersman smiled, and said "Wait!"

To be in the water suited the mink well enough. A hunter of fish in their holes, he was almost
as much at home in the water as a fish. But the raccoon it did not suit at all. With a splutter
he relinquished his hold on the mink's loins; and the latter, perceiving the advantage, let
go and snapped again for the throat. But again he miscalculated the alertness of the raccoon's
sturdy muscles. The latter had turned his head the instant that the mink's jaws relaxed, and
the two gnashed teeth in each other's faces, neither securing a hold. The next moment the raccoon
had leaped back to dry land, turning in threatening readiness as he did so.

Though there was no longer anything to fight about, the mink's blood was up. His eyes glowed
like red coals, his long, black shape looked very fit and dangerous, and his whole appearance
was that of vindictive fury. The raccoon, on the other hand, though bedraggled from his ducking,
maintained his gay, casual air, as if enjoying the whole affair too much to be thoroughly enraged.
When the mink darted upon him, straight as a snake strikes, he met the attack with a curious
little pirouette; and the next instant the two were once more locked in a death grapple.

It was some moments before the breathless watchers in the canoe could make out which was getting
the advantage, so closely were the grey body and the black intertwined. Then it was seen that
the raccoon was using his flexible, hand-like paws as a bear might, to hold his foe down to
the punishment. Both contestants were much cut, and bleeding freely; but the mink was now getting
slow, while the raccoon was as cheerfully alert as ever. At length the mink tore loose and
made one more desperate reach for his favourite throat-hold. But this time it was the raccoon
who avoided. He danced aside, flashed back, and caught the mink fairly under the jaw. Then,
bracing himself, he shook his foe as a terrier might. And in a minute or two the long, black
shape straightened out limply amid the sand and dead leaves.

When the body was quite still the raccoon let go and stood over it expectantly for some minutes.
He bit it several times, and seeing that this treatment elicited no retort, suffered himself
to feel assured of his victory. Highly pleased, he skipped back and forth over the body, playfully
seized it with his fore-paws, and bundled it up into a heap. Then seeming to remember the origin
of the quarrel, he sniffed regretfully at the crumbled fragments of egg-shell. His expression
of disappointment was so ludicrous that in spite of themselves the men in the canoe exploded
with laughter.

As the harsh, incongruous sound startled the white stillnesses, in the lifting of an eyelid
the little conqueror vanished. One of the canoeists stepped ashore, picked up the body of the
slain mink, and threw it into the canoe. As the two resumed their paddles and slipped away
into the mist, they knew that from some hiding-place on the bank two bright, indignant eyes
were peering after them in wonder.

Melindy and the Spring Bear

Soft, wet and tender, with a faint green filming the sodden pasture field, and a rose-pink
veil covering the maples, and blue-grey catkins tinting the dark alders, spring had come to
the lonely little clearing in the backwoods. From the swampy meadow along the brook's edge,
across the road from the cabin and the straw-littered barn-yard, came toward evening that music
which is the distinctive note of the northern spring--the thrilling, mellow, inexpressibly
wistful fluting of the frogs.

The sun was just withdrawing his uppermost rim behind the far-off black horizon line of fir-tops.
The cabin door stood wide open to admit the sweet air and the sweet sound. Just inside the
door sat old Mrs. Griffis, rocking heavily, while the woollen sock which she was knitting lay
forgotten in her lap. She was a strong-featured, muscular woman, still full of vigour, whom
rheumatism had met and halted in the busy path of life. Her keen and restless eyes were following
eagerly every movement of a slender, light-haired girl in a blue cotton waist and grey homespun
skirt, who was busy at the other side of the yard, getting her little flock of sheep penned
up for the night for fear of wild prowlers.

Presently the girl slammed the pen door, jammed the hardwood peg into the staple, ran her fingers
nervously through the pale fluff of her hair, and came hurrying across the yard to the door
with a smile on her delicate young face.

"There, Granny!" she exclaimed, with the air of one who has just got a number of troublesome
little duties accomplished, "I guess no lynxes, or nothing, 'll get the sheep to-night, anyways.
Now, I must go an' hunt up old 'Spotty' afore it gets too dark. I don't see what's made her
wander off to-day. She always sticks around the barn close as a burr!"

The old woman smiled, knowing that the survival of a wild instinct in the cow had led her to
seek some hiding-place, near home but secluded, wherein to secrete her new-born calf.

"I guess old 'Spotty' knows enough to come home when she gets ready, Child!" she answered.
"She's been kept that close all winter, the snow bein' so deep, I don't wonder she wants to
roam a bit now she can git 'round. Land sakes, I wish't I could roam a bit, 'stead er sittin',
sittin', an' knittin', knittin', mornin', noon an' night, all along of these 'ere useless old
legs of mine!"

"Poor Granny!" murmured the girl, softly, tears coming into her eyes. "I wish't we could get
'round, the two of us, in these sweet-smellin' spring woods, an' get the first Mayflowers together!
Couldn't you just try now, Granny? I believe you are goin' to walk all right again some day,
just as well as any of us. Do try!"

Thus adjured, the old woman grasped the arms of her chair sturdily, set her jaw, and lifted
herself quite upright. But a groan forced itself from her lips, and she sank back heavily,
her face creased with pain. Recovering herself with a resolute effort, however, she smiled
rather ruefully.

"Some day, mebbe, if the good Lord wills!" said she, shaking her head. "But 'tain't this day,
Melindy! You'll be the death o' me yet, Child, you're so set on me gittin' 'round ag'in!"

"Why, Granny, you did splendid!" cried the girl. "That was the best yet, the best you've ever
done since I come to you. You stood just as straight as anybody for a minute. Now, I'll go
an' hunt old 'Spotty.'" And she turned toward the tiny path that led across the pasture to
the burnt-woods.

But Mrs. Griffis's voice detained her.

"What's the good o' botherin' about old 'Spotty' to-night, Melindy? Let her have her fling.
Them frogs make me that lonesome to-night I can't bear to let ye a minnit out o' my sight,
Child! Ther' ain't no other sound like it, to my way o' thinkin', for music nor for lonesomeness.
It 'most breaks my heart with the sweetness of it, risin' an' fallin' on the wet twilight that
way. But I just got to have somebody 'round when I listen to it!"

"Yes, Granny, I love it, too!" assented Melindy in a preoccupied tone, "when I ain't too bothered
to listen. Just now, I'm thinkin' about old 'Spotty' out there alone in the woods, an' maybe
some hungry lynxes watchin' for her to lie down an' go to sleep. You know how hungry the bears
will be this spring, too, Granny, after the snow layin' deep so late. I just couldn't sleep,
if I thought old 'Spotty' was out there in them queer, grey, empty woods all night. In summer
it's different, an' then the woods are like home."

"Well," said her grandmother, seeing that the girl was bent upon her purpose, "if ye're skeered
for old 'Spotty,' ye'd better be a little mite skeered for yerself, Child! Take along the gun.
Mebbe ye might see a chipmunk a-bitin' the old cow jest awful!"

Heedless of her grandmother's gibe, Melindy, who had a very practical brain under her fluffy
light hair, picked up the handy little axe which she used for chopping kindling.

"No guns for me, Granny, you know," she retorted. "This 'ere little axe's good enough for me!"
And swinging it over her shoulder she went lightly up the path, her head to one side, her small
mouth puckered in a vain effort to learn to whistle.

What Melindy and her grandmother called the "Burnt Lands" was a strip of country running back
for miles from the clearing. The fire had gone over it years before, cutting a sharply defined,
gradually widening path through the forest, and leaving behind it only a few scattered rampikes,
or tall, naked trunks bleached to whiteness by the storms of many winters. Here and there amid
these desolate spaces, dense thickets of low growth had sprung up, making a secure hiding-place
of every hollow where the soil had not had all the life scorched out of it.

Having crossed the pasture, Melindy presently detected those faint indications of a trail which
the uninitiated eye finds it so impossible to see. Slight bendings and bruises of the blueberry
and laurel scrub caught her notice. Then she found, in a bare spot, the unmistakable print
of a cow's hoof. The trail was now quite clear to her; and it was clearly that of old "Spotty."
Intent upon her quest she hurried on, heedless of the tender colours changing in the sky above
her head, of the first swallows flitting and twittering across it, of the keen yet delicate
fragrance escaping from every sap-swollen bud, and of the sweetly persuasive piping of the
frogs from the water meadow. She had no thought at that moment but to find the truant cow and
get her safely stabled before dark.

The trail led directly to a rocky hollow about a hundred yards from the edge of the pasture--perhaps
a hundred and fifty yards from the doorway wherein Mrs. Griffis sat intently watching Melindy's
progress. The hollow was thick with young spruce and white birch, clustered about a single
tall and massive rampike.

Into this shadowy tangle the girl pushed fearlessly, peering ahead beneath the dark, balsam-scented
branches. She could see, in a broken fashion, to the very foot of the rampike, across which
lay a huge fallen trunk. But she could see nothing of old "Spotty," who, by reason of her vivid
colouring of red and white splotches, would have been conspicuous against those dark surroundings.

There was something in the silence, combined with the absence of the cow whom she confidently
expected to find, which sent a little chill to the girl's heart. She gripped her axe more tightly,
and stood quite motionless, accustoming her eyes to the confused gloom; and presently she thought
she could distinguish a small brownish shape lying on a mound of moss near the foot of the
rampike. A moment more and she could see that it was looking at her, with big, soft eyes. Then
a pair of big ears moved. She realized that it was a calf she was looking at. Old "Spotty's"
truancy was accounted for.

But where was old "Spotty"? Melindy thought for a moment, and concluded very properly that
the mother, considering the calf well-hidden, had slipped away to the spring for a drink. She
was on the point of stepping forward to admire the little new-comer and see if it was yet strong
enough to be led home to the barn, when a stealthy rustling at the farther side of the thicket
arrested her.

Certainly that could not be the cow, who was anything but stealthy in her movements. But what
could it be?

Melindy had a sudden prescience of peril. But her nerves stiffened to it, and she had no thought
of retreat. It might be one of those savage lynxes, spying upon the calf in its mother's absence.
At this idea Melindy's small mouth itself set very grimly, and she rejoiced that she had brought
the axe along. The lynx, of all the wild creatures, she regarded with special antagonism.

The stealthy movements came nearer, nearer, then suddenly died out. A moment more and a dark
bulk took shape noiselessly among the fir-branches, some ten or twelve feet beyond the spot
where the helpless calf was lying.

For a second Melindy's heart stood still. What was her little axe against a bear! Then she
recalled the general backwoods faith that the biggest black bear would run from a human being,
if only he had plenty of room to run. She looked at the helpless little one curled up on its
mossy bed. She looked at the savage black shape gliding slowly forward to devour it. And her
heart leaped with returning courage.

The bear, its fierce eyes glancing from side to side, was now within five or six feet of its
intended prey. With a shrill cry of warning and defiance Melindy sprang forward, swinging her
axe, and ordered the beast to "Git out!" She was greatly in hopes that the animal would yield
to the authority of the human voice, and retire abashed.

At any other season, it is probable that the bear would have done just as she hoped it would.
But now, it had the courage of a rampant spring appetite. Startled it was, and disturbed, at
the girl's sudden appearance and her shrill cry; and it half drew back, hesitating. But Melindy
also hesitated; and the bear was quick to perceive her hesitation. For a few seconds he stood
eyeing her, his head down and swinging from side to side. Then, seeming to conclude that she
was not a formidable antagonist, he gave vent to a loud, grunting growl, and lurched forward
upon the calf.

With a wild scream, half of fury, half of fear, Melindy also darted forward, trusting that
the animal would not really face her onslaught. And the calf, terrified at the sudden outcry,
staggered to its feet with a loud bleating.

The bear was just upon it, with great black paw uplifted for the fatal stroke that would have
broken its back, when he saw Melindy's axe descending. With the speed of a skilled boxer he
changed the direction of his stroke, and fended off the blow so cleverly that the axe almost
flew from the girl's grasp. The fine edge, however, caught a partial hold, and cleft the paw
to the bone.

Furious with the pain, and his fighting blood now thoroughly aroused, the bear forgot the calf
and sprang at his daring assailant. Light-footed as a cat, the girl leapt aside, just in time,
darted over the fallen trunk, and dodged around the base of the rampike. She realized that
she had undertaken too much, and her only hope now was that either she would be able to outrun
the bear, or that the latter would turn his attentions again to the calf and forget about her.

The bear, however, had no intention of letting her escape his vengeance. For all his bulk,
he was amazingly nimble and was at her heels again in a second. Though she might have outstripped
him in the open, he would probably have caught her in the hampering thicket; but at this crucial
moment there came a bellow and a crashing of branches close behind him, and he whirled about
just in time to receive the raging charge of old "Spotty," who had heard her youngster's call.

The bear had no time to dodge or fend this onslaught, but only to brace himself. The cow's
horns, unfortunately, were short and wide-spreading. She caught him full in the chest, with
the force of a battering-ram, and would have hurled him backwards but that his mighty claws
and forearms, at the same instant, secured a deadly clutch upon her shoulders. She bore him
backward against the trunk indeed, but there he recovered himself; and when she strove to withdraw
for another battering charge, she could not tear herself free. Foiled in these tactics, she
lunged forward with all her strength, again and again, bellowing madly, and endeavouring to
crush out her enemy's breath against the tree. And the bear, grunting, growling, and whining,
held her fast while he tore at her with his deadly claws.

Too much excited to think any longer of flight, Melindy stood upon the fallen trunk and breathlessly
watched the battle. In a few moments she realized that old "Spotty" was getting the worst of
it; and upon this her courage once more returned. Running down the great log as close as she
dared, she swung up her axe, and paused for an opening. She was just about to strike, when
a well-known voice arrested her, and she jumped back.

"Git out of the way, Child," it commanded, piercing the turmoil. "Git out of the way an' let
me shoot!"

The crippled old woman, too, had heard the cry of her young. When that scream of Melindy's
cleft the evening air, Mrs. Griffis had shot out of her chair as if she had never heard of
rheumatism. She did not know anything hurt her. At the summons of this imperious need her old
vigour all came back. Snatching up the big duck-gun from the corner, where it stood always
loaded and ready, she went across the pasture and through the laurel patches at a pace almost
worthy of Melindy herself. When she plunged through the bushes into the hollow, and saw the
situation, her iron will steadied her nerves to meet the crisis.

The instant Melindy had jumped out of the way Mrs. Griffis ran close up to the combatants.
The bear was being kept too busy to spare her any attention whatever. Coolly setting the muzzle
of the big gun (which was loaded with buckshot) close to the beast's side, just behind the
fore-shoulder, she pulled the trigger. There was a roar that filled the hollow like the firing
of a cannon, and the bear collapsed sprawling, with a great hole blown through his heart.

Old "Spotty" drew back astonished, snorted noisily, and rolled wild eyes upon her mistress.
Then, unable to believe that her late foe was really no longer a menace to her precious calf,
she fell once more upon the lifeless form and tried to beat it out of all likeness to a bear.
The calf, who had been knocked over but not hurt in the bear's charge upon Melindy, had struggled
to its feet again; and Mrs. Griffis pushed it forward to attract its mother's attention. This
move proved successful; and presently, in the task of licking the little creature all over
to make sure it was not hurt, "Spotty" forgot her noble rage. Then, slowly and patiently, by
pushing, pulling, and coaxing, the two women got the calf up out of the hollow and along the
homeward path, while the mother, heedless of her streaming wounds, crowded against them, mooing
softly with satisfaction. She was craving now, for her little one, the safe shelter of the
barn-yard.

At the well the quaint procession stopped, and the calf fell to nursing; while Melindy washed
the cow's wounds, and Mrs. Griffis hunted up some tar to use as a salve upon them. As she moved
briskly about the yard, Melindy broke into a peal of joyous but almost hysterical laughter.

"I declare to goodness, Granny," she cried, in response to the old woman's questioning look,
"if you ain't just as spry as me. I've heard tell that bear's grease was a great medicine for
rheumatism. It's plain to be seen, Granny, that you've used up a whole bear for yours."

"It wasn't the bear, Child!" answered the old woman, gravely. "It was that ter'ble scream o'
yours cured my rheumatiz! Old 'Spotty,' she come to her young one's call. Could I do less,
Child, when I heerd my little one cry out fer me?"

WILLIAM ALLEN WHITE'S

  A Certain Rich Man

                                                    Cloth, $1.50 net

  "It pulsates with humor, interest, passionate love, adventures,
  pathos--every page is woven with threads of human nature, life as we
  know it, life as it is, and above it all a spirit of righteousness,
  true piety, and heroic patriotism. These inspire the author's genius
  and fine literary quality, thrilling the reader with tenderest
  emotion, and holding to the end his unflagging, absorbing
  interest."--The Public Ledger, Philadelphia.

  "Mr. White has written a big and satisfying book made up of the
  elements of American life as we know them--the familiar humor,
  sorrows, ambitions, crimes, sacrifices--revealed to us with peculiar
  freshness and vigor in the multitude of human actions and by the
  crowd of delightful people who fill his four-hundred odd pages....
  It deserves a high place among the novels that deal with American
  life. No recent American novel save one has sought to cover so broad
  a canvas, or has created so strong an impression of ambition and of
  sincerity."--Chicago Evening Post.

  "The great fictional expression of this mighty Twentieth Century
  altruistic movement is sure to be something in kind and in degree
  akin to Mr. White's 'A Certain Rich Man.'"--Brooklyn Daily Eagle.

  "An American novel, home-grown in home soil, vital with homely
  American motives, and fragrant with homely American memories, Mr.
  White has certainly achieved."--New York Times.

  Dr. Washington Gladden considered this book of sufficient importance
  to take it and the text from which the title was drawn as his
  subject for an entire sermon, in the course of which he said: "In
  its ethical and social significance it is the most important piece
  of fiction that has lately appeared in America. I do not think that
  a more trenchant word has been spoken to this nation since 'Uncle
  Tom's Cabin.' And it is profoundly to be hoped that this book may do
  for the prevailing Mammonism what 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' did for
  slavery."

                             PUBLISHED BY
                        THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                     64-66 Fifth Avenue, New York

                         AMONG RECENT NOVELS

F. MARION CRAWFORD'S

  Stradella

                                 Illustrated, cloth, 12mo, $1.50 net

  "Schools of fiction have come and gone, but Mr. Crawford has always
  remained in favor. There are two reasons for his continued
  popularity; he always had a story to tell and he knew how to tell
  it. He was a born story teller, and what is more rare, a trained
  one."--The Independent.

  The White Sister

                                 Illustrated, cloth, 12mo, $1.50 net

  "Mr. Crawford tells his love story with plenty of that dramatic
  instinct which was ever one of his best gifts. We are, as always,
  absorbed and amused."--New York Tribune.

  "Good stirring romance, simple and poignant."--Chicago Record
  Herald.

  "His people are always vividly real, invariably individual."--Boston
  Transcript.

JAMES LANE ALLEN'S

  The Bride of the Mistletoe

                                              Cloth, 12mo, $1.25 net

  "He has achieved a work of art more complete in expression than
  anything that has yet come from him. It is like a cry of the soul,
  so intense one scarcely realizes whether it is put into words or
  not."--Bookman.

  "It is a masterpiece ... the most carefully wrought out of all his
  work." 

During a temporary absence from the Court of Poland, he made a tour
through Italy, and on his return, he met the Count and Countess de
Witt at Hamburgh, when he fell deeply in love with Sophia.

  Not to weary you with the details of the romance, I will come to
the dénouement at once.

                                 

  
  Nothing is so easy as to obtain a divorce in Poland. The law extends
  so far on this point, that I knew a gentleman, M. Wortrel, who had
  no less than four wives, all living, and bearing his name. Count Patocka,
  therefore, availing himself of this advantage, and having previously
made every necessary arrangement, one morning called on Count de Witt,
and, without further ceremony, said--"Count, I love your wife, and
cannot live without her.

  I know that I am not indifferent to her; and I might immediately
  carry her off; but I wish to owe my happiness to you, and to retain
  for ever a grateful sense of your generosity.

Here are two papers: one is an act of divorce, which only wants your
signature, for you see the Countess has already affixed hers to it;--the
other is a bond for two millions of florins, payable at my banker's,
in this city.

  We may, therefore, settle the business amicably or otherwise, just
as you please."

                                              The husband doubtless thought of his adventure at the fortress of
Kaminieck, and, like the French ambassador, he resigned himself to
his fate, and signed the paper.

  The fair Sophia became, the same day, Countess Patocka; and to the
  charms of beauty and talent, were now added the attractions of a
  fortune, the extent of which was at that time unequalled in Europe.--Court
  Journal.
  
  * * * * *
  
  Retrospective Gleanings.

  * * * *

                                              

  JOHN LOCKE.
  

ZONA GALE'S

  Friendship Village

                                              Cloth, 12mo, $1.50 net

  "As charming as an April day, all showers and sunshine, and
  sometimes both together, so that the delighted reader hardly knows
  whether laughter or tears are fittest for his emotion.... The book
  will stir the feelings deeply."--New York Times.

  To be followed by "Friendship Village Love Stories."

CHARLES MAJOR'S

  A Gentle Knight of Old Brandenburg

                                 Illustrated, cloth, 12mo, $1.50 net

  Mr. Major has selected a period to the romance of which other
  historical novelists have been singularly blind. The boyhood of
  Frederick the Great and the strange wooing of his charming sister
  Wilhelmina have afforded a theme, rich in its revelation of human
  nature and full of romantic situations.

MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT'S

  Poppea of the Post Office

                                              Cloth, 12mo, $1.50 net

  "A rainbow romance, ... tender yet bracing, cheerily stimulating ...
  its genial entirety refreshes like a cooling shower."--Chicago
  Record Herald.

  "There cannot be too many of these books by 'Barbara.' Mrs. Wright
  knows good American stock through and through and presents it with
  effective simplicity."--Boston Advertiser.

FRANK DANBY'S

  Sebastian

                                              Cloth, 12mo, $1.50 net

  Whenever a father's ideals conflict with a mother's hopes for the
  son of their dreams, you meet the currents underlying the plot of
  "Sebastian." Its author's skill in making vividly real the types and
  conditions of London has never been shown to better advantage.

                             PUBLISHED BY
                        THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                     64-66 Fifth Avenue, New York

