     ... "As to the singing of Professor Bliss and Miss Nellie
     Brown, it seems as though we are all in the third heaven at
     once, and that it is almost sacrilege to come down to meaner
     things." This certainly was placing a
very high, but perhaps not a much too high, estimate on the
song-writing power. As coming next in greatness to the composers of
meritorious popular ballads, we may mention those accomplished
persons, who, possessing sweetly-toned, sympathetic voices, and
evincing by their mode of expression a ready, a full conception of the
author's meaning, have, in an eminent degree, the power to correctly,
charmingly render them. In this form of musical expression Miss Brown
delights her audiences not less than in her rendition of songs of a
more pretentious character. In singing the former she exhibits a most
winning naïveté, enters wholly into the spirit of the song, and with
a full, pleasing voice, impresses deeply its melody and meaning upon
the hearts of her hearers, thus exhibiting the highest kind of lyric
eloquence. As a singer, then, of ballads alone, she would take high
rank in the musical profession, even if she did not excel--it has been
seen that she does--in the rendering of songs of a more technical
character.

And now, in nearing the close of this sketch, if any reader shall ask to know the secret of
the fine degree of success to which our subject has thus far attained (for, in considering
great instances of individual achievement, we are ever prone to attribute the same to mysterious
or fortuitous circumstances), let him be assured that there is really no "secret" about it.
Miss Brown, no doubt, commenced her career with much musical talent, and Nature was otherwise
kind to her: but she has always been a diligent, persevering worker; and to this cause, rather
than to her possession of rich natural endowments, must be mostly attributed her praiseworthy
achievements. Indeed, Nature's generous bestowment of talents, or even of genius, is of but
little value when the favored one does not assiduously labor to cultivate and develop the same.

     "No good of worth sublime will Heaven permit
       To light on man as from the passing air:
     The lamp of genius, though by nature lit,
       If not protected, pruned, and fed with care,
       Soon dies, or runs to waste with fitful glare."

In her efforts to acquire an artistic acquaintance with music, and to reach her present high
and enviable position as a vocalist, Miss Brown has had the warmest sympathy and active co-operation
of loving parents and an accomplished brother.[12] Nor should I in this connection fail to
advert to the helping, the inspiring influence of thousands of the noble people of New England,
who, fond lovers and constant promoters of the beneficent art of music, are ever prompt in
the recognition and encouragement of all its talented devotees. To the words of private cheer
from many of these, and to the inspiriting effect of their upturned, delighted faces, and frequent
plaudits, when listening to her beautiful voice in the crowded music-halls, she must often
revert with feelings not less of justifiable pride than of the warmest gratitude. The writer
is quite sure that he but echoes the sentiments of the admiring thousands just mentioned, when
he predicts, that if Miss Brown shall continue to exhibit in the future, as in the past, the
same conscientious, ambitious devotion to her chosen profession, she is destined to take rank
with the world's greatest singers.

[Footnote 12: Eugene L. Brown. He was possessed of very promising histrionic ability, had frequently
taken a leading part in amateur theatricals at Dover and elsewhere in New Hampshire, and was
the author of a drama which was highly spoken of by the press of Dover. Unfortunately, in 1875
he died.]

XV.

SAMUEL W. JAMIESON,

THE BRILLIANT YOUNG PIANIST.

     "While a skilled artist's nimble fingers bound
     O'er dancing keys, and wake celestial sound."

     JULIAN.

     "Nor Fame I slight, nor for her favors call:
     She comes unlooked for, if she comes at all."

     POPE.

"The entertainments at Parker Memorial Hall on Sunday evenings in no wise lessen in interest
and numbers. One evening, listening to Gounod's 'Ave Maria' by the famous Germania Orchestra,
we felt that the worship of the Virgin, of which was born such heavenly strains, if for no
other reason, was not without its use in the world even now. Another evening Mr. Jamieson awoke
the echoes of the piano in a manner to do credit to a Liszt and Chopin."

Thus, a year or two ago, spoke one of Boston's first writers and musical critics, when, in
an article published in "The Commonwealth," alluding to the accomplished pianist, Samuel W.
Jamieson.

In the comparison here made, so highly complimentary to our subject, this writer does not stand
alone; for the remarkably fine execution of Mr. Jamieson has often drawn from other piano-students
praise none the less flattering; while his mastery of so many of the difficulties that are
connected with piano-forte playing, and his fine general musical talents, entitle him to a
prominent place in books far more pretentious than this one. He has, in fact, attained to such
brilliant proficiency (although quite a young man) as to cause him to be already ranked with
the first pianists of the country.

Mr. Jamieson was born in Washington, D.C., in the year 1855. He began the study of music, taking
lessons on the piano-forte, when about eleven years of age. Since then he has been under the
instruction of some of the best masters of Boston, such as James M. Tracy, and Fred. K. Boscovitz,
the celebrated Hungarian pianist. He has been a pupil of the Boston Conservatory; from which
classical institution he graduated in honor in 1876, receiving its valuable diploma.

While a student at the Boston Conservatory, he was nearly always chosen by the director, Mr.
Julius Eichberg, to represent at the quarterly concerts the fine progress made by its pupils.
At such times his performances of numbers, requiring rapidity of reading and execution, together
with a good knowledge of piano technique, drew from the press the most favorable comments,
and made him the favorite piano pupil at the institution mentioned. The following, as an instance
of these comments, is taken from "The Boston Journal:"--

     ... "But the best thing in the piano line was the rendering
     of Chopin's 'Polonaise,' in E flat, by Mr. Samuel W.
     Jamieson. The 'Hungarian Rhapsodie,' No. 2, of Liszt, was
     most particularly characterized by a delicate touch, and a
     clear conception of the subject in hand.

     "It is but just to say that this gentleman is an advanced
     scholar."

And this from "The Folio," referring to another like occasion:--

     "Mr. Samuel Jamieson, pupil of the Boston Conservatory, but
     directly under the instruction of Mr. Tracy, carried off a
     good share of the honors of the recent matinée of that
     very successful school."

"The Boston Traveller," describing the performances of pupils of the Conservatory at Music
Hall, after stating that all the performances were of a high order, makes special mention of
Mr. Jamieson, saying that "his execution of a difficult number was worthy of the highest praise."
Many other comments equally favorable could here be given, were it necessary.

His performances at these concerts soon made him widely known among the musical and general
public of Boston and vicinity, and his services as a soloist became much in demand. As soon
as he had attained to a fair degree of proficiency, he began to give lessons on the piano-forte;
and by so doing, and by occasionally appearing at concerts, he secured the means to continue
his studies at the Conservatory. His playing at one of these concerts was thus spoken of in
a Boston paper:--

     "The concert given on Tuesday evening at the Music Hall,
     though so little known as to be thinly attended, was a very
     satisfactory entertainment, and well deserved a large
     audience. Mr. Jamieson is a pupil of the Hungarian pianist
     Mr. F. Boscovitz, some prominent features of whose style he
     closely imitates. His playing shows him to be a careful,
     conscientious student, possessed of real musical
     sensibility, without any of the nauseous sentimentalism so
     common among young players. His best performance in every
     respect was Liszt's 'Rigoletto' fantasie, the mechanical
     difficulties of which he has well conquered, and the
     passionate meaning of which he interpreted very finely. In
     answer to an encore of this piece, he gave Mr. Boscovitz's
     exquisite little 'Chant du Matin,' Op. 68.

     "He will make an excellent pianist if he prosecutes his
     study as faithfully as he has commenced it. Mr. Jamieson
     carries with him the good wishes and the highest
     expectations of those who heard him."

He early showed a singleness of devotion to his chosen work, and has always evinced a spirit
of ambitious aim. Some particulars of the latter, while winning him the approval of the thoughtful,
have caused him to be misunderstood and censured by others. With fine artistic taste, ever
aiming high, fully in earnest, and with no more than (as the writer believes) a just estimate
of his attainments and consequent rank as a musician, Mr. Jamieson has sometimes declined to
appear at the "two-penny show" concerts given generally in the churches, and often by "artists"
(?) of abilities so poor as to render them fit subjects for the training of a rudimentary music
school rather than as objects of public view or favor. Still I do not believe that Mr. Jamieson
has been unwilling to acknowledge the generally known fact, that much good has often been done
by amateurs and others at church concerts, both by the aid thus afforded to meritorious causes,
and by the musical practice and public acquaintance obtained for themselves. That he has not
been without a ready sympathy for the persons or causes to be benefited by such entertainments
is well evinced by the fact, that (notwithstanding he holds certain views mentioned in this
connection) he has appeared at times at the same, at the better kind, making no charge for
his services; and yet his occasional refusal to appear at certain of these concerts has been
attributed--generally by ignorant persons, but sometimes also by others, who, as they knew
better, must have been influenced alone by bad motives--to his possession of undue self-esteem,
&c. But these unjust criticisms, although often causing him pain, could never swerve him from
his chosen path. He would never lower his standard, and he always sought to enter the lists
with those who contended for the highest prizes in art. The prominent position he holds to-day
as an artist is proof that his course has been the right one, and the one which should serve
as an example to all those young persons, who, endowed with musical talents, are yet neglecting
to cultivate the same; who are, in fact, allowing them to gradually waste away by giving themselves
to unmusical, injurious associations; and who quite too often spend the precious time that
should be given under competent teachers to diligent, untiring study, in appearances before
audiences whose applause, of doubtful value, is readily bestowed in unstinted quantities, and
which serves, alas! but to dazzle, to deceive, and too often to permanently ruin, the young
performer.

Mr. Jamieson's fine, ever-increasing musical abilities, his general intelligence and gentlemanly
bearing, soon gained for him the entrée of the best musical circles of Boston and vicinity,
and secured for him association at concerts with the most advanced artists. During the winters
of 1875 and 1876 he several times appeared before large and enthusiastic audiences at a series
of entertainments given at Parker Memorial Hall. A writer thus mentions his performances at
one of these concerts:--

     "Mr. Jamieson, the pianist, was before the public last
     season, and then gained strong praise. He is a promising
     young artist, and his performances on this occasion showed
     marked improvement. His selections embraced a fantasie on
     the 'Wedding March' of Liszt, a fantasie on themes from
     'Rigoletto,' and variations on 'Home, Sweet Home;' and in
     all three he won deserved applause."

He has devoted himself solely to the piano-forte, and makes no pretensions to a knowledge of
other instruments, considering the former as quite worthy of his undivided study,--especially
in these days, when, in his own city and state at least, fine piano soloists are so numerous,
and whose best performances he desires to equal, and, if possible, to excel.

From the first, Mr. Jamieson has given himself to the performance of only the higher class
of music. So determined is he in this respect, that he will not play dance-music, not even
that of the best order. The writer once asked him to play one of Strauss' most bewitching waltzes,--one
full of those delicious, so to say, entrancing melodies, for which the productions of this
gifted composer are so noticeable, and one which at the time had taken nearly every one completely
captive. I refer to the "Beautiful Blue Danube" waltz. But he declined to play it. I again
and again entreated him; for I not only delighted to hear as often as possible this charming-selection,
but, knowing Mr. Jamieson's rare powers as a pianist, I was especially anxious to hear him
give life to its magic strains. No amount of persuasion could move him, however; and he finally
ended the matter by telling me that he never, under any circumstances, played dance-music,
as he deemed its practice an injury to one who wished to reach the highest positions as a pianist.
So I was compelled to pocket my disappointment, and to go elsewhere for my "Beautiful Blue Danube."

Mr. Jamieson is an assiduous student, devoting several of the early morning hours of each day
to practice on the piano-forte. Even during the heated term, when most artists neglect their
instruments, and hie away to enjoy the refreshing breezes of the sea-shore or the mountains,
he may much of the time be found at his rooms, undeterred by the hot atmosphere, diligently
at work keeping up the nice degree of proficiency he has already attained, or bravely attacking
whatever difficulties remain to be overcome. He does, it is true, go away every summer to a
quiet nook in the country, remaining, however, only a short while, and during which he does
not, to any great extent, lessen his hours of practice.

During the winter of 1874 he several times appeared at public concerts in Boston and in other
parts of New England. His performances at a soirée musicale at the Meionaon, Tremont Temple,
Boston, were alluded to in the following gratifying terms by "The Boston Globe:"--

     "Mr. Jamieson exhibits much power and delicacy, and a
     certain confident but not obtrusive manner, which will go
     far, with his abilities, to place him in a high rank among
     our pianists. He gave much satisfaction; his performance of
     Liszt's fantasie on themes from Verdi's 'Rigoletto' showing
     great skill in mastering the difficult technicalities in the
     variations on the theme."

And in this manner by "The Boston Traveller:"--

