ONLY AN INCIDENT

                      BY GRACE DENIO LITCHFIELD

                                 1883

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER

       I. JOPPA

      II. PHEBE

     III. GERALD

      IV. MRS. UPJOHN'S ENTERTAINMENT

       V. FRIENDS

      VI. THE PICNIC

     VII. TRIED AS BY FIRE

    VIII. GERALD OBEYS ORDERS

      IX. JOPPA'S MINISTRATIONS TO THE SICK

       X. AN APOLOGY AND ITS CONSEQUENCES

      XI. "MY SON DICK"

     XII. WHY DO SUMMER ROSES FADE?

    XIII. JOPPA'S TRIAL

     XIV. PHEBE'S GOOD-BY

      XV. ONLY AN INCIDENT

TO GRACE HILL AND EDWIN C. LITCHFIELD.

TO HER FOR WHOSE DEAR SAKE THE STORY WAS PENNED, ALTHOUGH HER EYES HAVE NEVER REST UPON ITS
PAGES, AND TO HIM WHOSE TENDER WATCH OVER ITS GROWTH HAS BEEN ITS VITAL INSPIRATION--TO THE
TWO WHO ARE BUT ONE FOREVER IN THE HEART OF THEIR DAUGHTER, THIS LITTLE FIRST BOOK IS MOST
LOVINGLY INSCRIBED.

ONLY AN INCODENT

CHAPTER I.

JOPPA.

Joppa was the very centre of all things. That was the opening clause in the creed of every
well-educated and right-thinking Joppite. Geographically, however, it was not the centre of
any thing, being considerably off from the great lines of railway travel, but possessing two
little independent branch roads of its own, that connected it with all the world, or rather
that connected all the world with it. For though there were larger places than Joppa even in
the county in which it condescended to find itself, and though New York, and Philadelphia,
and even Boston, were undeniably larger, as its inhabitants reluctantly admitted when hard
pressed, yet they were unanimous in agreeing, nevertheless, that the sun rose and set wholly
and entirely for the benefit of their one little aristocratic community.

Yes; the world was created for Joppa, that the Joppites might live, move, and have their being
with as much convenience and as little trouble as possible. Bethany, a considerable town near
by, was built to be its shopping emporium; Galilee, a little farther off, to accommodate its
art needs; Morocco, a more considerable town still farther off, to be the birthplace of those
ancestors who were so unfortunate as to come into the world before there was any Joppa to be
born in. Even New York was erected mainly to furnish it with a place of comfortable resort
once a year, when it transplanted itself there bodily in a clan, consoling itself for its temporary
aberration of body by visiting exclusively and diligently back and forth among its own people,
and conforming life in all particulars as far as possible to home rules, still doing when in
New York, not as the New Yorkers but as the Joppites did, and never for a moment abandoning
its proud position as the one only place in the world worth living in.

There certainly was much to say in favor of Joppa. In the first place, it was remarkably salubrious.
Its inhabitants died only of old age,--seldom even of that,--or of diseases contracted wholly
in other localities. Measles had indeed been known to break out there once in the sacred person
of the President of the village, but had been promptly suppressed; besides, it was universally
conceded that being in his second childhood he should be considered liable. The last epidemic
of small-pox even had swept by them harmless. Only two old and extremely ugly women took it,
whereas Bethany and Upper Jordan were decimated. So Joppa was decidedly healthy, for one thing.
For another, it was moral. There had not been a murder heard of in ever so long, or a forgery,
and the last midnight burglar was such a nice, simple fellow that he did not know real silver
when he saw it, and ran off with the plated ware instead. And Joppa was not only moral, but
religious; went to church no end of times on Sundays, and kept as many of the commandments
as it conveniently could. It had four churches: one Methodist, frequented exclusively by the
plebeians; one Baptist, of a mixed congregation; one Presbyterian, where three fourths of the
best people went; and one Episcopal, which the best quarter of the best people attended, and
which among the Presbyterians was popularly supposed to be, if not exactly the entrance to
the infernal regions, yet certainly only one short step removed from it. And added to all these
good traits, Joppa was a beautiful place. There were a few common, ugly little houses in it,
of course, but they were all tucked away out of sight at one end, constituting what was known
as "the village," while the real Joppa meant in the thoughts of the inhabitants only the West
End so to speak, where was a series of pretty villas and commodious mansions running along
a broad, handsome street, and stretching for quite a distance along the border of the lake.
For, oh! best of all, Joppa had a lake. To speak of Joppa in the presence of a Joppite, and
not in the same breath to mention the lake with an appreciative adjective, was to make as irrevocable
a mistake as to be in conversation with a poet and forget to quote from his latest poem; for
next to their wives, their dinners, and their ease, the Joppites loved their beautiful little
lake. And they had cause thus to love it, for apart from its exquisite charm as the main feature
of their landscape, it gave them a substantial reason for existence. What could they have done
with their dolce far niente lives, but for the fishing and rowing and sailing and bathing and
sliding and skating which it afforded them in turn? It was all they had to keep them from settling
down into a Rip Van Winkle sleep, this dear little restless lake, that coaxed them out of their
land-torpor, and forced them occasionally to lend a manly hand to a manly pursuit. For there
was this distinguishing peculiarity about Joppa, that no one in it seemed to need to work,
or to have any manner of business whatever. Its society, outside of the village, was formed
wholly of cultivated, refined, wealthy people, who had nothing in the world to do, but idly
to eat and drink up the riches of the previous generation. It is a widely admitted truth, that
one generation always gathers for another, never for itself, and that the generation which
is thus generously gathered for, is invariably found willing to sacrifice without a murmur
any latent duty to harvest on its own account, consenting to live out its life softly upon
the hard-earned savings of its predecessors, without regard to posterity, and calling itself
"gentlemen" where its fathers were content to be known as "men."

So this was Joppa, a place mighty in its own conceit, and high too in the estimate of others,
to whom it was becoming known as the gayest and the prettiest of all dear little summer resorts;
and thither strangers were beginning to flock in considerable numbers each year, made warmly
welcome by the Joppites as an occasion for breaking out into an unending round of parties and
picnics and dinners and lunches and teas, and even breakfasts when there was not room to crowd
in any thing else. The summer was one continual whirl from beginning to end. There were visitors
and visits; there was giving and receiving; there were flirtations and rumors of flirtations;
there was everything the human heart could desire in the way of friendly hospitality and liveliest
entertainment. Saratoga might be well enough, and Newport would do in its way; but for solid
perfection, said the Joppites, there was no place in the world quite like Joppa.

But unknown to itself, Joppa nursed one apostate in its midst, one unavowed but benighted little
heretic, who so far from sharing these sentiments and offering up nightly thanksgiving that
despite her great unworthiness she had been suffered to be born in Joppa, made it one of her
most fervent and reiterated petitions that she might not always have to live there; that some
time, if she were very good and very patient, it might be granted her to go. She was so weary
of it all: of the busy idleness and the idle business, of the unthinking gayety and the gay
thoughtlessness, and of the nothingness that made up its all. She wanted, she did not exactly
know what, only something different; and to go, she did not quite know where, only somewhere
else. But she had been born in Joppa, (quite without her permission,) and in Joppa she had
lived for all of twenty-four healthful, tranquil, uneventful years, spending semi-occasional
winters in New York, and, unlike all other Joppites, returning always more and more discontented
with her native place. Who could ever have expected such treason in the heart of dear little
Phebe Lane? Of course it would not have mattered much had it been suspected, since it was only
Phebe Lane after all who entertained it,--little Phebe Lane, whose ancestors, though good and
well-born enough, did not hail from Morocco, and who lived, not in the West End proper, but
only on the borders of it, in a street where one could not get so much as a side peep at the
lake. It was not a pretty house either where she lived. It was square and clumsy and without
any originality, and, moreover, faced plump on the street, so that one could look right into
its parlor and sitting-room windows as one strolled along the wooden sidewalks. And people
were in the habit of looking in that way a good deal. Nothing was ever going on in there that
could not bear this sudden outside inspection, and it was the shortest way to call Phebe when
she was wanted for any thing of a sudden,--to bear a fourth hand at whist, or to stone raisins
for Mrs. Adams the day before her luncheon, or to run on an errand down town for some lazy
body who preferred other people's legs to her own for locomotion, or to relieve some wearied
host in the entertainment of his dull guest, or to help in some way or other, here, there,
and yonder. She was just the one to be called upon, of course, for she was just the one who
was always on hand, and always ready to go. She never had any thing to keep her at home. Her
father had long been dead, and she lived alone with her step-mother and step-aunt in the house
which was left her by her mother, but in which the present Mrs. Lane still ruled absolute,
as she did when she first came into it in Phebe's childish days. Mrs. Lane was strong and energetic
and commonplace; and she ran the little house from garret to cellar with a thoroughness that
left Phebe no part whatever to take in it, while the remainder of her energy she devoted to
nursing her invalid sister, Miss Lydia, a little weak, complaining creature, who had had not
only every ill that flesh is heir to, but a great many ills besides that she was firmly persuaded
no other flesh had ever inherited, and who stood in an awe of her sister Sophia only equalled
by her intense admiration of her.

So what was there for Phebe to do? She was fond of music, and whistled like a bird, but she
had no piano and did not know one note from another; and she did not care for books, which
was fortunate, as their wee library, all told, did not count a hundred volumes, most of which,
too, were Miss Lydia's, and were as weak and wishy-washy as that poor little woman herself.
And she did not care for sewing, though she made nearly all her own clothes, besides attending
at any number of impromptu Dorcas meetings, where the needy were the unskilled rich instead
of the helpless poor, so that of course her labor did not count at all as a virtue, since it
was not doing good, but only obliging a friend. And she did not care for parties, though she
generally went and was always asked, being such a help as regarded wall-flowers, while none
of the young girls dreaded her as a rival, it being a well known fact that Phebe Lane, general
favorite though she was, somehow or other never "took" with the men, or at least not sufficiently
to damage any other enterprising girl's prospects. Why this was so, was hard to say. Phebe
was pretty, and lovable, and sweet tempered. If she was not sparkling or witty, neither was
she sarcastic; and bright enough she was certainly, though not intellectual, and though she
talked little save with a few. It was strange. True as steel, possessed of that keen sense
of justice and honor so strangely lacking in many women, with a passionate capability for love
and devotion and self-sacrifice beyond power of fathoming, and above all with a clinging womanly
nature that yearned for affection as a flower longs for light, she was yet the only girl out
of all her set who had never had any especial attention. Perhaps it was because she was no
flirt. Bell Masters said no girl could get along who did not flirt. Perhaps because in her
excessive truthfulness she was sometimes blunt and almost brusque; it is dreadfully out of
place not to be able to lie a little at times. Even Mrs. Upjohn, the female lay-head of the
Presbyterians, who was a walking Decalogue, her every sentence being a law beginning with Thou
shalt not, admitted practically, if not theoretically, that without risk of damnation it was
possible to swerve occasionally from a too rigid Yea and Nay. Perhaps,--ah, well, there is
no use in exhausting the perhapses. The fact remained. Of girl-friends she had plenty, and
of men-friends she had plenty; but of lovers she had none.

And this was why when the Rev. Mr. Denham Halloway was called to the vacant parish of St. Joseph's
and fell down in its maidenly midst like a meteor from an unexplored heaven,--a young, handsome
divine, in every way marriageable, though still unmarried, and in every way attractive, though
still to the best of hope and belief unattracted,--this was why no girl of them all thought
her own chances lessened in the least when he and Phebe became such friends. No one gossiped.
No one ah-ah'd, or oh-oh'd. No one thought twice about it. What difference could it make? If
it had been anybody else now! But it was only Phebe Lane.

CHAPTER II.

PHEBE.

"Miss Phebe!"

"Oh, Mr. Halloway!"

"Hush. Don't let them know I'm here. I couldn't help peeping in as I went by. You look done up."

"I am."

"What's going on?"

"Come in and see."

"Heaven forbid! Gracious! Mrs. Upjohn will think that's a swear. Don't look this way, Miss
Phebe. They'll discover me. What's Mr. Hardcastle saying?"

"The world is very evil."

"'The times are waxing late.' Why doesn't he add that and go?"

"He never goes. He only comes."

"What is Mrs. Upjohn so wrought up about?"

"She caught one of her Sunday-school boys breaking Sunday."

"How?"

"Eating apples."

"Horrible! Where?"

"Up in a tree."

"Whose tree?"

"That's where the unpardonable comes in. Her tree."

"Poor boy; what a mistake! What are you doing with that hideous silk stocking?"

"Picking up dropped stitches."

"Whose stitches? Yours?"

"Mrs. Hardcastle's."

"Don't aid and abet her in creating that monstrosity. It's participation in crime. It's worse
than eating apples up a tree. Do you always have such a crowd here in the morning?"

"Always."

"How long have they been here?"

"Nearly two hours."

"What do they come for?"

"Habit."

"Miss Lydia's asleep."

"Habit too."

"What shall you do when you are done with that odious stocking?"

"Sort crewels for Mrs. Upjohn."

"And then?"

"Iron out my dress for the party."

"Oh, at Mrs. Anthony's? Who'll be there?"

"Everybody who has dropped in here this morning."

"Who else?"

"Those who dropped in yesterday."

"But what will you do to make it party-like?"

"Simper. Aren't you coming too?"

"Not if you think it would do for me to say that I held party-going wrong for a clergyman.
Could I? I might win over Mrs. Upjohn to the Church by so holy a statement."

"You had better take to round-dancing instead, then, to keep her out of it."

"Miss Phebe, is it possible you are severe on poor Mrs. Upjohn?"

"Very possible."

"As your pastor I must admonish you. Don't be. Besides, it's safer to keep on her blind side."

"She hasn't any."

"Unhappy woman! What a blaze of moral light she must live in! But I ought to have been in my
study an hour ago. I must tear myself away. I wish you all ill-luck possible with those stitches."

"Ah, is that you, Mr. Halloway? I was wondering what kept Phebe so long in the window. Good-morning,
sir. Good-morning, sir. Pray, come in." And having, by a turn of his slow old head, discovered
the young man standing just outside the window, Mr. Hardcastle came pompously forward, waving
his hand in a grand way he had, that seemed to bespeak him always the proprietor, no matter
in whose house he chanced to be.

"Thank you, Mr. Hardcastle, not this morning. I was just telling Miss Phebe I ought to be at
work. Good-morning, Mrs. Lane. Good-morning, Mrs. Upjohn--Mrs. Hardcastle--Miss Delano--Miss
Brooks."

And with a cheery bow to each individual head, craning itself forward to have a look at the
unusual young man who had work to do, the Rev. Mr. Halloway walked off to his rectory, which
was directly opposite, giving a merry glance back at Phebe from the other side of the street.
Phebe was still smiling as she went with the stocking to its owner.

"Thank you, my dear," said Mrs. Hardcastle, taking it from her without looking. "Oh, my child,
how could you be so careless! You have let me pull out one of the needles. Well--well."

Phebe took the work silently back, and sat herself down on a stool to remedy the mischief.

"A nice young fellow enough," remarked Mr. Hardcastle, condescendingly, returning to the group
of ladies. "But he'll never set the river on fire."

"No need he should, is there?" said Mrs. Upjohn, looking up sharply from her embroidery. She
always contradicted, if only for argument's sake, so that even her assents usually took a negative
form. "It's enough if he's able to put out a fire in that Church. It doesn't take much of a
man, I understand, to fill an Episcopalian pulpit." (Nobody had ever yet been able to teach
the good dame the difference between Episcopal and Episcopalian, and she preferred the undivided
use of the latter word.) "Any thing will go down with them."

"Yes, my dear Mrs. Upjohn. It's undeniably a poor Church, a poor Church, and I hope we may
all live to witness its downfall. It must have been a hard day for you, Mrs. Lane, when Phebe
went over to it. I never forgave old Mr. White for receiving her into it; I never did, indeed."

Phebe only smiled.

"Humph!" said Mrs. Lane, biting off a thread. "Phebe may go where she likes, for all me, so
long as only she goes. Baptist I was bred, and Baptist I'll be buried; but it's with churches
as with teas, I say. One's as good as another, but people may take green, or black, or mixed,
as best agrees with their stomachs."

"That's a very dangerous doctrine," said Mrs. Upjohn. "Push it a little further, and you'll
have babes and sucklings living on beef, and their elders dining on pap."

"Humph!" ejaculated Mrs. Lane again. "If they like it, what's the odds?"

"He-he!" snickered Miss Brooks.

"Well, now," resumed Mr. Hardcastle, "it stands to reason children should learn to like what
their elders have liked before them. That's the only decent and Christian way of living. And
as I said to my son,--to my Dick, you know" (Mr. Hardcastle had a son of whom he always spoke
as if sole owner of him, and indeed solely responsible for his being),--"'Dick,' I said, when
he spoke disrespectfully of Mr. Webb's prayers,--and Mr. Webb is a powerful prayer-maker, to
be sure,--'Dick,' I said, 'church is like physic, and the more you don't like it, the more
good it does you. And if you think Mr. Webb's prayers are too long, it's a sign that for your
soul's salvation they ought to be longer.' And I said--"

Mrs. Lane knew by long experience that now or never was the time to stop Mr. Hardcastle. Once
fairly started on the subject of his supposed advice to Dick on any given occasion, there was
no arresting his eloquence. She started up abruptly from her sewing-machine with her mouth
full of pins, emptying them into her hand as she went. "Those ginger-cookies--" she mumbled
as she passed Mr. Hardcastle. "They ought to be done by this."

A promissory fragrance caught the old gentleman's nostrils as she opened the door, dispelling
sterner thoughts. "Ah," he said, sniffing the air with evident approbation, "I was about going,
but I don't mind if I stay and try a few. Your make, Phebe?"

"No," answered Phebe, shortly, moving just out of reach of the bland old hand, which stretched
itself out to chuck her under the chin, and was left patting the air with infinite benevolence
"mother made them."

"All wrong," commented Mrs. Upjohn. "All wrong. You should not leave your mother any work that
you could spare her. One of the first things I taught our Maria" (Mrs. Upjohn in Mr. Hardcastle's
presence always said our Maria with great distinctness),--"one of the first things I taught
her was, that it was her privilege to save me in every thing. I don't believe in idleness for
girls. Aren't you ready yet to attend to these crewels, Phebe? Miss Brooks is snarling them
terribly."

"Phebe's really a very good girl in her way though," remarked Mrs. Hardcastle, indulgently,
from her easy chair. "I will testify that she can make quite eatable cake at a pinch."

Phebe secretly thought Mrs. Hardcastle ought to know. She remembered her once spoiling a new-made
company loaf by slashing into it without so much as a by-your-leave.

"That was very nice cake Miss Lynch gave us last night," piped in Miss Delano.

"Too much citron," pronounced Mrs. Upjohn, decisively. "You should never overload your cake
with citron. It turns it out heavy, as sure as there's a sun in the heavens."

"There isn't any to-day; it's cloudy," Phebe could not help putting in, demurely, but no one
paid any attention, except that Mrs. Upjohn turned on her an unworded expression of: "If I
say so, it is so whether or no."

An animated debate on cake followed, in the middle of which Mrs. Lane reappeared with a trayful
of cookies hot from the oven; and two more callers came in, Bell Masters and Dick Hardcastle,
which last first woke up Miss Lydia with a boisterous kiss, frightening the poor soul half
to death by assuring her she had been snoring so that he heard her way down street, and then
devoted himself to the cookies with a good-will and large capacity that filled one with compassionate
feelings toward his mother's larder. With these new and younger elements the talk varied a
little. They discussed last night's party, the supper, the dresses, the people, and then the
probabilities of to-night's party, the people, the dresses, the supper. And then Dick made
a sensation by saying right out, that he had just met Mr. Upjohn on Main Street with Mrs. Bruce,
holding a parasol gallantly over her head. And everybody looked at once at Mrs. Upjohn, and
then back at the graceless Dick, and an awful silence succeeded, broken by Mrs. Upjohn's reaching
out her hand and saying in the tone of a Miss Cushman on the stage: "Dick, dear, I'll take
another cookie." If Mr. Upjohn chose to walk down town shielding women's complexions for them,
why in the world should she trouble herself about it, beyond making sure that he did not by
mistake take her parasol for the kindly office? And so the talk went on, people coming and
people going, and Mrs. Lane did up a whole basketful of work undisturbed, and Phebe inwardly
chafed and fumed and longed for dinner-time, that at last the ceaseless, aimless chatter might
come to an end.

She went to the party that night, because in Joppa everybody had to go when asked. To refuse
was considered tantamount to an open declaration of war, unless in case of illness, and then
it almost required a doctor's certificate to get one off. It was a good law and ensured the
suppers being disposed of. There was no dancing to-night, it being an understood thing that
when Mrs. Upjohn was asked there should be none or she would not come; but there was music.
Bell Masters had a very nice contralto voice, and was always willing to sing, thus sure of
securing one of Joppa's few young gentlemen to stand by and turn over her leaves; she thoughtfully
took her music on that account, giving out that she could not play without notes. Phebe had
been doing her best all unconsciously to herself to help her hosts entertain, but when the
singing began she stole away to the nearly empty piazza, and stood leaning by the window, enjoying
the cool air and softly whistling an accompaniment to the song; and there Mr. Halloway found
her. She looked up at him and smiled as he joined her, but went on with her low, sweet whistling
all the same.

"I like that better than the singing," he said, when at last it came to an end with the music.

"You ought not to, Mr. Halloway. Don't you know it's very unlady-like to whistle? Mrs. Upjohn
puts Maria to bed for it."

"Dear me. I must take care she doesn't ever catch me at it. Ah! the dress has ironed nicely,
hasn't it? Would you mind standing out a little from the shadow?"

Phebe moved a step forward into the stream of light that shot across the piazza from the open
window, and stood so, looking up at him out of her soft white muslin draperies and white ribbons,
not a ray of color about her anywhere, like a very material and sweet little ghost.

"Yes, you look very nice, very nice indeed," he said, after a grave inspection that took in
every detail of face and figure. A young, innocent face it was, with soft brown hair as bright
and as fine as silk, all turned back from a low forehead, around which it grew in the very
prettiest way in the world, and gathered in loose braids in the neck; and she had such a fresh,
clear complexion, and such honest, loving, gray eyes, and such a round, girlish figure,--how
was it people never made more of her prettiness?

"I think you look nicer than any one here," Mr. Halloway added, in thorough conviction. "You
must be an adept in ironing." Phebe laughed softly in pure pleasure. It was so new to have
such pretty things said to her. "Would it be very wrong to slip away together for a rest?"
he continued, leading her a little farther along. "Let us sit down on the steps here and recruit.
I have talked my throat hoarse to each of the very deafest old ladies in turn,--I suppose they
came here purposely to be screeched at,--and I saw you working valiantly among the old men.
What a place this is for longevity!"

"You are finding out its characteristics by degrees, I see."

"Yes, am I not?" said he, with his pleasant laugh. "I know intimately every member of my parish
and every member of every other parish by this time from sheer hearsay. Each house I visit
gives me no end of valuable and minute information about all the other houses. I am waiting
to come out with a rousing sermon against gossip, till I shall have gained all possible enlightenment
and help from it. I mustn't kill my goose that lays the golden eggs before I have all the eggs
I want, must I?"

"And knowing us all so well, what do you think of Joppa as a whole?" asked Phebe, curiously.
"You always say it is too soon to judge, but surely you must really know by this time."

He did not answer for a moment, then turned to her very seriously. "I think," he said slowly,
"it is a place that needs a much older, a much better, and a much wiser man than I am to be
among its leaders in any sense. It is not at all what I thought it would be when I accepted
the trust. It is beyond me. But since the Bishop sent me here, I mean to stay and do my best."

"How will you begin?"

"I will begin with you," he answered, lightly, with a smile that lit up all his face, the moment's
seriousness quite gone. "You were my first friend, and I ought to take you first in hand, ought
I not? I am going to do you a great deal of good."

"How?"

"I'm going to teach you to love books."

"You can't."

"Yes, I can. You don't know books, that is all. I intend to introduce you to each other. I
have some so interesting you can't help liking them, and you'll find yourself crying for more
before you know it. I am going to bring them over to you. You shall have something better to
do than fill up all your mornings with promoting stockings of exasperating colors, and listening
to tales of Sabbath-breakers. Just wait and see. I am going to metamorphose you."

"Oh, I wish you would!" sighed Phebe, clasping her hands and speaking so earnestly that he
looked at her in surprise. "I am so sick of myself. I do want to be something better than I
am. I am so dreadfully common-place. I amount to so little. I know so little. I can do so little.
And there is no one here who cares to help me to any thing better. I don't know enough even
to know how to improve myself. But I do want to. Will you help me, Mr. Halloway? Will you really
help me?" She positively had tears shining in her eyes.

Mr. Halloway leaned forward and gently took her hand. "Am I not here for that?" he asked. "Here
purposely to help you and all who need me in any way? Will it not be my greatest pleasure to
do so, as well as my best and truest work? You may be sure, Miss Phebe, I will do all I can
for you, with God's help."

"Rather damp for you to be sitting there without a shawl, isn't it, my child?"

It was only Mrs. Anthony's friendly voice, as that lady passed hurriedly by, intent on hospitable
duties, but Phebe started guiltily. What right had she to be out here with Mr. Halloway, keeping
him from the other girls, when she ought, of course, to be in the parlors seeing that the old
ladies got their ice-cream safely? "I'll go right in," she said, rising hastily; but Mr. Halloway
drew her hand through his arm to detain her.

"Why? Because it is damp?"

"No; because I ought not to be selfish, ought to go back and help."

"Ah," said he, "I am getting new lights every moment. Then you don't go to parties just to
enjoy yourself?"

She opened wide, serious eyes. "Oh, no." He smiled down at her very kindly, "You shall go right
away," he said, releasing her. "I will not keep you another instant from dear Mr. Hardcastle
and that nice Mrs. Upjohn. But before you go let me tell you, Miss Phebe, that, if only in
view of your latest confession, I do not think you commonplace at all!"

CHAPTER III.

GERALD.

It was another article of the Joppian creed, that there was no such thing possible as a purely
Platonic friendship between a young man and a young woman; there must always be "something
in it": either a mitten for him, or a disappointment for her, or wedding-cake for all--generally
and preferably, of course, the wedding-cake;--and belonging to such friendship as lawfully
as a tail belongs to a comet, was a great, wide-spreading area of gossip. It was only in the
case of Phebe Lane that this universal and common-sense rule had its one particular and unreasonable
exception; and it was acting upon a speedily acquired knowledge of this by-law, that Mr. Halloway
boldly pursued his plan for metamorphosing his young friend, right under the open eyes and
ears of the Joppites. He lived so near that it was the most natural thing in the world for
him to stop for a moment's chat, as every one else did, either inside or outside of the window
as he went by; and as he was always sure of meeting others, call when he would, it certainly
never could have been asserted of him that he went there only to see Phebe. Indeed, he often
scarcely spoke with her at all when he so dropped in, and yet out of these frequent and informal
meetings an intimacy had sprung up between them such as Phebe at least had never known before. 

All this long preamble, "said Don Quixote, while the others supped, forgetting bring to his
mouth, because sometimes you had said Sancho Panza cenase that then there would be room to say
anything he wanted. In which he had heard came new shame to see a man who apparently had a good
understanding and good sense in all that was, I so hopelessly in treating his black and pizmienta
cavalry. The priest said he was quite right in all he had said in pro-gun, and that he, although
lawyer and graduate, was of the same opinion.

They finished their supper, the cloth, and while the hostess, her daughter and Maritornes mending
the garret of Don Quixote de la Mancha, which had determined that single women at night it
presents, Don Fernando begged the captive to tell them the story of his life, because it could be
but it was strange and interesting, as the samples had begun to arrival in company with Zoraida.
To which the captive how gladly would do what he commanded, and she only feared the story
was not to be such that give them pleasure as he wished, but that, nevertheless, not to miss
in obedecelle, tell him. The priest and all the others thanked him and begged him again and he,
seeing so many pray, said there was no occasion where a command was begging so hard.

"And so, your worships are attentive, and hear a real speech, who could be liars not arrived
curious and thought that often consist artifice.

With that said, made everyone sit back and lend him a great silence, and he, seeing and silent
and hoped that it wanted to say, his voice pleasant and relaxed,
he began saying thus:

Chapter XXXIX.

Where the captive tells of his life and events

- "In a village in the mountains of León was beginning my descent, who was most grateful liberal
nature and fortune, but in the narrowness of those people, yet My father reached fame rich,
and truly out knack if they would retain his property as it is given in Gastall. And the condition
that had to be liberal and spendthrift I have been a soldier came from the years of his youth,
is a school where the soldiers the mean is honest, and frank, extravagant, and if some soldiers
are miserable are monsters, they are rarely seen. My father passed the terms of the donation,
and bordered on prodigality, not something that is of no benefit to a married man and have children
that have to happen in the name and in being. Which my father had three, all men and all old
state to choose. So, seeing my father, which he said he could not go hand against his condition,
he wanted to deprive the instrument and causes spender and he was generous, he was deprived
of the estate, without which Alexander himself seems narrow.

And so, one day calling all three alone in a room, told us about similar reasons to now say:''Children,
to tell you that I love you, just say that you know and my children, and to understand that
I want bad enough to know that I will not hand in what up to preserve your wealth. Well, for
you to understand from now on that I love as a parent, and you do not want to destroy and stepfather
want to do one thing with you has many days that I have designed and prepared mature consideration.
You are and age to take state, or, at least, to choose exercise, such that, when older, you honor
and advantage. And what I think is to make my fortune four parts: the three will give you to
you, to each one his touches, not to exceed in anything, and I will stay with the other I to live
and sustain the days that the sky would be served to give me life. But I would like that after
everyone had in their possession that her part of his estate, to continue one way that will tell
you. There is a saying in our Spain, I think very true as we all are, being short sentences
drawn from long experience and unobtrusive, and I say that says: "Church, or sea, or royal house,"
as clearly as if to say: "Whoever wishes worth and become rich, do or church, or surf, exercising
the art of the goods, or between to serve the kings in their houses "because they say:" Better shred
of mercy lord king. " I say this because I would like, and it is my will, that one of you follow
the lyrics, the other the good, the other serve the king in the war, it is difficult to come to
serve at home, that since the war of great wealth, often to great value and great fame. Within
eight days, I will give you all your part in money, without defrauding you of a farthing, as
you will see in the work. Tell me now if you want to follow my advice and counsel on what I
have proposed.'' And send me, being the eldest, who answered, after telling not get rid of the
estate, but to spend whatever was his will, that we boys to know we were winning, I came to
conclude that meet your tastes, and mine was follow the profession of arms, serving it to God
and my king. The second brother did the mesmos offers, and chose to go to India, bringing the farm
that used cupiese him. The child, and what I believe, the wisest, said he wanted to follow the
church, or go to finish his studies at Salamanca. As stated above, agree and choose our exercises,
my father embraced us all, and, as soon as he said, called his work As we had promised, and
giving each one his part, that, what I remember, were three thousand ducats in money (because
a guy we bought all the property and paid spot, because they come out of the trunk of the house),
in a very day we said goodbye to all three of our good father, and, at the same moment, seeming
to me to be my father's inhumanity stay old and with so little property, took with him to take
my three thousand two thousand ducats because I was enough to settle down the rest of what
he needed a soldier. My two brothers, moved by my example, each gave him a thousand ducats,
so that my father left four thousand in money, and three thousand, which, it seems, value the
property that quota, who refused to sell, but to stay with her roots. I say, finally, we said goodbye
to that our uncle and I said, not without much regret and tears of all, ordering we did know
them, every time that it would comfort of our events, prosperous or adverse. Prometímosselo, and
hugging and throwing his blessing, one took the trip from Salamanca, Sevilla and I another
of Alicante, where he had had new a ship that carried there ginovesa wool for Genoa.

"This nearly twenty-two years since I left my father's house, and all of them, since I written several
letters, I have not known of either of my brothers new one. And so in this speech I will say
I spent time briefly. Embarked at Alicante, I came with a prosperous Travel to Genoa, went
from there to Milan, where I settled in arms and some Gallic soldier
where I wanted to go to establish my place in Piedmont, and was already
on the way to Alexandria the Palla, I learned that the Grand Duke
of Alba was going to Flanders.

I changed the way, went with he, servile in the days that he did, I found myself in the deaths
of the Counts of Eguemón and Horn, I managed to be ensign under a famous captain of Guadalajara,
Diego de Urbina, and out some time I came to Flanders, was new to the league that His Holiness
the Pope Pius Fifth, of happy remembrance, had made with Venice and Spain against the common enemy
which is the Turkish, who, at that very time, his army had won the famous island Cyprus, which
was under the dominion of Venice, and sad and unfortunate loss. SUPOS a general coming down
league Desta Serene Don John of Austria, the natural brother of our good king Don Felipe. Divulgóse
the great war machine was doing. All which prompted me and touched the spirit and the desire
to see me in the day than expected, and even had inklings, and promises almost certain, that
at the first opportunity that presented itself would be promoted to captain, I wanted to drop
everything and come to me, as I did, to Italy. And he wanted me good fortune that Don John
of Austria had just arrived at Genoa, who went to Naples to join the Venetian fleet, as he
afterwards did at Messina.

"I say, finally, I found myself in that glorious day, and a captain of infantry, honorable position
to which I climbed my good luck rather than my merits. And that day that was so fortunate for
Christendom, because it is disabused the world and all nations they were in error, believing
that the Turks were invincible at sea: in that day, I mean, where was the shattered Ottoman pride
and arrogance, among many adventurous as there there (because more
chance there were Christians who died than those who live and winners
were), I alone was unfortunate because, however it could be expected
if the Roman times, some naval crown, I was that night that followed
that famous day in chains to the feet and manacles on their hands.

And it was this pass, that, having the Uchali, king of Algiers, a daring and successful corsair,
rammed and paid the captain of Malta, only three knights left alive in it, and they injured,
The captain went to socorrella Andrea Juan, where I went with my company and making what should
be on a similar occasion, I jumped on the galley counter, which, deviating from the he had rammed,
kept my men following me, so I found myself alone in my enemies, who could not resist, being
many, in short, gave me full of wounds. And, as you will have, gentlemen, Uchali heard that was
saved with his whole fleet, I came to be held captive in his power,
and alone was both happy and sad among the captive between so many
free, there were fifteen thousand Christians that day reached the
desired freedom, all at the oar in the Turkish fleet.

"They carried to Constantinople, where the Grand Turk, Selim, general of the sea became my master,
because had done his duty in the battle, having led by displays of the standard value the religion
of Malta. I found myself in the second year, which was the seventy-two, in Navarino rowing in
the captain of the three lanterns. I saw and felt the chance that there will not get lost
in the port all the Turkish fleet, because all the Levent and that she came Janissaries were
certain that they had to ram in the same manner, port, and had to point his pasamaques clothes
that are your shoes, then overland to run away without waiting to be fought: such was the
fear that had become our army.

But Heaven ordered otherwise, no fault or neglect of the general who commanded on our side, but
for the sins of Christendom and because God wants and we have always allows punishment to
chastise us.

"In truth, standing on Uchali Modon was collected, which is an island that is next to Navarino,
and throwing people on the ground, fortified the mouth of the harbor, and dwelt quietly until
Don John turned. This trip took the galley called the Prize, whose captain was a son of the famous
corsair Barbarossa. Naples took her captain, called La Loba, governed by that thunderbolt of war,
the father of the soldiers, for that fortunate and never vanquished Captain Don Alvaro de Bazán, Marquis
of Santa Cruz. And I do wish to say what happened in the dam of La
Presa.

It was so cruel son of Barbarossa, and was so badly to their captives, that just as the oar which
saw the wolf galley was coming in and that they reached them, released all at once their oars
and seized their captain who stood on the estanterol screaming that bogasen hastily, and passing
from bank to bank, from stem to stern, gave snacks, that happened just over the tree and had spent
his soul to hell-that was, as I said, the cruelty with which he treated and hatred that they will
have.

We returned to Constantinople, and the following year, which was seventy-three, it was learned how Don
John had beaten Tunisia, and removed the kingdom from the Turks and put into Muley Hamet in possession,
cutting the hopes of returning to reign there was Muley Hamida, the cruelest Moor and was braver
than the world. Felt much this loss the Great Turco, and using the wisdom that all of your home
have made peace with the Venetians, much more than he wanted, and
the following year seventy-four, he attacked the Goleta and the strong
near Tunis had left half built Don Juan.

In all these trances walked me to the oar without any hope of freedom, at least, did not expect
to have it redemption, because he was determined not to write the news of my misfortune to
my father.

"Perished, finally, the schooner is perished the fort, on which squares of soldiers were Turks
paid seventy-five thousand, and Moors, and Alarab of all Africa, more than four thousand, accompanied
by this very large number of people with so much ammunition and implements of war, and with
so many pioneers, with their hands and handfuls of dirt would cover the Goleta and strong. Goleta
perished first, then taken to be impregnable, and not lost because
of its defenders, who did everything in his defense that should and
could, but because the experience showed how easily entrenchments
could raise at that desert sand, because water was two feet, and the
Turks found none at two yards; and so, with many sandbags entrenchments
lifted so high that surpassed the walls force, and, throwing a gentleman,
no one could stop or assist the defense.

Was common opinion that there had to lock ours in Goleta, but wait in campaign the landing,
and those who say talk and with little experience of similar cases because if the schooner and the fort
there were barely seven thousand soldiers, how could such a small numbers, although they were
more hardworking, go to the campaign and remain in the forces, against both as was that of
the enemy?, and how is it possible to help losing a force that is not relieved, and more when surrounded
by many enemies and stubborn, and in their same country there? But many thought, and it seemed to
me that was special grace and mercy which Heaven showed to Spain to allow that is stricken and
hiding place of mischief, and that Cornia or sponge moth numerous unprofitable monies were spent
there, not otherwise serve to preserve the memory of its capture by the invincible Charles V; as
if it were necessary to make it eternal, as it is and will be, these stones to support it.

"The fort also fell, but they were their winning the Turkish inch by inch, because the soldiers
who fought so bravely and defended stoutly that twenty-five thousand enemies those killed in twenty-two
general assaults were. None captivated healthy three hundred that remained alive, a clear and
manifest in their work and value, and how well had defended and kept their seats. Rindióse
to match a small fort or tower was in the middle of tin, by Don Juan Zanoguera, Valencian gentleman
and a famous soldier.

She is a Michael Angelo at painting, and has represented striking scenes from his 'Last Judgment'
on a set of after-dinner coffee cups. She drives, she skates, she swims, she rows, she sails,
has a thorough knowledge of business, and is up in stocks, is femininely masculine and masculinely
feminine, scorns novels, and can order a dinner, is a churchwoman, and dresses always in the
latest style. Is there any thing else, Miss Phebe?"

"Only one thing else that I think you have rather forgotten, Mr. Halloway: I love her and she
is my friend."

"Miss Phebe," cried the young man in instant contrition, "have I hurt you? Have I been thoughtless
enough for that with my foolish fun? You know I did not mean it. Will you forgive me?" He held
out his hand.

Phebe hesitated. "Will you not make fun of her any more? And will you like her if she comes?
You know she may come here this summer; there is just a chance of it. Will you promise?"

"I can safely promise to like any one whom you like, I know, Miss Phebe. Soeur Angélique, make
this stubborn child give me her hand. It is not fitting that I crave absolution so abjectly."

"You are two silly children together," said Soeur Angélique, rising and laughing. "You may
settle your quarrels as you can while I order tea."

"Miss Phebe, have I really vexed you so much?" asked the young man, earnestly, as his sister
left the room. "You must know I would not do that for the world."

"I don't think you could hurt or vex me in any way," said Phebe, "excepting only through Gerald.
For you don't know how I love her, Mr. Halloway. I love her with all my heart and soul, I think,
oh, more--almost more--than any one else in the world."

"I know you do," he answered. "It is a love to envy her." Phebe was still looking up at him
from her low stool, her face raised as if in appeal. She always looked very young for her years,
and now she seemed not more than a child of sixteen in the waning light. He could not help
it this time; he laid his hand very lightly for one briefest instant on her pretty hair. "But
you will not be less friends with me because I like you best?"

"I will not ever be less friends with you," Phebe replied, soberly. "I don't change so."

"No," he said; "I know you do not. Nor do I."

And then he moved away from her, and began telling an irresistibly comic story about a call
he had made on a poor woman that afternoon (he could not for the life of him help seeing the
ludicrous side of every thing), and from one subject they passed to another, and when Soeur
Angélique summoned them to tea, she found her reverend brother standing in the middle of the
room in the full swing of a chorus from "The Pirates," with Phebe whistling the liveliest possible
accompaniment, and both of them gesticulating wildly. He stopped with a laugh as his sister
appeared in the door-way.

"Don't be shocked, Soeur Angélique. I shut the window lest Mrs. Upjohn should chance to go
by and hear me. She would telegraph the Bishop. I am only resting. It wore me out working for
Miss Phebe's pardon. No; wait a moment, Soeur Angélique. Don't let's go to tea instantly. I
would rather quiet down a little before I go in and say grace." He took up a chance book from
the table, and turning to the window to catch the light, read a few lines to himself, then
threw it down, and came forward with a smile. "There, I am ready now. Take my arm, Soeur Angélique.
Miss Phebe, will you come, please?"

CHAPTER IV.

MRS. UPJOHN'S ENTERTAINMENT.

Mrs. Upjohn was going to give an entertainment. She was about to open the hospitable doors
of the great house upon the hill, which seemed to have chosen that pre-eminence that it might
the better overlook the morals of its neighbors. Joppa held its breath in charmed suspense.
The question was not, Will I be asked? that was affirmatively settled for every West-End Joppite
of party-going years; nor was it, What shall I wear? which was determined once for all at the
beginning of the season; but, What will be done with me when I get there? For to go to Mrs.
Upjohn's was not the simple thing that it sounded. She wished it to be distinctly understood
that she did not ask people to her house for their amusement, but for their moral and spiritual
improvement; any one could be amused anywhere, but she wished to show her guests that there
were pleasanter things than pleasure to be had even in social gatherings, and to teach them
to hunger and thirst after better than meat and drink, while at the same time she took pains
always to provide a repast as superior to the general run as her sentiments, quite atoning
to the Joppites for the spiritual accompaniments to her feast by its material and solid magnificence,
which lingered appetizingly in their memories long after they had settled their consequent
doctors' bills. Yes, the Joppites were not asked to Mrs. Upjohn's to eat and drink only, or
merely to have a good time, with whatever ulterior intentions of so doing they may have gone
thither. They were asked for a purpose,--a purpose which it was vain to guess, and impossible
to escape. Go they must, and be improved they must, bon gré mal gré, and enjoy themselves they
would if they could.

So there were mingled feelings abroad when Mrs. Upjohn's neatly written invitations found their
way into each of the West-End houses, embracing natives and strangers alike in their all-hospitable
sweep, and even creeping into some outlying less aristocratic quarters, where confusion worse
confounded, in the shape of refurbishing and making over, followed agonizingly in their wake.
The invitations were indited by Miss Maria Upjohn, it being an opportunity to improve that
young lady's handwriting which her mother could not have conscientiously suffered to pass,
and stated that Mr. and Mrs. Reuben O. Upjohn requested the honor of your company on Thursday,
July 14th, punctually at four o'clock. R.S.V.P. Joppa immediately R.S.V.P.'d that it would
feel flattered to present itself at that hour, and then looked anxiously around and asked itself
"What will it be this time?" The day dawned, and still the great question agitated public minds
unsolved.

"There isn't a word to be coaxed or threatened out of Maria," said Bell Masters. "I believe
it's something too awful to tell. Mr. De Forest, can't you hazard a guess?"

Mr. Ogden De Forest was lazily strolling past the Masters' front steps, where a knot of girls
had gathered after a game of lawn tennis, and were imbibing largely of lemonade, which was
being fabricated on the spot, according to demand, by Phebe and Janet Mudge. The spoons stopped
clinking in the various glasses as Bell thus audaciously called out to the gentleman. He was
not a Joppite by either birth or education; indeed, he had but lately arrived on his first
visit as a summer guest, and was hardly known to anybody personally as yet, though there was
not a girl in the place but was already perfectly well aware of his existence, and had placed
him instantly as "one of the very swellest of the swells." He was a short, dark, well-dressed
man, and so exceedingly handsome that every feminine heart secretly acknowledged that only
to have the right to bow to him would be a joy and pride indescribable. And here was Bell,
who had accidentally been introduced to him the day before, calling to him as unceremoniously
as if he were Dick Hardcastle or Jake Dexter. He turned at her voice and paused at the gate,
lifting his hat. "I beg you pardon, Miss Masters, you called me?"

"Yes," said Bell. "Have some lemonade?"

"No, thanks."

"Come in."

"Thanks, not this morning. I shall see you later at Mrs. Upjohn's, I suppose."

"Yes, you'll see us all later," said Miss Bell, fishing out a lemon-seed from her goblet. "We
shall have on different dresses, and you'll be offering us lemonade instead of our offering
it to you. Take a good look at us so as to see how much prettier we are now than we shall be then."

Mr. De Forest obeyed literally, staring tranquilly and critically at each in turn, his glance
returning slowly to the young lady of the house. "Unless you introduce me to your friends I
shall not be able to tell them so," he replied, in the slow, deliberate voice that seemed always
to have a ring of suppressed sarcasm in it, no matter what he said.

"Then I'll certainly not introduce you," said Bell, composedly, with a saucy shot at him from
her handsome black eyes. "And so I'll be the only girl to get the compliment. Phebe, more sugar,
please."

"I will endeavor to work one up between now and then regardless of cost. Four o'clock, I believe.
What is it to be? A dance?"

"Holy Moses! at Mrs. Upjohn's!"

"Oh, she doesn't go in for that kind of thing? A card-party, then?"

"Great heavens! Mr. De Forest, are you mad? I don't doubt she struggles with herself over every
visiting card that she uses,--and playing-cards--!"

"Theatricals, then?"

Bell gave a positive howl. "Theatricals! Hear him, girls!"

"We hear well enough. You don't give us a chance to do any thing but listen," said Amy Duckworth,
pointedly.

"My dear, you'll converse all the more brilliantly this afternoon for a brief period of silence
now," said Bell, sweetly. "Mr. De Forest, you are not happy in your guesses."

"I have exhausted them, unless it is to be a musicale."

"No. That's what we are going to have to-morrow ourselves. I sing, you know."

"Do you? Well, a garden party perhaps?"

"That's what the Ripleys are going to have Thursday."

"Then, so far as I can see, there is nothing left for it to be except a failure," said De Forest,
lifting his arms off the gate. "And, in view of so much coming dissipation, I feel constrained
to retire and seek a little preparatory repose. Good-morning, Miss Masters."

"How hateful not to introduce him, Bell! And when he distinctly asked you to! How abominably
mean of you! How selfish, how horrid! I wouldn't have done so," broke out in an indignant chorus,
as the gentleman walked off.

"Do you think I would be such a goose as to go shares in the handsomest man Joppa ever laid
eyes on, so long as I can keep him to myself?" said Bell, honestly. "Fish for yourselves, girls.
The sea is open to all, and you may each land another as good."

Phebe's lip curled very disdainfully. What a fuss to make over a man, and how Bell had changed
in the last few years!

"Well, keep him, if you can, but I'll be even with you yet," said Amy, with an ominous smile.
"And what luck! Here comes Mr. Moulton now, and I know him and you don't, and I'll pay you
off on the spot. Good-morning, Mr. Moulton."

The young gentleman stopped, in his turn, at the gate as Amy spoke to him.

"Oh, Miss Duckworth, I was on my way to call on you."

"I will go home with you in a minute," said Amy, graciously. "I wouldn't miss your call for
any thing. But first let me introduce you to my friends. Miss Mudge, Mr. Moulton,--Miss Lane,
the Misses Dexter. You will meet us all again at Mrs. Upjohn's. Of course, you are going?"

"Certainly, now I am told that I shall meet you there, and if you will promise that I shan't
be called upon to do any thing remarkable. I have heard alarming reports."

"That is out of anyone's power to promise," replied Miss Duckworth. "No genius is safe from her."

"Amy, love," broke in Bell, with infinite gentleness of tone and manner, "you have forgotten
to present your friend to me, and I cannot be so impolite as to leave him standing outside
my own gate. I am Miss Masters, Mr. Moulton. Pray excuse the informality, and come in to share
our lemonade."

Mr. Moulton, nothing loath, accordingly came in, took his glass, and sat himself just where
Bell directed, on a step at her feet. Amy colored, and there was a subdued titter somewhere
in the background, and Bell calmly resumed the reins of the conversation. "No, there is no
knowing what we shall be put through this afternoon. One time when Mrs. Upjohn had got us all
safely inside her doors, she divided us smartly into two classes, set herself in the middle,
and announced that we were there for a spelling bee. We shouldn't say we hadn't learned something
at her house. And upon my word we did learn something. Never before or since have I heard such
merciless words as she dealt us out. My hair stands on end still when I recollect the horrors
I underwent that day."

"I'll smuggle in a dictionary," declared Mr. Moulton. "I'll be ready for her."

"No use. She never runs twice in the same groove. It's only sure not to be a spelling bee this
time."

"When we last went there it turned out to be a French soirée," said one of the Misses Dexter,
"and she announced that there would be a penny's fine collected at the end of the evening for
each English word spoken."

"Proceeds to go to a lately imported poor family," added the sister Dexter. "There was quite
a sum raised, and the head of the family decamped with it two days after, for Heaven knows
where, leaving his wife and infants on Mrs. Upjohn's hands poorer than ever."

But Mrs. Upjohn's entertainment proved to be neither orthographic nor linguistic. The guests
arrived punctually as bidden, and their hostess, clad in her most splendid attire, received
them with her most gracious manner. There was nothing to foretell the fate that awaited them.
Her tall, awkward daughter stood nervously by her side. Mr. Upjohn, too, kept there valiantly
for a time, then his round, ample figure and jolly face disappeared somewhere, under chaperonage
of Mrs. Bruce, his latest admiration. But no one ever thought of Mr. Upjohn as the host, any
way; beseemed rather to be a sort of favored guest in his own parlor; and his place was more
than made good by Mr. Hardcastle, who, standing in the centre of the room, exactly as he always
stood in the centre of everybody's room on such an occasion, appeared himself to be quite master
of ceremonies, from the grand way in which he stepped forward to meet each guest and hope he
or she "would make out to enjoy it." The rooms filled rapidly, and before long Mrs. Upjohn
turned from the door and stood an instant reviewing her guests with the triumphant mien of
a victorious general. Then she advanced solemnly to the middle of the room, displacing Mr.
Hardcastle, who graciously made way and waved his hand to signify to her his permission to proceed.

"My friends," said the great lady, with her deep, positive voice, drawing her imposing figure
to its fullest height, "as you know, it is never my way to give parties. I leave that for the
rest of you to do. When I ask you to my house, it is with a higher motive than to make a few
hours lie less heavily on your hands."

"Dear soul!" muttered Dick Hardcastle to his crony, Jake. "Nobody could have the conscience
to charge her with ever having lightened them to us."

"And therefore," continued the lady, gazing around upon her victims with a benignant smile,
"without further prelude, I will inform you for what object I have asked you to honor me with
your presence this afternoon."

She paused, and a cold chill ran through the company. What would she do? Would she open on
them with the Westminster Catechism this time, or set them to shelling peas for some poor man's
dinner, or would she examine them in the multiplication table? A few had run it hastily over
before leaving home to make sure that they were ready for such an emergency.

"I had thought first," Mrs. Upjohn proceeded, "of a series of games as instructive as delightful,
games of history and geography, and one particularly of astronomy, which I am persuaded would
be very helpful. It brought out the nature of the spectroscope in a remarkably clear and intelligent
light, and after a few rounds I am sure none of us could ever again have forgotten those elusive
figures relative to the distances and proportions of the planets. However, that must be for
another time. For today I thought it would be a pleasure as well as a benefit to us all to
learn something about a gifted and noble person who, I am surprised to find, is not so well
known in Joppa as she should be, and whom, I am convinced, we should all be infinitely the
better and happier for knowing. I have, therefore, persuaded Mr. Webb, with whose powers as
a reader long years of acquaintanceship have so pleasantly familiarized us, to read to us this
afternoon extracts from the 'Life and Letters of the Baroness Bunsen.'"

"Good Lord!" ejaculated Dick beneath his breath, "who's that?"

"Hush," whispered Jake. "I've got a novel of Miss Braddon's in my pocket. I thought it might
come in handy. That'll help us through till feed time."

"You are all familiar with the name, of course," pursued Mrs. Upjohn, smiling graciously around
the dismayed circle of her guests. "The book has been in the library this long time past, and
observing with regret that only its first fifty pages had been cut, I caught at this invaluable
opportunity to make you further acquainted with it."

Mr. Webb now came forward, a thick, green-bound volume in his hand, and a look on his face
as if he were about to open the proceedings with a prayer, but Mrs. Upjohn held up her hand.

"One moment, please, before we begin. We ladies are so unaccustomed to sitting with idle hands,
even when listening to so absorbing a theme as the virtues of this truly excellent Christian
wife and mother, that I thought it would be a kindness to ourselves to provide some simple
work which should occupy our fingers and at the same time be in itself a worthy object of industry.
Maria, my dear."

The silence in the room was appalling; one could almost hear the shiver of apprehension running
down the silk-and muslin-clad backs. The sign was given, however, by the docile Maria, and
immediately two enormous baskets were brought in: one, the smaller, containing every possible
implement for unlimited sewing by unlimited hands; the other, of alarming dimensions, filled
to overflowing with shapeless and questionable garments of a canton-flannel coarse, so yellow,
so indestructible, so altogether unwearable and hideous, that had it been branded "charity"
in flaming letters, its object could not have been more plainly designated. Mrs. Upjohn lifted
the top article and unfolded it lovingly. It was a night-dress, atoning in lavishness of material
for deficiency in grace of make, and would have been a loose fit for the wife of the giant Chang.

"These, ladies," she said, "as you will have guessed, are for the winter wear of our parish
poor. Though you are not all so fortunate as to belong to our church, still I feel there is
not one of you here but will be more than glad to help forward so blessed a charity as clothing
the naked" (Mrs. Upjohn, in view of the nature of the garments, spoke even more literally than
she intended), "who none the less need your ministrations whether you worship with us or apart.
Maria, my child, Bell, Phebe, Mattie, will you kindly distribute the work among the ladies?
There is another basket ready outside if the supply gives out. Dick, I would like you to carry
around the thimbles. Jake, here are the needles and the spools and the scissors. If I may be
permitted, ladies, I would suggest that we should all begin with the button-holes."

Nothing but the thought of the recompense in the coming supper could have sustained Mrs. Upjohn's
doomed guests in the prospect before them. Extracts from Baroness Bunsen, and buttonholes in
canton-flannel charity nightgowns, and a hot July afternoon, made a sum of misery that was
almost too great a tax upon even Joppian amiability.

"I say it's a shame!" cried Bell Masters, in unconcealed wrath. "The idea of springing such
a trap on us! Let Mrs. Upjohn's parish sew for its own poor, I won't crease my fresh dress
holding that great, thick lump on my lap all the afternoon. I'm not going to be swindled into
helping in this fashion."

"Oh, yes you are," said Mr. Halloway, bubbling over with suppressed merriment at the intense
fun of it all. "There isn't one of you here who will refuse. I never knew any thing so delightful
and novel in my whole life. This condensed combination, in one afternoon party of charity,
literature, and indigestion is masterly. Miss Mudge, here is a seat for you right by Miss Masters.
Miss Phebe, let me find you a chair."

And in a few moments, simply, it seemed, by the natural law of gravitation, without any engineering
whatever, Mrs. Upjohn's guests had resolved themselves into two distinct parties, the elders
all in the drawing-room, the younger ones in the parlor across the hall, too far off from Mr.
Webb for their gay whispering to disturb that worthy as he boldly plunged headlong at his work,
to do or die written on every feature of his thin, long face.

"So this is what the party turned out, Miss Masters, is it?" said Moulton, pulling his moustache
as he stood up beside her. "A first-class Dorcas society."

"Charity covereth a multitude of sins," said Bell, crossly, giving a vindictive snap with her
scissors, "but it won't begin to cover the enormity of Mrs. Upjohn's transgressions on this
occasion. You gentlemen must be very devoted to atone to us for the button-holes. There's Mr.
De Forest standing in the other room looking as if he wished he were dead. Go and bring him here."

Thus summoned, Mr. De Forest came leisurely enough, looking, if possible, a little more languid
and blasé than he did in the morning. Bell instantly made a place for him on the sofa by her side.

"Thanks, I would rather stand. I can take it all in better."

"Well?" asked Bell, after a pause, looking saucily up at him. "Was I right this morning? Didn't
we look prettier then?"

"Infinitely."

Bell colored rather angrily, and Phebe laughed outright. Mr. De Forest favored her with a stare,
chewed the end of his side-whiskers reflectively a moment, then deliberately walked over to
her. "Miss Lane, I believe."

Phebe bowed, but somewhat stiffly.

"Excuse me," continued De Forest, imperturbably. "There doesn't seem to be any one to introduce
us, and we know perfectly well who we each are, you know, and I wanted to ask about a mutual
friend of ours,--Miss Vernor."

Phebe brightened and softened instantly. "Oh!" she exclaimed, dropping her work, "you know
her? you have seen her? lately?"

"I know her, yes, quite well. I saw her some weeks since. I understood then that there was
a little talk of her coming up here this summer. One of those fearful children, Olly, or Hal,
or some one of the superfluous young ones, was a little off condition,--not very well, you
know,--and the doctor said he mustn't go with the rest to the sea-shore, and she mentioned
bringing him up here to recruit. I heard her mention your name, too, and didn't know but you
might have heard something of it."

"I have, I have!" cried Phebe, her face all aglow, "She is coming,--she and Olly. She is going
to stay with me. I wrote and begged her to."

"Ah, that will be very pleasant for you. Do you expect her soon?"

"To-morrow."

"Ah!" Mr. De Forest ruminated silently a moment. "She'll be bored to death up here, won't she?"
he asked, presently.

"Then she can go home again," replied Phebe, shortly.

"True, true," said her companion, thoughtfully. "I forgot that. And she probably will. It would
be like her to go if it bored her."

"Only there's Olly," said Phebe, grimly, the light fading out of her face a little. "She'll
have to stay for him."

"Oh, no. She can put him to board somewhere and leave him. Miss Vernor doesn't concern herself
overmuch with the young ones. They are an awful nuisance to her."

"She does every thing for them. You can't know her," said Phebe, indignantly. "Did you say
you knew her well, Mr. De Forest?"

"I don't remember just what I said, Miss Lane, but it would have been the truth if I did, and
I generally speak the truth when it's equally convenient. Yes, I do know Miss Vernor very well,
and I have worsted her in a great many arguments,--you know her argumentative turn, perhaps?
If you will allow me, I will do myself the honor of calling upon her when she comes,--and upon
yourself, if I may have the pleasure."

"Not if you come with the intention of putting Gerald out of conceit with Joppa. I want her
to stay a long, long time."

"Don't be afraid, Miss Lane. I'll do my best to help keep her here, so long, at least, as I
stay myself. 'Aprés celà le déluge.'"

"I don't speak French."

"Ah? No? I regret it. You might have assisted me in my genders. I am never altogether sure
of them."

"Mr. De Forest," called Bell, imperatively, from the other side of the room, displeased at
the defalcation of her knight, "I want to introduce you to Miss Mudge."

Miss Mudge tried to make Bell understand by frantic pantomime that she hadn't meant just now,--any
time would do,--but Bell chose it should be just now; and slightly lifting his eyebrows, Mr.
De Forest took his handsome person slowly back to Bell to make an almost impertinently indifferent
bow to the new claimant upon him.

Mr. Halloway had been standing near Phebe, too near not to overhear the conversation, and he
turned to her now quickly.

"So this accounts for your beaming face," he said in a low tone, as he took a seat just back
of her in the window niche. "The mysterious Gerald is really coming, then. I wondered what
had happened as soon as I saw you. Why did you not tell me?"

"I was only waiting till I had the chance," she answered, all the brightness coming back into
her bonny face as she smiled up at him.

"Do you think I could keep any thing so nice from you for long? It seems to make every thing
nicer when you know it too. She is coming to-morrow,--only think,--to-morrow,--just twenty-one
hours more now. I can hardly wait!"

"It will be a great happiness to her, surely, to see you again," said Denham.

"That's what she writes in her letter. At least she says: 'I shall be glad to see you again,
Phebe, my dear' Isn't that nice? 'Phebe, my dear,' she says. That is a great deal for Gerald
to say."

"Is it? But I believe some young ladies are less effusive with their pens than with their tongues."

"It isn't Gerald's nature ever to be effusive. But oh, I'm so glad she's coming! I only got
her letter last night. See, doesn't she write a nice hand?" And cautiously, lest any one else
should see too, Phebe slipped an envelope into Denham's hand. He bent back behind the lace
curtains to inspect it.

"Do you generally carry about your letters in your pocket, Miss Phebe?"

"No, only Gerald's. I love so always to have something of hers near me. Isn't it a nice hand?"

Halloway looked silently at the upright, angular, large script. "It's legible, certainly."

"But you don't like it?"

"Miss Phebe, I am torn between conflicting truth and politeness. It is like a man's hand, if
I must say something."

"And so are her letters like a man's. Read it and see. Oh, she wouldn't mind! There is nothing
in it, and yet somehow it seems just like Gerald. Do read it. Oh, I want you to. Please, please
do."

And led half by curiosity, half by the eagerness in Phebe's pretty face, Denham opened the
letter and read, Phebe glancing over it with him as if she couldn't bear to lose sight of it
an instant.

"DEAR PHEBE," so ran the letter, "your favor of 9th inst. rec. I had no idea of intruding ourselves
upon you when I asked you to look up rooms, but as you seem really to want us"--("seem!" whispered
Phebe, putting her finger on the word with a pout)--"I can only say we shall be very glad to
come to you. You may look for Olly and myself Friday, July 15th, by the P.M. train. Olly isn't
really ill, only run down. He is as horrid a little bear as ever. All are well, and started
last week for Narragansett Pier. I shall rejoice to get away from the art school and guilds,
which keep on even in this intemperate weather, and I shall be glad to see you again, Phebe,
my dear," (Phebe looked up triumphantly in Denham's face as she reached the words.) "Remember
me to Mrs. Lane and Miss--, I can't think of her name,--Aunt Lydia, I mean.

"Sincerely yours

"GERALDINE VERNOR,

"P.S.--Olly only drinks milk."

Phebe took back the letter and folded it up. "Well?" she said.

"Well?" said Denham, looking at her and smiling.

"It's just like her," declared Phebe. "It's so downright and to the point. Gerald never wastes
words."

"You said it was like a man's letter," said Denham. "But I must beg leave to differ with you
there. I don't think it is at all such a letter as I would have written you, for instance."

"Of course not. It wouldn't be proper for you to say 'Phebe, my dear,' as Gerald does. Yours
would have to be a very dignified, pastoral letter."

"Yes, addressed to 'My Lamb,' which you couldn't object to in a pastoral letter of course,
and which sounds nearly as affectionate, blaming you for having caused me to lose the valuable
information I might have gained about the Baroness Bunsen. I never got much farther than her
birth in that famous history. I see poor Miss Delano casting longing glances in here. I'll
smuggle her in among you young people."

He departed on his errand of mercy, and soon had the timid little old maid in the more congenial
atmosphere of the parlor, where little by little, though in a very stealthy and underhand way,
the talk grew more general, and the restraint slackened more and more, until sewing and reading
were both forgotten and the fun became fast and furious, culminating in the sudden appearance
of Jake Dexter dressed up as an ancient and altogether unlovely old woman, whom Dick Hardcastle
presented in a stage whisper as "Baroness Bunsen in the closing chapter," and who forthwith
proceeded to act out in dumb show the various events of that admirable woman's life, as judiciously
and sonorously touched upon by Mr. Webb in the drawing-room opposite. Jake was a born actor,
and having "done up" the Baroness, he proceeded to "do up" several other noted historical characters,
not omitting a few less celebrated contemporaries of his own, each representation better and
truer to life than the last; and winding up with snatching away their work from the young ladies'
not unwilling hands, and piling it in heaps on the floor around him, he sat himself in the
middle with an armful hugged close and an air of comically mingled resignation and opulence,
and announced himself as "a photo from life of ye destitute poor of Joppa."

Mrs. Upjohn may have had suspicions that all was not going on precisely as she had planned
in that other half of her domains which she had surrendered to Maria's feeble guardianship,
but it certainly could not be laid to her blame if young people would amuse themselves even
at her house. If they wilfully persisted in neglecting the means of grace she had conscientiously
provided for them, so much the worse for them, not for her; and if Mr. Upjohn found the contemplation
of Mrs. Bruce's profile, and her occasional smiles at him as she bent over her ugly work, not
sufficient of an indemnity for his enforced silence, and chose to sneak over to the young people's
side and enjoy himself too, as an inopportune and hearty guffaw from thence testified just
at the wrong moment, when Mr. Webb had reached the culminating point of the Baroness' death,
and was drawing tears from the ladies' eyes by the irresistible pathos of his voice,--why,
Mrs. Upjohn owned in her heart that it was only what might be expected of him, and that she
couldn't help that either.

So at last the reading came to an end. Everybody said it had been unprecedentedly delightful,
and they should never forget that dear Baroness so long as they lived, and they thought Mrs.
Upjohn herself might have sat for the original of the biography, so identical were her virtues
with those of the departed saint, and so exactly did she resemble her in every particular except
just in the outward circumstances of her life. And Mrs. Upjohn modestly entreated them to desist
drawing so unworthy a comparison, and said it was an example of a life they should each and
all do well to imitate so far as in them lay, and then she went about collecting the nightgowns,
and (oh, cruellest of all!) inspecting the button-holes. It was an excellent day's work, she
reported, fanning herself vigorously, and Miss Brooks, as champion button-hole-maker, having
made three more than any one else, should have the post of honor and be taken in to supper
by Mr. Upjohn, who was routed out from the parlor for the purpose, very red in the face, and
still convulsed with laughter. Mrs. Bruce may have suspected this to be designed as a neat
way of cutting her out, but there is no knowing to what lengths a flippant widow's imagination
will not go, and any way Mr. Upjohn quite atoned afterward for any temporary neglect, by paying
her the most assiduous attentions right in the face of his wife, who apparently did not care
a straw, and only thought her husband a little more foolish than usual. Did not everybody know
that it was only Mr. Upjohn's way, and that it did not mean any thing?

And so the doors were thrown open, supper was announced, and Joppa, as it swarmed around the
loaded tables, felt that its hour of merited reward was come; and Mr. Hardcastle, when at last
he could eat and drink no more, stood up and pronounced, in the name of the united assembly,
that Mrs. Upjohn's entertainment had been a very, very great success, as all that dear Mrs.
Upjohn undertook always was sure to be, and particularly those devilled crabs were unapproachable
for perfection. Nobody could make him believe that even the Baroness Bunsen with all her learning
could ever have spiced them better.

CHAPTER V.

FRIENDS.

Several days later, as Mr. Halloway was leaving the rectory one afternoon, he saw Phebe standing
in her door-way, and crossed to speak to her.

"Alone?" he asked, smiling. "I supposed that now you would never be without a shadow."

"Gerald is up-stairs dressing. She is going to ride with Mr. De Forest. He has been to see
her twice already, and you have not called yet." There was the faintest possible reproach in
her voice and in her eyes.

"I have been really busy the last few days, Miss Phebe. You may know there is always some desperate
reason when I am long absent. But here I am now. Shall I send in my card for Miss Vernor? Must
I do it up in New York or Joppa style?"

Phebe laughed. "Never mind the card, Gerald will be down soon. It is nearly time, and she is
always so punctual. What is it, Olly, dear?"

An ugly little boy, with a pale, pinched face and impish eyes, was pulling smartly at her dress.

"I say, Pheeb, can I have a cookie?"

"Does Gerald let you have cookies between meals, Olly?"

"Yes," answered Olly, unhesitatingly. "Always."

"What's that?" broke in an unexpected voice behind,--a clear, ringing, decided voice. "I will
not have you tell such lies, Olly! Why will you do it!"

"I'll have the cookie anyhow," said Olly, starting on a run. "Pheeb said I could, and this
is Pheeb's house, and I will."

"And you won't," said the voice, sharply. There was a scuffle, a rush, the sound of a smart
box on the ear, a sudden childish howl, and Olly fled back to Phebe and buried his face in
her dress. Phebe folded her arms protectingly around him, and looked up appealingly at the
tall, slender figure approaching.

"Oh, Gerald, must you?"

"Phebe, I can't have you spoil that boy so. I won't have him a liar and a gourmand; he's bad
enough without that. Olly, stop bawling this moment."

"I won't," screamed Olly. "You hurt me, you did, and if I can't have a cookie I'll cry just
as loud as ever I can; so there!"

"Then you'll cry in the house and not on the front steps. I won't have it. Come in immediately."

And holding up her habit with one hand, the young lady reached out with the other,--a very
small and white but determined-looking little hand Denham noticed (from where he stood he could
not see her face)--and wrenching the child by no means gently away from Phebe, she dragged
him with her toward the parlor.

"I hate you! I hate you! I hate you!" cried Olly, vociferously, doing battle valiantly with
hands and feet as he went. "I hate you every day worse than ever!"

"Hate me all you like," said Gerald, with utmost coolness and disdain. "I leave you perfectly
free in that direction, but you shan't tell lies or disobey me. Now stay in there and be still."

And closing the door on the sobbing culprit, she came slowly back to Phebe, still scowling
and pressing her lips firmly together as she drew on her gauntlets. "Little wretch!" she muttered.

"Gerald, please," said Phebe, flushing scarlet with mortification, "here is Mr. Halloway. I
want to introduce him to you."

Gerald stopped abruptly and looked up. She had not seen him before. A fleet, faint color tinged
her clear cheeks an instant, but there was no other sign of embarrassment or annoyance as her
dark blue eyes met his with the singularly penetrating gaze with which they looked out on all
the world. There was no denying it. With her clear-cut, aristocratic face, and her slim, straight
figure, stately perhaps rather than graceful, and a trifle haughty in its unbending erectness,
Gerald Vernor was very, very handsome.

"I am happy to meet you at last, Miss Vernor," said Denham, with his pleasant smile. "But you
are no stranger to me, I assure you. Miss Phebe made us all friends of yours long since."

Gerald's brows contracted. "Phebe is very kind," she said, with quite the opposite from gratitude
in her voice, "but I hate to be talked about beforehand. One starts on a false basis from the
first. Besides, it gives every one else the advantage over one."

"To be sure," replied Denham, "we cannot expect you to know us as well from hearsay. It would
be too much to hope that Miss Phebe should have had as much to say for any of the rest of us."
He turned laughingly to Phebe as he spoke, and she looked at him with eyes full of implicit faith.

"No," she said, simply; "I haven't told Gerald any thing about you, only your name. She will
find it all out for herself so much better than I can tell her."

"I am afraid I am not very good at finding people out," remarked Gerald, bluntly, "unless I
am extraordinarily interested in them--"

"Which I imagine you generally are not," interrupted Denham.

"True," she answered, smiling a little, "which I generally am not; I am content with a very
superficial knowledge. The world is crowded so full, where could one stop who set out to know
thoroughly all he met?"

"It is a bitter thought that you will never know more of me than just the color of my beard,"
said Denham, reflectively, "but if such is your habit I suppose I must resign myself to it.
Now, I am exactly the reverse from you; I am always extraordinarily interested in everybody."

"Ah, because as a clergyman you must be."

"No; simply because it happens to be my nature. One has one's individual characteristics, you
know, quite independently of one's profession."

"Yes, in other professions; but in yours--"

"But we are men first, Miss Vernor, afterward clergymen. Why may we not keep our distinct idiosyncrasies,
even in our clerical uniform?"

Gerald slashed her dress gently with her riding whip. "It seems to me as if you should all
be clergymen first and men afterward, fitting yourselves to the profession rather than the
profession to you; and so by all confessedly following one pattern, you would be necessarily
drawn into a greater similitude with each other than any other class of men. Ah, here is Mr.
De Forest at last."

"At last?" repeated that gentleman as he joined the group, or rather paused just beyond it,
surveying Gerald with a critical glance which seemed to take in accurately at one swift sweep
every least detail of her dress. "My watch stands at the minute, Miss Vernor."

"And here come the horses," added Phebe.

"Not much to boast of," said De Forest, turning the severe criticism of his look upon the animals
as the boy brought them up. "I wouldn't let you be seen in Central Park with them. However,
they are the best Joppa can do for us. They are not very good-natured brutes either, but I
believe you look to a horse's hoofs rather than his head."

"I do, decidedly," laughed Gerald, as De Forest raised her deftly to the saddle and arranged
bridle and girths to her liking, turning to tighten his own before mounting, and kicking away
a small dog that had run up to sniff at his heels.

"What did you bring along this ugly little beast of yours for, Jim? I abhor curs."

"Tain't none of mine, Mister," said the stable-boy, grinning. "It's one of them street dogs
that ain't nobody's." And he in his turn gave a push to the puppy, while Gerald leaned down
and hit at it lightly with her whip.

"Get away, my friend. There isn't room both for you and for us here," she said, turning her
horse toward it playfully as the little creature slunk aside. In another instant her horse
kicked violently, there was a single sharp yelp, and the dog lay motionless in the road.

"Hi!" exclaimed Jim, quite in accents of admiration, as he ran up and bent over the poor thing.
"That was a good un! Right on the head! He won't trouble any other genelman again, I'm thinking."

"What!" cried Gerald, sharply. "You don't mean the dog is dead?"

"Don't I?" said the boy, moving a little aside so that she should see. "That was a neat un
and no mistake."

Gerald looked down with a cry of horror; then suddenly sprang from her horse and caught up
the poor little limp animal in her arms.

"Take away the horse," she said to the boy, imperiously. "I shall not ride to-day."

"But, Miss Vernor!" expostulated De Forest, "for heaven's sake don't take it so to heart. It's
unfortunate, of course, but no one is to blame. Do put the thing down. It's dead. You can't
do any thing more for it."

"I know it," said Gerald. "I did all I could; I killed him. But you'll have to excuse me, Mr.
De Forest, I can't ride."

De Forest caught her by the arm impatiently, as she turned from him. "What nonsense, Miss Vernor!
What is the good of playing tragedy queen over a dead dog? I'll have him buried in a silver
coffin if you like and raise a memorial to his inestimable virtues, but in the name of all
that is sensible, do get on the horse again and let us have our ride."

"Not to-day," replied Gerald. "I could not. It is impossible." She looked up at him, holding
the little victim pressed close in her arms, utterly regardless of its rough and grimy coat.
Her eyes were swimming with tears.

"As you decide, of course," said De Forest, sulkily, releasing her, and tossing his bridle
to the boy. "Here you, Sim, or Tim, or Jim, or whatever you are, take away the horses, and
as you value your tip, mind you don't have any more dogs around the next time I want you."

Gerald turned away without another word, gathering up her dress as she best could, and went
into the house. Olly, who had witnessed the whole proceeding enchantedly from the window, ran
to meet her. "I say, let's see him. My, ain't he dirty! Is he dead? just as dead as he can be?"

"Yes," answered his sister, very gently; "the poor thing is quite dead. Come and help me bury
him decently somewhere. No, Phebe, stay there. I wish it. Don't let us have any more fuss about
it, please."

De Forest lifted his hat and turned to leave as Gerald disappeared. "Pray don't let me detain
you from the interesting ceremony, Miss Lane," he said, with his most cynical and mocking voice;
"Miss Vernor as high-priestess will be worth a full audience. Good-morning."

"Gerald wouldn't like it if I went to her when she said not; I must stay here," said Phebe
turning her distressed face to Halloway, who had stood a silent spectator of it all. "Oh, I'm
so sorry it happened! Isn't it too bad?"

"It certainly is,--for the dog."

"She won't get over it for ever so long, and it wasn't really her fault. She was only in fun
when she turned her horse that way. Gerald is very tender-hearted."

"I see she is,--toward dogs."

"Mr. Halloway, you don't like her!"

"Miss Phebe, I am madly in love with her."

"Don't laugh at me, please. Isn't she handsome?"

"Well, I couldn't judge of the length of her hair."

"Nonsense, tell me what you really think of her."

Denham pondered a moment. "I think all sorts of things," he answered presently, with an amused
laugh. "She is so contradictory she'll fit almost any opinion, and the worst I can say of her
is that she'll never concern herself in the least to find out what my opinion may be."

"Ah," said Phebe, softly, "just wait. You don't either of you know each other yet!"

CHAPTER VI.

THE PICNIC.

Gerald's and Olly's visit was quite an event in the quiet Lane household. Olly flagrantly broke
every existing custom in it with the sublime autocracy of childhood, and regained his health
at the cost of the peace of mind of every individual with whom he came in contact, from nervous
Miss Lydia down to the protesting servants; while Gerald was one of those intense personalities
whose influence seems to recreate the entire atmosphere about them at once, go where they will.
Poor Miss Lydia was afraid of her quick speech and brusque ways and decided opinions, and spent
more hours than usual upstairs alone in her own little room, and wore her best cap whenever
she appeared below, as a sort of mute appeal to the young lady's indulgence. But Gerald, in
her robust health, had no sympathy whatever with invalids as a class, and for "chronic nerves"
she had an absolute contempt, unmitigated by even the best cap's gay ribbons. "It's altogether
a matter of will," she asserted. "People needn't be ill if they are only resolved not to be so."

"Humph!" said Mrs. Lane, who had chanced to overhear; and there was a trifle more tenderness
than usual in her manner when she went up later to put the mid-day cup of beef-tea into her
sister's thin hands, and stood looking compassionately down at her. "Nothing is easier than
to insist that a thing is so and so, just because there's no way to prove that it isn't so."

"How you do always talk in proverbs, Sister Sophy!" said Miss Lydia, admiringly. "I only wish
Solomon could have heard you. I do believe he would have put some of them in."

"He would have been far too busy taking down Mrs. Upjohn's fine speeches to mind me," grunted
Mrs. Lane. "And I never did think much of Solomon, anyway. He was too much of a Mormon with
his hundred wives and that. Want any thing else, Lyddy?"

"No, thank you. The house is very nice and still this morning. There's a picnic up at the Dexter's
farm, isn't there? I suppose they've all gone to it."

"Of course. Who ever heard of a picnic unless Phebe went along to do all the fussing and mussing
that everybody else shirks? Don't tell me there's any fun in a picnic,--going off in the woods
like that, to do for yourself what you'd sell the clothes off your back to have somebody else
do for you at home, and eating all kinds of heathenish messes with your fingers because you've
forgotten the forks. But what people like let them have. They'll get experience out of it if
nothing better. And of course Phebe had to go."

True enough, Phebe was as essential to any picnic as the feast, though much less obtrusively
so, and Gerald watched her friend's quiet helpfulness with lazy interest. She herself was stretched
at ease on the clean, fresh grass under some glorious old trees. The place chosen was a lovely
spot at the head of the lake; the drive there had been long and hot, and now she lay enjoying
to the full the refreshment of the shadow and the breeze, and the perfection both of the view
and of her immediate surroundings. Bell Masters sat near her, having discovered that she was
generally surest of Mr. De Forest's company when in Gerald's neighborhood. Nor had she been
mistaken this time. He had openly abandoned the greedy band of berry-pickers, and the artistic
knot of sketchers, and the noisy body of pleasure-seekers, who were paddling frivolously around
the shores of the lake and screaming with causeless laughter, as soon as he found that Gerald
did not intend attaching herself to any of them but had struck out the new and independent
line of doing absolutely nothing at all. Halloway had been helping industriously with the fire,
but he came toward the group under the trees when his services seemed no longer required.

"You look most invitingly comfortable," he said, fanning himself with his hat. "We must try
to coax Miss Phebe here for a rest."

"Pray don't," said De Forest, lifting a lazy hand with an air of finding even that motion too
great an effort. "At least not till the coffee is well under way. I tasted a cup of her make
yesterday. Don't call her off. We are all benefiting in a manner by her absence."

"I can make good coffee too, when I choose," said Bell, biting at the rim of her straw hat.

De Forest contemplated her with new interest. "Ah, can you. 'Tis a gift of the gods given to
few. And when do you choose, may I ask? Apparently not to-day."

"'Tisn't my picnic."

"Oh! Is it Miss Lane's?"

"One would say it was, from the way she slaves for it," remarked Gerald.

"Why don't you help too?" asked De Forest, breaking off blades of grass and flinging them out
singly upon the air.

"For Miss Masters' excellent reason: it is not my picnic."

"You contribute your valuable aid solely to your own undertakings then?"

"Why am I called upon to contribute it to any other?"

"'Tis a problem for philosophers. But for argument's sake, let us say for the good of humanity
at large, and of the Dexters in particular."

"I am not bound to the Dexters by any obligation that I can see to help them carry out their
entertainment. If they are not equal to it, they should not give it."

"Nothing Quixotic about you, is there?" said De Forest, looking at her quizzically.

"Nothing whatever," replied Gerald, easily. "Why should there be? Let every one look out for
himself."

"And if some can't?"

"That is no business of mine. It's simply my business to make sure that I can look after myself."

"What an outrageously frank exposure of a universally concealed sentiment! Mr. Halloway is
scandalized. He is thinking how he can fit a scorching text to it to wither you with next Sunday."

"No; here is a sermon ready made on the spot," said Denham, as Phebe came slowly toward them.
"Miss Lane in herself is a sufficient illustration of the opposite doctrine."

"Prove it," answered Gerald, shrugging her shoulders. "Prove that Phebe, who toils for everybody,
is any happier than I, who only follow my inclination."

"You certainly look vastly the more comfortable at present," said De Forest, looking from Gerald's
cool cheeks and unruffled muslin flounces to Phebe's flushed face and tumbled cambric. "You
are a practical embodiment of the beauty and expediency of selfishness."

"What are you talking about?" asked Phebe, coming up and leaning wearily against a tree.

"About you and Miss Vernor," explained Bell. "Which of you is happier? I should say Miss Vernor
decidedly."

A loving look came into Phebe's eyes, as she glanced down at Gerald.

"Miss Vernor, of course", she said, with a very tender inflection of voice. "Being what she
is, how can she help being the happier?"

"Virtue advocating vice," said De Forest. "Mr. Halloway, your sermon is a dead failure,--as
a sermon."

"By no means," answered Denham, smiling. "I don't expect to convert you in a single lesson.
Will you not sit down with us, Miss Phebe? You look tired."

"Not just yet, thank you."

"And why not?" asked Gerald.

"I want to see a little after Miss Delano first. She's off there all alone hunting for ferns."

"Well," persisted Gerald, "what of it? Are you fonder of her society than ours, that you must
run after her?"

"I am not fonder of any one's society than of yours, Gerald."

"But are you fond of that tiresome creature at all? Confess it; doesn't she bore you to death
with her interminable grasshopper chatter?"

Phebe glanced at Halloway, and laughed a little as she moved away. "Oh, I am learning by degrees
not to be bored by people,--not even by Miss Delano."

"Now, will any one explain why she should wish to teach herself not to know a bore from a Christian?"
exclaimed Gerald, impatiently. "It is quite beyond me."

"But do you really never talk to anybody unless you want to, Miss Vernor?" asked Bell, disagreeably
conscious that Gerald had not voluntarily addressed her once that morning.

"Never," replied Gerald, staring out at the lake.

"Don't you ever do any thing you don't want to, because you ought to?"

"I don't always see the ought. For instance, why should I put myself out to entertain Miss
Delano as Phebe does?"

"I don't know," muttered Bell. "I wouldn't, I am sure. She is mortally dull."

"One might imagine reasons for the self-sacrifice, I suppose," said De Forest, making a languid
snatch at a butterfly fluttering near. "The possibility, we will say, that it might please
the gentle old babbler to come under the condescension of your notice. How would that do for
a motive?"

"Why should I want to please her?" insisted Gerald, removing a hideous beetle from her dress
with all possible care lest she should hurt it. "I don't want to. I don't care for her, nor
she for me. Why should I put myself out for her? What claim has she on me that I should displease
myself to please her?"

"Let us see," said Denham, ruminatingly. "Miss Delano's pleasure against Miss Vernor's displeasure,
or vice versa, Miss Vernor's pleasure against Miss Delano's displeasure. Yes; the balance of
pleasure remains quite the same whichever lady has it. Apart from principle, the logic is unanswerable."

"It is admirable," commented De Forest. "I always did like logic so much better than moral
philosophy. Hello, what's the matter now?"

There was a wail of distress somewhere in the distance.

Gerald turned her shapely head and listened a moment. "It's only Olly," she said, composedly.
"I recognize the cry. He isn't hurt. Oh, you needn't go, Mr. Halloway; Olly never comes to
any harm. He's only quarrelling with some one."

De Forest raised himself on his elbow to listen, while Halloway walked off in the direction
of the outburst. "There are possibilities lurking in picnics, you know," he remarked, resuming
his recumbent position, "mad bulls, and rabbit traps, and fine chances for a drown now and
then. But I suppose we needn't trouble ourselves, Mr. Halloway'll see to it. Besides, Olly
bears the charmed life of the wicked. Miss Masters, I hope you remember to give daily thanks
that you haven't any small brothers."

"I do devoutly give thanks that I haven't any sisters," said Bell, with an unaffectionate glance
toward Gerald. "I should hate them."

And so the desultory talk rambled on, the little group growing larger by degrees as the approaching
luncheon hour brought back the stragglers, and with them Olly, trotting contentedly along,
clinging to Halloway's hand, meek as any lamb.

"What were you doing when you cried out so a little while ago?" asked Gerald, going up to the
child.

Olly looked at her with instant defiance in his eyes. "I hurt my foot."

"You know perfectly well you can't deceive me, Olly. Tell me the truth. What mischief were you at?"

"I tell you I hurt my foot, and it hurt like mischief, and that's all the mischief there was.
I wish it had been your foot, and I wouldn't have cried a bit."

Halloway was turning aside, but Gerald appealed to him. "Is he telling the truth?"

"Yes," answered Denham, dryly. "He was racing with the Anthony boys and fell, but, as you see,
he's right enough now."

"Ya-ah!" said Olly, and leered into her face with brotherly disrespect. "I'll tell you a lie
next time if you'd rather. Ya-ah!"

Gerald looked as if she were going to shake him on the spot, and to prevent any such catastrophe
Denham suddenly seized the little fellow and put him through a number of acrobatic feats in
breathless succession, till he was fairly hustled into good temper and everybody around was
laughing, even Gerald. Jake Dexter was instantly incited to display some marvellous limber-jointed
powers of his own, and had just demonstrated to the assembled company, to his and their entire
satisfaction, that the impossible is after all sometimes possible, when luncheon was announced
by the ringing of a cow-bell, and a gay onslaught upon the usual picnic table, rich in luxuries
and poor in necessities, superseded for the nonce all less material forms of amusement.

Later in the afternoon Halloway wandered off from the rest for one of the solitary strolls
that he preferred to companionship as being less lonely,--a feeling often experienced when
fate and not choice appoints one's comrades,--and returning leisurely along the banks of the
lake, he came upon a little group of picnickers, and stopped unperceived beyond them, to enjoy
for a while that comfortable sense of being in the world yet out of it, which is the birthright
of all spectatorship. Gerald and Phebe were skipping stones, thoroughly absorbed in energetic
enjoyment of the simple game; their two contrasting figures, Gerald dark and tall and slim,
and Phebe so round and fair and supple, making a pretty-enough picture for any artist. Olly,
little Maggie Dexter, and an assortment of sturdy urchins known throughout Joppa only as the
Anthony boys, were dancing and chattering aimlessly around, and near by was drawn up a clumsy
old boat where Phebe had made a comfortable niche for Miss Delano, who every day at about this
hour was afflicted with a remarkable disorder which had grown upon her wholly of late years,
and whose symptoms, so far as she was willing to admit them, consisted of a painful heaviness
of the eyelids, a weakness in the nape of the neck, and an irresistible tendency to retire
for a brief season within herself. A little farther off still, having taken fortune at the
flood and secured De Forest at last, Bell Masters was embarked on another kind of craft, a
thorough-going, fully-freighted flirtation, all sails set; and through the trees were glimpses
of lazily moving figures beyond, generally in twos and twos, following some occult rule of
common division peculiar to picnics. By degrees the children wandered off up the bank, and
presently there came a shout, followed by an evident squabble. Phebe looked around uneasily.
Gerald kept on with her sport.

"One, two, three, four, five, six, seven times, Phebe. Now do better than that."

At this juncture little Maggie ran up, her pretty brown eyes wide and her red lips quivering.
"Oh! Miss Vernor, Olly shan't do it, shall he? Do say he shan't!"

"Do what?" asked Gerald, pausing in the act of searching for another pebble.

"Put it in the water to swim like a duck. It isn't a duck, it's a little, little young bird
he's found in a nest, and it can't swim, it can't hardly fly. Oh, don't let him!"

"Let him!" echoed Gerald sharply. She sprang toward the children with a bound, almost lifting
Olly off his feet as she drew him back from the water's edge. "You cruel boy!" she cried. "Give
it to me directly."

"I won't!" answered Olly, trying to shake himself free from her grasp. "It's mine, I found it."

But the small hands held him in a grip as strong as a man's, and in another moment Gerald had
taken the poor little half-feathered creature from him, and bidden Maggie restore it carefully
to its nest.

"It's mine! It's mine! I'll have it back!" shouted Olly, angrily, after the little girl.

Gerald took hold of him by the shoulders and turned him round toward her. There was a great
deal of hatred for the sin, and not overmuch love for the sinner, in her face, as she looked
down at him. "If you dare touch that bird again, Olly, I'll find a punishment for you that
you will not soon forget, do you hear?"

A hidden thought of revenge for the spoiled sport came into Olly's mind. He twisted himself
away from his sister with a little grunt, and stood peevishly playing a moment with a couple
of marbles; then suddenly darting aside, seized the boat in which Miss Delano was established,
still struggling, but more feebly, with the mysterious trouble that held her in thrall; and
with a strength with which one would hardly have credited his slight form, he pushed it off
into the water. There was, of course, not a particle of real danger for Miss Delano, even though
this chanced to be the only boat at that point, and she was no oarswoman; but the poor little
old lady, thus suddenly roused from the strange hallucinations (as she called them) which were
the most marked feature of her complaint, and finding herself afloat upon the unstable deep,
instantly supposed that her last hour was come. She sprang up, too terrified to scream, with
a look of deadly horror in her face, and then sank again all in a heap in the bottom of the
boat. Olly gave a fiendish laugh, but before any one else could move to the rescue, Gerald,
with one fierce, unutterable look at her brother, and no thought but how soonest to end Miss
Delano's speechless agony, quick as a flash, caught hold of an overhanging bough and swung
herself on to a rock quite far out in the water, and thence, with a light, bold spring, landed
safely in the middle of the boat as it drifted past.

"All right, Miss Delano," she said, briskly, seating herself and laying hold of the oars with
accustomed hands; "I'm a born sailor, and we'll have a little row first before we go back."

Had an angel visibly descended from heaven to assume the helm, Miss Delano could not have been
more grateful and overcome. "Oh, my dear, my dear!" she said, and, in the intensity of her
relief, began to cry a little softly. Gerald pretended not to notice her emotion (she was very
awkward as a comforter, and as shy before tears as a man), and rowed around for a while in
utter silence; and then feeling that conversation might aid in quieting her companion's unnecessarily
excited nerves she began abruptly charging her with questions as one loads a gun with cartridges,
dropping down one after another with cruel directness into the harmless vacancy of Miss Delano's
brain. How many inhabitants had Joppa in precise figures? what was the height of those farther
hills to the left? upon what system was the village-school governed? what was the mineral nature
of the soil? what was the fastest time ever made by that bay mare of Mr. Upjohn's with the
white hind foot? etc. etc., etc., on all which points poor Miss Delano could only assure her
timidly: "I don't know, dear; it would be well if I did," and relapsed into an alarmed and
most uncharacteristic silence.

Phebe stood watching the boat as Gerald rowed off, then, as if recollecting some neglected
duty, turned suddenly, and found herself face to face with Mr. Halloway.

"No farther," he said, playfully barring her passage.

"Oh, but I must! I want to find Olly and talk him into a better frame of mind before Gerald
comes back."

"Leave Olly to me, please. I am a perfect child-tamer, and guarantee to exorcise his seven
evil spirits in less than no time. Meanwhile, sit you down and rest."

"Oh, I don't need rest. If you'll undertake Olly I'll help put back the lunch things. Picnics
are quite like the Biblical feasts: five loaves and two fishes somehow always make twelve basketfuls
to take up."

"And you are always a true disciple at the feast, Miss Phebe, intent only upon ministering
to others."

Phebe laughed her own peculiarly light-hearted, gay laugh. "That is a much prettier way of
putting it than Gerald's. She says I make myself maid-of-all-work."

"Miss Gerald, of course, doesn't approve of such service."

"But you do. So I needn't mind her blame."

"But I shall blame too, Miss Phebe, when you overdo yourself. I don't see why others' recreation
need be all work for you. Let each take his share of both the pleasure and the toil."

"But you see this is my share, Mr. Halloway, because I can't help in any better way. I don't
know enough to entertain people's guests just by talking to them, as Gerald does. You forget
how dull I am."

"So I do," said Denham, gravely. "I forget it all the time. Indeed, the forgetfulness has quite
become chronic. Now I'll find Olly, and we'll all go at the dishes together and make a game of it."

Certainly Denham Halloway must have possessed some secret charm in his management of children,
for by the time Gerald turned her boat to the shore, he stood at the bank to meet them, with
Olly by his side, as amiable a little fellow as any Sunday-school-book hero ever born.

"I am glad your sail turned out such a success, Miss Delano," said Halloway, cheerily, as he
lifted the little old lady carefully out on to the pebbles. "You have been envied of us all.
But here is a little boy come to tell you all the same how sorry he is that he gave you such
a fright. Olly, my lad, I think Miss Delano looks as if she had forgiven you through and through."

"Oh, indeed, indeed yes," answered Miss Delano, hurriedly. "It was only my silly way of being
scared, particularly when I'm roused up so sudden out of one of those turns of mine. And it's
all right, my dear, all right."

"But I'm sorry, real and honest," declared Olly, stoutly, looking squarely in Miss Delano's
kindly face. "And I didn't mean to scare you."

"You meant it for a revenge on me, I suppose," said Gerald, in a low, harsh voice. She took
hold of his arm as she spoke. "Give me those marbles of yours."

Olly looked at her, hesitated, and then reluctantly produced three very handsome agates from
some outlying storehouse of his jacket.

"I bought you six," said Gerald. "Where are the rest?"

"I lost one," answered Olly, sullenly. "It fell down a hole."

"Then give me the other two."

Olly obeyed still more reluctantly, fixing great, anxious eyes upon his treasures as he laid
them, each one more slowly than the last, in his sister's hand.

"There," said Gerald. "Perhaps this will teach you to behave better another time. I shall not
buy you any more this summer." She flung out her hand suddenly, and the five pretty stones
fell with a splash far out in the lake and disappeared forever, five little cruel sets of circles
instantly beginning to widen and widen over their graves in a perfect mockery of roundness.
Olly gave one sharp cry, and then stood stock-still, a bitterly hard look coming over his face;
those marbles had been very, very dear to his heart. Halloway put his arm tenderly around the
little fellow, and drew him close in a very sympathetic way.

"Olly," he said, gently, "you know you deserved some punishment, but now that your sister has
punished you, I am sure she will forgive you too, as Miss Delano has done, if you only ask her."

Olly buried his face in his friend's coat, and burst into a fit of heart-broken tears. "I don't
want her to forgive me," he sobbed. "I only want my agates,--my pretty, pretty agates!"

"Surely you will forgive him?" pleaded Halloway, looking up at Gerald over Olly's head, and
holding out one of the boy's hands in his own. "He was really penitent when you came up. Let
me ask for him."

Gerald moved a step away, ignoring the hand. "Certainly, if you wish it," she said, coldly.

Halloway bent and kissed Olly's flushed face. "Do you hear, my boy? It is all right now, and
there is Maggie calling you to swing her. Don't forget you promised to make me a visit at the
rectory to-morrow."

Olly threw his arms around Denham's knees and gave him a convulsive hug. "I like you though
you are a minister," he said, through his tears. "I just wish you were my sister!" And then
he went slowly off to Maggie, and Denham and Gerald stood silently where he had left them.
Gerald was the first to speak.

"You think I am hard on Olly. I see it in your face."

"I do think," replied Denham, slowly, with a faint smile curving his well-cut lips, "that perhaps
it might be happier for Olly if you would try to consider him less in the light of a boy, and
more as--as only a little animal. You are so tender-hearted and pitiful toward animals."

Gerald flushed angrily. "I like plain speaking best. You think I am hard on him. Why don't
you say so?"

"I will if you prefer it. I do think so."

"Thanks. Is there any thing else you would like to say to me in your capacity as clergyman
before we join the others?"

"Yes, if I may really venture so far. Your hat is quite crooked."

Gerald straightened it without a smile. "Thanks again. Anything else?"

"Absolutely nothing." He turned to escort her back, but Gerald stood still, frowning out at
the lake.

"You don't know Olly," she said, curtly.

"Maybe not, but I know childish nature pretty well, perhaps because I love it."

"Ah! I don't love it. It isn't lovable to me. It is all nonsense to call it the age of innocence.
It is vice in embryo instead of in full leaf, that is all."

"But that is an inestimable gain of itself. A little of a bad thing is surely much better than
a great deal of it. For my part I confess to a great partiality for children. There is something
pathetic to me in the little faults and tempers that irritate us now chiefly because they clash
against our own weaknesses, and yet on the right guidance of which lies the whole making or
marring of the child's life."

"Doesn't guidance include punishment?"

"Yes, it includes it. But it does not consist of it."

Gerald still stood half turned from him, frowning out over the placid blue water. "Ah," she
said, "it chiefly consists of good example and that sort of thing, I suppose."

"I think it consists chiefly of love," said Halloway, simply.

Gerald made no answer at first, then turned and looked at him almost defiantly. Her changeable
eyes seemed black as she raised them to his. "Would you have thrown Olly's marbles into the lake?"

"No," replied Halloway, looking steadily back at her.

"Then you would have been very foolish," said Gerald, haughtily. "It was the only way to touch
him. I was quite right to do it."

"You should be the best judge of your actions, Miss Vernor."

Gerald bowed without answer, and moved past him like an offended duchess. Halloway stood looking
after her with an amused sparkle in his eyes. "Miss Geraldine Vernor," he said to himself,
"with all your beauty and your reputed accomplishments and intellect, you would yet do well
to take a few lessons of my little friend Phebe Lane."

CHAPTER VII.

TRIED AS BY FIRE.

"Gerald, what are you thinking of?"

"I was wondering how soon you would let us have the lamp."

"I'll get it immediately, if you like, but it's so pleasant talking in the twilight. I could
spend hours contentedly sitting here so with you."

"How reprehensibly idle!"

"No, I should be learning something all the time. You have always something to teach me. Or
if you didn't feel like talking, I could just sit still and hold your hand and not need any
thing more."

Gerald put her hand instinctively out of reach. "I beg you won't try it. I hate having my hand
held."

"Yes, I know you do. You hate being kissed, too. You hate being admired and made a fuss over.
I don't suppose any thing would induce you to let me call you a pet name. O Gerald, I do wish
you liked being loved!"

"But I do like it well enough. Of course every one likes being cared for and all that sort
of thing. It's only the gushing and spooning and sentimentalizing that I can't endure. I never
could, even as a child."

Phebe sat suddenly upright, away from Gerald. Perhaps even the mute caress of her attitude
jarred upon her friend. "To me the half of being loved would be the being told so," she said.
"I should never weary of hearing it said over and over again."

"Bah!" ejaculated Gerald, "it would make me sick!" She got up as if the very thought were too
much for her, and going to the window stood still there looking out. Phebe followed her with
her eyes.

"I am afraid you are fated to be deadly sick all your life through, Gerald. What will you do
with your lovers?"

"Dismiss them."

"All?"

"All but one."

"What will you do with him?"

"Marry him, of course. That is what he will be there for, won't it? I expect to marry some
one some time. Marriage makes a woman's life fuller and freer, though not necessarily happier.
I want to get all into my life that I can."

"I wonder whom you will marry," mused Phebe, where she sat curled up on the sofa. "I wonder
what he could be like. Gerald, how I should like to see you in love!"

"You won't see it," replied Gerald. "No one will ever see it. It wouldn't be my way to make
a display of the insanity, supposing, that is, that I have it."

"I hope at least you will show it to him."

"Not overmuch even to him. He'll have to take it on faith. I haven't the faintest intention
of informing any one of the state of my affections a dozen times a day. Once for all ought
to be sufficient with the declaration, as it is with the marriage vow."

Phebe puckered up her forehead. "Ah, how different we are! If I am ever engaged to any one
I shall want to keep telling him all the time how much I love him, for fear he wouldn't guess it."

"You will bore him to death then."

"I suppose I shall," replied Phebe, dejectedly. "I don't suppose any one living wants to be
loved so much as I would want to love him. I couldn't be cool and deliberate and wise at loving
as you would be. I should have to do it with my whole heart and just give myself up to it for
good and all."

"That's the story-book way of loving," said Gerald. "I don't believe in it for real life. Blind
adoration doesn't do either the lover or the loved any good. There should be sense in one's
emotions as well as in one's opinions."

Phebe was silent a moment or two. "You are so self-possessed, and so self-controlled, Gerald,"
she said at last. "It must be very nice to have one's self so perfectly in command as you have.
And yet I don't know. I think it would be rather nice too to find one's self suddenly under
the power of some one a great deal better and stronger and wiser than one's self, who compelled
one to love him, not because one would, but just because one could not help it."

The girls were alone in the sitting-room, Mrs. Lane having gone out to a neighbor's, taking
Olly with her, and Miss Lydia not having yet appeared for her usual hour downstairs. It was
a few days after the picnic, and was one of those suddenly cool August evenings that sometimes
drop down so unexpectedly upon the summer heat, and a wood-fire lay upon the hearth ready to
light at the invalid's coming. Phebe too sprang from the sofa as she spoke, as if her words
had evoked too vivid a picture, and kneeling down by the hearth, applied a match. The bright
flame leaped swiftly up and filled all the room with a flickering golden glow. Gerald turned
in the window to watch it. 

They asked where he had surmised at that fennel were those ten crowns, and said he had seen him
give the old man swore to his opponent, that staff in while making the oath and swear that
they are really and truly had, and that finishing swear, I turned to ask the staff, came to
the imagination that was inside of it pay what they wanted. From this it could be inferred that
those who govern, even if some silly, perhaps headed God in their trials, and more, that he
had heard otherwise as that the priest of his place, and that he had such a great memory, that,
but everything olvidársele what they want to remember, there were no such memory across the
island. Finally, a old run and the other paid, left, and those present were astonished, and
he wrote the words, deeds and movements of Sancho could not quite determine if you would and would
a fool or discrete.

Then finish this lawsuit, the court entered a woman grabbed by a man dressed sharply Breeder rich,
and she came loud voice, saying:

- Justice, senor governor, justice, and if not found in the land, I'll go look at the sky!
Governor Lord my soul, this wicked man caught me half want to camp, and has advantage of my body
as badly washed rag, and miserable on me, led me what I had saved more than twenty-three years
ago, defending it against Moors and Christians natives and foreigners, and I, always hard as
an oak, as a whole retained the salamander in the fire, or wool among the brambles, for this good
man came Now with his bare hands to hands.

"Even that is about to find out: if you have clean hands or not, this
gallant," said Sancho.

And turning to the man, he said what he said and responded to the complaint of the woman. The
which all embarrassed, replied:

"Gentlemen, I am a poor farmer of swine, and this morning I left this
town to sell, with forgiveness is that, four pigs, they took me socaliñas
sales tax and just under what they were worth; round I turned to my
village, I met on the way to this good woman, and the devil Anasco
everything and anything cooked, made yoga together, pay him what soficiente,
and she bad content, grabbed me and would not let me to bring me to
this position.

He says he forced her, and lies by the oath that I do or I do, and this is the whole truth,
without missing crumbs.

Then the governor asked him if he had any money in silver, he said that until twenty ducats was in the
breast, in a leather bag. He ordered the sacase and delivery as it was, to the complainant, he did
trembling, the woman took it, and making a thousand salaams to all
and praying to God for life and health of Mr. Governor, and looked
for the orphans needy and maidens, and with that he left the courthouse,
carrying the bag grasped with both his hands, but first looked to
see if silver was the currency that was inside.

Just came out, when Sancho said the farmer, which he burst into tears,
and eyes and the heart went after his bag:

"Good man, go after the
woman and away the bag, but does not want, and come back here with
her.

And did not say a fool or deaf, because then departed in a flash and went to what was told.
All present were in suspense, awaiting the end of that litigation, and in a little back man
and woman bound together and attached to the first time, she lifted
her skirt and put the bag in her lap, and the man struggling to remove
it, but it was not possible, by Women's defending, which cried out
saying:

- Justice of God and the world!

Look, your worship, senor governor, the shamelessness and Deste the heartless little fear
that, in the middle of town and in the middle of the street, I wanted remove the bag sent me
your grace.

"And did he take removed? Asked the governor.

- How to remove? "Replied the woman. Before I leave I take life I removed the bag. Bonita is the
girl! Other cats I have to put on the beard, that this unfortunate
and disgusting!

Pincers and hammers, mallets and chisels not be enough to get it out of nails, claws even Lions:
before the bore in the middle in the middle of the meat!

"She's right," said the man, and I am to surrender, and without strength,
and I confess that mine are not enough to remove it, and let them
fall.

The governor then told the woman:

-Shew, honest and brave, that bag.

She gave then, and the governor returned it to the man and said the
struggling and not forced:

"Sister, if the same breath and courage
you have shown in defending that purse you mostrárades, and even the
bottom half, defending your body, the strength of Hercules I do not
strength.

Go with God, and bad luck, and thou shalt not lack in this whole island or six leagues around,
under penalty of two hundred lashes. Walk then I say, churrillera, shameless and cheat!

The woman was shocked and was crestfallen and bad content, and the governor told the man:

"My good man, walk with God to your place with your money, and from now on, if not I want to lose,
trying not you come in will yogar with anyone.

The man thanked the worst that could, and went, and the bystanders were amazed of new trials
and sentences of their new governor. All of which, noted of his crown, was then written to the
Duke, who with great desire was waiting.

And stay here the good Sancho, that is a lot of haste gives us his love, overjoyed with the Altisidora
music.

Chapter XLVI. Fearful of terror and catlike cencerril received speech Don Quixote of love of
love Altisidora

We left the great Don Quixote wrapped in thoughts that had caused the music Altisidora the maiden
in love.

He went to bed with them, and, like fleas, did not give sleep or
calm down a point, and juntábansele that your socks were missing,
but as light time, and there 's no stopping him, Knight ran in the
hours, and very soon arrived in the morning.

Seeing this, Don Quixote, let the soft feathers, and not just sloth acamuzado wore his dress
and put on his boots way to cover up the misfortune of his stockings threw over his scarlet mantle and
stood on his head a cap of green velvet trimmed with silver rails, hung from his shoulders tahelí
chopper with his good sword, grabbed a large rosary that he always
had, and with great pomposity and swagger out into the anteroom, where
the duke and duchess were already dressed and as expected, and, passing
through a gallery, they were deliberately waiting Altisidora and other
damsel, her friend, and saw Don Quixote Altisidora, pretended to faint,
and her friend picked it up on your lap, and with great alacrity was
going to undo the chest.

Don Quixote, saw him coming up to them and said,

"I know what I
come from these accidents.

I do not know what the friend replied, "because the girl is Altisidora
healthiest of all this house, and I have never felt a ay! as has that
I know, that evil men have few errant in the world, if all are ungrateful.

Go away, Senor Don Quixote itself will not this poor girl as your worship here they were.

To which Don Quixote

-Make your grace, madam, that I put a lute in my room tonight, I will comfort the best we could
for this poor girl, that in the early disappointments love ready remedies are usually qualified.

And
this was because it was not noticed by those who see him there. No sooner was the paragraph, when
he came to himself the faint Altisidora, told his companion:

-Must be that he put the lute, which certainly wants us to Don Quixote music, and not be bad, be
yours.

Then they came to realize the Duchess of what happened and asked Don Quixote lute and her cheerful
sobremodo, concluded with the duke and her maids of making a mockery was more cheerful than
harmful, and very happy waiting for the night, which came so hastily as had been the day, which
became the Dukes of tasty conversation with Don Quixote. And the Duchess that day and truly
sent to a page of his, who had been in Figure enchanted forest of
Dulcinea, Teresa Panza, the letter from her husband Sancho Panza and
the bundle of clothes he had left to which to send him, charging him
fetch him some good relationship with it all pass.

Done, and arrivals eleven at night, Don Quixote found a guitar in
his room; templóla, opened the gate, and felt that people walking
in the garden, and, having passed the frets of the guitar and tuning
it as best he could, he spat and remondóse chest, and then with a
hoarse voice, but toned, he sang the following ballad, which he himself
that day had written:

"They tend to love forces

rile souls,

taking
by instrument

careless idleness.

Often the sewing and styling,

and always be busy,

be an antidote
to poison

of amorous desires.

The maidens gathered

who aspire to be married

Honesty is the dowry

and voice their praise.

Knights-errant,

and

walk in the court,

requiébranse with free

Honest to marry.

There is some love from the east,

that both guests are treated

coming
soon to the west,

because in the finished part.

Love newcomer,

arrived today and gone tomorrow,

the images does not stop

well printed
in the soul.

Paint on paint

or display or signals;

and do no first beauty

the second does not do tricks.

Dulcinea del Toboso

the soul in a clean sweep

I have painted so

it is impossible to erase.

The firmness of the lovers

is the most precious,

for whom love makes miracles

and likewise rose.

Don Quixote had got so far of his song, who were listening to the
Duke and Duchess, Altisidora and almost everyone in the castle, when
suddenly, from a gallery above that on grating lead Don Quixote fell,
let down a cord came more than a hundred bells attached to it, and
then, after them, poured a large sack of cats, which also had bells
less tied to their tails.

So great was the noise of the bells and the mayar of cats that while the Dukes were inventors
of the joke, they were startled, and, fearful, Don Quixote was amazed. And as luck would have two
or three cats came through the gate stay, and giving one part to another, it seemed that a
region of devils in it. They extinguished the candles burning in the room, and were looking
to do away. The hook and up the cord with the large bells never ceased, with the majority of
the people of the castle I did not know the truth of the matter, was suspended and admired.

Don Quixote rose up, and, drawing his sword, began to grope for fence
and say a loud voice:

- Outdoor, malignant enchanters!

Outdoor hechiceresca rogue, I am Don Quixote of Mancha, against whom they have power are not
worth your evil intentions!

Then turning to the cats that roamed the room, he made several cuts,
including came to the fence, and left there, although one, finding
itself hard pressed by the knife Don Quixote, flew at his face and
grabbed him by the nose with nails and teeth, Don Quixote whose pain
began to raise a shout his loudest.

Hearing this, the Duke and the Duchess, and considering what could be, very quickly came to his
room, and open with master, they saw the poor gentleman struggling with all his might to wrest
the cat from his face. They came in with lights and witnessed the unequal combat, came to Duke
parteth, and Don Quixote said loudly:

- I do not take away anyone! Let me hand in hand with this demon, this wizard, this enchanting,
I give him to understand from me to him who Don Quixote de la Mancha!

But the cat, not healing WITH THESE threats, snarled and clenched. But in the end, Duke will
uprooted and threw him through the gate.

Don Quixote was sifting the face and nose not very healthy, but very indignant because had not
left as it concluded the battle that had stuck with that charming scoundrel. They sent oil Aparicio,
and the same Altisidora, with their white hands, put a bandage around the wounded, and, to put
them in a low voice said:

"All these mishaps happen to you, stubborn knight, for the sin of
your hardness and obstinacy; and God forbid you forget your squire
Sancho whip, because you never leave your charm is so beloved Dulcinea
yours, or enjoyments thou, nor reach the thalamus with it, at least
living I love you.

To all this Don Quixote said no other word if not take a deep breath, and then lay in his bed,
thanking the duke and duchess for mercy, not because he was afraid
of that gatesca rogue, charming and cencerruna, but because I knew
the good intention who had come to his rescue.

The Dukes left him to repose, and went away grieved at the unfortunate of the joke, they did not
believe how heavy and expensive would turn out to Don Quixote or adventure, which cost him five
days of confinement and bed, where he had another adventure more palatable than the last, which
does not want his stories to tell now, go to Sancho Panza, who was very attentive and very
funny in his government.

Chapter XLVII. You should continue how he behaved in his government Sancho Panza

The story goes that since the court took Sancho to a sumptuous palace, where in a large room and
was wearing a spotless real table, and, as Sancho entered the room, oboes sounded, and four
pages came to give aguamanos, which Sancho received with great gravity.

The music ceased, and Sancho seated himself at the head of the table, because there was no more
than one seat, and no other service in all of it. Stood beside him stood a man, who afterwards
was a doctor, with a whalebone wand in his hand. They raised a fine white towel which were
covered with fruit and a great variety of dishes of different sorts, one that looked like a
student said grace, and a page put a laced rand Sancho another was the office of steward, a dish
of fruit before, but had hardly eaten a bite, when the wand touched her on the plate, were removed
from the front with utmost celerity, but the butler came another of other food. Sancho proceeded
to try; But before he could get him or liked him, and the wand had touched him, and a page alzádole
as readily as that of the fruit. Sancho seeing this was puzzled,
and looking to another asked if he could eat that food as maesecoral
game.

To which the rod:

"Do not be eaten, senor governor, but as is usual and customary in
other islands where there are governors.

I, sir, I am a doctor, and am employed in this island to serve its
governors as such, and look for their health far more than mine, studying
at night and day, and feeling the governor's, to able to cure him
when he falls sick and the main thing I do is attend their dinners
and suppers and allow him to eat what I think that suit you, and take
what I imagine will do him harm and be injurious to the stomach; and
so I sent away the plate of fruit, for being too moist, and the other
plate delicacy also sent away for being too hot and have many species
that stimulate thirst, and he who drinks much kills and consumes the
radical moisture wherein life consists.

"So then, that dish of roast partridges there that, and I think, well seasoned, not do me any
harm.

To which the doctor replied:

"Those will not eat the governor as long as I live.

"Well, why? "Said Sancho.

And the doctor responded:

"Because our master Hippocrates, the polestar and beacon of medicine, one of his aphorisms, says: Omnis
saturatio bad, partridges autem pessima. It means: "All fullness was bad, but of partridges,
very bad. "

"If that's so," said Sancho, "see the doctor sir the dishes that are on the table what I will do
most good and least harm, and let me eat it without getting clubbed him, because, life of the
governor, and so God me to enjoy it, I'm starving, and refusing food, to spite Mr doctor and
he more you say, you first take my life instead of prolonging it.

"Your worship is right, senor governor," said the doctor, and so is my opinion that Your Grace not
eat of those stewed rabbits there, because it is tricky dish. That veal, if not roasted and served
with pickles, you could try, but there is no why.

And Sancho said:

"That is below platonazo vahando pot I think it is rotten, that diversity of things in pots such
bad there, I can not stop bumping with some whether I taste and profit.

-Absit!

"Said the doctor.

Go away from us so badly thought: there is nothing in the world less nourishing than a rotten
pot. Pots beyond rotten to the canons, or the Rectors of colleges, or peasants' weddings, and
let us free the tables of the governors, where everything that is present delicate and refined,
and the reason is because it always and wherever and whoever are more esteemed than compound simple
medicines, because in simple can not miss and the compound itself, altering the amount of things
they are made, but what I know I have to eat the governor now, to preserve and fortify his health
is a hundred supplications and a comb subtiles tajadicas of quince jelly, which will settle
the stomach and help digestion.

Sancho heard this, he leaned over the back of the chair and looked
at one another to such medical deep voice and asked her name and where
he had studied.

To which he replied:

"I, Mr Governor, my name is Dr. Pedro Recio de Aguero I am a native
of a place Tirteafuera called, which is between Caracuel and Almodovar
del Campo, on the right hand, and I have doctoral degree from the
University of Osuna.

To which Sancho, all burning with rage:

"Well, Doctor Pedro Recio de Mal Agüero, Tirteafuera natural, is to
place right hand as we go Caracuel to Almodovar del Campo, graduate
of Osuna, then quíteseme forward, if not, vote for the sun to take
a stick and clubbed, beginning with him, not me has to be a doctor
in the whole island, at least those that I understand that they are
ignorant; that doctors wise, prudent and discreet them I will reverence
and honor as divine persons.

And I say again that I go, Pedro Recio, from here, otherwise I will
take this chair where I sit and the starry in the head, and ask Me
to the residence, I myself by saying that I serve God in killing a
bad doctor, an executioner of the republic.

And give me something to eat, or do not take your government, as
a profession that feeds your landlord does not worth two beans.

Alborotóse the doctor, looking very angry at the governor, and wanted
to make Tirteafuera of the room but at that moment a bugle sounded
a coaching inn on the street, he bent down the sewer to the window
again saying:

Duke-mail comes from my Lord, a firm should bring significant.

The

courier came in sweating and scared, and pulling out a statement of the breast, placed in the
hands of governor, and Sancho put in Butler, who commanded read the overwritten, which read: To Don
Sancho Panza, governor of the island of Barataria, into his own hands or in the his secretary.
Hearing this, Sancho said:

- Who is my secretary?

And one of those present said:

"I, sir, because I can read and write,
and am Biscay.

"With that addition," said Sancho, "you might be secretary
of the emperor. Open that statement, and see what it says.

He did
so the new-born secretary, and having read the contents said the matter
was to be discussed in private. Sancho ordered the room cleared, and
it should not remain in the butler but and the butler, and others,
and the doctor left, and then the secretary read the letter, which
well said

To my knowledge has come, Don Sancho Panza, that certain
enemies of mine and of the island are give a furious assault, do not
know what night should watch and be alert, because you do not take
un-noticed. She wants cheering up, and
she isn't quite dead yet, you know, though really the evening before last, Phebe, I heard that
you weren't expected to live the night through."

"How ridiculous!" said Gerald, impatiently. "Miss Delano, will you have a chair?"

"Thank you, no, dear. I'll just sit here on the bed," said the little old dame, humbly, anxious
not to make any one any trouble. "O Phebe, my dear!"

Phebe smiled at her affectionately, and Mrs. Hardcastle, who was on the point of leaving when
Mrs. Upjohn came in, sat down again to ask that lady about the character of a servant whom
she had just engaged.

"I thought I should have died when I heard it," said Miss Delano, patting Phebe's cheek. "Poor
dear, poor dear! And they say you won't ever be able to walk again!"

"Who says that?" asked Phebe, laughing. "I shall be a terrible disappointment to them."

"'Tain't her legs at all; it's her shoulders," said Olly, as he emerged from his corner, chewing
Europe into a pasteboard bull. "What have you got in that paper?"

"Oh, the blessed child, and I was forgetting it. My dear, it's just a little sponge-cake I
made free to bring you, it turned out so light. Don't you think you could eat a bit perhaps?"

"My, but it looks good!" said Olly, approaching a hungry finger and poking at it softly. "I'll
get a knife."

"I hope you don't allow any such trash as that about, Miss Vernor," said Mrs. Upjohn, sharply,
in the middle of her discussion of Jane's demerits. "Phebe ought to be exceedingly careful
what she eats for a great while to come. It's doubtful, indeed, whether her stomach ever recovers
its tone after such a shock. I knew one woman who died just of the shock alone some two months
after precisely such an accident as this, when everybody thought she had got well, and Phebe
must be very careful. Her appetite is not to be tempted, but guided."

"Well, ladies, I must be going," announced Mrs. Hardcastle, rising. "You really think I am
safe, then, in engaging her, Mrs. Upjohn?" But just then Mrs. Dexter came in with two of her
daughters, and Mrs. Hardcastle sat down again.

"There was no one downstairs, and as the doctor says Phebe is so much better, we thought we
might just come up," said the new comer. "Why, Phebe, you are as blooming as a rose, and I
understood you had lost all your pretty hair. I've brought you some grapes, my dear, and a
jar of extra fine brandy peaches, and little Maggie insisted on sending some molasses candy
she had just made."

"Well, well, I did look for more sense from you," said Mrs. Upjohn, tapping Mrs. Dexter rather
smartly on the shoulder. "Where'll you sit? Oh, on the bed. Yes, Phebe's had a narrow escape,
and one she'll likely bear the marks of to her dying day. Let it be a warning to you, young
ladies, to be prepared. There's no knowing how soon some one of you may not be carried off
in the same way,--just as you are dressed for a dance, maybe." Her tone implied that death
could not overtake them at a more sinful moment.

"Hullo, up there! I say!" shouted a voice in the hall below, "how's Phebe?"

"Oh, it's Dick!" cried the Dexter girls in a breath. "You can't come up, Dick."

"Ain't a-going to. But a fellow can speak, can't he, without his body a-following his voice?
How's Phebe?"

"She's splendid."

"What's the doctor say?"

"He says she only needs to be kept perfectly quiet."

"Hooray!" said Dick, and apparently executed a war-dance on the oil-cloth, while Olly profited
by the general hubbub created by the entrance of two more ladies, to satisfactorily investigate
the sponge-cake.

"Why, quite a levee, isn't it, Phebe?" said one of the last arrivals, looking in vain for a
chair, and forced to seat herself on a low table, accidentally upsetting Phebe's medicines
as she did so.

"Yes, altogether too much of one," said Gerald, knitting her brows as she rescued a bottle
just in time, and darted an angry glance around the crowded room. "Phebe isn't at all equal
to it yet."

"You are right, Miss Vernor," agreed Mrs. Upjohn, drawing out her tatting from her pocket,
and settling herself at it with an answering frown. "There are quite too many here. Some people
never know when to stay away."

"Oh, there's Bell. I hear her voice," called Mattie, running to look over the banisters. "She's
got both Mr. De Forest and Mr. Moulton with her."

There was a sound of many voices below, a giggling, a rush for the stairs, and a playful scuffle.

"It's me" (Bell's voice); "Dick won't let me pass."

"Me is Bell" (Dick's voice); "she wouldn't pass if she could. Too many fellows down here for
her to want to leave 'em. Send us down a girl or two from up there, can't you?"

A girl or two, however, apparently appeared from outside, greetings were called up to Phebe,
offerings of flowers and delicacies transmitted via Dick on the stairs to Olly at the top (who
took toll by the way), and the liveliest kind of a time went on. It was quite like a party,
Dick shouted up, only that there was no ice-cream and a singular scarcity of girls.

"It's a shame," said Mrs. Upjohn, severely, in her chair, while Gerald held her peace, too
wrathful to speak, and conscious of her inability to mend matters. "I should think people might
have sense enough not to crowd all the air out of a sick-room in this fashion."

"It's exceedingly inconsiderate of them, I am sure," answered Mrs. Hardcastle, drawing a sofa
cushion behind her back. "She ought to be so quiet."

"Phebe!" shouted Dick. "Here's the parson. He wants to know if you're dead yet. Shan't I send
him up? It will be all right, you know, quite the thing. He's a parson, and wears a gown on
Sundays."

"Dick, Dick!" screamed his mother. "Was there ever such a lad!"

"He's coming. Get ready for him. Have out your Prayer-books," called Dick.

Phebe flushed crimson, and looked imploringly at Gerald. An indignant murmur ran through the
room. Mrs. Upjohn drew herself up to her severest height. "What shameless impertinence! How
dare he intrude!" A shout of unholy laughter downstairs followed Dick's sally.

"Mr. Halloway isn't there at all," cried Olly, his fine, clear-voice pitched high above the
rest, "He only asked about Pheeb at the door, and went right off."

"Well, he left this for her with his compliments, and this, and this," called Dick, rummaging
in his pockets, and tossing up an apple, and then a hickory nut, and last a good-sized and
dangerously ripe tomato. Olly caught them dexterously with a yell of delight, and was immediately
rushed at by three of the nearest ladies and ordered not to make a noise, for Phebe was to
be kept perfectly quiet.

"Such doings would never be permitted a moment if she had only been in Dr. Harrison's hands,"
said Mrs. Upjohn, in denunciatory tones. "He would have forbidden her to see any one. It is
scandalous."

"It is outrageous," added Mrs. Hardcastle. "Most inconsiderate."

"Ah, I can't get over it that it isn't your legs, poor dear!" murmured Miss Delano, still plaintively
overcome. "And you will walk, after all?"

"Dr. Dennis is an excellent physician," said Mrs. Dexter, somewhat defiantly. It was impossible
not to enter the lists against Mrs. Upjohn. This last lady was immediately up in arms, and
a heated discussion as to the respective skill of the two practitioners took place, everybody
gradually taking sides with one or the other of the leaders, and forgetting both poor exhausted
Phebe and the noise downstairs, which finally culminated in a rousing lullaby led by Bell,
and lustily seconded by half a dozen others:

"Slumber on, Phebe dear; Do not hear us fellows sigh!"

The song, however, suddenly stopped in the midst. Some one seemed speaking very low and softly,
and neither the chorus nor the laughter nor the tumult was resumed. Phebe drew a deep breath.
Was relief really coming at last? Yes. Soeur Angélique stood in the door-way.

"Will you excuse me, ladies," she said, in that soft, irresistible voice of hers, as she laid
aside bonnet and shawl in a quiet, business-like way. "I came to relieve Miss Vernor and play
nurse for a while, and I think Phebe looks as if she needed a little sleep. If you will kindly
take leave of her, I will darken the room at once."

She stood so evidently waiting for them to go, that in a few moments they all found themselves
somehow or other outside the door, with Gerald politely escorting them down-stairs, and Olly
dancing joyously ahead, crying that Mr. Halloway had sent for him to the rectory. Left mistress
of the situation, Mrs. Whittridge proceeded to draw down the shades, straighten the chairs,
smooth the bedclothes and rearrange the pillows, all with the noiseless, graceful movements
peculiar to her. Then she drew a low chair up to the bedside, and laid her cool hand soothingly
on Phebe's forehead. A great peace seemed suddenly to fill the room.

"Now, my darling, you must sleep. Between them they have quite worn you out."

"Who told you I needed you?" asked Phebe, drawing the gentle hand down to her lips. "How did
you happen to come just when I wanted you so?"

"Denham sent me over," answered Soeur Angélique. "He thought perhaps I could make it a little
quieter for you."

"Ah," murmured Phebe. A faint tinge crept up into her white cheeks. She turned her head away
and closed her eyes. "I knew it was he who sent you."

CHAPTER X.

AN APOLOGY AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.

It was some days after Phebe's accident before Halloway saw Gerald again. She was generally
upstairs when he called, or driving or sailing with De Forest, who was in daily attendance
upon her, paying her persistent, blasé devotion. She was in the parlor one evening, however,
sitting with De Forest near the door, when Denham came in, but he merely bowed to her and passed
on to the other end of the room, where Mrs. Lane was seated with Mr. and Mrs. Hardcastle. Mr.
Hardcastle rose at once to receive him. "Ah, good-evening, good-evening. Pray take a seat.
I am delighted to see you. I suppose you came to ask after our little invalid. Sad accident,
sir; sad accident, very. It has kept us most anxious and busy seeing after her. But she is
doing nicely now. We shall have her about again before we know it." He spoke as if her recovery
were altogether due to himself, for the regularity with which he had fulfilled his neighborly
duties toward her, and he paused and looked at Halloway for a recognition of the same.

"It will be a bright day for us all when we have her among us once more," Halloway said in
answer to the look. "You must tell her how much we miss her, Mrs. Lane."

"Ah, that we do," murmured Mrs. Hardcastle. "My knitting has been at a standstill ever since
the poor dear child's misfortune. I have been so thankful her hands were spared. There's always
some cause for gratitude in every evil, after all."

"That's one way of looking at it," said Mrs. Lane, turning up the lamp and drawing her work-basket
nearer. "The Lord make us thankful for all our mercies, but a misfortune's a misfortune, and
I don't know as we're called upon to look at it as any thing else. Won't you sit down, Mr.
Halloway?"

"Thank you, not this evening. It is nearly time for service. I only wanted to know that Miss
Phebe was doing well."

Mr. Hardcastle rose again to bow off the guest. "Sorry you can't stay, sir. In spite of our
difference of faith,--and how great it is I am in hopes you will appreciate some day when you
have come to see the errors of the way you are walking in,--in spite of our material differences,
I say, you are always very welcome at any time. But pray don't let us detain you from what
you deem your duty."

"Mr. Halloway, a moment, please," said Gerald, rising as he was going by. He stopped, and she
came toward him holding out her hand. "I want to thank you for your kindness of the other night.
I believe I was ungrateful and perhaps rude at the time, and I have not seen you since to apologize."

"Pray do not speak of it!" said Denham, flushing a little as he took her hand. "There was no
occasion whatever for gratitude, and therefore no possible lack of it. I trust you are quite
well now."

"There was occasion for gratitude," persisted Gerald, "or at least for an acknowledgment of
your kindness, and it is because I am ashamed of my remissness that I take this first opportunity
to thank you."

"You embarrass me," said Denham, laughingly. "I am not at all accustomed to having public restitution
made me in this manner, and especially for purely imaginary slights. But may I not be permitted
now--as a sort of reward if you will--to inquire if you have quite recovered?"

"At least I have sufficiently recovered to retract my disbelief in kitchen soap, and--and in
your skill," she added, with a little visible effort.

"You honor us above our deserts,--the soap and me," answered Denham, playfully. "I don't know
how deleteriously it may affect the soap, but as for me I feel myself growing alarmingly conceited.
So good-night."

"What a very elaborate apology," said De Forest, as Denham went out. "If the offence were at
all proportionate, I tremble to think of the enormity of your crime; or is it because he is
a Reverend, that you demean yourself so humbly before him?"

Halloway was still hunting for his hat in the hall, and could scarcely help overhearing De
Forest's remark and Gerald's answer.

"I demean myself before nobody in seeking to make amends for a previous neglect. The humiliation
is in the misconduct, not in the confession of it; and whether I owed the apology to Mr. Halloway
or to a beggar in the street, I should have made it quite the same, not at all for sake of
his pardon, but simply for sake of clearing my own conscience."

"Not at all for sake of my pardon," said Denham, as he strode on toward the church, with the
uncomfortable sensation of having been an involuntary eavesdropper. "It is fortunate that my
conceit was only veneered on."

The following Sunday Gerald was in church both morning and evening, sitting in Phebe's accustomed
place. She was one of those noticeable presences impossible to overlook, and as Denham mounted
into the pulpit he felt as if he were preaching solely to her, or rather as if hers were the
only criticism he feared in all the friendly congregation. He was annoyed that he should feel
so, and quite conscious at the same time that he was far from doing his best, and once or twice
he caught a flash in the serious eyes fastened on his face, that seemed to say she knew this
last fact too, and was impatient with him for it. What excuse had any one, in Gerald's eyes,
for not doing his best always? De Forest was with her in the evening, and as Halloway came
out of the vestry after service, he found himself directly behind them.

"He's not a mighty orator," De Forest was saying with his cynical drawl. "I doubt if he is
destined to be one of the pillars or even one of the cushions of the church."

"He was not doing his best to-night," answered Gerald.

"Thank you," said Halloway, coming quickly to her side, anxious to avoid further eavesdropping.
"Thank you--I mean for thinking I might do better."

"That is not much to be grateful for, I am afraid," replied Gerald, "since it implies, you
know, that you have not done well."

"I hope you like uncompromising truth, Mr. Halloway," said De Forest, leaning forward to look
at him across Gerald. "It's the only kind Miss Vernor deals in."

"I prefer it infinitely to the most flattering falsehood imaginable," answered Denham.

"I believe clergymen are usually the last people to hear the truth about themselves," continued
Gerald. "Their position at the head of a community, pre-supposes their capability for the office,
and naturally places them outside of the criticism of those under their immediate charge, who
are nevertheless just the ones best qualified to judge them. But of course scholars may not
teach the teacher."

"What an invaluable opening for you who are not one of Mr. Halloway's flock," said De Forest,
"to undertake to remedy the deficiency, and to be in yourself a whole critical public to him,
a licensed Free Press as it were, pointing out all his errors with the most unhesitating frankness
and unsparing perspicuity!"

"Do you think your love of truth would hold out long under such a crucial test?" asked Gerald,
turning quite seriously to Denham. The moonlight shone full on her clear-cut, cameo-like face.
Her eyes, with their shadowy fringe, looked deeper and blacker than midnight. It did not seem
possible that truth spoken by her could be any thing but beautiful too. Denham smiled down
at her seriousness.

"Try me."

"Well, then, it seems to me you do not often enough try to do your best. You are contented
to do well, and not ambitious to do better. You are quite satisfied, so I think, if your sermons
are good enough to please generally, instead of seeking to raise your standard all the time
by hard effort toward improvement, and I doubt, therefore, if at the end of a year your sermons
will show any marked change from what they are to-day. Am I too hard?"

"You are very just," answered Denham, pleasantly, though the blood mounted to his face. "You
have found out my weak spot. I confess I am not ambitious. I aspire to no greatness of any kind."

"You have discovered the secret of contentment," said De Forest, with effusive approbation.
"I am glad to have met you, Mr. Halloway. You are the one happy man I know."

"The secret of contentment?" repeated Gerald. "Say rather the principle of all stagnation,
mental and spiritual. Not to aspire to become greater than one can be is to fall short of becoming
all that one may be; to be satisfied with one's powers is to dwarf them hopelessly."

"A powerful argument against conceit," reflected De Forest. "Still, upon my word, I think I
would as lief be conceited in every pore as eternally in a state of dissatisfaction with myself
about every thing."

"It is well, above all, I think, to have a just appreciation of one's own powers or lack of
powers," said Denham, slowly. "Ambition, without the corresponding strength to gratify it,
is a cruel taskmaster."

"How can you tell, till you have tried, that there is no corresponding strength?" asked Gerald,
turning full upon him again. How marvellously expressive her face was, with its earnest eyes
and mobile mouth! "If I were a man,--and great heavens! how I wish I were one!--I would create
the strength if it were not there of itself. I would force myself upward. I would never rest
till I had become something more than nature originally made me."

"Then Heaven be thanked, who has spared us the monstrosity you would have developed into under
the harrowing circumstances of a reversal of your sex," said De Forest, devoutly.

"I was always glad you were a woman. Now I am positively aglow with gratitude for it."

Denham was silent. They had reached Mrs. Lane's now, and Gerald and her cavalier paused.

"I have not hurt you, Mr. Halloway, have I?" said Gerald, more gently. "I know I sometimes
speak strongly where I am least qualified to do so."

"A very womanly trait," put in De Forest. "Don't apologize for your one redeeming weakness."

"No, you have not hurt me," said Denham, in a low voice. "I hope you have done me good." And
without adding even a good-night or a message for Phebe, he lifted his hat and crossed over
to the rectory. His sister was not there as he entered her sitting-room, and throwing himself
down on the sofa, clasped his hands over his forehead and stared thoughtfully up at the ceiling.
She had been sitting with Phebe while the Lane household went to its various churches, Phebe
was tired, in consequence of the entire population of Joppa having run in to ask after her
between services "on their way home," and she was not talking much. But only to look up and
smile into Soeur Angélique's sweet face was pleasure enough for the girl, and she lay very
quietly, holding a rose that Denham had sent her over by his sister, and feeling supremely
contented.

"How would you like me to read to you?" asked Mrs. Whittridge at last, taking up a book. "Shall
I try it?"

"No, thank you. I am afraid my thoughts would be louder than your words, and I should be listening
to them and losing what you are saying."

"And, pray, what are these remarkably noisy thoughts?" asked the lady. "Let me listen and hear
them too."

"I don't think I could say just what they are," replied Phebe, dreamily. "They are running
through my head more like indistinct music than like real thoughts. And I never was clever
at saying things, you know. But, oh! I do feel very happy."

"You look so," said Soeur Angélique, tenderly. "You poor little one, is it just the getting
well again that makes you so?"

Phebe flushed ever so slightly. "I don't know just what it is," she answered, lifting the rose
to her face. "Perhaps it is only the listening to that indistinct music. It seems to have put
all my soul in tune. Oh, dear Mrs. Whittridge, what a beautiful world this is, when only there
are no discords in one's own heart!"

A day or two went by, and Phebe, though rapidly convalescing, was still a prisoner to her room.

"You're missing a lot of fun," said Bell Masters, sympathetically, as she bustled in to see
her one morning, and sat down by the window, pushing back the curtain so that she could look
out into the street and nod to passers as she talked. "There's no end going on. Dear me, it's
a shame to come to you empty-handed, Phebe. I had two or three rosebuds for you,--beauties
they were too,--but the fact is I gave them away piecemeal as I came along, and I haven't one
left. It seemed as if I met every man there was this morning. How soon do you think you'll
be out again?"

"I don't know," answered Phebe, pushing a box of bonbons within reach of Bell's easy-going
fingers. "I think I might go down-stairs now, but Dr. Dennis won't let me."

"Too bad. You'll miss Dick's coming of age, won't you? There are to be high doings. Mr. Hardcastle
is too mysterious and pompous to live. One can't get any thing out of him but just 'My son
Dick doesn't come of age but once' (as if we thought it was a yearly occurrence), 'and we don't
celebrate it but once.' But I got hold of Dick privately and wheedled it out of him in less
than no time with a piece of soft gingerbread. It's to be something stunning. His father wanted
to do it up in English style, dinner to the tenantry, and all that sort of thing, only unluckily
there wasn't any tenantry, and he had to abandon the benevolent role and take to a jollier
one. He won't show off as well, but we'll have a deal more fun. It's to be a sort of royal
picnic, but in the evening, mind,--wasn't that a brilliant idea for the old gentleman? We are
all to go up in boats, and there are to be great rafts with blazing torches, and a supper in
the woods grander than any of Mrs. Upjohn's, and bonfires, and the band from Galilee, and bouquets
for the ladies, and I don't know what not, and best of all, unlimited opportunities for flirting.
It's to be the affair of this and every other season past or future. It's a crying shame you
can't go."

"Oh! how I wish I could!" sighed poor Phebe.

"I made pa give me a new dress for it," continued Bell, leaning forward to pick off the biggest
grapes from a bunch on the table. "I mean to look just too-too. Mr. De Forest is going to row
me up. I don't know exactly how I made him ask me, but I did. It's such a triumph to get him
away from Miss Vernor for once, though I suspect I'll have to pay for it by doing more than
half the rowing myself. I don't suppose he would exert his precious self to pull an oar more
than five minutes at a time. Amy tried her best to get Mr. Halloway, and so did the Dexters.
The way those girls run after him is a caution even to me; but they didn't get him. He's monstrously
clever in keeping out of people's clutches. I gave him up long ago as a bad job. Well, good-by,
Phebe. Awfully sorry you can't go. Everybody'll be there, and it's to be the biggest lark out."

During the few days that intervened before Dick's birthday, little else was talked of anywhere
than Mr. Hardcastle's party, which was never spoken of, by the way, as Mrs. Hardcastle's party,
though upon that good lady devolved the onus of the weighty preparations. It seemed purely
Mr. Hardcastle's affair, just as every thing did in which he was in any way concerned. Impromptu
meetings were held at every house in turn to discuss the coming event, and the latest bits
of information regarding it were retailed with embellishments proportionate to the imagination
of the accidental narrator. Not a soul in Joppa but knew every proposed feature of the entertainment
better than the hosts themselves. The old people said it would be damp and rheumatic and would
certainly be the death of them. The young people said it would be divine, and quite worth dying
for. The people who were neither old nor young said nobody could tell how it would be till
after it was over, and they felt it their duty to go to look after the others. The day came,
brilliantly clear and soft and warm: such a day, in short, as Mr. Hardcastle had felt to be
his due, and had expected of the elements all along as the one token of regard in their power
to accord him, and he accepted his friends' congratulations upon it with a grave bow which
seemed to say: "I ordered it so. Pray, did you suppose I had forgotten to attend to the weather?"
The sun set in a cloudless heaven; the evening star hung quivering over the green-topped hills;
the twilight dropped noiseless and fragrant over earth and water, and the long-dreamed-of moment
had arrived at last.

"Just let me have one more look at you, Gerald, before you start," said Phebe, wistfully. "Oh,
how beautiful you look! Nobody's dresses ever fit like yours, and that great dark-red hat and
feather,--I thought I should not like it,--but it makes a perfect picture of you."

"For pity's sake do stop!" begged Gerald. "You know of all things I hate compliments. Where's
that boy Olly?"

"He's coming to me later. I promised to make up to him for his not going to the party, poor
little fellow."

"Phebe, dear," said Gerald, suddenly stooping to give her one of her rare kisses, "I cannot
bear to leave you all alone so. That miserable Miss Lydia and Olly aren't any sort of company.
Let me stay with you. I had a great deal rather."

"Oh, no, no, no!" cried Phebe, almost pushing her toward the door. "I don't mind a bit being
left, and I wouldn't have you stay for anything. How lovely of you to propose it! You are an
angel, Gerald, even though you don't like being told so, Good-by. And--Gerald,"--she had followed
her friend out into the hall, and stood leaning against the banisters,--"Gerald, dear, will
you tell Mr. Halloway I am going down-stairs to-morrow?"

Halloway was to be Gerald's escort that evening, and stood waiting for her now in the hall
below, and looking up at sound of Phebe's voice, he gave an exclamation of surprise and pleasure,
and immediately sprang up the stairs.

"Miss Phebe!" he said, taking both her hands in his. "How glad I am to see you once more!"

Phebe shrank back from him with a little cry of dismay. Ah! when does ever any thing happen
exactly as we plan it shall? She had pictured this meeting to herself over and over again during
the long days of her seclusion,--just what he would say and what she would say, and just how
she would dress on that first day when she went down-stairs. She meant to look so particularly
nice on that first day! And now to be caught in her plain little gray flannel wrapper with
its simple red trimmings, her hair all loose and mussy, and even her very oldest slippers on,--and
with Gerald standing beside her in her rich, dainty, becoming attire as if to make the contrast
all the more painfully striking! Poor little Cinderella Phebe! She looked up at Denham almost
ready to cry, and said never a word.

"It has been such a long, long time!" he said, still holding her hands. "I do not know how
we have made out to spare you."

"We shall not have to spare her much longer," said Gerald. "She is coming down-stairs to-morrow."

And then Halloway dropped Phebe's hands, and turning to Gerald, held out a hand to her.

"Forgive me for not even noticing you, Miss Vernor. At first I could only see Miss Phebe."

"Doesn't Gerald look nice?" asked Phebe, trying to choke back the uncomfortable lump rising
so unreasonably in her throat. Halloway moved back a little and looked at Gerald, who stood
fastening her long glove, utterly unconscious or unheedful of his scrutiny. The light in the
niche at the head of the stairs threw its full glow over both her and Phebe.

"Yes," he answered, quietly, after an imperceptible pause, and, as he turned back to Phebe,
it seemed to her that his eyes glanced over her with a suddenly awakened consciousness of the
wrapper and the tumbled hair and even of the little worn-out slippers. "You look pale," he
said, kindly. "I know I am wrong to keep you standing here just because it is so pleasant to
see you again. And it is easier to say good-by, knowing I have only till to-morrow to wait
now. A demain."

"Good-night," murmured Phebe, without looking up; "good-night, Gerald." And then she turned
quickly into her room, and closed the door, and stood stock-still behind it, holding her breath
and listening intently till she heard the front door close upon them and the last echo of their
footsteps die away in the street outside. Then she flung herself face downward upon the bed
and cried miserably to herself out of sheer disappointment. Why did it have to be all so very,
very different from her dream?

CHAPTER XI.

"MY SON DICK."

Never had there been a more perfect night than that whereon Dick Hardcastle's coming of age
was celebrated. Only enough wind stirred to toy softly with the gay little pennons streaming
from the many boats winding their way to the rendezvous, and to throw dancing shadows of light
upon the water from the torches at their prow. All along the banks of the lake, where high
hills shut out the moonlight and bound the shore in an almost Egyptian darkness, rafts were
stationed at intervals, blazing with colored lights. The sound of distant music floated far
down upon the air, mingled with the swish of steady oars and laughter and happy voices as the
occupants of the various boats called out merrily to each other across the water, or here and
there broke into light-hearted song. Denham's boat glided stilly along through all this carnival-like
revelry. Gerald was not in a mood for talking, and he felt little inclined to disturb her.
It was companionship enough merely to glance at her ever and anon as she sat silently in the
stern, the red ropes of the tiller drawn loosely around her slender waist like a silken girdle.
He wondered idly what she was thinking of. Her broad hat threw too deep a shadow for him to
see her face save when they neared one of the beacon rafts; then it was suddenly in brilliant
illumination, and it was impossible not to watch for these moments of revelation, which lit
her up to such rare beauty. He fancied he could almost see her thoughts as there flashed across
her face some new, swift expression more speaking than words,--now a noble thought, he was
sure; now an odd fancy, now a serious meditative mood, that held her every sense and faculty
in thrall at once. Through all her revery she never forgot her duty with the rudder, though
she quite forgot her oarsman. She made no effort whatever toward his entertainment, and he
felt sure that he could do no more toward hers than simply not to obtrude himself upon her.
Were there many, he wondered, even among her chosen friends (in whose ranks he could not count
himself), who would have enjoyed this silent sail with her so much as he? They neared the destined
spot all too soon for him, and Gerald at last roused herself.

"Are we there now? I had no idea it was so far."

"It is not far enough," answered Denham, resting a moment on his oars as he looked around.
"Nothing surely can be devised, even in this pleasure-ingenious society, so enjoyable as I
have found our evening sail."

"Why do you go to the party at all then?" asked Gerald, abruptly. "It isn't compulsory, is
it? After you land me, are you not at liberty to row off if you prefer?"

"Ah, but I don't prefer," Halloway said gayly, resuming his oars. "I expect to be very greatly
entertained there too. There is almost always something to be got out of every thing, and anyway
I particularly like parties."

"I hate them."

"Yes, because you do not care for people. I like them just because I do care for people, and
parties are but people collectively instead of individually, you know."

By this time Denham had shot the boat up to the landing, where the hosts of the evening stood
ready to receive them. Dick was in a wild state of boyish hilarity, profiting by the novelty
of his exalted position as hero of the evening, boldly to take a kiss from every pretty girl
in succession as he swung her to the shore. "It's my right, to-night, you know, or if it isn't,
I'm major now and can make laws for myself," he explained complacently to any expostulatory
subject; and Mr. Hardcastle rubbed his soft, plump hands, and added: "Never you mind, never
you mind, my dear; every dog must have his day, and this is Dick's day. And after all it's
my son Dick, you know, and that makes it all right. He doesn't need any other guaranty than
that he's my son, I'm sure, and seeing I'm Dick's papa, my dear, why I'll just make bold to
follow suit."

But Dick would as soon have thought of offering to kiss the polar star as Gerald, and she was
suffered to pass on unmolested to Mrs. Hardcastle, who stood just beyond, looking fagged and
jaded, and as if she were heartily thankful that in all his life Dick could never come of age
again. One of the next arrivals was Bell Masters, very fine in her new dress, but flushed and
overheated to an unbecoming degree. She rowed up smartly, shipped her oars in true nautical
fashion, sprang from the boat, and held out her hand to her companion with a hardly repressed
sneer: "Pray allow me to assist you, Mr. De Forest."

That gentleman got up leisurely from his cushioned seat in the stern, and came forward cool
and comfortable to an enviable degree. "Thanks," he said, with even a little more drawl than
usual as he took her proffered hand. "This boat is a little teetery. You are uncommonly kind,
and quite a champion oarswoman."

"You ought to be a judge of my powers by this time certainly," said Bell, snappishly. 

The second, which is going to go to press, understand the description of Switzerland, Germany
Rhine, Belgium and several departments of France.

The third will embrace the narratives relating to another part of
France (the Northeast), and to Württemberg, Bavaria, Austria, Hungary,
Bohemia, Saxony, Prussia, Hamburg, Hanover, Hese-Gasela and the Netherlands.

The

fourth will include Britain, Italy, and a social study comparing Paris and London and European civilization.

Each
volume shall be provided with this, a simple map indicating the routes.

If

for any insurmountable problems, not acquired to finish my post in
Paris, just finish in Bogota in 1863.

Do not forget that the text of this volume has been written and published in 1859-60, and is
therefore to relate the time that all statistical observations, and other character more or less transient.

THE
AUTHOR.

A COLOMBIAN TRIP IN EUROPE.

       TWO WORDS TO THE READER.

* * * * *

I do not know the degree of esteem that may merit from many readers
reflections a traveler who, unknown outside his homeland, sets out
on his pilgrimage from the heart of the Colombian jungle to the center
of these old European societies, full of memories, great monuments
and bitter disappointments.

Contrasts loving and always seeking the truth, I left my sweet homeland of freedom and hope,
- the land of colossal mountains, splendid valleys, cataracts, forests, sparkling rivers, high snow-capped
peaks, perfumes, echoes mysterious solitude, the treasures of light and unfailing harmony and
pageantry of this nature which summarizes in her womb all the poetry and all the wonders of creation!
All that is left back: this is Colombia, hidden under the cloak of
shells and coral, light and mystery that will extend the Atlantic
and Pacific ....

Why leave this world so far all that is worshiped?

Is that the Democrat needs to Colombia nurture your spirit with the light of the old civilization
and strengthen his heart Republican with the strict teachings of a society deeply ulcerated
oppression and privilege. Is that the full truth is not acquired but by comparison, and should embrace
the spirit lives of the two continents working differently in the work of civilization.

Must be present at this whirlwind that moves the European world in search of light, science,
the refinement of art, the industry wonders, and all this set admirable efforts is the work of progress
.-- It is necessary to watch the show recomposition of this society, rages, which is agitated and
worried, determined to solve the problem of welfare, fighting between the traditions of absolutism
and aspirations towards freedom.

The contrast is great and it deserves careful study. In Colombia, the simple scenes democracy, the
solemn mystery, solitude and the sublime spectacle of nature in all the splendor of its pomp
and grandeur. In Europe, the intrigues of the aristocracy, the light of science, exuberant people,
and art up to the most prodigious proportions. If Colombia is the land of the future, hope and
the idea; Europe the world of the past, memories and facts. Compare these two worlds, analyzing
the body and the face of civilization in every one of them, such is the task of travelers.

As bad as play my share of work I not therefore expect that some readers New World associated
with research that one of his brothers is to make the left field where, with the horrors of
the conquest, the semi-feudal civilization we infiltrated? Happy traveler, inspired the deepest
feelings of love towards her Family favorite from the regions of Colombia, could find in their
pilgrimage treasures really to offer to his brothers!

Attending day by day, hour by hour, to the ebb and flow of the institutions and customs, literature,
science and industry, which reveals itself in impressive monuments, sumptuous, rich in museums,
libraries, on the railways and telegraphs, factories of great or of ingenious production, in
the academies and universities, exhibitions and international conferences, in cabinets printers
and art in schools popular in charitable institutions and penalty, in the administration of justice
different forms, ports, dams and canals, in the theaters of all kinds in public places for the service
of science and good taste, in Banks, Exchanges and associations, and all that may represent
progress, tradition, a social organization or a characteristic fact, attend to this movement,
I repeat, is to look package the work of civilization is simultaneously feeding the senses and
soul.
 Even Mrs. Upjohn admitted it to be very well, very well indeed, all but
the dancing, for which, however, Mr. Hardcastle apologized to her handsomely as a quite unexpected
ebullition of youthful spirits which in his soul he was far from countenancing, and upon which
she resolutely turned her back all the evening, so at least not to be an eye-witness of the
indecorum. Of course, therefore, she knew nothing whatever about it when Mr. Upjohn toward
the end of the evening, actually allowed himself to be decoyed into the gay whirl by one of
the youngest and most daring of the girls, and galloped clumsily around like a sportive and
giddy elephant set free for the first time in its native jungle, and finding it very much to
its liking. His daughter Maria, faithfully at her mother's side, sat with one ear grudgingly
lent to the prosy heaviness of Mr. Webb's light talk, and her whole face turned longingly toward
the spot where the happy sinners were gyrating, and, seeing her father there, her round eyes
grew rounder than ever, as she watched in breathless alarm lest the earth should open under
his feet in instant retribution. Gracious, if ma should turn her head! But there are some wrongs
it is best to ignore altogether, where prevention is hopeless, and Mrs. Upjohn, like many another
good woman, always knew when not to see. So she persistently did not see now, and Mr. Upjohn
spun away to his heart's content (prudently keeping in the remotest corner of the sward, to
be sure), winking at Maria every now and then in the highest glee, and once absolutely signing
to her to sneak over to him and try a turn too.

And then came supper-time, and such a supper, setting all confectioners and doctors at defiance
at once! Mr. Upjohn, red and perspiring, and remarking how curiously hot the bonfires made
the woods at night, waited on his wife with gallant solicitude, lest she should leave a single
dish untasted. Mrs. Bruce had left town the day before, and in the absence of any new admiration
he always fell back with perfect content upon his old allegiance. Mrs. Upjohn received his
devotion as calmly as his intermittent neglects, and only raised her eyebrows when he stooped
to whisper, "My love, you're the most handsomely dressed woman here!" which was strictly true
as regarded the materials of her attire, and unblushingly false as regarded the blending of
them. Dick had been in his element all the evening. He had had a serio-comic flirtation with
every girl in turn. He had cut out Jake Dexter with Nellie Atterbury, and made it up to his
friend by offering him a lock of Bell's hair, which he had surreptitiously cut from her hanging
braids, and which Jake wore pinned in his button hole as a trophy for the rest of the evening,
to the immense scandal of everybody. But with the supper-hour Dick's spirits ebbed. He knew,
poor fellow, what Fate held in store. His father intended making a few remarks over him, as
a sort of substitute for his defrauded speech to the non-existing tenantry.

"Stand by me, Jake, there's a man!" whispered Dick, forlornly, to his crony.

"I will, Dick, like a woman!" Jake responded, tenderly, and the two stood together just at
Mr. Hardcastle's elbow, as that worthy advanced to a central spot between the bonfires, cleared
his throat ominously, and pirouetted solemnly around, holding up his hand to attract general
attention.

"My friends," began Mr. Hardcastle, swelling with the importance of the moment to even more
than his usual rotundity, "this has been a day of days to me. All of you who are parents will
appreciate my feelings of mingled pride and humility,--of pride and humility," repeated Mr.
Hardcastle, pleased with the antithesis, and swaying gently back and forth, "as I stand here
before you with my son, the boy whom I have watched over from his cradle up with an unsleeping
eye, and whose tender feet"--Dick here stooped over to inspect those honest, able members.
Jake did the same with evident disapproval of them. Mr. Hardcastle raised his voice--"whose
tender feet I have endeavored from his youth up, so far as lay in my limited power, to guide
in the way that I hope he may never depart from. This boy I now present to you, friends, a
man,--this boy who has grown up among you, whom you all know, and whom I hope you all harbor
some kindly feeling for,--this boy,"--he put out his hand to draw him forward, Dick gave Jake
a gentle push toward the hand and vanished, and Mr. Hardcastle, quite unconscious of the manoeuvre,
drew the grinning Jake solemnly up to him, and casting around a look of triumph which seemed
to say: Do better than this, friends, if you can, placed his hand on Jake's shoulder with his
grandest air, and continued, sonorously,--"my son, ladies and gentlemen,--my son Dick."

There was a moment's pause of consternation among the guests and a suppressed scream from the
defrauded Mother Dexter. Mr. Hardcastle slowly turned his radiant face toward his supposed
son, and immediately dropped his hand and exclaimed, in entirely altered and most natural tones
of amazement: "Well, I never! How in the world did you get here, Jake Dexter?" He tried to flee. When I was
to do it noted that the traitors had stopped at the end of the street.

Amalia throws her arms around her lover, puts her lips to the mouth and kisses that lasts, lasts
forever. Fernanda close your eyes.

When reopens is moving away hand in hand.

Let them leave the garden. The follow immediately. Where do they go? Once on the run, notes they
are released and head home. Sign in following him, but had disappeared
and do not know which room to find them.

Runs through all reckless, blinded by emotion strange that it fails
to suppress, a rush of yearning, longing, to spy.

- Where are you
going, Fernanda? - A young man asks.

- I am looking for the bride.

-
As you go wrong.

Is at the other end of the house, in one of the rooms overlooking
the North.

He turns to hide, but once again undertook the raid. Arrives at last to a locked cabinet, which
is none other than the famous quarter of the countess. Will lift latch, as did others, but remains
still to hear the faintest rumor.

Apply hearing. Them!

It departs from there, run as if pursued, is inserted through the woods and, when found in
solitary place, sits at the foot of a tree trunk rests on his head.
The face sad and haggard, his eyes ecstatic, holding her hands folded
on one knee, says attitude desperate agony and mute. "For the peace of my soul, let me ascribe
your decision to a love of justice rather than of individual. Au revoir."

Halloway drew Gerald's hand through his arm with a very comfortable feeling of possession,
and they walked on some time in silence. "Are you tired?" he asked at last.

"No--yes. Parties always tire me, and life in Joppa consists of parties. Do you always go?"

"Oh, always!"

"Your mental constitution must be robust to stand such a steady strain upon it."

"The shepherd must keep by his sheep, you know," laughed Denham.

"I thought the shepherd was to lead the sheep, not to be led by them. Don't you hope to inspire
them with a love for better things? I fancied the province of a clergyman was to improve people--not
just to preach to them."

A shadow crossed Denham's face. "There are many of them more fitted to improve me than I them,"
he said, humbly. "How would you have me begin?"

"With making Mr. Hardcastle less offensively pompous, and Mrs. Hardcastle less tedious, and
Mrs. Upjohn less dogmatic, and Mrs. Anthony more sincere, and Miss Delano less namby-pamby,--in
short, by taking a little of the superficiality and narrow-mindedness and provinciality out
of the place if possible."

Denham tossed back his head with a light laugh. "Ah, how you relieve my mind! Most of those
whom you have so scathingly described belong to other congregations, and are therefore beyond
my jurisdiction."

"Do you really feel so? Are you so like a physician?" asked Gerald, quickly. "Do you seek to
do good only to those who pay for the care you give them? Is not your mission with all with
whom you are thrown?"

"The days of single-handed combat against the world are over," answered Denham. "You cripple
a man by giving him too wide a field of action."

"I would not take less than the widest were I a man!" exclaimed Gerald, proudly.

"Would you be a clergyman?"

"No. I have no talent for writing. I could not preach."

"Nay, I think you an admirable preacher," said Denham, gently, without the faintest tinge of
sarcasm in either tone or look. Gerald glanced at him quickly and flushed slightly.

"I am too dogmatic myself," she said, biting her lip and turning away her head. "I should not
be so hard on Mrs. Upjohn."

"You do not intend to be hard on any one."

"But to be just is to seem hard," said Gerald.

"It is a divine prerogative to know just how far to temper justice with mercy," Denham answered.
"I suppose none of us can hope to attain to perfect knowledge; but if there must be error,
I would for myself rather err in excess of mercy than of justice."

"In other words, between two evils you would choose the least," Gerald replied. "That is the
common way of getting out of the difficulty. But it seems to me like compromising with evil.
There ought to be always some third, wholly right, way out of every dilemma, if only one sought
earnestly enough." She spoke more as if to herself than to him.

"Then perhaps," said Denham, pleasantly, "we may hope that you will in time light upon the
very kindliest and rightest way combined of judging not only abstract subjects, but also the
not altogether unworthy inhabitants of even this little place of Joppa."

"Oh, Joppa!" cried Gerald, all the impatience instantly coming back to her face and voice.
As instantly too she frowned in self-conviction, and turned almost contritely to Denham. "You
see, Mr. Halloway, I shall have to bring my own character first to that future Day of Judgment,
and to be very careful that I do not err on your side,--in being too merciful."

CHAPTER XII.

WHY DO SUMMER ROSES FADE?

A few more days slipped by, easily and swiftly, as all days did in Joppa. The famous party
was discussed and re-discussed down to its minutest details. Mrs. Hardcastle recovered from
her subsequent attack of neuralgia. Mr. Hardcastle, who went from house to house, gathering
compliments as an assessor levies taxes, completed the round of the village and began again.
Mrs. Upjohn asked for and obtained the recipe of a certain dish, the like of which had never
before been seen in Joppa, and the Joppites commended her boldness in asking and condemned
Mrs. Hardcastle's weakness in giving. The report that Mr. Upjohn had apostatized from the Presbyterian
Church, disapproving of its tenets as regarded waltzing, was duly started, denied, violently
adopted, and as violently exploded. The statements that Jake Dexter was engaged to Nellie Atterbury,
that Bell Masters had offered herself to Mr. Halloway and been declined with thanks, and that
Gerald's hat had been imported from Paris two days before, were also duly aired and evaporated.
It had, moreover, by this time become a town fact, that it was Bell Masters and not Janet Mudge
whom Halloway had rowed to the party, and that he had walked home with Mrs. Lane. Miss Brooks
overheard him taking leave of her at her door, and fancied--but was not sure--that she told
him to change his boots lest his feet should be damp. The large pool of dignity that had in
his character was rebelling against a proceeding so low, the broken shed tears of disappointment.
After shredding the last he wrote, had occasion to rejoice, because he knew casually that night
that no letter came to power Quiñones without passing through the hands of his wife. Sometimes could
not go, to surrender her sorrows and dropped into a chair, and spent a long while in ecstatic
eyes intense and painful meditation. Acometíanle in Currently, sudden bursts of tenderness,
she confessed without shame, with voluptuous delight, her love, forgive Luis wholeheartedly
and promised to love life in silence never to be any man. As this day was spent feeling irritated sick
was transformed into desire, irrational. The excitement of the senses, at last awakened it in
a violent way, we collected the trickle of wounded pride, to keep live this desire. Bit was missing,
when I saw Luis at his side, to open your chest and confess the burning passion he felt.

Without a clear awareness of what he did, Fernanda looking for his
ex-boyfriend on the farm.

All there had interested him deeply, the forest, the house, the servants, to the animals grazing
on the prairie, mostly scattered look nice, bright with excitement. How nice it seemed that big
broken, corroded by moisture and mice! After wandering through the most deserted in the forest
a long time, became distracted by meadows decreased slowly to some place where he had some workers
digging a ditch deep to dry the ground. They knew without asking that the count, after being
a while watching the play, was gone. Waited some time to hide, and after it She walked slowly
away, dragging the umbrella, and who does not know where to straighten.

In fact, I did. But not for lack of goal but he did not know where
he was it.

A cruel idea floating in his brain to be determined clearly, that of Luis could being alone
at that time with Amalia. Gradually, as they marched down the field, This idea was gaining attention.
And as stated, gnawing on the heart, filled him of spite and anger. Why? Do not know perfectly
their adulterous relationships? Well, however, irritation caused him alive, he thought they
should not suffer, he was entitled to prevent the joints. Without realizing what he was doing
his pace. His nerves were altering. When he reached the corrada was entirely convinced that
adulterers were together and alone. He entered the house and, as those who visit out of curiosity,
streamed through, scanned to the most remote rooms. Failed to see, but the fact of not finding Amalia
by anywhere further confirmed in their suspicion. Both look weary, swollen of longing and
nervous, came back outside. Avoided meeting people who might stop and went to the garden. As he
set foot on strongly aroused in spirit in the hope of finding them. Vegetable that corner where shrubs,
growing at will, intertwined to form an impenetrable mass was calculated to confidences love. He moved
with caution, quietly, their paths almost disappeared, upholstery grass, overrun in many places
by branches of shrubs and undergrowth. Sometimes a mound of lilies cut him off, and looked to
jump on them clarified, others a rhododendron branches extended to embrace the camellia in front and so
was vault I needed a lot of bending low to pass. Before coming he thought he felt faint sound of
voices. Stood still and waited a few moments. Perceiving again and headed toward the site
where started.

It was them! Yes, they were. Long before to hear his voice clearly had guessed. They walked by a
wide and open street the other, guarded on one side by the wall, the other by high hedge of
boxwood

.
 Looking in the glass when all was done, she had been fain to confess that she
really did look nice for once, though she reproached herself immediately afterward in severest
terms for the unpardonable vanity of the thought, and made a little grimace at her own image
to effectually dispel the illusion. What could it ever matter how she looked? And particularly
how could it matter when Gerald was by,--Gerald, who possessed that rare and enviable gift
of always looking her best? So Phebe put the subject of her looks entirely away from her mind,
and leaned back on the sofa, her hands folded idly in her lap, feeling perfectly content with
the passing moment, and asking nothing from the future but that it might be always "now." What
more could she want? The room held her three dearest friends in the world,--Gerald, Soeur Angélique,
and Mr. Halloway;--of course one should always put ladies before gentlemen even only in thought.
How handsome Gerald looked as she stood with her head slightly bent forward, listening to Mrs.
Whittridge. If Gerald did not choose to listen, no one could ever force her to lend an ear.
But when she did so choose, she listened with her whole mind, and was lost to all else. Phebe
smiled with quiet amusement at her friend's intensity in every thing, and turned with the smile
on her face to Halloway. He was not smiling at all, but he too was looking fixedly at Gerald.

"It has been lovely having her here, but how we shall miss her, shall we not, when she goes?"
said Phebe, softly.

"Goes?" repeated Halloway, blankly. "It is scarcely September yet."

"What, have you not heard?" exclaimed Phebe. "Do you not know? Gerald has been sent for. She
and Olly go back next Thursday."

"Thursday?" echoed Halloway, in a sort of stunned way. "So soon? Going for good? Thursday?"

What closely guarded secret did the loving gray eyes, fastened upon him, read in the swift,
uncontrollable look that flashed suddenly across his face, like the lightning that leaps out
of the dark by night, laying all earth bare in one brief, vivid glimpse? He was so taken by
surprise as to be completely off guard. It was but an instant, and with a start he recovered
himself.

"I had not heard your news," he said, with perfect quiet, reaching out to the table for an
uncut magazine, and proceeding leisurely to open its pages. "I suppose it is a sign that summer
is over when the birds begin to fly home."

Phebe did not answer immediately. In that one short moment, all her face had changed also.
As by the stroke of a wand, its brightness and sweet content had given place to an expression
of unutterable weariness. She got up and went to the window, standing with her back to Halloway.

"We had our first cold night that evening of my accident," she said, with an effort to speak
very calmly. "I think the summer really ended then."

CHAPTER XIII.

JOPPA'S TRIAL.

It was the night before Gerald's departure, and a number of people strayed into Mrs. Lane's
parlor to bid the fair traveller god-speed. She had not been at all a popular guest, but that
was no reason why Joppa should lack in any possible courtesy toward her, little as she appreciated
the magnanimity of its conduct.

"Very sorry to lose you, very," said Mr. Hardcastle, taking her hand in the soft, warm grasp
that Gerald so particularly detested. "But maybe it's as well you are going. Joppa isn't the
place it used to be. Here's Mr. Anthony's got the fever to-night, and there's a poor family
down in the village as have all got it, Dennis says; and I noticed that little Nellie Atterbury
had monstrous red cheeks when Dick and I passed her to-night, and indeed I crossed the street
to avoid her in case she might be going to have the fever too. Where one has a family one has
duties one would never feel for one's self. So I say, my dear, it's as well you're going, if
only on account of that boy of yours. We must all learn early to sacrifice ourselves for our
children."

"Olly isn't my child," said Gerald, twisting her handkerchief around her hand to efface the
remembrance of Mr. Hardcastle's touch.

"Hey? Ah, yes, to be sure, he's your brother; but it's all one. You stand in the light of a
parent to him just now, my dear." He was actually going to pat Gerald paternally on the shoulder,
but she moved abruptly aside, and he pulled Olly's ear instead. It was necessary to do something
with his outstretched hand before drawing it back. Olly was playing cat's-cradle with the good-natured
Mr. Upjohn, and merely kicked out at his caresser, as a warning that he was not to be interrupted.

"Fine spirited boy," muttered Mr. Upjohn under his breath. "Very fine. Will make a man some day."

"Not so big as you, though, I won't be when I'm a man," declared Olly. "You're too fat."

"Now just hear him!" exclaimed Mr. Upjohn, shaking all over with corpulent mirth. "Maybe you
would rather be like Mr. Webb then?"

"No, I wouldn't neither," retorted Olly, nothing deterred by that gentleman's presence from
a frank exposure of his sentiments. "He's too lean. He's leaner than any thing. He's just like
the blade of my pocket-knife with clothes on. Oh, crickey!"

It was conveniently discovered at this crisis that it was Olly's bedtime, and he was with some
difficulty conveyed from the parlor, followed by an angry glare from Gerald and a severely
truthful comment from Mrs. Upjohn. De Forest outstayed the rest of the leave-takers. Phebe
thought it hard, when she so wanted to have Gerald all to herself on this last evening; and
she wondered too that Halloway had not come to say good-by. He came in, however, at last, flushed
and tired, apologizing for the lateness of his call, saying he had been sent for by two of
his parishioners who were also down with the fever.

"It looks something like an epidemic," remarked Gerald. "I am really rather glad we are going."

"You have no ambition to remain and turn Florence Nightingale then?" asked De Forest.

"Not in the slightest. It is a role I am eminently unfitted for. I detest sick people."

"Not always, I think, Gerald," said Phebe, with a grateful glance, which Gerald returned with
one of real though undemonstrative tenderness.

"Your case was very different, Phebe."

"I should think it would be extremely difficult to detest Miss Phebe under even the must aggravating
circumstances," said Halloway, smiling frankly at her. "Hallo, who is this?"

It was Olly, bootless and coatless, whom the sound of Halloway's voice had brought down from
the midst of his slow preparations for bed, to bid his friend good-by, and who sprang upon
him with a rush of suffocating affection.

"What would Mrs. Upjohn say!" drawled De Forest.

Gerald rose at once to send off the child with a reprimand, and remained standing after he
had gone. De Forest rose too and slowly came toward her.

"I suppose I had better leave you to follow Olly up-stairs. I wish you to be fresh to entertain
me during to-morrow's tedious journey."

"What, do you go back to-morrow too?" asked Gerald, in surprise. "I thought you were to stay
till next week."

"I am afraid of the fever," pronounced De Forest with great gravity, his handsome eyes fastened
on her face. "I am running away from it. I don't think it safe to stay another day in the place."

Gerald colored a little,--not at his words, but his look. "Then I suppose I need not bid you
good-by," she said, turning away. She seemed almost embarrassed. "Good-night."

"Oh, but Gerald,--Mr. Halloway, you must say good-by to him you know," said Phebe, distressed.

"Surely. I forgot," replied Gerald, with uncomplimentary sincerity. She turned back, the faint
shade of confusion quite disappearing. "Good-by, Mr. Halloway. I wish you success in finding
all the Nightingales that you may require."

"Thank you," answered Denham, shortly. "Good-by."

Phebe glanced up at him quickly. She noticed a shade of bitterness in his voice for the first
time. He said nothing more, and dropped Gerald's hand almost immediately. De Forest bent forward
and raised it. "Am I to be defrauded of a good-night, Miss Vernor, simply because it is not
my good-by? Au revoir."

It seemed to Phebe that he held Gerald's hand an instant longer when she would have withdrawn
it, and that she permitted or at least did not resent it, and before releasing it he stooped
and touched her fingers lightly with his lips. "Au revoir," he said again.

Halloway turned abruptly to Phebe. "Good-night." He spoke almost brusquely, and went directly
away, without offering his hand or looking at any of them again.

Phebe followed Gerald into her room when the two girls went up-stairs, and sat watching her
friend's quick movements as she completed some last arrangements for the journey. It was strangely
unlike Phebe not to offer to help her, but somehow Gerald looked so strong and able and self-sufficient,
and she herself felt so tired and weak to-night.

"How quiet you are!" said Gerald, folding a soft shawl smoothly over the top of a tray. "Haven't
you any last message to give me? Isn't there any thing you would like me to do for you in New
York?"

"Nothing, thank you."

"You are sure? Well, now I am through and mustn't keep you up longer. You have all been exceedingly
kind, Phebe, both to myself and that troublesome Olly. I appreciate it, even though I don't
say as much about it as perhaps some would."

"Have you really enjoyed it here, Gerald? Have you been happy? Will you miss us a little--just
a little--when you are gone?"

"I shall miss you, child, of course. You constitute Joppa to me, you know. And indeed I have
enjoyed it here very much, and it has done Olly a world of good. Good-night, dear."

Phebe had her arms about her friend at once, clasping her close. "O Gerald, Gerald, I think
it is almost better to have no friends at all, it is so hard--so cruelly hard--to part with
them, and--and to lose them! O Gerald!"

"Parting with them isn't losing them, you foolish sentimentalist," returned Gerald, gently
unclasping Phebe's arms. "Now go to bed. You look worn out."

"Just tell me once first, Gerald, that you love me. I haven't many to love me. I need all your
love."

"Of course I love you," said Gerald. "You know it without my saying so. And don't talk so foolishly.
I never knew a girl with more friends. Now good-night."

Phebe kissed her very quietly, and then crept into Olly's room, and sat down on his bed. "Olly,
dear," she murmured, "are you asleep?"

The little fellow sprang up and flung his arms closely around her neck, embracing collar, ruffles,
and ribbon in one all-comprehensive destruction.

"Do you love me? Do you love me? Do you love me?" whispered Phebe, half laughing and half crying,
as she strained him to her heart. "Oh, Olly dear, I do want some one just to say so!"

"I do, I do, I do, and I do!" said Olly, with a bear's hug at each assertion. "Blest if I don't.
That's what Mr. Upjohn said when I asked him if he didn't want some taffy. 'Blest if I don't.'
I guess it's a swear, 'cause he said I mustn't tell Mrs. Upjohn he said so, not to the longest
day I lived. The longest day won't come now till next year, the twenty-first of June. That's
the longest day, ain't it? Mr. Halloway taught me that. My, don't he know a lot! I'm going
to be like him when I'm a man. That's who I'm going to be like. And I'm going to love you always.
He loves you too, doesn't he, Pheeb?"

"No, dear," answered Phebe, still laughing and crying together, and rocking gently back and
forth with the boy in her arms; "he doesn't at all. There doesn't any body really love me,
I think, but just you. But you do, don't you, dear?"

"Bet on it!" said Olly, with forcible vulgarity.

"God bless you," said Phebe, very softly, as she put the boy back in the bed, and laid her
wet cheek on his. "God bless you now and always."

"Forever and ever, amen," whispered Olly back, with an impression that Phebe was saying her
prayers over him. "And oh, I say, Pheeb, can't you let us have some of that jelly cake with
raisins in it, to take with us for luncheon to-morrow?"

And Phebe promised she would, and laughed and went away feeling, somehow, a little comforted.

And so Gerald and Olly and De Forest all disappeared from the scene together, and shortly after
the Dexters went to Morocco on a visit, and the Masters adjourned to Bethany to do their fall
shopping; and there were whisperings around that something was wrong; there was more and more
talk of the fever; of how it ought to be checked, and why it had not been checked, and what
would be the dire consequences if it were not checked. The summer guests all slipped quietly
away, leaving Joppa alone to its growing trouble. Every day brought some new case, sometimes
a death, and people began to look suspiciously at each other in the streets and to avoid each
other on the flimsiest pretexts. Miss Lydia cried helplessly in her room and said she was sure
she should take it and die of it. Mr. Hardcastle found he was too busy at home to have time
for neighborly visits, and went around the block rather than pass a door where he saw the doctor's
gig. When one has a family, one owes it duties that should not be neglected. Mrs. Upjohn declared
the panic to be ridiculous. She shouldn't be scared away by a red flag, like a crow from a
cornfield. Amalia arm hung count, and negligence rule and spoke at the floor,
as he bent towards her smiling, submissive, sticking words by ear. Watched them from afar to
through the foliage. The excitement left nailed to the floor a few moments. Above the feeling
of pain and anger that gripped poked his head in pride of women. After examining with anxious eyes
the figure of Amalia could not help muttering bitterly:

- What is love that man be? If it's a stuffed cat!

Then he thought:

- What do you say?

Acometiole a yearning to hear her talk, and without reflecting on the danger, was slowly approaching
the fence, bending the body not to be seen. Search for place more somber and safe, and listened. Only
heard them while crossing nearby.

As they walked away few steps are not perceived word. He could not collect more than snippets
of conversation, that were inconsistent.

- You rub a lot of the thighs. If you saw how you fatter!

Neither starch powder or with those of pink softens the skin irritation
- said the lady.

- They talk about the girl - thought Fernanda.

-
I have not ever seen in the bathroom.

How would you for coming to him one day!

- It is because they want to.

- No, I do not want, you expose yourself to a risk and thus the end ...

He heard no more. Had to wait to reach the end of the street and should give back.

- Say you've been home for those old pussy and do not lie - heard from Amalia, the approach again.

-
I assure you that I was at the Casino. We have met individuals of the board to see whether
to re-decorate the lounge.

I thought I could leave at ten, but until midnight not separated. Do not know the nature and
depth of D. disputón Juan? A house of the Mere a century ago that I will not. So much so that
some start a. ..

Again the words were lost. Did that D. John would be his father? Seek to learn. When again, the
count's hand gently caressed his beloved, smiling, talking with rapt expression of happiness.

- Many times I have set off you.

At night, being alone in bed, I enter terrible remorse.

Then I say, 'This needs to end.

The two inevitably condemn us. "And I resolve to get away from Lancia and even compose an entire
plan of life, travel with the imagination throughout Europe, I miss
you, come back after some years, and instead of renewing old love
in my heart a tender and honest friendship in we can rest easy without
fear of punishment from Heaven ... But that dawn, these resolutions
dissipate, succumb to temptation, go to your house, and as I see,
as I hear your beloved voice ...

Fernanda clenched hand gripped the
trunk of a magnolia.

Around Amalia was speaking.

- It is not true that.

I told you that for me there is always a black dot.

As much as I intend forge the illusion of being the first ...

-
The first and last! I do not love another woman more than you.

-
Do not know the jealousy I have of the past. Every day. Tell the truth:
have you wanted to or not?

- No.

- So, how you were able to ...

He
heard no more.

Soeur Angélique put aside her work and came to sit by the sofa and stroke her boy's head. If
the doctors were overworked and spent, so too was he. The hour of trial had not found him wanting.
His unambitious, simple spirit, that sought no wider duty than merely to fulfil the moment's
call as he best could, met and conquered a stress of work that would have disheartened many
a bolder hero. He never thought of it in the light of duty at all. There was nothing heroic
or high-minded about it. It was simply what in the nature of things he was bound to do. Wherever
he was wanted he went, and because where he went he brought such sunny cheer, and such sympathetic
help, and such bright, kindly ways, he was wanted everywhere; not only those of his own parish,
but those of the other churches too came to look to Mr. Halloway as the one whose visit helped
them the most in any season of trial. Among the poor he was held a ministering angel, and supplemented
by Soeur Angélique as an unseen force, often proved one in truth, while his bright face did
them more good, they said, than a power of sermons; and no one ever thought the less of him
because he seemed so much more the friend than the pastor, and did no preaching at all.

"So Janet is better," said Soeur Angélique, toying caressingly with the wavy brown hair tossed
over his forehead. "Now I hope we shall see more of our Phebe again. What a little heroine she is!"

"A perfectly unconscious one," answered Halloway, lazily submitting himself to the fondling
hand. "She thinks it the most matter-of-fact thing in the world that she should play Sister
of Charity to other people's sick, and never expect so much as a thank-you from them."

"She is a lovely character," said Mrs. Whittridge, warmly.

"She is indeed," assented her brother. "A rare character. She is one in a thousand."

"I cannot but compare her sometimes with her friend, Gerald Vernor," continued Mrs. Whittridge.
"And despite Miss Vernor's beauty and her power, which makes itself felt even by me, still
it is always to Phebe's advantage."

Halloway got up and began slowly pacing the room, with an odd smile upon his lips. "Always
to Phebe's advantage," he repeated. "Yes, she is by far the more amiable, the more unselfish,
the more lovable, the better worth loving of the two. She is all heart. She is brimming over
with affection, and must speak it or die, while Gerald is colder than stone,--than ice. She
is so cold she burns. She reminds one of stars in mid-winter, of icicles in the moonlight,
of any thing eminently frigid and brilliant and remote. I daresay, despite all her beauty and
her talent and even with her wealth thrown in, she will have comparatively few lovers, yet
those few will be truer to her through all her coldness and her disfavor than the lovers of
many a sweeter girl. Did I say Phebe was one in a thousand? Well Miss Vernor is one in nine
hundred and ninety-nine,--or one in ten thousand,--I don't know which."

"You said Phebe was the better worth loving of the two," said Mrs. Whittridge, coming to walk
up and down the room with him and clasping her hands over his arm. "I used to think,--I fancied
you cared for the child,--that you would care for her."

Denham stood still and faced his sister very gravely, "I was growing to care for her, Soeur
Angélique," he said. "I believe I would have loved her if,--if Gerald Vernor had not come here
when she did."

"Oh, Denham!"

"Yes, Soeur Angélique. It is a humiliating confession, is it not, that one has wilfully thrown
away something that perhaps one might have had, for something that one knows one can never
have? It is sheerest folly. And to do it with one's eyes open is the maddest folly of all.
Gerald Vernor is as indifferent to me as it is possible for one human creature to be to another.
I hold no more place in her thoughts than had I never existed. And yet, Soeur Angélique, I
am fool enough,--or helpless enough,--whichever you please, to love her. I love her not for
what she is to me, but for what she is in herself, for what she really is, rather than for
what she seems,--for the strength and the heroism of her heart, which I see through all the
glaring, commonplace faults, which she is at no pains to hide. Or perhaps I only love her because
it was meant that I should. Be it as it may, I do love her, and as passionately, as entirely,
and as hopelessly as it is possible for man to love."

"O Denham, Denham, my boy!"

Denham laid his hand lightly on his sister's lips. "Now we have had a sufficiency of heroics
for once, indeed for always," he said, with a wholly altered voice. "Life has enough of solemnity
in it and in spare, without our adding aught to it. We will not speak of this again, if you
please. Folly is always best forgotten. But Soeur Angélique, if you imagine me to be a blighted
being, if you think I walk the floor in the dead of night, tearing my hair and calling on all
the stars to witness the unearthly gloom in my racked bosom, you are utterly mistaken. I do
nothing of the kind. I am not blighted at all. My damask cheek is not going to be preyed upon,
nor shall I take to an excess of tobacco and poetry. I have made a mistake, but I mean to sing
over it,--not weep over it,--and to become a stronger and better man, if possible, for having
been so weak a one."

"And Phebe?" said Soeur Angélique. Great tears stood in her eyes. "I hoped--"

Denham placed both hands on his sister's shoulders. "Soeur Angélique, you must bury those hopes
in the grave. Loving Gerald Vernor, never, now, or in the future, shall I have one word of
love for any other woman. But for her, I should have come perhaps to love Phebe with this same
love; perhaps,--who knows?--Phebe might so have loved me. As it is--Soeur Angélique you know
what I am. You know if I am likely to deceive myself. Gerald Vernor has changed my life for
always. What might have been, now can never be."

He stood still a moment, looking full at her. It was wonderful how resolute and firm and yet
brave and gentle too those merry brown eyes of his could become. Soeur Angélique sighed and
shook her head softly. He stooped and kissed her, then turned away saying: "Now that chapter
has been read through to the end. Woe be to him who turns back the page! And it is time I went
to call on poor Widow Brown."

Soeur Angélique stood in the window as a moment later he passed by. He kissed his hand to her
with a gay smile and went on. But she still stood there with the tears welling and welling
in her eyes till they fell gently over upon her cheeks. She did not heed them, she was so busy
with her thoughts. "Poor Phebe," she said softly to herself. "My poor little Phebe! But perhaps,--with
time--"

CHAPTER XIV.

PHEBE'S GOOD-BY.

When was it Phebe first fell ill? No one knew. Mr. Hardcastle had kept cautiously out of her
way this long time past, but nobody else suspected that the brilliant cheeks and eyes which
shone like stars were telltales of a hidden fire burning her life away. The fever was abating
in the village. The doctors declared the epidemic virtually over, and mutually congratulated
each other upon the success of their measures. Mr. Hardcastle returned to the sidewalks; Mr.
Upjohn brought back Maria; Miss Lydia said death had spared her this once, but next time it
would be her turn to go; Mrs. Lane said she needn't make her will yet for all that; and everybody
said how very much worse the fever would have been in any less peculiarly healthy spot than
Joppa. How was it that at the very last, when there was no reason at all, when she had been
apparently so perfectly well all along, Phebe Lane should suddenly take to her bed? Not only
one doctor was called in, but both, and when they saw her they said the fever had been running
a long time already, and then they looked very grave and shook their heads. She did not seem
so ill. Most of their patients had had far more aggravated symptoms yet still they shook their
heads as they looked at her, and murmured something about lake of vitality, a general giving
way, a complete want of will power, etc. People looked at each other aghast. Was it possible
that little Phebe Lane was really going to die? Nobody really believed it could be, excepting
only Soeur Angélique. "Oh, my darling, my darling!" she cried out when she first heard of it,
and then she instantly went over and installed herself in Phebe's room. And there she sat the
slow days through, waiting and waiting with a breaking heart. Phebe suffered very little. She
lay generally perfectly still, too weak to move, too weak to care to speak. People came and
went noiselessly below, but no one was admitted to her room save her step-mother and Mrs. Whittridge.
Mrs. Lane watched her with growing anxiety. The fever was so slight, why did she not rally
from it? How was it credible she could fail so rapidly and so causelessly? And Mrs. Whittridge
sat by with despair in her heart.

One day, late in the afternoon, as she sat so watching, Phebe suddenly opened her eyes. "Will
you call him, please? I hear him."

"Who? Denham?" asked Soeur Angélique, with quick intuition. A finer ear than hers had caught
the light step and low voice in the narrow hall below.

"Yes, Denham," said Phebe, softly. "Denham. I want to see him."

It pleased her to say his name so. She said it to herself over and over beneath her breath,
while waiting for him to come. It was but a moment, and he was kneeling by the bedside, holding
both her hands in his. She looked up in his face and smiled, and said his name again, lower still.

"Denham."

"Yes, Phebe--yes, dear," he answered, too moved to say more.

"I only wanted to say good-by," she continued, her eyes full of a love unutterable that not
even the shadow of coming death could wholly darken. "Will you kiss me good-by please, this
once, good-by--for always?"

A faint, soft flush crept up over her white face, and he bent down and kissed her gently, as
one would kiss the Madonna of a shrine.

"Phebe," he whispered, "not for always only for a time, dear--good-by." With her ex-boyfriend
was circumspect, left that aggressive tone that he used to employ and became smoother and more
formal, but also, much to the chagrin of his, the emotion he felt when speaking it shone through
quite a few times in a mild voice alteration and pallor or flushing upset. His inner life during those
six months, had been devoured by a feverish activity, anxious, dizzy, disguised with effort
under calm and haughty attitude. He did not know what time it was--it seemed as if it might be morning---when
at last the door opened and Soeur Angélique came in. He got up and stood waiting, too agitated
to speak. What news could she bring him but the one? She came slowly up to him, then gave a
little gasp, and flinging her arms around his neck, burst into tears.

"O Denham, Denham, all is over! Phebe is dead!"

CHAPTER XV.

ONLY AN INCIDENT.

The morning sun was streaming brilliantly in through the richly curtained windows of a handsome
New York dwelling. Mr. and Mrs. De Forest were about sitting down to breakfast, which waited
for them ready served, and which indeed had been so waiting for some minutes. The butler coughed
behind his hand as a discreet reminder of his presence, and so indirectly of the cooling dishes.
The gentleman looked up from his easy-chair by the fire and yawned.

"My dear, I've been up so long I think it's getting bedtime again."

"Just one moment, Ogden," answered the lady, from her desk. "I must send off this note by the
first mail."

"Any thing important?"

"Yes. I will not be put on that new committee. They must find some one else. My time is too full."

De Forest rose and stood with his back to the fire, looking complacently at his wife. "What
an odd sensation it must be--having one's time too full! It's an experience I'm willing always
to delegate to some one else. Doesn't it feel rather like too tight shoes?"

Gerald laughed as she passed her husband to her seat at the table, and he stood still watching
her as she began pouring coffee. It was always a pleasure to watch her. The butler drew out
the gentleman's chair firmly. It was time his master took his seat with his lady. There was
too much of this dilly-dallying. De Forest came lazily forward and seated himself.

"Any news?" asked Gerald.

"None whatever. It's a swindle to pay three cents for the Herald in such monotonous times.
I was reduced to searching in your church paper to see if by any chance something new had gotten
lost in there."

"I hope you found it."

"I didn't. Not so much even as the death of someone I knew to cheer me. There would have been
variety at least in that. By the way, though, I did see a familiar name among the personals,--just
a notice that the Rev. Denham Halloway had accepted a call to some church or other in some
place or other. 

It so happened that the next day, at sunset and out of a jungle, tended Don Quixote view over
a green meadow, and saw the last of the people, and when he came to, he knew they were falconers.
He came up again, and among them was a gallant lady on a palfrey or-white pony, adorned with
green trim and a silver chair. The lady was also dressed in green, and richly bizarre that it had
been transformed bravery in it.
 Well, I was perfectly fair.
I left your friend, Phebe, for Halloway."

"Poor little Phebe!" said Gerald, with softened eyes. "How long ago it all seems. Poor dear
little Phebe! I have never wanted to hear of Joppa since her death. I feel as if she had given
her life for it. Yes; I don't suppose I have thought twice of Denham Halloway since."

Ah, so it was! That brief summer meeting, which had had so potent an influence on the lives
of those other two, had in her life been only an incident.

THE END.

