The pieces flew every way. Some went scurrying off for hundreds of miles and fell into the
sea, where they made the water around them boiling hot. Some probably flew back again the way
the star had come. Some perhaps flew high enough to fall into the moon itself! but one piece,
about as large as a bushel basket, came zipping downward at a long angle, like a blazing ball
of flame, for it had struck the air so hard a blow that the heat of it had melted the fragment.
Down it came, crashing through the great limbs of the trees beyond Umpl and Sptz with a huge
rushing roar, and when it struck the earth the ground trembled for half a mile around, especially
as it glanced from a ledge after diving deep in the soil, and came leaping out of the soil
again only to fall with a thud a rod or two away.

It is hard to say whether Umpl or Sptz was the more frightened. Umpl thought of nothing but
dragons, and was scared white. Sptz was whiter to begin with, as she lived more in the cave
underground, and now that she thought the sky was falling she could think of nothing else.
But she was the first to find out that they were not dead after all. Then she gave a start,
and sniffed eagerly. She smelt something.

Jumping up on the log she looked around, and--no, it couldn't be! but it was, though--fire.
Real fire! Smoking away merrily among the dead leaves where a bit of molten star had been scraped
off by a tree trunk and had fallen. Sptz flew to it like a bird. In no time, more dead leaves
were heaped around the light flame; with a shout of joy Umpl rushed to a windfall and brought
an armful of wood, and soon a royal fire was sending out light and heat, beautifully nickering
upward among the trees. Umpl knew what to do now as well as any one. He hunted up two pitchy
sticks and set them both alight. Then he held them before him, crossed like a pair of scissors,
with the flame where the joint was; and in that way he kept them both alight, burning each
other up, until they reached home. And then--what a royal supper they had!

I might tell you many more things about Umpl and Sptz. For instance, how they went to the place
again in after days and found the piece of the fallen star, broken into several pieces. And
how Sptz found that one of them was just the thing to crack nuts on, and Umpl found another
was quite as good as a bone-cracker, till his father took it from him and made a head of it
for his war-club, where it did great bone-cracking in another way. And I might tell how Umpl
learned at last to take one sharp stone and, by pressing on it with another, break off little
chips until what was left became a beautiful arrowhead, and how he made so many, and so many
chips around the cave, and so many other chipmakers were doing likewise, that to-day men call
the time when Umpl lived the Stone Age, for all their axes, knives, and tools seemed made of
stone. Some day I may tell more. Meanwhile, now you know how the Iron Star came into this world
of ours.

SPARK II.

HOW THE STAR AGAIN BEGAN TO TRAVEL.

It certainly seemed to both Umpl and Sptz that the iron mass which was once a falling star
had brought good luck to them. Fire in itself was a grand thing. It was so good not to lie
cold o' nights, or to be obliged to fill up the doorway with stones and pull them down in the
morning. Many and many a time they went to the spot where the large piece lay and looked at
it with half-frightened eyes. They could not understand it. Where did it come from? Why did
it come there? When would it go away? Did a spirit throw it, or was it itself a spirit? All
these and many other odd thoughts came to them because of it; and this was one of the very
best things that ever happened to either. No other Cave boy or girl in the whole valley ever
took the trouble to think about anything that was not connected with dinner, or the latest
style of wearing burrs in their hair; and when Umpl thought so long about it that he feared
it must be a spirit, and laid his best arrowhead on it as an offering, while Sptz for the same
reason brought a queer bit of bone with a feather in one end and a scrap of rabbit fur around
it, the thoughts were good for them. It did for their small brains just what a boy does for
his arm when he swings a club or a dumb-bell. It made them stronger, so that they could use
them for other things and use them better.

Umpl, for one thing, looked upward among the trees oftener. He saw more birds, he learned their
actions better and so knew better how to have roast bird for supper. So perhaps they were right
about the good luck. Besides, both of them were growing up. Sptz had learned to make acorn
bread and found a hollow on the top of the Iron Star which was just the thing to grind up nuts
in. Umpl was two feet taller than when the star fell, and could draw a bow and send an arrow
right through a stag. And one great day he met a Cave Bear and sent his flint-headed shaft
whistling with such force that it broke through the hard skull of the savage beast and dropped
him in his tracks.

All his life long Umpl wore on his arm an ornament made out of the longest teeth and sharpest
claws of that bear; and boys and girls looked at it and wondered if they would ever have the
right to be so honored. Umpl had become a man. But he was a very young one still.

This luck did not follow every one in that long valley. There came a time when it did not rain
for nearly a year. The springs stopped running. The birds flew away. The hares went, no one
knew where. The stags disappeared. Food was hard to earn, and every meat-eater in the valley
found it so, and many of them lived only by eating each other. Umpl's eyes were brighter, and
he was thinner than in better days; yet he still managed to find some things eatable; and he
laid it all to the Star. And one day he found himself a long way from the cave and among a
dozen young men as hungry as himself, and each one ready to kill the other. It was very much
as though they had all met there for a picnic.

It was a part of Umpl's good fortune that he had of late been carrying with him the Star-club
that his father had made. On his arm gleamed the Cave Bear's teeth, grim and white; and when
the others saw that they stopped to think a moment. They feared the bear. Who dared, then,
to meet the Cave Bear's slayer? And then something happened which gave them other thoughts
still more unpleasant.

Straight through the glade came the rush of galloping feet, and an antlered stag swept by like
a stone from a sling. So swiftly did he pass that no arrow was ready save Umpl's. His went
hurtling after, straight at the back of the tossing head, and the great deer fell in a heap,
stone-dead. But what had scared him?

Ah! They did not need to ask. Gaunt, grey forms were rushing toward them. Green eyes were flashing
in the black shadows beyond. They did not need the long howl to tell them that it was the wolf-pack
from beyond the mountains, starved out of its usual range.

There was but one thing to do--to take to the trees; and it was well that the trees near by
were low limbed. Umpl was the last one up. But he was also the only one who had a great slice
of that stag as a luncheon. The fact that he had it proved that the white-toothed bracelet
told the truth in regard to his bravery.

While the wolves fought over their prey below Umpl looked at them and thought. The others looked
without thinking. Presently the noise grew less, and Umpl looked about him and began to talk
to the other young men. He pointed out to them that one wolf, or two, would not have dared
to attack them. But as a band they had made even the bracelet- wearer flee. So with themselves.
One, or even two of them could not go to another land where there was more water and game;
but suppose they stopped making war on each other and went as a band across the great mountains?
This country was eaten out. There were not caves enough to go round among young men who wanted
caves of their own. Elsewhere things might be better. They could not be worse. And he would
go with them, taking Sptz, who could cook well, and the Iron Star, which would bring them luck.

It seemed a very good idea, especially to youths who had none of their own; and they agreed
to form a band and go, if Umpl first would prove the luck of the Star.

The youth nodded, and held up his club.

"This was made from it. Now see!"

Tying to it one end of the long thong he always carried, Umpl flung the iron mass down on the
head of a wolf that was trying to leap up within reach. The animal fell, and his mates sprang
on him, as wolves will, and ate him up. Five times Umpl did it before the rest began to take
warning, and even then a pretended tumble brought them back and three more fell. The rest ran
back to a wider circle, and before they got over their scare Umpl was on the ground and back
again, with his bow and quiver of arrows; and that was the beginning of the end of that wolf-pack,
while every youth in the trees now believed in the Star.

They found the Iron Star was heavy. It took Umpl two days to plan out a way for them to carry
it, and to cut down with stone axes saplings to sling it on. But the rest looked up to him
as a leader now; and when they left the valley he was their chief, with Sptz trotting on behind
carrying a skin of acorn-flour, and the crossed and lighted firebrands.

It was a weary march through the mountains. For many weeks they travelled. They found more
game than in the valley behind, but nowhere enough to be worth staying for, and at last one
morning they found a very curious thing. Across the gorge through which they were travelling
there was a barricade of trees, which had been cut down by men. But why? It could not be for
war, since they were not arranged in a way suitable for that. Still, men had done it, and they
looked carefully around for the cave where the men belonged. It was better to find it than
to be found by its owners.

But they did not find any. Beyond the barricade was a little meadow, shoulder deep in a curious
grass with bristly heads which grew very thickly. Wading through it, beyond a thicket, the
sight that met them struck them dumb with surprise! Before them was a lake. Out in the lake
what seemed a cluster of dome-shaped rocks rose from the water, and a narrow path to shore
was made with trunks of trees tied together. Before them, in a place fenced off, were stags
of a kind they never saw before, with long smooth horns and shaggy, black hair. In among them
wild pigs were grunting around a man who was feeding them, and this looked like witchcraft.
Why did not the animals kill him instantly? They had met wild pigs in their old valley and
held them in great respect as fighters. What kind of men were these who ruled such savage beasts?
And was that a wolf, stealing toward them, and giving warning with that barking howl?

There were lively doings in that village when that howl went up. On the whole, it was well
for Umpl and his party that Sptz was with them. Breaking a green branch, she went forward in
advance and spears were slowly lowered. Someone was found who could speak a few Cave-Men words,
and all could use sign language; so the case was explained and Umpl welcomed. The Star was
given a special welcome and a hut all to itself.

Nothing in all their lives had seemed more curious to Umpl and Sptz than those huts. They were
made of twigs and reeds wattled into basketwork, and then clay plastered over all until they
were water tight, and they were perched on logs driven into the bottom of the lake like piles.
There were clay things on the fires, too, and by the smell they knew that some good cooking
was going on; but never before had they seen a pot that would hold water or stand fire.

On the other hand, Umpl was looked at with much respect by the Lake- Dwellers (as we now call
those people). He was taller than they by half a head. The tooth bracelet told its own tale,
for they, too, knew the Cave Bear. So they made him presents, and of value, one of the choicest
being a knife of copper. This was a great wonder to Umpl and his people. A knife which would
not break, as their flint ones did, but bent and could be pounded straight again, was exceedingly
odd. They even showed Umpl a piece of copper which had been brought to the village in a large
lump by some young men from a far country, and explained how the knife had been hammered out
with stones.

This gave Umpl an idea. Taking a flint knife he sawed off a slice of copper from the lump and
with his iron war-club he hammered it out on the Iron Star and fashioned a beautiful spearhead
in no time, the iron clinking merrily beneath his blows. There was a great rush around him
after that. Every one who had copper wanted it worked up, and Umpl was clear-headed enough
to bargain for a hut for his people and one for himself and Sptz.

Here he lived happily for many years. He owned a share in the long- horned cattle. His men
were the best hunters in the village, and the copper things he made were sought for by men
who came long distances. Sometimes they brought him bars of copper. After a time some one brought
tin, and two pieces fell into the fire one day, along with a copper knife, and all three were
melted into one and cooled in a little hollow in the ashes after the fire was out. Umpl was
astonished to find that the sharp edge of this would cut like flint, yet would not bend like
copper; and he began to make regular knives and spearheads of such material, finding out a
way of making clay moulds and pouring the melted metal into them to harden into the right shapes.
Of course these were far more valuable than the copper tools and they were sold here and there
among the tribes of other peoples, and often travelled far from where they were made. Other
people began to find out how to make them, and made so many that, although they still used
flint knives too, yet people nowadays when speaking of that long ago time often call it the
Bronze Age, because tin and copper, when melted together in a certain way, make bronze. But
the Iron Star's travels were not ended.

SPARK III.

HOW THE STAR WAS CARRIED ON THE WARPATH, AND WHAT CAME OF IT.

Just why it seemed necessary for Umpl and his people to go to war with anybody may not be clear.
They were living very happily in their village on the lake. Their cattle were fat; their fields
of that curious grass through which Umpl had waded before he knew what it was good for were
sure to harvest grain enough to make bread, and Sptz had found that grain-bread was as much
better than acorn-bread as sponge cake is better than gingerbread; although both gingerbread
and acorn- bread are good enough for any one, when one cannot get anything better.

