  She was due from England, and Sydney was waiting, and counting the hours; counting
the hours, and making ready to give her a heart-stirring welcome; for she was bringing back
a great company of mothers and daughters, the long-missed light and bloom of life of Sydney
homes; daughters that had been years absent at school, and mothers that had been with them
all that time watching over them.  Of all the world only India and Australasia have by custom
freighted ships and fleets with their hearts, and know the tremendous meaning of that phrase;
only they know what the waiting is like when this freightage is entrusted to the fickle winds,
not steam, and what the joy is like when the ship that is returning this treasure comes safe
to port and the long dread is over.

On board the Duncan Dunbar, flying toward Sydney Heads in the waning afternoon, the happy home-comers
made busy preparation, for it was not doubted that they would be in the arms of their friends
before the day was done; they put away their sea-going clothes and put on clothes meeter for
the meeting, their richest and their loveliest, these poor brides of the grave.  But the wind
lost force, or there was a miscalculation, and before the Heads were sighted the darkness came
on.  It was said that ordinarily the captain would have made a safe offing and waited for the
morning; but this was no ordinary occasion; all about him were appealing faces, faces pathetic
with disappointment.  So his sympathy moved him to try the dangerous passage in the dark. 
He had entered the Heads seventeen times, and believed he knew the ground.  So he steered straight
for the false opening, mistaking it for the true one.  He did not find out that he was wrong
until it was too late.  There was no saving the ship.  The great seas swept her in and crushed
her to splinters and rubbish upon the rock tushes at the base of the precipice.  Not one of
all that fair and gracious company was ever seen again alive.  The tale is told to every stranger
that passes the spot, and it will continue to be told to all that come, for generations; but
it will never grow old, custom cannot stale it, the heart-break that is in it can never perish
out of it.

There were two hundred persons in the ship, and but one survived the disaster.  He was a sailor.
A huge sea flung him up the face of the precipice and stretched him on a narrow shelf of rock
midway between the top and the bottom, and there he lay all night.  At any other time he would
have lain there for the rest of his life, without chance of discovery; but the next morning
the ghastly news swept through Sydney that the Duncan Dunbar had gone down in sight of home,
and straightway the walls of the Heads were black with mourners; and one of these, stretching
himself out over the precipice to spy out what might be seen below, discovered this miraculously
preserved relic of the wreck.  Ropes were brought and the nearly impossible feat of rescuing
the man was accomplished.  He was a person with a practical turn of mind, and he hired a hall
in Sydney and exhibited himself at sixpence a head till he exhausted the output of the gold
fields for that year.

We entered and cast anchor, and in the morning went oh-ing and ah-ing in admiration up through
the crooks and turns of the spacious and beautiful harbor--a harbor which is the darling of
Sydney and the wonder of the world.  It is not surprising that the people are proud of it,
nor that they put their enthusiasm into eloquent words.  A returning citizen asked me what
I thought of it, and I testified with a cordiality which I judged would be up to the market
rate.  I said it was beautiful--superbly beautiful.  Then by a natural impulse I gave God the
praise.  The citizen did not seem altogether satisfied.  He said:

"It is beautiful, of course it's beautiful--the Harbor; but that isn't all of it, it's only
half of it; Sydney's the other half, and it takes both of them together to ring the supremacy-bell.
God made the Harbor, and that's all right; but Satan made Sydney."

Of course I made an apology; and asked him to convey it to his friend. He was right about Sydney
being half of it.  It would be beautiful without Sydney, but not above half as beautiful as
it is now, with Sydney added.  It is shaped somewhat like an oak-leaf-a roomy sheet of lovely
blue water, with narrow off-shoots of water running up into the country on both sides between
long fingers of land, high wooden ridges with sides sloped like graves.  Handsome villas are
perched here and there on these ridges, snuggling amongst the foliage, and one catches alluring
glimpses of them as the ship swims by toward the city.  The city clothes a cluster of hills
and a ruffle of neighboring ridges with its undulating masses of masonry, and out of these
masses spring towers and spires and other architectural dignities and grandeurs that break
the flowing lines and give picturesqueness to the general effect.

The narrow inlets which I have mentioned go wandering out into the land everywhere and hiding
themselves in it, and pleasure-launches are always exploring them with picnic parties on board.
It is said by trustworthy people that if you explore them all you will find that you have covered
700 miles of water passage.  But there are liars everywhere this year, and they will double
that when their works are in good going order. October was close at hand, spring was come.
It was really spring --everybody said so; but you could have sold it for summer in Canada,
and nobody would have suspected.  It was the very weather that makes our home summers the perfection
of climatic luxury; I mean, when you are out in the wood or by the sea.  But these people said
it was cool, now--a person ought to see Sydney in the summer time if he wanted to know what
warm weather is; and he ought to go north ten or fifteen hundred miles if he wanted to know
what hot weather is.  They said that away up there toward the equator the hens laid fried eggs.
Sydney is the place to go to get information about other people's climates.  It seems to me
that the occupation of Unbiased Traveler Seeking Information is the pleasantest and most irresponsible
trade there is.  The traveler can always find out anything he wants to, merely by asking. 
He can get at all the facts, and more.  Everybody helps him, nobody hinders him.  Anybody who
has an old fact in stock that is no longer negotiable in the domestic market will let him have
it at his own price.  An accumulation of such goods is easily and quickly made.  They cost
almost nothing and they bring par in the foreign market.  Travelers who come to America always
freight up with the same old nursery tales that their predecessors selected, and they carry
them back and always work them off without any trouble in the home market.

