I was scarcely established in my new habitation before I frequently suffered from retentions,
which were accompanied by a new complaint; that of a rupture, from which I had for some time,
without knowing what it was, felt great inconvenience.  I soon was reduced to the most cruel
state. The physician Thieiry, my old friend, came to see me, and made me acquainted with my
situation.  The sight of all the apparatus of the infirmities of years, made me severely feel
that when the body is no longer young, the heart is not so with impunity.  The fine season
did not restore me, and I passed the whole year, 1758, in a state of languor, which made me
think I was almost at the end of my career.  I saw, with impatience, the closing scene approach.
Recovered from the chimeras of friendship, and detached from everything which had rendered
life desirable to me, I saw nothing more in it that could make it agreeable; all I perceived
was wretchedness and misery, which prevented me from enjoying myself.  I sighed after the moment
when I was to be free and escape from my enemies.  But I must follow the order of events.

My retreat to Montmorency seemed to disconcert Madam d'Epinay; probably she did not expect
it.  My melancholy situation, the severity of the season, the general dereliction of me by
my friends, all made her and Grimm believe, that by driving me to the last extremity, they
should oblige me to implore mercy, and thus, by vile meanness, render myself contemptible,
to be suffered to remain in an asylum which honor commanded me to leave.  I left it so suddenly
that they had not time to prevent the step from being taken, and they were reduced to the alternative
of double or quit, to endeavor to ruin me entirely, or to prevail upon me to return.  Grimm
chose the former; but I am of opinion Madam d'Epinay would have preferred the latter, and this
from her answer to my last letter, in which she seemed to have laid aside the airs she had
given herself in the preceding ones, and to give an opening to an accommodation.  The long
delay of this answer, for which she made me wait a whole month, sufficiently indicates the
difficulty she found in giving it a proper turn, and the deliberations by which it was preceded.
She could not make any further advances without exposing herself; but after her former letters,
and my sudden retreat from her house, it is impossible not to be struck with the care she takes
in this letter not to suffer an offensive expression to escape her.  I will copy it at length
to enable my reader to judge of what she wrote:

                                   GENEVA, January 17, 1758.

"SIR: I did not receive your letter of the 17th of December until yesterday.  It was sent me
in a box filled with different things, and which has been all this time upon the road.  I shall
answer only the postscript.  You may recollect, sir, that we agreed the wages of the gardener
of the Hermitage should pass through your hands, the better to make him feel that he depended
upon you, and to avoid the ridiculous and indecent scenes which happened in the time of his
predecessor.  As a proof of this, the first quarter of his wages were given to you, and a few
days before my departure we agreed I should reimburse you what you had advanced.  I know that
of this you, at first, made some difficulty; but I had desired you to make these advances;
it was natural I should acquit myself towards you, and this we concluded upon.  Cahouet informs
me that you refused to receive the money.  There is certainly some mistake in the matter. 
I have given orders that it may again be offered to you, and I see no reason for your wishing
to pay my gardener, notwithstanding our conventions, and beyond the term even of your inhabiting
the Hermitage.  I therefore expect, sir, that recollecting everything I have the honor to state,
you will not refuse to be reimbursed for the sums you have been pleased to advance for me."

After what had passed, not having the least confidence in Madam d' Epinay, I was unwilling
to renew my connection with her; I returned no answer to this letter, and there our correspondence
ended.  Perceiving I had taken my resolution, she took hers; and, entering into all the views
of Grimm and the Coterie Holbachique, she united her efforts with theirs to accomplish my destruction.
Whilst they manoevured at Paris, she did the same at Geneva.  Grimm, who afterwards went to
her there, completed what she had begun.  Tronchin, whom they had no difficulty in gaining
over, seconded them powerfully, and became the most violent of my persecutors, without having
against me, any more than Grimm had, the least subject of complaint.  They all three spread
in silence that of which the effects were seen there four years afterwards.

They had more trouble at Paris, where I was better known to the citizens, whose hearts, less
disposed to hatred, less easily received its impressions.  The better to direct their blow,
they began by giving out that it was I who had left them.  Thence, still feigning to be my
friends, they dexterously spread their malignant accusations by complaining of the injustice
of their friend.  Their auditors, thus thrown off their guard, listened more attentively to
what was said of me, and were inclined to blame my conduct.  The secret accusations of perfidy
and ingratitude were made with greater precaution, and by that means with greater effect. 
I knew they imputed to me the most atrocious crimes without being able to learn in what these
consisted.  All I could infer from public rumor was that this was founded upon the four following
capital offences: my retiring to the country; my passion for Madam d'Houdetot; my refusing
to accompany Madam d'Epinay to Geneva, and my leaving the Hermitage.  If to these they added
other griefs, they took their measures so well that it has hitherto been impossible for me
to learn the subject of them.

It is therefore at this period that I think I may fix the establishment of a system, since
adopted by those by whom my fate has been determined, and which has made such a progress as
will seem miraculous to persons who know not with what facility everything which favors the
malignity of man is established.  I will endeavor to explain in a few words what to me appeared
visible in this profound and obscure system.

With a name already distinguished and known throughout all Europe, I had still preserved my
primitive simplicity.  My mortal aversion to all party faction and cabal had kept me free and
independent, without any other chain than the attachments of my heart.  Alone, a stranger,
without family or fortune, and unconnected with everything except my principles and duties,
I intrepidly followed the paths of uprightness, never flattering or favoring any person at
the expense of truth and justice. Besides, having lived for two years past in solitude, without
observing the course of events, I was unconnected with the affairs of the world, and not informed
of what passed, nor desirous of being acquainted with it.  I lived four leagues from Paris
as much separated from that. capital by my negligence as I should have been in the Island of
Tinian by the sea.

Grimm, Diderot and D'Holbach were, on the contrary, in the centre of the vortex, lived in the
great world, and divided amongst them almost all the spheres of it.  The great wits, men of
letters, men of long robe, and women, all listened to them when they chose to act in concert.
The advantage three men in this situation united must have over a fourth in mine, cannot but
already appear.  It is true Diderot and D'Holbach were incapable, at least I think so, of forming
black conspiracies; one of them was not base enough, nor the other sufficiently able; but it
was for this reason that the party was more united.  Grimm alone formed his plan in his own
mind, and discovered more of it than was necessary to induce his associates to concur in the
execution.  The ascendency he had gained over them made this quite easy, and the effect of
the whole answered to the superiority of his talents.

It was with these, which were of a superior kind, that, perceiving the advantage he might acquire
from our respective situations, he conceived the project of overturning my reputation, and,
without exposing himself, of giving me one of a nature quite opposite, by raising up about
me an edifice of obscurity which it was impossible for me to penetrate, and by that means throw
a light upon his manoevures and unmask him.

This enterprise was difficult, because it was necessary to palliate the iniquity in the eyes
of those of whose assistance he stood in need. He had honest men to deceive, to alienate from
me the good opinion of everybody, and to deprive me of all my friends.  What say I?  He had
to cut off all communication with me, that not a single word of truth might reach my ears.
Had a single man of generosity come and said to me, "You assume the appearance of virtue, yet
this is the manner in which you are treated, and these the circumstances by which you are judged:
what have you to say?"  truth would have triumphed and Grimm have been undone. Of this he was
fully convinced; but he had examined his own heart and estimated men according to their merit.
I am sorry, for the honor of humanity, that he judged with so much truth.

In these dark and crooked paths his steps to be the more sure were necessarily slow.  He has
for twelve years pursued his plan and the most difficult part of the execution of it is still
to come; this is to deceive the public entirely.  He is afraid of this public, and dares not
lay his conspiracy open.

     [Since this was written he has made the dangerous step with the
     fullest and most inconceivable success.  I am of opinion it was
     Tronchin who inspired him with courage, and supplied him with the
     means.]

But he has found the easy means of accompanying it with power, and this power has the disposal
of me.  Thus supported he advances with less danger.  The agents of power piquing themselves
but little on uprightness, and still less on candor, he has no longer the indiscretion of an
honest man to fear.  His safety is in my being enveloped in an impenetrable obscurity, and
in concealing from me his conspiracy, well knowing that with whatever art he may have formed
it, I could by a single glance of the eye discover the whole.  His great address consists in
appearing to favor whilst he defames me, and in giving to his perfidy an air of generosity.

I felt the first effects of this system by the secret accusations of the Coterie Holbachiens
without its being possible for me to know in what the accusations consisted, or to form a probable
conjecture as to the nature of them.  De Leyre informed me in his letters that heinous things
were attributed to me.  Diderot more mysteriously told me the same thing, and when I came to
an explanation with both, the whole was reduced to the heads of accusation of which I have
already spoken.  I perceived a gradual increase of coolness in the letters from Madam d'Houdetot.
This I could not attribute to Saint Lambert; he continued to write to me with the same friendship,
and came to see me after his return.  It was also impossible to think myself the cause of it,
as we had separated well satisfied with each other, and nothing since that time had happened
on my part, except my departure from the Hermitage, of which she felt the necessity.  Therefore,
not knowing whence this coolness, which she refused to acknowledge, although my heart was not
to be deceived, could proceed, I was uneasy upon every account.  I knew she greatly favored
her sister-in-law and Grimm, in consequence of their connections with Saint Lambert; and I
was afraid of their machinations.  This agitation opened my wounds, and rendered my correspondence
so disagreeable as quite to disgust her with it.  I saw, as at a distance, a thousand cruel
circumstances, without discovering anything distinctly.  I was in a situation the most insupportable
to a man whose imagination is easily heated.  Had I been quite retired from the world, and
known nothing of the matter I should have become more calm; but my heart still clung to attachments,
by means of which my enemies had great advantages over me; and the feeble rays which penetrated
my asylum conveyed to me nothing more than a knowledge of the blackness of the mysteries which
were concealed from my eyes.

I should have sunk, I have not a doubt of it, under these torments, too cruel and insupportable
to my open disposition, which, by the impossibility of concealing my sentiments, makes me fear
everything from those concealed from me, if fortunately objects sufficiently interesting to
my heart to divert it from others with which, in spite of myself, my imagination was filled,
had not presented themselves.  In the last visit Diderot paid me, at the Hermitage, he had
spoken of the article 'Geneva', which D'Alembert had inserted in the 'Encyclopedie'; he had
informed me that this article, concerted with people of the first consideration, had for object
the establishment of a theatre at Geneva, that measures had been taken accordingly, and that
the establishment would soon take place. As Diderot seemed to think all this very proper, and
did not doubt of the success of the measure, and as I had besides to speak to him upon too
many other subjects to touch upon that article, I made him no answer: but scandalized at these
preparatives to corruption and licentiousness in my country, I waited with impatience for the
volume of the 'Encyclopedie', in which the article was inserted; to see whether or not it would
be possible to give an answer which might ward off the blow.  I received the volume soon after
my establishment at Mont Louis, and found the articles to be written with much art and address,
and worthy of the pen whence it proceeded.  This, however, did not abate my desire to answer
it, and notwithstanding the dejection of spirits I then labored under, my griefs and pains,
the severity of the season, and the inconvenience of my new abode, in which I had not yet had
time to arrange myself, I set to work with a zeal which surmounted every obstacle.

In a severe winter, in the month of February, and in the situation I have described, I went
every day, morning and evening, to pass a couple of hours in an open alcove which was at the
bottom of the garden in which my habitation stood.  This alcove, which terminated an alley
of a terrace, looked upon the valley and the pond of Montmorency, and presented to me, as the
closing point of a prospect, the plain but respectable castle of St. Gratien, the retreat of
the virtuous Catinat.  It was in this place, then, exposed to freezing cold, that without being
sheltered from the wind and snow, and having no other fire than that in my heart; I composed,
in the space of three weeks, my letter to D'Alembert on theatres.  It was in this, for my 'Eloisa'
was not then half written, that I found charms in philosophical labor.  Until then virtuous
indignation had been a substitute to Apollo, tenderness and a gentleness of mind now became
so.  The injustice I had been witness to had irritated me, that of which I became the object
rendered me melancholy; and this melancholy without bitterness was that of a heart too tender
and affectionate, and which, deceived by those in whom it had confided, was obliged to remain
concentred.  Full of that which had befallen me, and still affected by so many violent emotions,
my heart added the sentiment of its sufferings to the ideas with which a meditation on my subject
had inspired me; what I wrote bore evident marks of this mixture.  Without perceiving it I
described the situation I was then in, gave portraits of Grimm, Madam d'Epinay, Madam d' Houdetot,
Saint Lambert and myself.  What delicious tears did I shed as I wrote!  Alas!  in these descriptions
there are proofs but too evident that love, the fatal love of which I made such efforts to
cure myself, still remained in my heart.  With all this there was a certain sentiment of tenderness
relative to myself; I thought I was dying, and imagined I bid the public my last adieu.  Far
from fearing death, I joyfully saw it approach; but I felt some regret at leaving my fellow
creatures without their having perceived my real merit, and being convinced how much I should
have deserved their esteem had they known me better.  These are the secret causes of the singular
manner in which this work, opposite to that of the work by which it was preceded, is written.--[Discours
sur l'Inegalite.  Discourse on the Inequality of Mankind.]

I corrected and copied the letter, and was preparing to print it when, after a long silence,
I received one from Madam d'Houdetot, which brought upon me a new affliction more painful than
any I had yet suffered.  She informed me that my passion for her was known to all Paris, that
I had spoken of it to persons who had made it public, that this rumor, having reached the ears
of her lover, had nearly cost him his life; yet he did her justice, and peace was restored
between them; but on his account, as well as on hers, and for the sake of her reputation, she
thought it her duty to break off all correspondence with me, at the same time assuring me that
she and her friend were both interested in my welfare, that they would defend me to the public,
and that she herself would, from time to time, send to inquire after my health.

"And thou also, Diderot," exclaimed I, "unworthy friend!"

I could not, however, yet resolve to condemn him.  My weakness was known to others who might
have spoken of it.  I wished to doubt, but this was soon out of my power.  Saint Lambert shortly
after performed an action worthy of himself.  Knowing my manner of thinking, he judged of the
state in which I must be; betrayed by one part of my friends and forsaken by the other.  He
came to see me.  The first time he had not many moments to spare.  He came again.  Unfortunately,
not expecting him, I was not at home.  Theresa had with him a conversation of upwards of two
hours, in which they informed each other of facts of great importance to us all. The surprise
with which I learned that nobody doubted of my having lived with Madam d'Epinay, as Grimm then
did, cannot be equalled, except by that of Saint Lambert, when he was convinced that the rumor
was false. He, to the great dissatisfaction of the lady, was in the same situation with myself,
and the eclaircissements resulting from the conversation removed from me all regret, on account
of my having broken with her forever.  Relative to Madam d'Houdetot, he mentioned several circumstances
with which neither Theresa nor Madam d'Houdetot herself were acquainted; these were known to
me only in the first instance, and I had never mentioned them except to Diderot, under the
seal of friendship; and it was to Saint Lambert himself to whom he had chosen to communicate
them.  This last step was sufficient to determine me.  I resolved to break with Diderot forever,
and this without further deliberation, except on the manner of doing it; for I had perceived
secret ruptures turned to my prejudice, because they left the mask of friendship in possession
of my most cruel enemies.

The rules of good breeding, established in the world on this head, seem to have been dictated
by a spirit of treachery and falsehood.  To appear the friend of a man when in reality we are
no longer so, is to reserve to ourselves the means of doing him an injury by surprising honest
men into an error.  I recollected that when the illustrious Montesquieu broke with Father de
Tournemine, he immediately said to everybody: "Listen neither to Father Tournemine nor myself,
when we speak of each other, for we are no longer friends."  This open and generous proceeding
was universally applauded.  I resolved to follow the example with Diderot; but what method
was I to take to publish the rupture authentically from my retreat, and yet without scandal?
I concluded on inserting in the form of a note, in my work, a passage from the book of Ecclesiasticus,
which declared the rupture and even the subject of it, in terms sufficiently clear to such
as were acquainted with the previous circumstances, but could signify nothing to the rest of
the world.  I determined not to speak in my work of the friend whom I renounced, except with
the honor always due to extinguished friendship.  The whole may be seen in the work itself.

There is nothing in this world but time and misfortune, and every act of courage seems to be
a crime in adversity.  For that which has been admired in Montesquieu, I received only blame
and reproach.  As soon as my work was printed, and I had copies of it, I sent one to Saint
Lambert, who, the evening before, had written to me in his own name and that of Madam d' Houdetot,
a note expressive of the most tender friendship.

The following is the letter he wrote to me when he returned the copy I had sent him.

                                   EAUBONNE, 10th October, 1758.

"Indeed, sir, I cannot accept the present you have just made me.  In that part of your preface
where, relative to Diderot, you quote a passage from Ecclesiastes (he mistakes, it is from
Ecclesiasticus) the book dropped from my hand.  In the conversations we had together in the
summer, you seemed to be persuaded Diderot was not guilty of the pretended indiscretions you
had imputed to him.  You may, for aught I know to the contrary, have reason to complain of
him, but this does not give you a right to insult him publicly.  You are not unacquainted with
the nature of the persecutions he suffers, and you join the voice of an old friend to that
of envy.  I cannot refrain from telling you, sir, how much this heinous act of yours has shocked
me.  I am not acquainted with Diderot, but I honor him, and I have a lively sense of the pain
you give to a man, whom, at least not in my hearing, you have never reproached with anything
more than a trifling weakness.  You and I, sir, differ too much in our principles ever to be
agreeable to each other.  Forget that I exist; this you will easily do.  I have never done
to men either good or evil of a nature to be long remembered.  I promise you, sir, to forget
your person and to remember nothing relative to you but your talents."

This letter filled me with indignation and affliction; and, in the excess of my pangs, feeling
my pride wounded, I answered him by the following note:

                              MONTMORUNCY, 11th October, 1758.

"SIR: While reading your letter, I did you the honor to be surprised at it, and had the weakness
to suffer it to affect me; but I find it unworthy of an answer.

"I will no longer continue the copies of Madam d'Houdetot.  If it be not agreeable to her to
keep that she has, she may sent it me back and I will return her money.  If she keeps it, she
must still send for the rest of her paper and the money; and at the same time I beg she will
return me the prospectus which she has in her possession.  Adieu, sir."

Courage under misfortune irritates the hearts of cowards, but it is pleasing to generous minds.
This note seemed to make Saint Lambert reflect with himself and to regret his having been so
violent; but too haughty in his turn to make open advances, he seized and perhaps prepared,
the opportunity of palliating what he had done.

A fortnight afterwards I received from Madam d'Epinay the following letter:

                                        Thursday, 26th.

"SIR: I received the book you had the goodness to send me, and which I have read with much
pleasure.  I have always experienced the same sentiment in reading all the works which have
come from your pen. Receive my thanks for the whole.  I should have returned you these in person
had my affairs permitted me to remain any time in your neighborhood; but I was not this year
long at the Chevrette.  M. and Madam Dupin come there on Sunday to dinner.  I expect M. de
Saint Lambert, M. de Francueil, and Madam d'Houdetot will be of the party; you will do me much
pleasure by making one also.  All the persons who are to dine with me, desire, and will, as
well as myself, be delighted to pass with you a part of the day.  I have the honor to be with
the most perfect consideration," etc.

This letter made my heart beat violently; after having for a year past been the subject of
conversation of all Paris, the idea of presenting myself as a spectacle before Madam d'Houdetot,
made me tremble, and I had much difficulty to find sufficient courage to support that ceremony.
Yet as she and Saint Lambert were desirous of it, and Madam d'Epinay spoke in the name of her
guests without naming one whom I should not be glad to see, I did not think I should expose
myself accepting a dinner to which I was in some degree invited by all the persons who with
myself were to partake of it.  I therefore promised to go: on Sunday the weather was bad, and
Madam D'Epinay sent me her carriage.

My arrival caused a sensation.  I never met a better reception.  An observer would have thought
the whole company felt how much I stood in need of encouragement.  None but French hearts are
susceptible of this kind of delicacy.  However, I found more people than I expected to see.
Amongst others the Comte d' Houdetot, whom I did not know, and his sister Madam de Blainville,
without whose company I should have been as well pleased.  She had the year before came several
times to Eaubonne, and her sister-in-law had left her in our solitary walks to wait until she
thought proper to suffer her to join us.  She had harbored a resentment against me, which during
this dinner she gratified at her ease.  The presence of the Comte d' Houdetot and Saint Lambert
did not give me the laugh on my side, and it may be judged that a man embarrassed in the most
common conversations was not very brilliant in that which then took place.  I never suffered
so much, appeared so awkward, or received more unexpected mortifications.  As soon as we had
risen from table, I withdrew from that wicked woman; I had the pleasure of seeing Saint Lambert
and Madam de'Houdetot approach me, and we conversed together a part of the afternoon, upon
things very indifferent it is true, but with the same familiarity as before my involuntary
error.  This friendly attention was not lost upon my heart, and could Saint Lambert have read
what passed there, he certainly would have been satisfied with it.  I can safely assert that
although on my arrival the presence of Madam d'Houdetot gave me the most violent palpitations,
on returning from the house I scarcely thought of her; my mind was entirely taken up with Saint
Lambert.

Notwithstanding the malignant sarcasms of Madam de Blainville, the dinner was of great service
to me, and I congratulated myself upon not having refused the invitation.  I not only discovered
that the intrigues of Grimm and the Holbachiens had not deprived me of my old acquaintance,

     [Such is the simplicity of my heart was my opinion when I wrote
     these confessions.]

but, what flattered me still more, that Madam d'Houdetot and Saint Lambert were less changed
than I had imagined, and I at length understood that his keeping her at a distance from me
proceeded more from jealousy than from disesteem.  This was a consolation to me, and calmed
my mind. Certain of not being an object of contempt in the eyes of persons whom I esteemed,
I worked upon my own heart with greater courage and success. If I did not quite extinguish
in it a guilty and an unhappy passion, I at least so well regulated the remains of it that
they have never since that moment led me into the most trifling error.  The copies of Madam
d' Houdetot, which she prevailed upon me to take again, and my works, which I continued to
send her as soon as they appeared, produced me from her a few notes and messages, indifferent
but obliging.  She did still more, as will hereafter appear, and the reciprocal conduct of
her lover and myself, after our intercourse had ceased, may serve as an example of the manner
in which persons of honor separate when it is no longer agreeable to them to associate with
each other. 

"That is very possible," said he, with a sigh; "but what did they charge you with doing?"

And Rodney moved closer to him, and leaned his head upon his breast, and told him all. There
was such an evident sincerity, such consistency, such tones of truth in the simple narrative, that
he saw he was believed, and the sympathizing words and looks of the listener inspired him with
trust, as though he was talking to a well-known friend.

For several days, they were constantly together; the stranger waited upon Rodney, and gave him
his medicine, and helped him from his cot, talked with him, and manifested for him the kindness
of a brother. From several conversations, Rodney gleaned from him the following history.

Lewis Warren,--so will we call him--(indeed, Rodney never knew his true name),--was born and
had lived most of his life in a New England village. He was the son of a farmer; a pious man,
and deacon of a church, by whose help he received a liberal education. Soon after he had graduated
at ---- College, he came on to Philadelphia, with the expectation of getting into some business.
At the hotel where he stopped, he became acquainted with a man of very gentlemanly appearance
and address, who said that he, too, was a stranger in the city, and proposed to accompany him
to some places of amusement. Warren went with him to the theatre, and, on succeeding evenings,
to various places of amusement. As they were one evening strolling up Chestnut-street, this friend,
Mr. Sharpe, stopped at the well-lighted vestibule of a stately building,
that had the air of a private house, although it was thrown open,
and proposed that they should go in, and see what was going on there.

Warren consented, and, after ascending to the second floor, and passing through a hall, they
entered a large, brilliantly-lighted billiard saloon. Around several tables were gathered gentlemanly-looking
men, knocking about little ivory balls, with long, slender wands or cues, and seeming, evidently,
engrossed in their respective games. After looking around for a while, Sharpe proposed going
up stairs into the third story. They ascended to the upper rooms. In the upper passage stood a stout,
short negro-man, who glanced at Sharpe, stepped one side, and permitted them to pass unquestioned.
They entered another smaller room,--for the third story was divided into several rooms,--and
found other games than those exhibited below. After walking through some of the rooms, and observing
the different games, most of which were new to Warren, his companion said to him:

"Do you understand anything about cards?"

"Not a great deal; I have occasionally played a game of whist or sledge."

"Well,

that is about the sum of my knowledge. Suppose we while away a half-an-hour at one of these vacant
tables."

Warren consented, and they sat down. After playing a game or two, Sharpe proposed having a bottle of
wine, and, said he, laughingly, "Whoever loses the next game, shall pay for it."

"Agreed," said Warren; and the wine was brought, and he won the game.

"Well, that is your good luck; but I'll bet you the price of another bottle you can't do it again."

Warren
won again.

They tried a third, and that Sharpe won; a fourth, and Warren rose the winner.

The next evening found them, somehow, without much talk about it, at the same place. They played
with varied success; but when they left, Warren had lost ten dollars.

He wanted to win it back, and himself proposed the visit for the third night. He became excited
by the game, and lost seventy dollars.

Still his eyes were not open; he did not dream that he was in the hands of a professed gambler,
and, hoping to get back what he had lost, and what he felt he really could not spare from his
small amount of funds, he went again.

"There!" said he, after they had been about an hour at the table,
"there is my last fifty-dollar bill; change that, and I'll try once
more."

"Well," said Sharpe, "here is the change; but the luck seems against you. We had better stop for
to-night."

But Warren insisted upon continuing, and he won thirty dollars in addition to the fifty which
Sharpe had changed for him. The gambler then rose, and told him that he would give him a chance
to win all back another time, as fortune seemed to be again propitious to him.

Warren never saw him after that night. The next morning he determined to seek a more private
boarding house, and economize his remaining funds, and seek more assiduously some business situation.
He stepped to the bar to pay his board, handing the clerk one of the notes he had received in change
for his last fifty-dollar bill.

The clerk examined it a moment, and passed it back, saying, "That is a counterfeit note, sir."
He took it back, amazed, and offered another.

"This is worse still," said the clerk.

"I think we had better take care of you, sir. You will please go with me before a magistrate."

"But
I did not know----!"

"You can tell that to the squire."

"You have no right to take me," said Warren; "you have no warrant."

"No; but I can keep you here till I send for one, which I shall certainly do, unless you consent
to go willingly."

And Warren, conscious of his own innocence in this respect, and never thinking of the difficulty of
proving it, went to a magistrate's office with the clerk at once.

The clerk entered his complaint, and, besides swearing to the offer of the notes, swore that he
had seen him, for several days past, in the company of a notorious
gambler.

Warren was stunned, overwhelmed, by this declaration. No representation that he made was believed.
His pockets were searched, and all the money he had, except some small change, was found to
be counterfeit. A commitment was at once made out against him, and he was sent to jail, to await
his trial on the charge of passing counterfeit money.

This is one of the methods by which professional gamblers "pluck young pigeons." No young man
is safe who allows himself to play with cards, or to handle dice.

Rodney believed that Warren had told him the truth, and fellowship in misfortune drew the hearts
of the duped man and the wronged boy towards each other; for though both had been very much
to blame, yet duped and wronged they had been by knaves more cunning and wicked than themselves.

They
had many serious conversations together, for both had been piously instructed, and Warren,
who seemed truly penitent for his wanderings, as he sat by the bed-side of the sick boy, encouraged
him in his resolutions to lead a different life,--to seek the forgiveness and grace of God through
a merciful Redeemer. Seldom has a poor prisoner received sweeter sympathy, or more salutary
counsel, than was given to Rodney within the walls of that old Arch-street jail, by his fellow-prisoner.

"Rodney,"
said Warren to him one day,--it was the first day that he had left his cot,--"I shall soon leave
this place; I have written to my father, and he will be here at the trial with such evidences
in my favor, from the whole course of my life, as cannot fail to secure me an acquittal. I
feel no doubt that this stain upon my character will be wiped away. And I believe that I shall
have reason to thank God, as long as I live, for having permitted this trouble. It is a very
hard lesson, but I trust it will be a salutary one. Since I have been here, I have prayed earnestly
to God for the pardon of my sins. I have resolved, in sincerity of soul, to consecrate my affections
and my life to his service. I have had a severe struggle; but I believe, I feel, that God
has heard my prayers, forgiven my iniquities, and the last few days in this jail have been
the happiest of my life.

I feel that I hate the sins of which my heart has been so full, and that I love God even for
the severe providences that have checked my course of impenitence. I feel like a new man; and
if I am not deceiving myself,--and I pray that I may not be,--I have experienced that regeneration
of heart of which I have so often heard, but which I could never before comprehend.

"I hope that you, too, will try and seek the Saviour, pray to him for forgiveness, and beg the guidance
of His Holy Spirit for your future life. If we both do this sincerely, we shall have reason
forever to bless God for the way in which he has led us."

"Pray for me," said Rodney; while tears rolled down his pale cheeks. "I want to be a Christian,
and I hope that God will have mercy upon me, and guide me, for the future, in the right path."

A
few days after, Warren was called into court to take his trial; and, to Rodney's great delight,--for
he had learned to love him like a brother,--he heard from one of the nurses that he had been honorably
acquitted.

During the same week, the case of Rodney was called up, and he was conducted by an officer to the
court-house.

CHAPTER XI.

THE TRIAL.

Justice was now to be administered, and Rodney was brought into the crowded court-room for trial.
The officer led him to the prisoner's narrow dock, an enclosed bench,
at each end of which sat a constable, with a long staff in his hand.

There were five or six other prisoners sitting in the dock with him. Next to him was a woman,
her garments ragged, her hair matted, and her face red and bloated. Next to her sat a squalid
negro, who seemed totally indifferent to the scenes that were passing around him. On the other
side of him was a young man, apparently about twenty years old, of thin, spare form, with a
red flush at intervals coloring his cheek, and a hollow cough that sounded like an echo from
the grave. He was evidently in a deep consumption, and had been already several months in prison.
And he leaned his head upon the railing, as though he would hide himself from every eye. He had
been tried a few days before, for having been associated with others in a burglary, and found
guilty, and he was now present to hear his sentence.

After the formal opening of the court, this young man was the first called upon, and, with
trembling limbs, he rose to hear the sentence of the judge. After some remarks upon the enormity
of his crime, and the clear evidence upon which he had been convicted, the judge sentenced
him to five years' imprisonment in the penitentiary. When those words, five years, reached
him, he dropped back upon the seat, as if struck with a bullet, and then raising his face to
the judge, with an expression of profound anguish, said, "Half the time would be more than enough, your
honor; I shall be in the grave before one year is past."

The case of the negro-man was immediately called up, but Rodney heard nothing of it. He hid
his face in his hands, and wept.

A sense of his terrible position flashed upon him, and he could not keep back his tears, or
stifle his sobs. He wept aloud, and felt, though he might not see, that all eyes were turned
upon him. His whole frame shook with the anguish of his soul.

Presently a hand was laid upon his, and a head was bent over the bar near him, and a voice addressed
him kindly: "Be calm, my boy; there is no good in crying; who is your counsel?"

Rodney looked up, and saw a young man, well dressed, and with an affable and winning countenance,
standing before him. His face looked kind and benevolent, at least in Rodney's eyes, for he
had spoken to him gently and encouragingly.

He replied to his question, "I have no counsel, sir; I have no money."

"Well, I will try what I can do for you," said the young lawyer. "Come out here, and sit by me,
and tell me what you are here for."

He led him out of the disgraceful dock, gave him a seat directly in front of the jury, sat down
beside him, and asked him to tell him the truth about all the circumstances that led to his
imprisonment and trial.

Rodney told him truly all that happened from the time of his running away to his arrest. He
told him, too, who he was, and who were his relatives in the neighborhood of Philadelphia. He
had never spoken of these before.

"Well," said the lawyer, "I don't see that they can bring anything
out to hurt you, if that is the true statement of the case.

     And now, my boy, you may cry as much as you wish."
     

Rodney looked up, surprised, wondering what on earth he wanted him to cry for. He thought afterwards
that the advice was probably given that his weeping might affect the sympathies of the jury,
before whose eyes he was sitting. But he could scarcely have shed a tear then if his liberty had
depended upon it. He felt as though he had a friend, and his consciousness of innocence of any
violation of human law, and his confidence that his new friend could show that he was guiltless,
set his perturbed heart at rest, and he felt sure that he should be acquitted.

When the court adjourned, the lawyer took out a card, and, giving it to Rodney, said, "If your
case should be called up before I get here this afternoon, just tell them that I am your counsel,
and they will put it off till I come. Here is my name."

There was but one word on the card, and Rodney kept it long as a grateful memento of the disinterested
kindness that had been shown him in the hour of his bitter trial. The name on the card was

+-----------------------+ | | | WATMOUGH.[A] | | | +-----------------------+
[A] This is not a fictitious but the real name of the gentleman whose
kindness it commemorates.

That young lawyer never knew the gratitude
with which his name was remembered for long, long years, and the thrill
of emotion which its utterance always excited in the heart of that
befriended boy. An act of kindness is never lost, and many a one which
the benefactor may have forgotten, has won for him the prayers and
blessings of a grateful heart.

During the recess, Rodney was conducted
across Independence-square to the old Walnut-street prison. He ate
his scanty prison dinner that day with a light and hopeful heart;
and though he trembled at the idea of the coming trial, yet he did
not for a moment doubt that the result must be his acquittal. He believed
that the law was framed to punish the guilty, and to do justice to
the innocent; and he could scarcely conceive that the guiltless could
be made to suffer by its administration.

Immediately after the opening
of the court, in the afternoon, the case was called up. The woman
in whose house the robbery was committed, and one other, were witnesses;
but not one word was said by either, in any way implicating Rodney
in the robbery, beyond the fact that he had come to the house in company
with the robber.

His friend made a very brief speech, demanding his
acquittal; the judge said a few words to the jury, who consulted together
for a moment, when the foreman arose, and pronounced the happy words,
"Not Guilty."

And now the tears again rained down the cheeks of Rodney,
as he came out of the infamous dock,--but they were tears of joy.

A
few kind questions were asked him by the judge; and a small sum of
money, contributed by him and by several of the members of the bar,
furnished Rodney the means of returning to his friends.

CHAPTER XII.

CONCLUSION.

Hastening
to the end of our narrative, we pass by several intervening months,
and witness again another Sabbath morning in May.

Some twenty miles
from the city of Philadelphia, a sparkling little brook passes through
the meadow of a beautiful farm, losing itself in a thick wood that
divides the contiguous estates.

On that lovely May morning,--that
serene Sabbath,--there might have been seen,--there was seen by the
Omniscient eye,--a lad, some fifteen years old, walking thoughtfully
along the margin of that little stream, and penetrating into the thickest
part of the wood. He carried a book in his hand, and sat down close
by the stream, under the shade of an old beech tree. And as he read,
the tears streamed from his eyes, and his sighs indicated a burdened
spirit. Indeed, his heart was very sad. He was oppressed by the consciousness
of the great sinfulness of his life and heart against the holy and
benevolent God. He remembered the early instructions he had received
at home and in the Sabbath-school. He recalled the precious privileges
he had enjoyed, and he remembered, with anguish and shame, how wickedly
he had disregarded all these instructions, abused all these privileges,
and sinned against his own knowledge of right, against his conscience
and his God. He had long been burdened with these distressing emotions;
he had often prayed, but had found little relief of his anguish, even
in prayer. And now, even on this calm and beautiful Sabbath morning,
there seemed to his heart a gloom in the landscape. There was a smile,
he knew, upon the face of nature, but he felt that it beamed not for
him. The carol of wild birds rung out sweetly around him; but the
music saddened his heart yet more, for there was no inward response
of gratitude and joy. The bright green of the Spring foliage and of
the waving grass seemed dark and gloomy, as he gazed upon it through
tearful eyes. His mourning spirit gave its own sombre interpretation
to all the lovely scenes of nature. He deeply felt that he was a wretched
sinner against God, and he could not see how God could be merciful
to one who had so grievously transgressed. He scarcely dared to hope
for the pardon of his iniquities, and was in almost utter despair
of ever obtaining mercy.

The book he had taken with him in his morning
walk, was "Doddridge's Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul."
He read, carefully, the twelfth chapter in that excellent work, entitled,
"The invitation to Christ of the sinner overwhelmed with a sense of
the greatness of his sins." He was convinced that Jesus Christ was
able to save even him; and the strong assurances of his willingness
to save, "even to the uttermost," furnished in the promises of the
gospel, began to dawn upon his mind as he read what seemed like a
new revelation to his soul. There seemed a freshness, a force, a glorious
personal adaptation in them which he had never seen before.

Since I am now upon the subject of my Venetian acquaintance, I must not forget one which I
still preserved for a considerable time after my intercourse with the rest had ceased.  This
was M. de Joinville, who continued after his return from Genoa to show me much friendship.
He was fond of seeing me and of conversing with me upon the affairs of Italy, and the follies
of M. de Montaigu, of whom he of himself knew many anecdotes, by means of his acquaintance
in the office for foreign affairs in which he was much connected.  I had also the pleasure
of seeing at my house my old comrade Dupont who had purchased a place in the province of which
he was, and whose affairs had brought him to Paris.  M. de Joinville became by degrees so desirous
of seeing me, that he in some measure laid me under constraint; and, although our places of
residence were at a great distance from each other, we had a friendly quarrel when I let a
week pass without going to dine with him.  When he went to Joinville he was always desirous
of my accompanying him; but having once been there to pass a week I had not the least desire
to return.  M. de Joinville was certainly an honest man, and even amiable in certain respects
but his understanding was beneath mediocrity; he was handsome, rather fond of his person and
tolerably fatiguing.  He had one of the most singular collections perhaps in the world, to
which he gave much of his attention and endeavored to acquire it that of his friends, to whom
it sometimes afforded less amusement than it did to himself.  This was a complete collection
of songs of the court and Paris for upwards of fifty years past, in which many anecdotes were
to be found that would have been sought for in vain elsewhere.  These are memoirs for the history
of France, which would scarcely be thought of in any other country.

One day, whilst we were still upon the very best terms, he received me so coldly and in a manner
so different from that which was customary to him, that after having given him an opportunity
to explain, and even having begged him to do it, I left his house with a resolution, in which
I have persevered, never to return to it again; for I am seldom seen where I have been once
ill received, and in this case there was no Diderot who pleaded for M. de Joinville.  I vainly
endeavored to discover what I had done to offend him; I could not recollect a circumstance
at which he could possibly have taken offence.  I was certain of never having spoken of him
or his in any other than in the most honorable manner; for he had acquired my friendship, and
besides my having nothing but favorable things to say of him, my most inviolable maxim has
been that of never speaking but in an honorable manner of the houses I frequented.

At length, by continually ruminating.  I formed the following conjecture: the last time we
had seen each other, I had supped with him at the apartment of some girls of his acquaintance,
in company with two or three clerks in the office of foreign affairs, very amiable men, and
who had neither the manner nor appearance of libertines; and on my part, I can assert that
the whole evening passed in making melancholy reflections on the wretched fate of the creatures
with whom we were.  I did not pay anything, as M. de Joinville gave the supper, nor did I make
the girls the least present, because I gave them not the opportunity I had done to the padoana
of establishing a claim to the trifle I might have offered, We all came away together, cheerfully
and upon very good terms.  Without having made a second visit to the girls, I went three or
four days afterwards to dine with M. de Joinville, whom I had not seen during that interval,
and who gave me the reception of which I have spoken.  Unable to suppose any other cause for
it than some misunderstanding relative to the supper, and perceiving he had no inclination
to explain, I resolved to visit him no longer, but I still continued to send him my works:
he frequently sent me his compliments, and one evening, meeting him in the green-room of the
French theatre, he obligingly reproached me with not having called to see him, which, however,
did not induce me to depart from my resolution.  Therefore this affair had rather the appearance
of a coolness than a rupture.  However, not having heard of nor seen him since that time, it
would have been too late after an absence of several years, to renew my acquaintance with him.
It is for this reason M. de Joinville is not named in my list, although I had for a considerable
time frequented his house.

I will not swell my catalogue with the names of many other persons with whom I was or had become
less intimate, although I sometimes saw them in the country, either at my own house or that
of some neighbor, such for instance as the Abbes de Condillac and De Malby, M. de Mairan, De
la Lalive, De Boisgelou, Vatelet, Ancelet, and others.  I will also pass lightly over that
of M. de Margency, gentleman in ordinary of the king, an ancient member of the 'Coterie Holbachique',
which he had quitted as well as myself, and the old friend of Madam d'Epinay from whom he had
separated as I had done; I likewise consider that of M. Desmahis, his friend, the celebrated
but short-lived author of the comedy of the Impertinent, of much the same importance.  The
first was my neighbor in the country, his estate at Margency being near to Montmorency.  We
were old acquaintances, but the neighborhood and a certain conformity of experience connected
us still more.  The last died soon afterwards.  He had merit and even wit, but he was in some
degree the original of his comedy, and a little of a coxcomb with women, by whom he was not
much regretted.

I cannot, however, omit taking notice of a new correspondence I entered into at this period,
which has had too much influence over the rest of my life not to make it necessary for me to
mark its origin.  The person in question is De Lamoignon de Malesherbes of the 'Cour des aides',
then censor of books, which office he exercised with equal intelligence and mildness, to the
great satisfaction of men of letters.  I had not once been to see him at Paris; yet I had never
received from him any other than the most obliging condescensions relative to the censorship,
and I knew that he had more than once very severely reprimanded persons who had written against
me.  I had new proofs of his goodness upon the subject of the edition of Eloisa.  The proofs
of so great a work being very expensive from Amsterdam by post, he, to whom all letters were
free, permitted these to be addressed to him, and sent them to me under the countersign of
the chancellor his father.  When the work was printed he did not permit the sale of it in the
kingdom until, contrary to my wishes an edition had been sold for my benefit.  As the profit
of this would on my part have been a theft committed upon Rey, to whom I had sold the manuscript,
I not only refused to accept the present intended me, without his consent, which he very generously
gave, but persisted upon dividing with him the hundred pistoles (a thousand livres--forty pounds),
the amount of it but of which he would not receive anything.  For these hundred pistoles I
had the mortification, against which M. de Malesherbes had not guarded me, of seeing my work
horribly mutilated, and the sale of the good edition stopped until the bad one was entirely
disposed of.

I have always considered M. de Malesherbes as a man whose uprightness was proof against every
temptation.  Nothing that has happened has even made me doubt for a moment of his probity;
but, as weak as he is polite, he sometimes injures those he wishes to serve by the excess of
his zeal to preserve them from evil.  He not only retrenched a hundred pages in the edition
of Paris, but he made another retrenchment, which no person but the author could permit himself
to do, in the copy of the good edition he sent to Madam de Pompadour.  It is somewhere said
in that work that the wife of a coal-heaver is more respectable than the mistress of a prince.
This phrase had occurred to me in the warmth of composition without any application.  In reading
over the work I perceived it would be applied, yet in consequence of the very imprudent maxim
I had adopted of not suppressing anything, on account of the application which might be made,
when my conscience bore witness to me that I had not made them at the time I wrote, I determined
not to expunge the phrase, and contented myself with substituting the word Prince to King,
which I had first written.  This softening did not seem sufficient to M. de Malesherbes: he
retrenched the whole expression in a new sheet which he had printed on purpose and stuck in
between the other with as much exactness as possible in the copy of Madam de Pompadour.  She
was not ignorant of this manoeuvre.  Some good-natured people took the trouble to inform her
of it.  For my part, it was not until a long time afterwards, and when I began to feel the
consequences of it, that the matter came to my knowledge.

Is not this the origin of the concealed but implacable hatred of another lady who was in a
like situation, without my knowing it, or even being acquainted with her person when I wrote
the passage?  When the book was published the acquaintance was made, and I was very uneasy.
I mentioned this to the Chevalier de Lorenzy, who laughed at me, and said the lady was so little
offended that she had not even taken notice of the matter. I believed him, perhaps rather too
lightly, and made myself easy when there was much reason for my being otherwise.

At the beginning of the winter I received an additional mark of the goodness of M. de Malesherbes
of which I was very sensible, although I did not think proper to take advantage of it.  A place
was vacant in the 'Journal des Savans'.  Margency wrote to me, proposing to me the place, as
from himself.  But I easily perceived from the manner of the letter that he was dictated to
and authorized; he afterwards told me he had been desired to make me the offer.  The occupations
of this place were but trifling.  All I should have had to do would have been to make two abstracts
a month, from the books brought to me for that purpose, without being under the necessity of
going once to Paris, not even to pay the magistrate a visit of thanks.  By this employment
I should have entered a society of men of letters of the first merit; M. de Mairan, Clairaut,
De Guignes and the Abbe Barthelemi, with the first two of whom I had already made an acquaintance,
and that of the two others was very desirable.  In fine, for this trifling employment, the
duties of which I might so commodiously have discharged, there was a salary of eight hundred
livres (thirty-three pounds); I was for a few hours undecided, and this from a fear of making
Margency angry and displeasing M. de Malesherbes.  But at length the insupportable constraint
of not having it in my power to work when I thought proper, and to be commanded by time; and
moreover the certainty of badly performing the functions with which I was to charge myself,
prevailed over everything, and determined me to refuse a place for which I was unfit.  I knew
that my whole talent consisted in a certain warmth of mind with respect to the subjects of
what I had to treat, and that nothing but the love of that which was great, beautiful and sublime,
could animate my genius.  What would the subjects of the extracts I should have had to make
from books, or even the books themselves, have signified to me?  My indifference about them
would have frozen my pen, and stupefied my mind.  People thought I could make a trade of writing,
as most of the other men of letters did, instead of which I never could write but from the
warmth of imagination.  This certainly was not necessary for the 'Journal des Savans'.  I therefore
wrote to Margency a letter of thanks, in the politest terms possible, and so well explained
to him my reasons, that it was not possible that either he or M. de Malesherbes could imagine
there was pride or ill-humor in my refusal.  They both approved of it without receiving me
less politely, and the secret was so well kept that it was never known to the public.

The proposition did not come in a favorable moment.  I had some time before this formed the
project of quitting literature, and especially the trade of an author.  I had been disgusted
with men of letters by everything that had lately befallen me, and had learned from experience
that it was impossible to proceed in the same track without having some connections with them.
I was not much less dissatisfied with men of the world, and in general with the mixed life
I had lately led, half to myself and half devoted to societies for which I was unfit.  I felt
more than ever, and by constant experience, that every unequal association is disadvantageous
to the weaker person.  Living with opulent people, and in a situation different from that I
had chosen, without keeping a house as they did, I was obliged to imitate them in many things;
and little expenses, which were nothing to their fortunes, were for me not less ruinous than
indispensable.  Another man in the country-house of a friend, is served by his own servant,
as well at table as in his chamber; he sends him to seek for everything he wants; having nothing
directly to do with the servants of the house, not even seeing them, he gives them what he
pleases, and when he thinks proper; but I, alone, and without a servant, was at the mercy of
the servants of the house, of whom it was necessary to gain the good graces, that I might not
have much to suffer; and being treated as the equal of their master, I was obliged to treat
them accordingly, and better than another would have done, because, in fact, I stood in greater
need of their services.  This, where there are but few domestics, may be complied with; but
in the houses I frequented there were a great number, and the knaves so well understood their
interests that they knew how to make me want the services of them all successively.  The women
of Paris, who have so much wit, have no just idea of this inconvenience, and in their zeal
to economize my purse they ruined me.  If I supped in town, at any considerable distance from
my lodgings, instead of permitting me to send for a hackney coach, the mistress of the house
ordered her horses to be put to and sent me home in her carriage.  She was very glad to save
me the twenty-four sous (shilling) for the fiacre, but never thought of the half-crown I gave
to her coachman and footman.  If a lady wrote to me from Paris to the Hermit age or to Montmorency,
she regretted the four sous (two pence) the postage of the letter would have cost me, and sent
it by one of her servants, who came sweating on foot, and to whom I gave a dinner and half
a crown, which he certainly had well earned.  If she proposed to me to pass with her a week
or a fortnight at her country-house, she still said to herself, "It will be a saving to the
poor man; during that time his eating will cost him nothing."  She never recollected that I
was the whole time idle, that the expenses of my family, my rent, linen and clothes were still
going on, that I paid my barber double that it cost me more being in her house than in my own,
and although I confined  my little largesses to the house in which I customarily lived, that
these were still ruinous to me.  I am certain I have paid upwards of twenty-five crowns in
the house of Madam d'Houdetot, at Raubonne, where I never slept more than four or five times,
and upwards of a thousand livres (forty pounds) as well at Epinay as at the Chevrette, during
the five or six years I was most assiduous there.  These expenses are inevitable to a man like
me, who knows not how to provide anything for himself, and cannot support the sight of a lackey
who grumbles and serves him with a sour look.  With Madam Dupin, even where I was one of the
family, and in whose house I rendered many services to the servants, I never received theirs
but for my money.  In course of time it was necessary to renounce these little liberalities,
which my situation no longer permitted me to bestow, and I felt still more severely the inconvenience
of associating with people in a situation different from my own.

Had this manner of life been to my taste, I should have been consoled for a heavy expense,
which I dedicated to my pleasures; but to ruin myself at the same time that I fatigued my mind,
was insupportable, and I had so felt the weight of this, that, profiting by the interval of
liberty I then had, I was determined to perpetuate it, and entirely to renounce great companies,
the composition of books, and all literary concerns, and for the remainder of my days to confine
myself to the narrow and peaceful sphere in which I felt I was born to move.

The produce of this letter to D'Alembert, and of the New Elosia, had a little improved the
state of my finances, which had been considerably exhausted at the Hermitage.  Emilius, to
which, after I had finished Eloisa, I had given great application, was in forwardness, and
the produce of this could not be less than the sum of which I was already in possession.  I
intended to place this money in such a manner as to produce me a little annual income, which,
with my copying, might be sufficient to my wants without writing any more.  I had two other
works upon the stocks.  The first of these was my 'Institutions Politiques'. I examined the
state of this work, and found it required several years' labor.  I had not courage enough to
continue it, and to wait until it was finished before I carried my intentions into execution.
Therefore, laying the book aside, I determined to take from it all I could, and to burn the
rest; and continuing this with zeal without interrupting Emilius, I finished the 'Contrat Social'.

The dictionary of music now remained.  This was mechanical, and might be taken up at any time;
the object of it was entirely pecuniary.  I reserved to myself the liberty of laying it aside,
or of finishing it at my ease, according as my other resources collected should render this
necessary or superfluous.  With respect to the 'Morale Sensitive', of which I had made nothing
more than a sketch, I entirely gave it up.

As my last project, if I found I could not entirely do without copying, was that of removing
from Paris, where the affluence of my visitors rendered my housekeeping expensive, and deprived
me of the time I should have turned to advantage to provide for it; to prevent in my retirement
the state of lassitude into which an author is said to fall when he has laid down his pen,
I reserved to myself an occupation which might fill up the void in my solitude without tempting
me to print anything more. I know not for what reason they had long tormented me to write the
memoirs of my life.  Although these were not until that time interesting as to the facts, I
felt they might become so by the candor with which I was capable of giving them, and I determined
to make of these the only work of the kind, by an unexampled veracity, that, for once at least,
the world might see a man such as he internally was.  I had always laughed at the false ingenuousness
of Montaigne, who, feigning to confess his faults, takes great care not to give himself any,
except such as are amiable; whilst I, who have ever thought, and still think myself, considering
everything, the best of men, felt there is no human being, however pure he maybe, who does
not internally conceal some odious vice. I knew I was described to the public very different
from what I really was, and so opposite, that notwithstanding my faults, all of which I was
determined to relate, I could not but be a gainer by showing myself in my proper colors.  This,
besides, not being to be done without setting forth others also in theirs and the work for
the same reason not being of a nature to appear during my lifetime, and that of several other
persons, I was the more encouraged to make my confession, at which I should never have to blush
before any person.  I therefore resolved to dedicate my leisure to the execution of this undertaking,
and immediately began to collect such letters and papers as might guide or assist my memory,
greatly regretting the loss of all I had burned, mislaid and destroyed.

The project of absolute retirement, one of the most reasonable I had ever formed, was strongly
impressed upon my mind, and for the execution of it I was already taking measures, when Heaven,
which prepared me a different destiny, plunged me into a another vortex.

Montmorency, the ancient and fine patrimony of the illustrious family of that name, was taken
from it by confiscation.  It passed by the sister of Duke Henry, to the house of Conde, which
has changed the name of Montmorency to that of Enguien, and the duchy has no other castle than
an old tower, where the archives are kept, and to which the vassals come to do homage.  But
at Montmorency, or Enguien, there is a private house, built by Crosat, called 'le pauvre',
which having the magnificence of the most superb chateaux, deserves and bears the name of a
castle.  The majestic appearance of this noble edifice, the view from it, not equalled perhaps
in any country; the spacious saloon, painted by the hand of a master; the garden, planted by
the celebrated Le Notre; all combined to form a whole strikingly majestic, in which there is
still a simplicity that enforces admiration.  The Marechal Duke de Luxembourg who then inhabited
this house, came every year into the neighborhood where formerly his ancestors were the masters,
to pass, at least, five or six weeks as a private inhabitant, but with a splendor which did
not degenerate from the ancient lustre of his family.  On the first journey he made to it after
my residing at Montmorency, he and his lady sent to me a valet de chambre, with their compliments,
inviting me to sup with them as often as it should be agreeable to me; and at each time of
their coming they never failed to reiterate the same compliments and invitation.  This called
to my recollection Madam Beuzenval sending me to dine in the servants' hall.  Times were changed;
but I was still the same man.  I did not choose to be sent to dine in the servants' hall, and
was but little desirous of appearing at the table of the great I should have been much better
pleased had they left me as I was, without caressing me and rendering me ridiculous.  I answered
politely and respectfully to Monsieur and Madam de Luxembourg, but I did not accept their offers,
and my indisposition and timidity, with my embarrassment in speaking; making me tremble at
the idea alone of appearing in an assembly of people of the court.  I did not even go to the
castle to pay a visit of thanks, although I sufficiently comprehended this was all they desired,
and that their eager politeness was rather a matter of curiosity than benevolence.

However, advances still were made, and even became more pressing. The Countess de Boufflers,
who was very intimate with the lady of the marechal, sent to inquire after my health, and to
beg I would go and see her.  I returned her a proper answer, but did not stir from my house.
At the journey of Easter, the year following, 1759, the Chevalier de Lorenzy, who belonged
to the court of the Prince of Conti, and was intimate with Madam de Luxembourg, came several
times to see me, and we became acquainted; he pressed me to go to the castle, but I refused
to comply.  At length, one afternoon, when I least expected anything of the kind, I saw coming
up to the house the Marechal de Luxembourg, followed by five or six persons.  There was now
no longer any means of defence; and I could not, without being arrogant and unmannerly, do
otherwise than return this visit, and make my court to Madam la Marechale, from whom the marechal
had been the bearer of the most obliging compliments to me. Thus, under unfortunate auspices,
began the connections from which I could no longer preserve myself, although a too well-founded
foresight made me afraid of them until they were made.

I was excessively afraid of Madam de Luxembourg.  I knew, she was amiable as to manner.  I
had seen her several times at the theatre, and with the Duchess of Boufflers, and in the bloom
of her beauty; but she was said to be malignant; and this in a woman of her rank made me tremble.
I had scarcely seen her before I was subjugated.  I thought her charming, with that charm proof
against time and which had the most powerful action upon my heart.  I expected to find her
conversation satirical and full of pleasantries and points.  It was not so; it was much better.
The conversation of Madam de Luxembourg is not remarkably full of wit; it has no sallies, nor
even finesse; it is exquisitely delicate, never striking, but always pleasing.  Her flattery
is the more intoxicating as it is natural; it seems to escape her involuntarily, and her heart
to overflow because it is too full.  I thought I perceived, on my first visit, that notwithstanding
my awkward manner and embarrassed expression, I was not displeasing to her.  All the women
of the court know how to persuade us of this when they please, whether it be true or not, but
they do not all, like Madam de Luxembourg, possess the art of rendering that persuasion so
agreeable that we are no longer disposed ever to have a doubt remaining. From the first day
my confidence in her would have been as full as it soon afterwards became, had not the Duchess
of Montmorency, her daughter-in-law, young, giddy, and malicious also, taken it into her head
to attack me, and in the midst of the eulogiums of her mamma, and feigned allurements on her
own account, made me suspect I was only considered by them as a subject of ridicule.

It would perhaps have been difficult to relieve me from this fear with these two ladies had
not the extreme goodness of the marechal confirmed me in the belief that theirs was not real.
Nothing is more surprising, considering my timidity, than the promptitude with which I took
him at his word on the footing of equality to which he would absolutely reduce himself with
me, except it be that with which he took me at mine with respect to the absolute independence
in which I was determined to live. Both persuaded I had reason to be content with my situation,
and that I was unwilling to change it, neither he nor Madam de Luxembourg seemed to think a
moment of my purse or fortune; although I can have no doubt of the tender concern they had
for me, they never proposed to me a place nor offered me their interest, except it were once,
when Madam de Luxembourg seemed to wish me to become a member of the French Academy.  I alleged
my religion; this she told me was no obstacle, or if it was one she engaged to remove it. 
I answered, that however great the honor of becoming a member of so illustrious a body might
be, having refused M. de Tressan, and, in some measure, the King of Poland, to become a member
of the Academy at Nancy, I could not with propriety enter into any other.  Madam de Luxembourg
did not insist, and nothing more was said upon the subject. This simplicity of intercourse
with persons of such rank, and who had the power of doing anything in my favor, M. de Luxembourg
being, and highly deserving to be, the particular friend of the king, affords a singular contrast
with the continual cares, equally importunate and officious, of the friends and protectors
from whom I had just separated, and who endeavored less to serve me than to render me contemptible.

When the marechal came to see me at Mont Louis, I was uneasy at receiving him and his retinue
in my only chamber; not because I was obliged to make them all sit down in the midst of my
dirty plates and broken pots, but on account of the state of the floor, which was rotten and
falling to ruin, and I was afraid the weight of his attendants would entirely sink it. Less
concerned on account of my own danger than for that to which the affability of the marechal
exposed him, I hastened to remove him from it by conducting him, notwithstanding the coldness
of the weather, to my alcove, which was quite open to the air, and had no chimney.  When he
was there I told him my reason for having brought him to it; he told it to his lady, and they
both pressed me to accept, until the floor was repaired, a lodging of the castle; or, if I
preferred it, in a separate edifice called the Little Castle which was in the middle of the
park. This delightful abode deserves to be spoken of.

The park or garden of Montmorency is not a plain, like that of the Chevrette.  It is uneven,
mountainous, raised by little hills and valleys, of which the able artist has taken advantage;
and thereby varied his groves, ornaments, waters, and points of view, and, if I may so speak,
multiplied by art and genius a space in itself rather narrow. This park is terminated at the
top by a terrace and the castle; at bottom it forms a narrow passage which opens and becomes
wider towards the valley, the angle of which is filled up with a large piece of water. Between
the orangery, which is in this widening, and the piece of water, the banks of which are agreeably
decorated, stands the Little Castle of which I have spoken.  This edifice, and the ground about
it, formerly belonged to the celebrated Le Brun, who amused himself in building and decorating
it in the exquisite taste of architectual ornaments which that great painter had formed to
himself.  The castle has since been rebuilt, but still, according to the plan and design of
its first master.  It is little and simple, but elegant.  As it stands in a hollow between
the orangery and the large piece of water, and consequently is liable to be damp, it is open
in the middle by a peristyle between two rows of columns, by which means the air circulating
throughout the whole edifice keeps it dry, notwithstanding its unfavorable situation.  When
the building is seen from the opposite elevation, which is a point of view, it appears absolutely
surrounded with water, and we imagine we have before our eyes an enchanted island, or the most
beautiful of the three Boromeans, called Isola Bella, in the greater lake.

In this solitary edifice I was offered the choice of four complete apartments it contains,
besides the ground floor, consisting of a dancing room, billiard room and a kitchen.  I chose
the smallest over the kitchen, which also I had with it.  It was charmingly neat, with blue
and white furniture.  In this profound and delicious solitude, in the midst of the woods, the
singing of birds of every kind, and the perfume of orange flowers, I composed, in a continual
ecstasy, the fifth book of Emilius, the coloring of which I owe in a great measure to the lively
impression I received from the place I inhabited.

With what eagerness did I run every morning at sunrise to respire the perfumed air in the peristyle!
What excellent coffee I took there tete-a-tete with my Theresa.  My cat and dog were our company.
This retinue alone would have been sufficient for me during my whole life, in which I should
not have had one weary moment.  I was there in a terrestrial paradise; I lived in innocence
and tasted of happiness.

At the journey of July, M. and Madam de Luxembourg showed me so much attention, and were so
extremely kind, that, lodged in their house, and overwhelmed with their goodness, I could not
do less than make them a proper return in assiduous respect near their persons; I scarcely
quitted them; I went in the morning to pay my court to Madam la Marechale; after dinner I walked
with the marechal; but did not sup at the castle on account of the numerous guests, and because
they supped too late for me. Thus far everything was as it should be, and no harm would have
been done could I have remained at this point.  But I have never known how to preserve a medium
in my attachments, and simply fulfil the duties of society.  I have ever been everything or
nothing.  I was soon everything; and receiving the most polite attention from persons of the
highest rank, I passed the proper bounds, and conceived for them a friendship not permitted
except among equals.  Of these I had all the familiarity in my manners, whilst they still preserved
in theirs the same politeness to which they had accustomed me.  Yet I was never quite at my
ease with Madam de Luxembourg.  Although I was not quite relieved from my fears relative to
her character, I apprehended less danger from it than from her wit.  It was by this especially
that she impressed me with awe. I knew she was difficult as to conversation, and she had a
right to be so.  I knew women, especially those of her rank, would absolutely be amused, that
it was better to offend than to weary them, and I judged by her commentaries upon what the
people who went away had said what she must think of my blunders.  I thought of an expedient
to spare me with her the embarrassment of speaking; this was reading.  She had heard of my
Eloisa, and knew it was in the press; she expressed a desire to see the work; I offered to
read it to her, and she accepted my offer.  I went to her every morning at ten o'clock; M.
de Luxembourg was present, and the door was shut.  I read by the side of her bed, and so well
proportioned my readings that there would have been sufficient for the whole time she had to
stay, had they even not been interrupted.

     [The loss of a great battle, which much afflicted the King,
     obliged M. de Luxembourg precipitately to return to court.]

The success of this expedient surpassed my expectation.  Madam de Luxembourg took a great liking
to Julia and the author; she spoke of nothing but me, thought of nothing else, said civil things
to me from morning till night, and embraced me ten times a day.  She insisted on me always
having my place by her side at table, and when any great lords wished it she told them it was
mine, and made them sit down somewhere else.  The impression these charming manners made upon
me, who was subjugated by the least mark of affection, may easily be judged of. I became really
attached to her in proportion to the attachment she showed me.  All my fear in perceiving this
infatuation, and feeling the want of agreeableness in myself to support it, was that it would
be changed into disgust; and unfortunately this fear was but too well founded.

There must have been a natural opposition between her turn of mind and mine, since, independently
of the numerous stupid things which at every instant escaped me in conversation, and even in
my letters, and when I was upon the best terms with her, there were certain other things with
which she was displeased without my being able to imagine the reason. I will quote one instance
from among twenty.  She knew I was writing for Madam d'Houdetot a copy of the New Eloisa. 
She was desirous to have one on the same footing.  This I promised her, and thereby making
her one of my customers, I wrote her a polite letter upon the subject, at least such was my
intention.  Her answer, which was as follows, stupefied me with surprise.

                                             VERSAILLES, Tuesday.

"I am ravished, I am satisfied: your letter has given me infinite pleasure, and I take the
earliest moment to acquaint you with, and thank you for it.

"These are the exact words of your letter: 'Although you are certainly a very good customer,
I have some pain in receiving your money: according to regular order I ought to pay for the
pleasure I should have in working for you.'  I will say nothing more on the subject.  I have
to complain of your not speaking of your state of health: nothing interests me more. I love
you with all my heart: and be assured that I write this to you in a very melancholy mood, for
I should have much pleasure in telling it to you myself.  M. de Luxembourg loves and embraces
you with all his heart.

"On receiving the letter I hastened to answer it, reserving to myself more fully to examine
the matter, protesting against all disobliging interpretation, and after having given several
days to this examination with an inquietude which may easily be conceived, and still without
being able to discover in what I could have erred, what follows was my final answer on the subject.

                                   "MONTMORENCY, 8th December, 1759.

"Since my last letter I have examined a hundred times the passage in question.  I have considered
it in its proper and natural meaning, as well as in every other which may be given to it, and
I confess to you, madam, that I know not whether it be I who owe to you excuses, or you from
whom they are due to me."

It is now ten years since these letters were written.  I have since that time frequently thought
of the subject of them; and such is still my stupidity that I have hitherto been unable to
discover what in the passages, quoted from my letter, she could find offensive, or even displeasing.

I must here mention, relative to the manuscript copy of Eloisa Madam de Luxembourg wished to
have, in what manner I thought to give it some marked advantage which should distinguish it
from all others.  I had written separately the adventures of Lord Edward, and had long been
undetermined whether I should insert them wholly, or in extracts, in the work in which they
seemed to be wanting.  I at length determined to retrench them entirely, because, not being
in the manner of the rest, they would have spoiled the interesting simplicity, which was its
principal merit.  I had still a stronger reason when I came to know Madam de Luxembourg:  There
was in these adventures a Roman marchioness, of a bad character, some parts of which, without
being applicable, might have been applied to her by those to whom she was not particularly
known. I was therefore, highly pleased with the determination to which I had come, and resolved
to abide by it.  But in the ardent desire to enrich her copy with something which was not in
the other, what should I fall upon but these unfortunate adventures, and I concluded on making
an extract from them to add to the work; a project dictated by madness, of which the extravagance
is inexplicable, except by the blind fatality which led me on to destruction.

               'Quos vult perdere Jupiter dementet.'

I was stupid enough to make this extract with the greatest care and pains, and to send it her
as the finest thing in the world; it is true, I at the same time informed her the original
was burned, which was really the case, that the extract was for her alone, and would never
be seen, except by herself, unless she chose to show it; which, far from proving, to her my
prudence and discretion, as it was my intention to do, clearly intimated what I thought of
the application by which she might be offended.  My stupidity was such, that I had no doubt
of her being delighted with what I had done.  She did not make me the compliment upon it which
I expected, and, to my great surprise, never once mentioned the paper I had sent her.  I was
so satisfied with myself, that it was not until a long time afterwards, I judged, from other
indications, of the effect it had produced.

I had still, in favor of her manuscript, another idea more reasonable, but which, by more distant
effects, has not been much less prejudicial to me; so much does everything concur with the
work of destiny, when that hurries on a man to misfortune.  I thought of ornamenting the manuscript
with the engravings of the New Eloisa, which were of the same size.  I asked Coindet for these
engravings, which belonged to me by every kind of title, and the more so as I had given him
the produce of the plates, which had a considerable sale.  Coindet is as cunning as I am the
contrary.  By frequently asking him for the engravings he came to the knowledge of the use
I intended to make of them.  He then, under pretence of adding some new ornament, still kept
them from me; and at length presented them himself.

               'Ego versiculos feci, tulit alter honores.'

This gave him an introduction upon a certain footing to the Hotel de Luxembourg.  After my
establishment at the little castle he came rather frequently to see me, and always in the morning,
especially when M. and Madam de Luxembourg were at Montmorency.  Therefore that I might pass
the day with him, I did not go the castle.  Reproaches were made me on account of my absence;
I told the reason of them.  I was desired to bring with me M. Coindet; I did so.  This was,
what he had sought after. Therefore, thanks to the excessive goodness M. and Madam de Luxembourg
had for me, a clerk to M. Thelusson, who was sometimes pleased to give him his table when he
had nobody else to dine with him, was suddenly placed at that of a marechal of France, with
princes, duchesses, and persons of the highest rank at court.  I shall never forget, that one
day being obliged to return early to Paris, the marechal said, after dinner, to the company,
"Let us take a walk upon the road to St. Denis, and we will accompany M. Coindet."  This was
too much for the poor man; his head was quite turned.  For my part, my heart was so affected
that I could not say a word.  I followed the company, weeping like a child, and having the
strongest desire to kiss the foot of the good marechal; but the continuation of the history
of the manuscript has made me anticipate. I will go a little back, and, as far as my memory
will permit, mark each event in its proper order.

As soon as the little house of Mont Louis was ready, I had it neatly furnished and again established
myself there.  I could not break through the resolution I had made on quitting the Hermitage
of always having my apartment to myself; but I found a difficulty in resolving to quit the
little castle.  I kept the key of it, and being delighted with the charming breakfasts of the
peristyle, frequently went to the castle to sleep, and stayed three or four days as at a country-house.
I was at that time perhaps better and more agreeably lodged than any private individual in
Europe.  My host, M. Mathas, one of the best men in the world, had left me the absolute direction
of the repairs at Mont Louis, and insisted upon my disposing of his workmen without his interference.
I therefore found the means of making of a single chamber upon the first story, a complete
set of apartments consisting of a chamber, antechamber, and a water closet.  Upon the ground-floor
was the kitchen and the chamber of Theresa.  The alcove served me for a closet by means of
a glazed partition and a chimney I had made there.  After my return to this habitation, I amused
myself in decorating the terrace, which was already shaded by two rows of linden trees; I added
two others to make a cabinet of verdure, and placed in it a table and stone benches: I surrounded
it with lilies, syringa and woodbines, and had a beautiful border of flowers parallel with
the two rows of trees.  This terrace, more elevated than that of the castle, from which the
view was at least as fine, and where I had tamed a great number of birds, was my drawing-room,
in which I received M. and Madam de Luxembourg, the Duke of Villeroy, the Prince of Tingry,
the Marquis of Armentieres, the Duchess of Montmorency, the Duchess of Bouffiers, the Countess
of Valentinois, the Countess of Boufflers, and other persons of the first rank; who, from the
castle disdained not to make, over a very fatiguing mountain, the pilgrimage of Mont Louis.
I owed all these visits to the favor of M. and Madam de Luxembourg; this I felt, and my heart
on that account did them all due homage.  It was with the same sentiment that I once said to
M. de Luxembourg, embracing him: "Ah!  Monsieur le Marechal, I hated the great before I knew
you, and I have hated them still more since you have shown me with what ease they might acquire
universal respect."  Further than this I defy any person with whom I was then acquainted, to
say I was ever dazzled for an instant with splendor, or that the vapor of the incense I received
ever affected my head; that I was less uniform in my manner, less plain in my dress, less easy
of access to people of the lowest rank, less familiar with neighbors, or less ready to render
service to every person when I had it in my power so to do, without ever once being discouraged
by the numerous and frequently unreasonable importunities with which I was incessantly assailed.

Although my heart led me to the castle of Montmorency, by my sincere attachment to those by
whom it was inhabited, it by the same means drew me back to the neighborhood of it, there to
taste the sweets of the equal and simple life, in which my only happiness consisted.  Theresa
had contracted a friendship with the daughter of one of my neighbors, a mason of the name of
Pilleu; I did the same with the father, and after having dined at the castle, not without some
constraint, to please Madam de Luxembourg, with what eagerness did I return in the evening
to sup with the good man Pilleu and his family, sometimes at his own house and at others, at mine.

Besides my two lodgings in the country, I soon had a third at the Hotel de Luxembourg, the
proprietors of which pressed me so much to go and see them there, that I consented, notwithstanding
my aversion to Paris, where, since my retiring to the Hermitage, I had been but twice, upon
the two occasions of which I have spoken.  I did not now go there except on the days agreed
upon, solely to supper, and the next morning I returned to the country.  I entered and came
out by the garden which faces the boulevard, so that I could with the greatest truth, say I
had not set my foot upon the stones of Paris.

In the midst of this transient prosperity, a catastrophe, which was to be the conclusion of
it, was preparing at a distance.  A short time after my return to Mont Louis, I made there,
and as it was customary, against my inclination, a new acquaintance, which makes another era
in my private history.  Whether this be favorable or unfavorable, the reader will hereafter
be able to judge.  The person with whom I became acquainted was the Marchioness of Verdelin,
my neighbor, whose husband had just bought a country-house at Soisy, near Montmorency.  Mademoiselle
d'Ars, daughter to the Comte d'Ars, a man of fashion, but poor, had married M. de Verdelin,
old, ugly, deaf, uncouth, brutal, jealous, with gashes in his face, and blind of one eye, but,
upon the whole, a good man when properly managed, and in possession of a fortune of from fifteen
to twenty thousand a year.  This charming object, swearing, roaring, scolding, storming, and
making his wife cry all day long, ended by doing whatever she thought proper, and this to set
her in a rage, because she knew how to persuade him that it was he who would, and she would
not have it so. M. de Margency, of whom I have spoken, was the friend of madam, and became
that of monsieur.  He had a few years before let them his castle of Margency, near Eaubonne
and Andilly, and they resided there precisely at the time of my passion for Madam d'Houdetot.
Madam d'Houdetot and Madam de Verdelin became acquainted with each other, by means of Madam
d'Aubeterre their common friend; and as the garden of Margency was in the road by which Madam
d'Houdetot went to Mont Olympe, her favorite walk, Madam de Verdelin gave her a key that she
might pass through it.  By means of this key I crossed it several times with her; but I did
not like unexpected meetings, and when Madam de Verdelin was by chance upon our way I left
them together without speaking to her, and went on before. This want of gallantry must have
made on her an impression unfavorable to me.  Yet when she was at Soisy she was anxious to
have my company.  She came several times to see me at Mont Louis, without finding me at home,
and perceiving I did not return her visit, took it into her head, as a means of forcing me
to do it, to send me pots of flowers for my terrace. I was under the necessity of going to
thank her; this was all she wanted, and we thus became acquainted.

This connection, like every other I formed; or was led into contrary to my inclination, began
rather boisterously.  There never reigned in it a real calm.  The turn of mind of Madam de
Verdelinwas too opposite to mine.  Malignant expressions and pointed sarcasms came from her
with so much simplicity, that a continual attention too fatiguing for me was necessary to perceive
she was turning into ridicule the person to whom she spoke.  One trivial circumstance which
occurs to my recollection will be sufficient to give an idea of her manner.  Her brother had
just obtained the command of a frigate cruising against the English.  I spoke of the manner
of fitting out this frigate without diminishing its swiftness of sailing.  "Yes," replied she,
in the most natural tone of voice, "no more cannon are taken than are necessary for fighting." With
him also is inaugurated a new period and a different age. The age of Moses was distinguished as
that of law,--on the side of God absolute authority, commanding and forbidding; on the side of man
the only question was between obedience and disobedience. Moses was the Law-giver, and his age was
the age of law. In the time of the Judges the question concerned national existence and national
independence. The age of the Judges was the heroic age of the Jewish
nation.  However,
by frequently seeing this lady I became attached to her.  She had her troubles as well as I
had mine.  Reciprocal confidence rendered our conversations interesting.  Nothing so cordially
attaches two persons as the satisfaction of weeping together.  We sought the company of each
other for our reciprocal consolation, and the want of this has frequently made me pass over
many things.  I had been so severe in my frankness with her, that after having sometimes shown
so little esteem for her character, a great deal was necessary to be able to believe she could
sincerely forgive me.

The following letter is a specimen of the epistles I sometimes wrote to her, and it is to be
remarked that she never once in any of her answers to them seemed to be in the least degree piqued.

                                   MONTMORENCY, 5th November, 1760.

"You tell me, madam, you have not well explained yourself, in order to make me understand I
have explained myself ill.  You speak of your pretended stupidity for the purpose of making
me feel my own.  You boast of being nothing more than a good kind of woman, as if you were
afraid to being taken at your word, and you make me apologies to tell me I owe them to you.
Yes, madam, I know it; it is I who am a fool, a good kind of man; and, if it be possible, worse
than all this; it is I who make a bad choice of my expressions in the opinion of a fine French
lady, who pays as much attention to words, and speak as well as you do.  But consider that
I take them in the common meaning of the language without knowing or troubling my head about
the polite acceptations in which they are taken in the virtuous societies of Paris.  If my
expressions are sometimes equivocal, I endeavored by my conduct to determine their meaning,"
etc. The rest of the letter is much the same.

Coindet, enterprising, bold, even to effrontery, and who was upon the watch after all my friends,
soon introduced himself in my name to the house of Madam de Verdelin, and, unknown to me, shortly
became there more familiar than myself.  This Coindet was an extraordinary man.  He presented
himself in my name in the houses of all my acquaintance, gained a footing in them, and eat
there without ceremony.  Transported with zeal to do me service, he never mentioned my name
without his eyes being suffused with tears; but, when he came to see me, he kept the most profound
silence on the subject of all these connections, and especially on that in which he knew I
must be interested.  Instead of telling me what he had heard, said, or seen, relative to my
affairs, he waited for my speaking to him, and even interrogated me.  He never knew anything
of what passed in Paris, except that which I told him: finally, although everybody spoke to
me of him, he never once spoke to me of any person; he was secret and mysterious with his friend
only; but I will for the present leave Coindet and Madam de Verdelin, and return to them at
a proper time.

Sometime after my return to Mont Louis, La Tour, the painter, came to see me, and brought with
him my portrait in crayons, which a few years before he had exhibited at the salon.  He wished
to give me this portrait, which I did not choose to accept.  But Madam d'Epinay, who had given
me hers, and would have had this, prevailed upon me to ask him for it.  He had taken some time
to retouch the features.  In the interval happened my rupture with Madam d'Epinay; I returned
her her portrait; and giving her mine being no longer in question, I put it into my chamber,
in the castle.  M. de Luxembourg saw it there, and found it a good one; I offered it him, he
accepted it, and I sent it to the castle.  He and his lady comprehended I should be very glad
to have theirs.  They had them taken in miniature by a very skilful hand, set in a box of rock
crystal, mounted with gold, and in a very handsome manner, with which I was delighted, made
me a present of both.  Madam de Luxenbourg would never consent that her portrait should be
on the upper part of the box.  She had reproached me several times with loving M. de Luxembourg
better than I did her; I had not denied it because it was true.  By this manner of placing
her portrait she showed very politely, but very clearly, she had not forgotten the preference.

Much about this time I was guilty of a folly which did not contribute to preserve me to her
good graces. Two or three men, who acted as nurses, were sitting near it, talking and laughing
together. In another part of the room, by a grated window, looking out upon the pleasant sunset,
were two of the convalescent prisoners, pale and thin, conversing softly and sadly. There was not
a face he knew,--none that seemed to feel the slightest interest for him; and the wicked scenes
of the past two months, and the unhappy circumstances of the present hour, flashed through his mind,
and he hid his face in his pillow and wept.

                              

He heard steps softly approach his cot, and knew that some one was standing beside him. But he
could not stifle his sobs, and he did not dare to look up.

"I am glad to see that you are better, though I am sorry to see you so much troubled, my poor boy,"
said a soft, kind voice.

It was long since he had been spoken to in a kind tone, and he only
wept the more bitterly, and convulsively pressed his face closer to
the pillow.

Presently he felt an arm passed slowly under the pillow, which wound around his neck, and gently
drew his head toward the stranger.

"Come, come," said the same soft voice, "don't give way to such grief; look up, and talk to me.
Let me be a friend to you."

Rodney yielded to the encircling arm, and turned his tearful eyes
to the man who spoke to him.

He was a tall, slender man, pale from
sickness, decently dressed, and with an intelligent, benevolent countenance.
He was one of those whom Rodney had observed looking out of the window.

"What
is the matter?" said he; "what has brought you into this horrible
place?"

The confidence of the boy was easily won. He had felt an
inexpressible desire to talk to some one, and now he was ready to
lay open his whole heart at the first intimation of sympathy.  I think it superfluous
to remark here, that it is to her the history of the opiate of M. Tronchin, of which I have
spoken in the first part of my memoirs, relates; the other lady was Madam de Mirepoix.  They
have never mentioned to me the circumstance, nor has either of them, in the least, seemed to
have preserved a remembrance of it; but to presume that Madam de Luxembourg can possibly have
forgotten it appears to me very difficult, and would still remain so, even were the subsequent
events entirely unknown.  For my part, I fell into a deceitful security relative to the effects
of my stupid mistakes, by an internal evidence of my not having taken any step with an intention
to offend; as if a woman could ever forgive what I had done, although she might be certain
the will had not the least part in the matter.

Although she seemed not to see or feel anything, and that I did not immediately find either
her warmth of friendship diminished or the least change in her manner, the continuation and
even increase of a too well founded foreboding made me incessantly tremble, lest disgust should
succeed to infatuation.  Was it possible for me to expect in a lady of such high rank, a constancy
proof against my want of address to support it?  I was unable to conceal from her this secret
foreboding, which made me uneasy, and rendered me still more disagreeable.  This will be judged
of by the following letter, which contains a very singular prediction.

N. B.  This letter, without date in my rough copy, was written in October, 1760, at latest.

"How cruel is your goodness?  Why disturb the peace of a solitary mortal who had renounced
the pleasures of life, that he might no longer suffer the fatigues of them.  I have passed
my days in vainly searching for solid attachments.  I have not been able to form any in the
ranks to which I was equal; is it in yours that I ought to seek for them?  Neither ambition
nor interest can tempt me: I am not vain, but little fearful; I can resist everything except
caresses.  Why do you both attack me by a weakness which I must overcome, because in the distance
by which we are separated, the over-flowings of susceptible hearts cannot bring mine near to
you?  Will gratitude be sufficient for a heart which knows not two manners of bestowing its
affections, and feels itself incapable of everything except friendship?  Of friendship, madam
la marechale!  Ah! there is my misfortune!  It is good in you and the marechal to make use
of this expression; but I am mad when I take you at your word.  You amuse yourselves, and I
become attached; and the end of this prepares for me new regrets.  How I do hate all your titles,
and pity you on account of your being obliged to bear them?  You seem to me to be so worthy
of tasting the charms of private life!  Why do not you reside at Clarens? I would go there
in search of happiness; but the castle of Montmorency, and the Hotel de Luxembourg!  Is it
in these places Jean Jacques ought to be seen?  Is it there a friend to equality ought to carry
the affections of a sensible heart, and who thus paying the esteem in which he is held, thinks
he returns as much as he receives?  You are good and susceptible also: this I know and have
seen; I am sorry I was not sooner convinced of it; but in the rank you hold, in the manner
of living, nothing can make a lasting impression; a succession of new objects efface each other
so that not one of them remains.  You will forget me, madam, after having made it impossible
for me to imitate, you.  You have done a great deal to make me unhappy, to be inexcusable."

I joined with her the marechal, to render the compliment less severe; for I was moreover so
sure of him, that I never had a doubt in my mind of the continuation of his friendship.  Nothing
that intimidated me in madam la marechale, ever for a moment extended to him.  I never have
had the least mistrust relative to his character, which I knew to be feeble, but constant.
I no more feared a coldness on his part than I expected from him an heroic attachment.  The
simplicity and familiarity of our manners with each other proved how far dependence was reciprocal.
We were both always right: I shall ever honor and hold dear the memory of this worthy man,
and, notwithstanding everything that was done to detach him from me, I am as certain of his
having died my friend as if I had been present in his last moments.

At the second journey to Montmorency, in the year 1760, the reading of Eloisa being finished,
I had recourse to that of Emilius, to support myself in the good graces of Madam de Luxembourg;
but this, whether the subject was less to her taste; or that so much reading at length fatigued
her, did not succeed so well.  However, as she reproached me with suffering myself to be the
dupe of booksellers, she wished me to leave to her care the printing the work, that I might
reap from it a greater advantage. Soon they were viewed without dread or terror. He laughed at
their motions, and thought he should have companions and pets in his loneliness; still he did not
wish them to come too near.

Then there seemed to be other shapes in his cell. His old grandmother sat in one corner, reading,
through her familiar spectacles, the well-worn family Bible. His sister sat there, playing with
her baby, and his mother was singing as she sewed. And he laughed and talked to them, but
could get no answer. Occasionally he felt a half-consciousness that it was all a delusion,--a
mere vision of the brain; and yet their fancied presence made him happy, and he laughed and
talked incessantly, as if they heard him, and were wondering at his own strange emotions.

And then the gruff voice of the jailer scared away his visions, and roused him for a moment from
his reveries.

"You are merry, my boy, and you make too much noise," said the keeper.

The interruption made his head swim, and he attempted to rise; but he was very weak and faint,
and fell back again. He turned to say, "I believe I am sick;" but before the words found utterance,
the man had set down his pitcher and bread, and was gone.

There was an interval of dreary, blank darkness, and then there were other visions, too wild
and strange to describe, and soon the darkness of annihilation settled upon his soul. How
long a time elapsed while in this state of insensibility, he could
not say; but he was at length half-aroused by voices near him, and
he was conscious that some hand was feeling for his pulse, and that
men were carrying him out of the dungeon. He afterwards learned that
it was the jailer and the physician.

CHAPTER X.

THE HOSPITAL.

Upon
a narrow cot, in the Hospital apartment of the jail, they laid Rodney,
and immediately prepared the medicines suited to his case. The medicines
were at length administered, and, with a pleasant consciousness of
comfort and attention, he fell asleep.  Instead of saying flattering things to her, as any other person would have done,
I remained silent and disconcerted, and I know not which of the two, the little girl or myself,
was most ashamed.

I met her one day alone in the staircase of the little castle.  She had been to see Theresa,
with whom her governess still was.  Not knowing what else to say, I proposed to her a kiss,
which, in the innocence of her heart, she did not refuse; having in the morning received one
from me by order of her grandmother, and in her presence.  The next day, while reading Emilius
by the side of the bed of Madam de Luxembourg, I came to a passage in which I justly censure
that which I had done the preceding evening.  She thought the reflection extremely just, and
said some very sensible things upon the subject which made me blush.  How was I enraged at
my incredible stupidity, which has frequently given me the appearance of guilt when I was nothing
more than a fool and embarrassed! A stupidity, which in a man known to be endowed with some
wit, is considered as a false excuse.  I can safely swear that in this kiss, as well as in
the others, the heart and thoughts of Mademoiselle Amelia were not more pure than my own, and
that if I could have avoided meeting her I should have done it; not that I had not great pleasure
in seeing her, but from the embarrassment of not finding a word proper to say.  Whence comes
it that even a child can intimidate a man, whom the power of kings has never inspired with
fear?  What is to be done?  How, without presence of mind, am I to act?  If I strive to speak
to the persons I meet, I certainly say some stupid thing to them; if I remain silent, I am
a misanthrope, an unsociable animal, a bear.  Total imbecility would have been more favorable
to me; but the talents which I have failed to improve in the world have become the instruments
of my destruction, and of that of the talents I possessed.

At the latter end of this journey, Madam de Luxembourg did a good action in which I had some
share.  Diderot having very imprudently offended the Princess of Robeck, daughter of M. de
Luxembourg, Palissot, whom she protected, took up the quarrel, and revenged her by the comedy
of 'The Philosophers', in which I was ridiculed, and Diderot very roughly handled.  The author
treated me with more gentleness, less, I am of opinion, on account of the obligation he was
under to me, than from the fear of displeasing the father of his protectress, by whom he knew
I was beloved.  The bookseller Duchesne, with whom I was not at that time acquainted, sent
me the comedy when it was printed, and this I suspect was by the order of Palissot, who, perhaps,
thought I should have a pleasure in seeing a man with whom I was no longer connected defamed.
He was greatly deceived.  When I broke with Diderot, whom I thought less ill-natured than weak
and indiscreet, I still always preserved for his person an attachment, an esteem even, and
a respect for our ancient friendship, which I know was for a long time as sincere on his part
as on mine.  The case was quite different with Grimm; a man false by nature, who never loved
me, who is not even capable of friendship, and a person who, without the least subject of complaint,
and solely to satisfy his gloomy jealousy, became, under the mask of friendship, my most cruel
calumniator.  This man is to me a cipher; the other will always be my old friend.

My very bowels yearned at the sight of this odious piece: the reading of it was insupportable
to me, and, without going through the whole, I returned the copy to Duchesne with the following
letter:

                                   MONTMORENCY, 21st, May, 1760.

"In casting my eyes over the piece you sent me, I trembled at seeing myself well spoken of
in it.  I do not accept the horrid present.  I am persuaded that in sending it me, you did
not intend an insult; but you do not know, or have forgotten, that I have the honor to be the
friend of a respectable man, who is shamefully defamed and calumniated in this libel."

Duchense showed the letter.  Diderot, upon whom it ought to have had an effect quite contrary,
was vexed at it.  His pride could not forgive me the superiority of a generous action, and
I was informed his wife everywhere inveighed against me with a bitterness with which I was
not in the least affected, as I knew she was known to everybody to be a noisy babbler.

Diderot in his turn found an avenger in the Abbe Morrellet, who wrote against Palissot a little
work, imitated from the 'Petit Prophete', and entitled the Vision.  In this production he very
imprudently offended Madam de Robeck, whose friends got him sent to the Bastile; though she,
not naturally vindictive, and at that time in a dying state, I am certain had nothing to do
with the affair.

D'Alembert, who was very intimately connected with Morrellet, wrote me a letter, desiring I
would beg of Madam de Luxembourg to solicit his liberty, promising her in return encomiums
in the 'Encyclopedie'; my answer to this letter was as follows:

"I did not wait the receipt of your letter before I expressed to Madam de Luxembourg the pain
the confinement of the Abbe Morrellet gave me.  She knows my concern, and shall be made acquainted
with yours, and her knowing that the abbe is a man of merit will be sufficient to make her
interest herself in his behalf.  However, although she and the marechal honor me with a benevolence
which is my greatest consolation, and that the name of your friend be to them a recommendation
in favor of the Abbe Morrellet, I know not how far, on this occasion, it may be proper for
them to employ the credit attached to the rank they hold, and the consideration due to their
persons.  I am not even convinced that the vengeance in question relates to the Princess Robeck
so much as you seem to imagine; and were this even the case, we must not suppose that the pleasure
of vengeance belongs to philosophers exclusively, and that when they choose to become women,
women will become philosophers.

"I will communicate to you whatever Madam de Luxembourg may say to me after having shown her
your letter.  In the meantime, I think I know her well enough to assure you that, should she
have the pleasure of contributing to the enlargement of the Abbe Morrellet, she will not accept
the tribute of acknowledgment you promise her in the Encyclopedie, although she might think
herself honored by it, because she does not do good in the expectation of praise, but from
the dictates of her heart."

I made every effort to excite the zeal and commiseration of Madam de Luxembourg in favor of
the poor captive, and succeeded to my wishes. She went to Versailles on purpose to speak to
M. de St. Florentin, and this journey shortened the residence at Montmorency, which the marechal
was obliged to quit at the same time to go to Rouen, whither the king sent him as governor
of Normandy, on account of the motions of the parliament, which government wished to keep within
bounds.  Madam de Luxembourg wrote me the following letter the day after her departure:

                                        VERSAILLES, Wednesday.

"M. de Luxembourg set off yesterday morning at six o'clock.  I do not yet know that I shall
follow him.  I wait until he writes to me, as he is not yet certain of the stay it will be
necessary for him to make.  I have seen M. de St. Florentin, who is as favorably disposed as
possible towards the Abbe Morrellet; but he finds some obstacles to his wishes which however,
he is in hopes of removing the first time he has to do business with the king, which will be
next week.  I have also desired as a favor that he might not be exiled, because this was intended;
he was to be sent to Nancy.  This, sir, is what I have been able to obtain; but I promise you
I will not let M. de St. Florentin rest until the affair is terminated in the manner you desire.
Let me now express to you how sorry I am on account of my being obliged to leave you so soon,
of which I flatter myself you have not the least doubt.  I love you with all my heart, and
shall do so for my whole life."

A few days afterwards I received the following note from D'Alembert, which gave me real joy.

                                                  August 1st.

"Thanks to your cares, my dear philosopher, the abbe has left the Bastile, and his imprisonment
will have no other consequence.  He is setting off for the country, and, as well as myself,
returns you a thousand thanks and compliments.  'Vale et me ama'."

The abbe also wrote to me a few days afterwards a letter of thanks, which did not, in my opinion,
seem to breathe a certain effusion of the heart, and in which he seemed in some measure to
extenuate the service I had rendered him.  Some time afterwards, I found that he and D'Alembert
had, to a certain degree, I will not say supplanted, but succeeded me in the good graces of
Madam de Luxembourg, and that I Had lost in them all they had gained.  However, I am far from
suspecting the Abbe Morrellet of having contributed to my disgrace; I have too much esteem
for him to harbor any such suspicion.  With respect to D'Alembert, I shall at present leave
him out of the question, and hereafter say of him what may seem necessary.

I had, at the same time, another affair which occasioned the last letter I wrote to Voltaire;
a letter against which he vehemently exclaimed, as an abominable insult, although he never
showed it to any person.  I will here supply the want of that which he refused to do.

The Abbe Trublet, with whom I had a slight acquaintance, but whom I had but seldom seen, wrote
to me on the 13th of June, 1760, informing me that M. Formey, his friend and correspondent,
had printed in his journal my letter to Voltaire upon the disaster at Lisbon.  The abbe wished
to know how the letter came to be printed, and in his jesuitical manner, asked me my opinion,
without giving me his own on the necessity of reprinting it. As I most sovereignly hate this
kind of artifice and strategem, I returned such thanks as were proper, but in a manner so reserved
as to make him feel it, although this did not prevent him from wheedling me in two or three
other letters until he had gathered all he wished to know.

I clearly understood that, not withstanding all Trublet could say, Formey had not found the
letter printed, and that the first impression of it came from himself.  I knew him to be an
impudent pilferer, who, without ceremony, made himself a revenue by the works of others.  Although
he had not yet had the incredible effrontery to take from a book already published the name
of the author, to put his own in the place of it, and to sell the book for his own profit.

     [In this manner he afterwards appropriated to himself Emilius.]

But by what means had this manuscript fallen into his hands?  That was a question not easy
to resolve, but by which I had the weakness to be embarrassed.  Although Voltaire was excessively
honored by the letter, as in fact, notwithstanding his rude proceedings, he would have had
a right to complain had I had it printed without his consent, I resolved to write to him upon
the subject.  The second letter was as follows, to which he returned no answer, and giving
greater scope to his brutality, he feigned to be irritated to fury.

                                   MONTMORENCY, 17th June, 1760.

"I did not think, sir, I should ever have occasion to correspond with you.  But learning the
letter I wrote to you in 1756 had been printed at Berlin, I owe you an account of my conduct
in that respect, and will fulfil this duty with truth and simplicity.

"The letter having really been addressed to you was not intended to be printed.  I communicated
the contents of it, on certain conditions, to three persons, to whom the right of friendship
did not permit me to refuse anything of the kind, and whom the same rights still less permitted
to abuse my confidence by betraying their promise.  These persons are Madam de Chenonceaux,
daughter-in-law to Madam Dupin, the Comtesse d'Houdetot, and a German of the name of Grimm.
Madam de Chenonceaux was desirous the letter should be printed, and asked my consent.  I told
her that depended upon yours.  This was asked of you which you refused, and the matter dropped.

"However, the Abbe Trublet, with whom I have not the least connection, has just written to
me from a motive of the most polite attention that having received the papers of the journal
of M. Formey, he found in them this same letter with an advertisement, dated on the 23d of
October, 1759, in which the editor states that he had a few weeks before found it in the shops
of the booksellers of Berlin, and, as it is one of those loose sheets which shortly disappear,
he thought proper to give it a place in his journal.

"This, sir, is all I know of the matter.  It is certain the letter had not until lately been
heard of at Paris.  It is also as certain that the copy, either in manuscript or print, fallen
into the hands of M. de Formey, could never have reached them except by your means (which is
not probable) or of those of one of the three persons I have mentioned. M. de Lamartine having
made a mistake in his History of the Restoration, in describing Marshal Macdonald as of Irish
extraction, it may be worth while to state what really was the parentage of that highly respectable
man.

When Prince Charles Stuart had to voyage in an open boat from the isle of South Uist in the Hebrides
to Skye, he was guided and protected, as is well known, by Miss Flora Macdonald. On that occasion,
Flora had for her attendant a man called Neil Macdonald, but more familiarly Neil Macechan,
who is described in the History of the Rebellion as a 'sort of preceptor in the Clanranald family.'
This was the father of Marshal Macdonald.

He remained more or less attached to the fugitive prince during the remainder of his wanderings
in the Highlands, and afterwards joined him in France, under the influence of an unconquerable
affection for his person. It was thus that his son came to be born abroad.

Neil Macdonald, though a man of humble rank, had received the education proper for a priest at the
Scots College in Paris.

His acquaintance with the French language had enabled him to be of considerable service to Prince
Charles, when he wished to converse about matters of importance without taking the other people
about him into his confidence. There is some reason to believe, that he wrote, or at least
gave the information required for, a small novel descriptive of the poor Chevalier's wanderings, entitled
Ascanius, or the Young Adventurer. (Cooper, London, 1746.)

When Marshal Macdonald visited Scotland in 1825, he made his way to
the farm of Howbeg, in South Uist, where his father had been born,
and where his ancestors had lived for many generations. He found here
an old lady and her brother, his cousins at one remove, to whom he
shewed great kindness, settling a pension at the same time upon a
more distant relation whom he found in poverty. When about to leave
the spot, he took up some of the soil, and also a few pebbles, which
he got packed up in separate parcels, and carried back with him to
France.  Finally
I hate you because you have been desirous I should but I hate you as a man more worthy of loving
you had you chosen it.  Of all the sentiments with which my heart was penetrated for you, admiration,
which cannot be refused your fine genius, and a partiality to your writings, are those you
have not effaced.  If I can honor nothing in you except your talents, the fault is not mine.
I shall never be wanting in the respect due to them, nor in that which this respect requires."

In the midst of these little literary cavillings, which still fortified my resolution, I received
the greatest honor letters ever acquired me, and of which I was the most sensible, in the two
visits the Prince of Conti deigned to make to me, one at the Little Castle and the other at
Mont Louis.  He chose the time for both of these when M. de Luxembourg was not at Montmorency,
in order to render it more manifest that he came there solely on my account.  I have never
had a doubt of my owing the first condescensions of this prince to Madam de Luxembourg and
Madam de Boufflers; but I am of opinion I owe to his own sentiments and to myself those with
which he has since that time continually honored me.

     [Remark the perseverance of this blind and stupid confidence in the
     midst of all the treatment which should soonest have undeceived me.
     It continued until my return to Paris in 1770.]

My apartments at Mont Louis being small, and the situation of the alcove charming, I conducted
the prince to it, where, to complete the condescension he was pleased to show me, he chose
I should have the honor of playing with him a game of chess.  I knew he beat the Chevalier
de Lorenzy, who played better than I did.  However, notwithstanding the signs and grimace of
the chevalier and the spectators, which I feigned not to see, I won the two games we played:
When they were ended, I said to him in a respectful but very grave manner: "My lord, I honor
your serene highness too much not to beat you always at chess."  This great prince, who had
real wit, sense, and knowledge, and so was worthy not to be treated with mean adulation, felt
in fact, at least I think so, that I was the only person present who treated him like a man,
and I have every reason to believe he was not displeased with me for it.

Had this even been the case, I should not have reproached myself with having been unwilling
to deceive him in anything, and I certainly cannot do it with having in my heart made an ill
return for his goodness, but solely with having sometimes done it with an ill grace, whilst
he himself accompanied with infinite gracefulness the manner in which he showed me the marks
of it. A time when we are engaged in an honourable and serious war--a war in which, with the great
and faithful ally whom I have always desired, and the sympathy of all Europe, we are defending
civilisation against an enemy, barbarous indeed, but so formidable as to require our undivided
energy and our undivided attention.
But you must recollect when that letter was written. It was in last
September, in profound peace, when our whole thoughts were employed,
and were properly employed, on our internal affairs.  Refusing to accept presents of
game from a prince of the blood, who moreover sends it in so polite a manner, is less the delicacy
of a haughty man, who wishes to preserve his independence, than the rusticity of a clown, who
does not know himself.  I have never read this letter in my collection without blushing and
reproaching myself for having written it.  But I have not undertaken my Confession with an
intention of concealing my faults, and that of which I have just spoken is too shocking in
my own eyes to suffer me to pass it over in silence.

If I were not guilty of the offence of becoming his rival I was very near doing it; for Madam
de Boufflers was still his mistress, and I knew nothing of the matter.  She came rather frequently
to see me with the Chevalier de Lorenzy.  She was yet young and beautiful, affected to be whimsical,
and my mind was always romantic, which was much of the same nature.  I was near being laid
hold of; I believe she perceived it; the chevalier saw it also, at least he spoke to me upon
the subject, and in a manner not discouraging.  But I was this time reasonable, and at the
age of fifty it was time I should be so.  Full of the doctrine I had just preached to graybeards
in my letter to D'Alembert, I should have been ashamed of not profiting by it myself; besides,
coming to the knowledge of that of which I had been ignorant, I must have been mad to have
carried my pretensions so far as to expose myself to such an illustrious rivalry.  Finally,
ill cured perhaps of my passion for Madam de Houdetot, I felt nothing could replace it in my
heart, and I bade adieu to love for the rest of my life. In connection with this, I may tell
you that Lamont of Munich, after patient inquiry, has come to the conclusion, that there is
a decennial period in the variations of the magnetic declination; it increases regularly for
five years, and decreases as regularly through another five.

If it can be discovered that the horizontal intensity is similarly affected in a similar period,
another of the laws of terrestrial magnetism will be added to the
sum of our knowledge.

NATIVITY AND PARENTAGE OF MARSHAL MACDONALD,
DUKE OF TARENTUM.  I am neither mad nor vain enough to believe I was at my age capable of inspiring
her with the same feelings; but, from certain words which she let drop to Theresa, I thought
I had inspired her with a curiosity; if this be the case, and that she has not forgiven me
the disappointment she met with, it must be confessed I was born to be the victim of my weaknesses,
since triumphant love was so prejudicial to me, and love triumphed over not less so.

Here finishes the collection of letters which has served me as a guide in the last two books.
My steps will in future be directed by memory only; but this is of such a nature, relative
to the period to which I am now come, and the strong impression of objects has remained so
perfectly upon my mind, that lost in the immense sea of my misfortunes, I cannot forget the
detail of my first shipwreck, although the consequences present to me but a confused remembrance.
I therefore shall be able to proceed in the succeeding book with sufficient confidence.  If
I go further it will be groping in the dark.

