"We made the land on the 23rd January. It has little elevation, and is scarcely possible to
be seen at a greater distance than twelve leagues. The wind then became very variable; and,
like Captain Cook, we met with currents, which carried us every day fifteen minutes south of
our reckoning; so that we spent the whole of the 24th in plying in sight of Botany Bay, without
being able to double Point Solander, which bore from us a league north. The wind blew strong
from that quarter, and our ships were too heavy sailers to surmount the force of the wind and
the currents combined; but that day we had a spectacle to which we had been altogether unaccustomed
since our departure from Manilla. This was a British squadron, at anchor in Botany Bay, the
pennants and ensigns of which we could plainly distinguish. All Europeans are countrymen at
such a distance from home, and we had the most eager impatience to fetch the anchorage; but
the next day the weather was so foggy that it was impossible to discern the land, and we did
not get in till the 26th, at nine in the morning, when we let go our anchor a mile from the
north shore, in seven fathoms of water, on a good bottom of grey sand, abreast of the second bay.

"The moment I made my appearance in the entrance of the Bay, a lieutenant and midshipman were
sent aboard my vessel by Captain Hunter, commanding the British frigate SIRIUS. They offered
from him all the services in his power; adding, however, that, as he was just getting under
way to proceed to the northward, circumstances would not allow him to furnish us with provision,
ammunition or sails; so that his offers of service were reduced to good wishes for the future
success of our voyage.

"From the lieutenant we learnt that the English squadron was commanded by Commodore Phillip,
who had sailed from Botany Bay the previous evening in the SUPPLY, sloop, with four transports,
in search of a more commodious place for a settlement further north. The crew of the English
boat, less discreet than their officer, soon informed our people that they were only going
to Port Jackson, sixteen miles north of Point Banks, where Commander Phillip had himself reconnoitred
a very good harbour, which ran ten miles into the land, to the south-west, and in which the
ships might anchor within pistol-shot of the shore, in water as smooth as that of a basin.

Pieced together thus is nearly all we know about Laperouse during his visit to Botany Bay.
It is not much. We would gladly have many more details. What has become of the letter he wrote
to Phillip recommending (according to King) the Pacific Islands as worthy of the attention
of the new colony, "for the great quantity of stock with which they abound"? Apparently it
is lost. The grave and the deep have swallowed up the rest of this "strange eventful history,"
and we interrogate in vain. We should know even less than we do were it not that Laperouse
obtained from Phillip permission to send home, by the next British ship leaving Port Jackson,
his journal, some charts, and the drawings of his artists. This material, added to private
letters and a few miscellaneous papers, was placed in charge of Lieutenant Shortland to be
delivered to the French Ambassador in London, and formed part of the substance of the two volumes
and atlas published in Paris.

* * * * *

It may be well to cite, as a note to this chapter, the books in which contemporary accounts
of the visit of Laperouse and his ships to Botany Bay are to be found. The chief part of the congregation
seemed to me to be a charity school. And I gathered from all that a lesson--several lessons,
and this among the rest--that crowded passages do not always wait upon the best pastors; and
this also, that a waft of death soon discovers to us a true minister from an incompetent and a counterfeit
minister.

3. Writing to one of his correspondents about his correspondent's long- drawn-out deathbed, Samuel
Rutherford said to him, "It is long-drawn-out that you may have ample time to go over all your
old letters and all your still unsettled accounts before you take ship." Have you any such old
letters lying still unanswered? Have you any such old accounts lying still unsettled? Have you
made full reparation and restitution for all that you and yours have done amiss? You know all about
Zacchaeus. I need not tell his story over again.

But as I write these lines I take up a London newspaper and my eyes
light on these lines: "William Avary was a man of remarkable gifts,
both of mind and character.

He dedicated the residue of his strength wholly to works of piety.

In middle age he failed in business, and in his old age, when better days came, he looked up
such of his old creditors as could be found and divided among them
a sum of several thousand pounds."

Look up such of your old creditors as you can find, and that not in matters of money alone.
And, be sure you begin to do it now, before the horn blows. They do not agree in every particular,
but we may take the last letter written to express his final determination. According to this,
his plan was to sail north, passing between Papua ( New Guinea) and Australia by another channel
than Endeavour Strait, if he could find one. During September and October he intended to visit
the Gulf of Carpentaria, and thence sail down the west and along the south of Australia, to
Tasmania, "but in such a manner that it may be possible for me to stretch northward in time
to arrive at Ile-de-France in the beginning of December, 1788." That was the programme which
he was not destined to complete--hardly, indeed, to enter upon. Had he succeeded, his name
would have been inscribed amongst the memorable company of the world's great maritime explorers.
As it is, the glint on his brow, as he stands in the light of history, is less that of achievement
than of high promise, noble aims, romance and mystery.

One of the letters sent from Sydney concluded with these words: "Adieu! I shall depart in good
health, as are all my ship's company. We would undertake six voyages round the world if it
could afford to our country either profit or pleasure." They were not the last words he wrote,
but we may appropriately take them as being, not merely his adieu to a friend, but to the world.

Time sped on; the date given for the arrival at Ile-de-France was passed; the year 1789 dawned
and ticked off the tally of its days. But nothing was heard of Laperouse. If they have their
enemies--as all espoused men have--this is the hour and the power of their enemies. The day on
which any man's espousals are published is a small and local judgment-day to him. For all the
men, and, especially, all the women, who have ever been injured by him, or who have injured
themselves upon him; all the men and all the women who for any reason, and for no reason,
hate both him and his happiness,--their tongues and their pens will take no sleep till they
have got his contract if they can, broken off. But could not some news of its fate be ascertained? Had it
faded out of being like a summer cloud, leaving not a trace behind?

France was then in the throes of her great social earthquake; but it stands to the credit of
the National Assembly that, amidst many turbulent projects and boiling passions, they found
time and had the disposition to cause the fitting out of a new expedition to search for tidings
of those whose disappearance weighed heavily on the heart of the nation. The decree was passed
on February 9, 1791.

