'Oh, but those will be nasty little brats, like Mrs. James Wakenshaw's, or Mrs. Tom Cheek's.
But such children as ours! such charmers! such delights! there isn't a man in the county, from
the Lord-Lieutenant downwards, who wouldn't be proud--who wouldn't think it a compliment--to
be asked to be god-papa to such children. I tell you what, Mr. Jogglebury Crowdey, it would
be far better to get them rich god-papas and god-mammas than to leave them a whole house full
of sticks.'

'Well, but, my (puff) dear, the (wheeze) sticks will prove very (wheeze) hereafter,' replied
Jogglebury, bridling up at the imputation on his hobby.

'I hope so,' replied Mrs. Jogglebury, in a tone of incredulity.

'Well, but, my (puff) dear, I (wheeze) you that they will be--indeed (puff), I may (wheeze)
say that they (puff) are. It was only the other (puff) day that (wheeze) Patrick O'Fogo offered
me five-and-twenty (wheeze) shillings for my (puff) blackthorn Daniel O'Connell, which is by
no means so (puff) good as the (wheeze) wild-cherry one, or, indeed (puff), as the yew-tree
one that I (wheeze) out of Spankerley Park.'

'I'd have taken it if I'd been you,' observed Mrs. Jogglebury.

'But he's (puff) worth far more,' retorted Jogglebury angrily; 'why (wheeze) Lumpleg offered
me as much for Disraeli.'

'Well, I'd have taken it, too,' rejoined Mrs. Jogglebury.

'But I should have (wheeze) spoilt my (puff) set,' replied the gibbey-stick man. 'S'pose any
(wheeze) body was to (puff) offer me five guineas a (puff) piece for the (puff) pick of my
(puff) collection--my (puff) Wellingtons, my (wheeze) Napoleons, my (puff) Byrons, my (wheeze)
Walter Scotts, my (puff) Lord Johns, d'ye think I'd take it?'

'I should hope so,' replied Mrs. Jogglebury.

'I should (puff) do no such thing,' snorted her husband into his frill. 'I should hope,' continued
he, speaking slowly and solemnly, 'that a (puff) wise ministry will purchase the whole (puff)
collection for a (wheeze) grateful nation, when the (wheeze)' something 'is no more (wheeze).'
The concluding words being lost in the emotion of the speaker (as the reporters say).

'Well, but will you go and call on Mr. Sponge, dear?' asked Mrs. Jogglebury Crowdey, anxious
as well to turn the subject as to make good her original point.

'Well, my dear, I've no objection,' replied Joggle, wiping a tear from the corner of his eye
with his coat-cuff.

'That's a good soul!' exclaimed Mrs. Jogglebury soothingly. 'Go to-morrow, like a nice, sensible
man.'

'Very well,' replied her now complacent spouse.

'And ask him to come here,' continued she.

'I can't (puff) ask him to (puff) come, my dear (wheeze), until he (puff--wheeze) returns my
(puff) call.'

'Oh, fiddle,' replied his wife, 'you always say fox-hunters never stand upon ceremony; why
should you stand upon any with him?'

Mr. Jogglebury was posed, and sat silent.

CHAPTER XLV

THE DISCOMFITED DIPLOMATIST

Well, then, as we said before, when one door shuts another opens; and just as Mr. Puffington's
door was closing on poor Mr. Sponge, who should cast up but our newly introduced friend, Mr.
Jogglebury Crowdey. Mr. Sponge was sitting in solitary state in the fine drawing-room, studying
his old friend Mogg, calculating what he could ride from Spur Street, Leicester Square, by
Short's Gardens, and across Waterloo Bridge, to the Elephant and Castle for, when the grinding
of a vehicle on the gravelled ring attracted his attention. Looking out of the window, he saw
a horse's head in a faded-red, silk-fronted bridle, with the letters 'J.C.' on the winkers;
not 'J.C.' writhing in the elegant contortions of modern science, but 'J.C.' in the good, plain,
matter-of-fact characters we have depicted above.

'That'll be the doctor,' said Mr. Sponge to himself, as he resumed his reading and calculations,
amidst a peal of the door-bell, well calculated to arouse the whole house. 'He's a good un
to ring!' added he, looking up and wondering when the last lingering tinkle would cease.

Before the fact was ascertained, there was a hurried tramp of feet past the drawing-room door,
and presently the entrance one opened and let in--a rush of wind.

'Is Mr. Sponge at home?' demanded a slow, pompous-speaking, deep-toned voice, evidently from
the vehicle.

'Yez-ur,' was the immediate answer.

'Who can that be?' exclaimed Sponge, pocketing his Mogg.

Then there was a creaking of springs and a jingling against iron steps, and presently a high-blowing,
heavy-stepping body was heard crossing the entrance-hall, while an out-stripping footman announced
Mr. Jogglebury Crowdey, leaving the owner to follow his name at his leisure.

Mrs. Jogglebury had insisted on Jog putting on his new black frock--a very long coat, fitting
like a sack, with the well-filled pockets bagging behind, like a poor man's dinner wallet.
In lieu of the shrunk and darned white moleskins, receding in apparent disgust from the dingy
tops, he had got his nether man enveloped in a pair of fine cinnamon-coloured tweeds, with
broad blue stripes down the sides, and shaped out over the clumsy foot.

Puff, wheeze, puff, he now came waddling and labouring along, hat in hand, hurrying after the
servant; puff, wheeze, puff, and he found himself in the room. 'Your servant, sir,' said he,
sticking himself out behind, and addressing Mr. Sponge, making a ground sweep with his woolly hat.

'Yours,' said Mr. Sponge, with a similar bow.

'Fine day (puff--wheeze),' observed Mr. Jogglebury, blowing into his large frill.

'It is,' replied Mr. Sponge, adding, 'won't you be seated?'

'How's Puffington?' gasped our visitor, sousing himself upon one of the rosewood chairs in
a way that threatened destruction to the slender fabric.

'Oh, he's pretty middling, I should say,' replied Sponge, now making up his mind that he was
addressing the doctor.

'Pretty middlin' (puff),' repeated Jogglebury, blowing into his frill; 'pretty middlin' (wheeze);
I s'pose that means he's got a (puff) gumboil. My third (wheeze) girl, Margaret Henrietta has one.'

'Do you want to see him?' asked Sponge, after a pause, which seemed to indicate that his friend's
conversation had come to a period, or full stop.

'No,' replied Jogglebury unconcernedly. 'No; I'll leave a (puff) card for him (wheeze),' added
he, fumbling in his wallet behind for his card-case. 'My (puff) object is to pay my (wheeze)
respects to you,' observed he, drawing a great carved Indian case from his pocket, and pulling
off the top with a noise like the drawing of a cork.

'Much obliged for the compliment,' observed Mr. Sponge, as Jogglebury fumbled and broke his
nails in attempting to get a card out.

'Do you stay long in this part of the world?' asked he, as at last he succeeded, and commenced
tapping the corners of the card on the table.

'I really don't know,' replied Mr. Sponge, as the particulars of his situation flashed across
his mind. Could this pudding-headed man be a chap Puffington had got to come and sound him,
thought he.

Jogglebury sat silent for a time, examining his feet attentively as if to see they were pairs,
and scrutinizing the bags of his cinnamon-coloured trousers.

'I was going to say (hem--cough--hem),' at length observed he, looking up, 'that's to say,
I was thinking (hem--wheeze--cough--hem), or rather I should say, Mrs. Jogglebury Crowdey sent
me to say--I mean to say,' continued he, stamping one of his ponderous feet against the floor
as if to force out his words, 'Mrs. Jogglebury Crowdey and I would be glad--happy, that's to
say (hem)--if you would arrange (hem) to (wheeze) pay us a visit (hem).'

'Most happy, I'm sure!' exclaimed Mr. Sponge, jumping at the offer.

'Before you go (hem),' continued our visitor, taking up the sentence where Sponge had interrupted
him; 'I (hem) live about nine miles (hem) from here (hem).'

'Are there any hounds in your neighbourhood?' asked Mr. Sponge.

'Oh yes,' replied Mr. Jogglebury slowly; 'Mr. Puffington here draws up to Greatacre Gorse within
a few (puff--wheeze) miles--say, three (puff)--of my (wheeze) house; and Sir Harry Scattercash
(puff) hunts all the (puff--wheeze) country below, right away down to the (puff--wheeze) sea.'

'Well, you're a devilish good fellow!' exclaimed Sponge; 'and I'll tell you what, as I'm sure
you mean what you say, I'll take you at your word and go at once; and that'll give our friend
here time to come round.'

'Oh, but (puff--wheeze--gasp),' started Mr. Jogglebury, the blood rushing to his great yellow,
whiskerless cheeks, 'I'm not quite (gasp) sure that Mrs. (gasp) Jogglebury (puff) Crowdey would
be (puff--wheeze--gasp) prepared.'

'Oh, hang preparation!' interrupted Mr. Sponge. 'I'll take you as you are. Never mind me. I
hate being made company of. Just treat me like one of yourselves; toad-in-the-hole, dog-in-the-blanket,
beef-steaks and oyster-sauce, rabbits and onions--anything; nothing comes amiss to me.'

So saying, and while Jogglebury sat purple and unable to articulate, Mr. Sponge applied his
hand to the ivory bell-knob and sounded an imposing peal. Mr. Jogglebury sat wondering what
was going to happen, and thinking what a wigging he would get from Mrs. J. if he didn't manage
to shake off his friend. Above all, he recollected that they had nothing but haddocks and hashed
mutton for dinner.

'Tell Leather I want him,' said Mr. Sponge, in a tone of authority, as the footman answered
the summons; then, turning to his guest, as the man was leaving the room, he said, 'Won't you
take something after your drive--cold meat, glass of sherry, soda-water, bottled porter--anything
in that line?'

In an ordinary way, Jogglebury would have said, 'if you please,' at the sound of the words
'cold meat,' for he was a dead hand at luncheon; but the fix he was in completely took away
his appetite, and he sat wheezing and thinking whether to make another effort, or to wait the
arrival of Leather.

Presently Leather appeared, jean-jacketed and gaitered, smoothing his hair over his forehead,
after the manner of the brotherhood.

'Leather,' said Mr. Sponge, in the same tone of importance, 'I'm going to this gentleman's';
for as yet he had not sufficiently mastered the name to be able to venture upon it in the owner's
presence. 'Leather, I'm going to this gentleman's, and I want you to bring me a horse over
in the morning; or stay,' said he, interrupting himself, and, turning to Jogglebury, he exclaimed,
'I dare say you could manage to put me up a couple of horses, couldn't you? and then we should
be all cosy and jolly together, you know.'

''Pon my word,' gasped Jogglebury nearly choked by the proposal; ''pon my word, I can hardly
(puff) say, I hardly (wheeze) know, but if you'll (puff--wheeze) allow me, I'll tell you what
I'll do: I'll (puff--wheeze) home, and see what I can (puff) do in the way of entertainment
for (puff--wheeze) man as well as for (puff--wheeze) horse.'

'Oh, thank you, my dear fellow!' exclaimed Sponge, seeing the intended dodge; 'thank you, my
dear fellow!' repeated he; 'but that's giving you too much trouble--far too much trouble!--couldn't
think of such a thing--no, indeed, I couldn't. I'll tell you what we'll do--I'll tell you what
we'll do. You shall drive me over in that shandrydan-rattle-trap thing of yours'--Sponge looking
out of the window, as he spoke, at the queer-shaped, jumped-together, lack-lustre-looking vehicle,
with a turnover seat behind, now in charge of a pepper-and-salt attired youth, with a shabby
hat, looped up by a thin silver cord to an acorn on the crown, and baggy Berlin gloves--'and
I'll just see what there is in the way of stabling; and if I think it will do, then I'll give
a boy sixpence or a shilling to come over to Leather, here,' jerking his head towards his factotum;
'if it won't do, why then--'

'We shall want three stalls, sir--recollect, sir, 'interrupted Leather, who did not wish to
move his quarters.

'True, I forgot,' replied Sponge, with a frown at his servant's officiousness; 'however, if
we can get two good stalls for the hunters,' said he, 'we'll manage the hack somehow or other.'

'Well,' replied Mr. Leather, in a tone of resignation, knowing how hopeless it was arguing
with his master.

'I really think,' gasped Mr. Jogglebury Crowdey, encouraged by the apparent sympathy of the
servant to make a last effort, 'I really think,' repeated he, as the hashed mutton and haddocks
again flashed across his mind, 'that my (puff--wheeze) plan is the (puff) best; let me (puff--wheeze)
home and see how all (puff--wheeze) things are, and then I'll write you a (puff--wheeze) line,
or send a (puff--wheeze) servant over.'

'Oh no,' replied Mr. Sponge, 'oh no--that's far too much trouble. I'll just go over with you
now and reconnoitre.'

'I'm afraid Mrs. (puff--wheeze) Crowdey will hardly be prepared for (puff--wheeze) visitors,'
ejaculated our friend, recollecting it was washing-day, and that Mary Ann would be wanted in
the laundry.

'Don't mention it!' exclaimed Mr. Sponge; 'don't mention it. I hate to be made company of.
Just give me what you have yourselves--just give me what you have yourselves. Where two can
dine, three can dine, you know.'

Mr. Jogglebury Crowdey was nonplussed.

'Well, now,' said Mr. Sponge, turning again to Leather; 'just go upstairs and help me to pack
up my things; and,' addressing himself to our visitor, he said, 'perhaps you'll amuse yourself
with the paper--the Post--or I'll lend you my Mogg,' continued he, offering the little gilt-lettered,
purple-backed volume as he spoke.

'Thank'ee,' replied Mr. Jogglebury, who was still tapping away at the card, which he had now
worked very soft.

Mr. Sponge then left him with the volume in his hand, and proceeded upstairs to his bedroom.

In less than twenty minutes, the vehicle was got under way, Mr. Jogglebury Crowdey and Mr.
Sponge occupying the roomy seats in front, and Bartholomew Badger, the before-mentioned tiger,
and Mr. Sponge's portmanteau and carpet-bag, being in the very diminutive turnover seat behind.
The carriage was followed by the straining eyes of sundry Johns and Janes, who unanimously
agreed that Mr. Sponge was the meanest, shabbiest gent they had ever had in their house. Mr.
Leather was, therefore, roasted in the servants' hall, where the sins of the masters are oft
visited upon the servants.

But to our travellers.

Little conversation passed between our friends for the first few miles, for, in addition to
the road being rough, the driving-seat was so high, and the other so low, that Mr. Jogglebury
Crowdey's parables broke against Mr. Sponge's hat-crown, instead of dropping into his ear;
besides which, the unwilling host's mind was a good deal occupied with wishing that there had
been three haddocks instead of two, and speculating whether Mrs. Crowdey would be more pleased
at the success of his mission, or put out of her way by Mr. Sponge's unexpected coming. Above
all, he had marked some very promising-looking sticks--two blackthorns and a holly--to cut
on his way home, and he was intent on not missing them. So sudden was the jerk that announced
his coming on the first one, as nearly to throw the old family horse on his knees, and almost
to break Mr. Sponge's nose against the brass edge of the cocked-up splash-board. Ere Mr. Sponge
recovered his equilibrium, the whip was in the case, the reins dangling about the old screw's
heels, and Mr. Crowdey scrambling up a steep bank to where a very thick boundary-hedge shut
out the view of the adjacent country. Presently, chop, chop, chop, was heard, from Mr. Crowdey's
pocket axe, with a tug--wheeze--puff from himself; next a crash of separation; and then the
purple-faced Mr. Crowdey came bearing down the bank dragging a great blackthorn bush after him.

'What have you got there?' inquired Mr. Sponge, with surprise.

'Got! (wheeze--puff--wheeze),' replied Mr. Crowdey, pulling up short, and mopping his perspiring
brow with a great claret-coloured bandana. 'Got! I've (puff--wheeze) got what I (wheeze) think
will (puff) into a most elaborate and (wheeze) valuable walking-stick. This I (puff) think,'
continued he, eyeing the great ball with which he had got it up, 'will (wheeze) come in most
valuably (puff) for my great (puff--wheeze--gasp) national undertaking--the (puff) Kings and
(wheeze) Queens of Great Britain (gasp).'

'What are they?' asked Mr. Sponge, astonished at his vehemence.

'Oh! (puff--wheeze--gasp) haven't you heard?' exclaimed Mr. Jogglebury, taking off his great
woolly hat, and giving his lank, dark hair, streaked with grey, a sweep round his low forehead
with the bandana. 'Oh! (puff--gasp) haven't you heard?' repeated he, getting a little more
breath. 'I'm (wheeze) undertaking a series of (gasp) sticks, representing--(gasp)--immortalizing,
I may say (puff), all the (wheeze) crowned heads of England (puff).'

'Indeed!' replied Mr. Sponge.

'They'll be a most valuable collection (wheeze--puff),' continued Mr. Jogglebury, still eyeing
the knob. 'This,' added he, 'shall be William the Fourth.' He then commenced lopping and docking
the sides, making Bartholomew Badger bury them in a sand-pit hard by, observing, in a confidential
wheeze to Mr. Sponge, 'that he had once been county-courted for a similar trespass before.'
The top and lop being at length disposed of, Mr. Crowdey, grasping the club-end, struck the
other forcibly against the ground, exclaiming, 'There!--there's a (puff) stick! Who knows what
that (puff--wheeze) stick may be worth some day?'

He then bundled into his carriage and drove on.

Two more stoppages marked their arrival at the other sticks, which being duly captured and
fastened within the straps of the carriage-apron, Mr. Crowdey drove on somewhat more at ease
in his mind, at all events somewhat comforted at the thoughts of having increased his wealth.
He did not become talkative--indeed that was not his forte, but he puffed into his shirt-frill,
and made a few observations, which, if they did not possess much originality, at all events
showed that he was not asleep.

'Those are draining-tiles,' said he, after a hearty stare at a cart-load. Then about five minutes
after he blew again, and said, 'I don't think (puff) that (wheeze) draining without (gasp)
manuring will constitute high farming (puff).'

So he jolted and wheezed, and jerked and jagged the old quadruped's mouth, occasionally hissing
between his teeth, and stamping against the bottom of the carriage, when other persuasive efforts
failed to induce it to keep up the semblance of a trot. At last the ill-supported hobble died
out into a walk, and Mr. Crowdey, complacently dropping his fat hand on his fat knees, seemed
to resign himself to his fate.

So they crawled along the up-and-downy piece of road below Poplarton plantations, Mr. Jogglebury
keeping a sharp eye upon the underwood for sticks. After passing these, they commenced the
gradual ascent of Roundington Hill, when a sudden sweep of the road brought them in view of
the panorama of the rich Vale of Butterflower.

'There's a snug-looking box,' observed Sponge, as he at length espied a confused jumble of
gable-ends and chimney-pots rising from amidst a clump of Scotch firs and other trees, looking
less like a farmhouse than anything he had seen.

