'Clearly we stood among the ruins of some latter-day South Kensington! Here, apparently, was
the Palaeontological Section, and a very splendid array of fossils it must have been, though
the inevitable process of decay that had been staved off for a time, and had, through the extinction
of bacteria and fungi, lost ninety-nine hundredths of its force, was nevertheless, with extreme
sureness if with extreme slowness at work again upon all its treasures. Here and there I found
traces of the little people in the shape of rare fossils broken to pieces or threaded in strings
upon reeds. And the cases had in some instances been bodily removed--by the Morlocks as I judged.
The place was very silent. The thick dust deadened our footsteps. Weena, who had been rolling
a sea urchin down the sloping glass of a case, presently came, as I stared about me, and very
quietly took my hand and stood beside me.

'And at first I was so much surprised by this ancient monument of an intellectual age, that
I gave no thought to the possibilities it presented. Even my preoccupation about the Time Machine
receded a little from my mind.

'To judge from the size of the place, this Palace of Green Porcelain had a great deal more
in it than a Gallery of Palaeontology; possibly historical galleries; it might be, even a library!
To me, at least in my present circumstances, these would be vastly more interesting than this
spectacle of oldtime geology in decay. "But these I cannot command to any utterance of harmony: I have
not the skill."

SVIETLOVIDOFF. S'blood! Do you think I am easier to be played on than
a pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me,
you cannot play upon me!" Doubtless they had deliquesced ages ago. Yet the sulphur hung in my mind, and set up
a train of thinking. As for the rest of the contents of that gallery, though on the whole they
were the best preserved of all I saw, I had little interest. I am no specialist in mineralogy,
and I went on down a very ruinous aisle running parallel to the first hall I had entered. Apparently
this section had been devoted to natural history, but everything had long since passed out
of recognition. A few shrivelled and blackened vestiges of what had once been stuffed animals,
desiccated mummies in jars that had once held spirit, a brown dust of departed plants: that
was all! I was sorry for that, because I should have been glad to trace the patent readjustments
by which the conquest of animated nature had been attained. Then we came to a gallery of simply
colossal proportions, but singularly ill-lit, the floor of it running downward at a slight
angle from the end at which I entered. At intervals white globes hung from the ceiling--many
of them cracked and smashed--which suggested that originally the place had been artificially
lit. Here I was more in my element, for rising on either side of me were the huge bulks of
big machines, all greatly corroded and many broken down, but some still fairly complete. You
know I have a certain weakness for mechanism, and I was inclined to linger among these; the
more so as for the most part they had the interest of puzzles, and I could make only the vaguest
guesses at what they were for. I fancied that if I could solve their puzzles I should find
myself in possession of powers that might be of use against the Morlocks.

'Suddenly Weena came very close to my side. So suddenly that she startled me. Had it not been
for her I do not think I should have noticed that the floor of the gallery sloped at all. [Footnote:
It may be, of course, that the floor did not slope, but that the museum was built into the
side of a hill.--ED.] The end I had come in at was quite above ground, and was lit by rare
slit-like windows. As you went down the length, the ground came up against these windows, until
at last there was a pit like the "area" of a London house before each, and only a narrow line
of daylight at the top. I went slowly along, puzzling about the machines, and had been too
intent upon them to notice the gradual diminution of the light, until Weena's increasing apprehensions
drew my attention. Then I saw that the gallery ran down at last into a thick darkness. I hesitated,
and then, as I looked round me, I saw that the dust was less abundant and its surface less
even. Further away towards the dimness, it appeared to be broken by a number of small narrow
footprints. My sense of the immediate presence of the Morlocks revived at that. I felt that
I was wasting my time in the academic examination of machinery. I called to mind that it was
already far advanced in the afternoon, and that I had still no weapon, no refuge, and no means
of making a fire. And then down in the remote blackness of the gallery I heard a peculiar pattering,
and the same odd noises I had heard down the well.

'I took Weena's hand. Then, struck with a sudden idea, I left her and turned to a machine from
which projected a lever not unlike those in a signal-box. Clambering upon the stand, and grasping
this lever in my hands, I put all my weight upon it sideways. Suddenly Weena, deserted in the
central aisle, began to whimper. I had judged the strength of the lever pretty correctly, for
it snapped after a minute's strain, and I rejoined her with a mace in my hand more than sufficient,
I judged, for any Morlock skull I might encounter. And I longed very much to kill a Morlock
or so. Very inhuman, you may think, to want to go killing one's own descendants! But it was
impossible, somehow, to feel any humanity in the things. Only my disinclination to leave Weena,
and a persuasion that if I began to slake my thirst for murder my Time Machine might suffer,
restrained me from going straight down the gallery and killing the brutes I heard. 

[Turns his head about] I'm drunk! Ugh! The play to-night was for my benefit, and it is disgusting
to think how much beer and wine I have poured down my throat in honour of the occasion. Gracious!
My body is burning all over, and I feel as if I had twenty tongues in my mouth. It is horrid! Idiotic!
This poor old sinner is drunk again, and doesn't even know what he has been celebrating! Ugh!
My head is splitting, I am shivering all over, and I feel as dark and cold inside as a cellar!
 Had I been a literary man I might, perhaps, have moralized upon
the futility of all ambition. But as it was, the thing that struck me with keenest force was
the enormous waste of labour to which this sombre wilderness of rotting paper testified. At
the time I will confess that I thought chiefly of the Philosophical Transactions and my own
seventeen papers upon physical optics.

'Then, going up a broad staircase, we came to what may once have been a gallery of technical
chemistry. And here I had not a little hope of useful discoveries. Except at one end where
the roof had collapsed, this gallery was well preserved. I went eagerly to every unbroken case.
And at last, in one of the really air-tight cases, I found a box of matches. Very eagerly I
tried them. They were perfectly good. They were not even damp. I turned to Weena. "Dance,"
I cried to her in her own tongue. For now I had a weapon indeed against the horrible creatures
we feared. And so, in that derelict museum, upon the thick soft carpeting of dust, to Weena's
huge delight, I solemnly performed a kind of composite dance, whistling The Land of the Leal
as cheerfully as I could. In part it was a modest cancan, in part a step dance, in part a skirt-dance
(so far as my tail-coat permitted), and in part original. For I am naturally inventive, as
you know.

'Now, I still think that for this box of matches to have escaped the wear of time for immemorial
years was a most strange, as for me it was a most fortunate thing. Yet, oddly enough, I found
a far unlikelier substance, and that was camphor. I found it in a sealed jar, that by chance,
I suppose, had been really hermetically sealed. I fancied at first that it was paraffin wax,
and smashed the glass accordingly. But the odour of camphor was unmistakable. In the universal
decay this volatile substance had chanced to survive, perhaps through many thousands of centuries.
It reminded me of a sepia painting I had once seen done from the ink of a fossil Belemnite
that must have perished and become fossilized millions of years ago. I was about to throw it
away, but I remembered that it was inflammable and burned with a good bright flame--was, in
fact, an excellent candle--and I put it in my pocket. I found no explosives, however, nor any
means of breaking down the bronze doors. As yet my iron crowbar was the most helpful thing
I had chanced upon. Nevertheless I left that gallery greatly elated.

'I cannot tell you all the story of that long afternoon. It would require a great effort of
memory to recall my explorations in at all the proper order. I remember a long gallery of rusting
stands of arms, and how I hesitated between my crowbar and a hatchet or a sword. I could not
carry both, however, and my bar of iron promised best against the bronze gates. There were
numbers of guns, pistols, and rifles. The most were masses of rust, but many were of some new
metal, and still fairly sound. But any cartridges or powder there may once have been had rotted
into dust. One corner I saw was charred and shattered; perhaps, I thought, by an explosion
among the specimens. In another place was a vast array of idols--Polynesian, Mexican, Grecian,
Phoenician, every country on earth I should think. And here, yielding to an irresistible impulse,
I wrote my name upon the nose of a steatite monster from South America that particularly took
my fancy.

'As the evening drew on, my interest waned. I went through gallery after gallery, dusty, silent,
often ruinous, the exhibits sometimes mere heaps of rust and lignite, sometimes fresher. In
one place I suddenly found myself near the model of a tin-mine, and then by the merest accident
I discovered, in an air-tight case, two dynamite cartridges! I shouted "Eureka!" and smashed
the case with joy. Then came a doubt. I hesitated. Then, selecting a little side gallery, I
made my essay. I never felt such a disappointment as I did in waiting five, ten, fifteen minutes
for an explosion that never came. Of course the things were dummies, as I might have guessed
from their presence. I really believe that had they not been so, I should have rushed off incontinently
and blown Sphinx, bronze doors, and (as it proved) my chances of finding the Time Machine,
all together into non-existence.

'It was after that, I think, that we came to a little open court within the palace. It was
turfed, and had three fruit-trees. Now, then, here's something else of the same kind, to bring back
my youth to me. For instance, take this, from Hamlet, I'll begin . . . Let me see, how does
it go? Oh, yes, this is it. [Takes the part of Hamlet]

"O! the recorders,
let me see one.--To withdraw with you. I had in my possession a thing that
was, perhaps, the best of all defences against the Morlocks--I had matches! I had the camphor
in my pocket, too, if a blaze were needed. It seemed to me that the best thing we could do
would be to pass the night in the open, protected by a fire. In the morning there was the getting
of the Time Machine. Towards that, as yet, I had only my iron mace. But now, with my growing
knowledge, I felt very differently towards those bronze doors. Up to this, I had refrained
from forcing them, largely because of the mystery on the other side. They had never impressed
me as being very strong, and I hoped to find my bar of iron not altogether inadequate for the work.

IX

