When the soul arrives at Union with God, does she remain always in Union? Yes, but not at the
degree of Union which is Contact. What is the difference? It can perhaps be most easily explained
(though extremely imperfectly) by referring to the union of married life. In this union, though
we live in one house, we are not always both in that house at the same time; but this does
not dissolve our union, and we both know our way to return there, and the right to meet is
always ours. When we are both in the house, although not in the same room, there is a much
nearer feeling about it, and we are apt to give a momentary call one to the other, just to
have the pleasure of response: yet, though we are aware the other one is in the house and that
there is no part of the house where we are forbidden to meet--it is not enough; love requires
more: it will be necessary for one to go and seek the actual presence of the other (the soul
does this by a quiet prayer with perhaps a few words, but more probably no words). The one
finds the other one; but the other one is occupied, so the one waits patiently (this is passive
contemplation), and suddenly the occupied one is so constrained by love for the waiting one
that he must turn to her, open wide his arms, and embrace her--they meet, they touch, they
are content. In spiritual life this is contact or ecstasy or rapture. Here comes in the immensity
of the difference between joys physical and joys spiritual--physical joys being limited to
five senses: spiritual joys being above senses and open to limitless variations; but in order
that these may be known in their fulness, we must eventually (after leaving the flesh) rise
to immense heights of perfection: the joys enjoyed by the Archangel would destroy a lesser
angel: the degree of joy that invigorates the saint, that sends him into rhapsodies of happiness,
would destroy the sinner--(becoming insupportable agony to the sinner). This celestial joy
is, fundamentally, a question of the enduring of some un-nameable energy. How can energy be
a means of this immeasurable Divine joy? After years of experience I find I cannot go back
upon the knowledge that I acquired on the very first occasion of experience--that energy is
a fundamental principle of the mystery.

But how, it may very well be asked, do sins interfere with the reception of this activity?
Sins are all imperfections, thickenings of the soul from self-will: pure soul is necessary
for the happy reception of this celestial activity, and because impurities are automatically
dissipated by this activity, and the dissipation or dispersion of them is the most awful agony
conceivable when too suddenly done, what is bliss to the saint is the extremity of torture
to the sinner. Now we come very fearfully and dreadfully to understand something more of the
meanings, the happenings, of the Judgment Day. Christ will inflict no direct wilful punishment
on any soul; but when He presents Himself before all souls and they behold His Face, immediately
they will receive the terrible might of the activity of celestial joy. The regenerated will
endure and rejoice; the unrepentant sinner will agonise, and he must flee from before the Face
of Christ, because the agony that he feels is the dispersal of his imperfect soul; and where
shall the sinner flee, where shall he go to find happiness? for saint and sinner alike desire
happiness, and there is in Spirit-life only one happiness--the Bliss of God. So then let us
be careful to prepare ourselves to be able to receive and endure this happiness, even if it
can at first be only in a small degree, so that we shall not be condemned by our own pain to
leave the Presence of God altogether and consequently lose Celestial Pleasures; let us at least
prepare ourselves to remain near enough to know something of this tremendous living.

It was this Divine Activity which on the night of the Too Great Happiness so anguished my imperfect
soul. But that night, and that anguish, taught my soul what she could never have learnt by
any other means, and what it was I learnt I find myself unable to pass on to anyone; but that
night was for my soul the turning-point of her destiny, that night altered my soul for evermore;
that night I knew God as deeply as He can be known whilst the soul is in flesh.

* * *

God uses also a peculiar drawing power. All souls feeling desire towards God are to a greater
or lesser degree conscious of this, and, as we know, frequently remain conscious of it as a
desire and nothing further to the end of life in flesh. By means of it He draws a soul towards
Himself until, because of it, the whole being is willing to make efforts at self-improvement,
and this is the essential: it is this cleaning up of the character, this purification, which
alone can bring us to the point where we can receive God's communications of Himself (in other
words, ecstasies and periods of reunion with Celestial-living). Ecstasies inspire and awaken
the soul: they convince the mind absolutely of the existence of another form of living and
of God Himself.

After ecstasy the efforts of the entire being are bent on trying to perfect itself, and extraordinary
Graces may be freely and almost continually given to us in order to make improvement more rapid
for us. The feeling for God which before ecstasy was a deep (and often very painful) longing
for God now increases to a burning, never-ceasing desire for Him: only three thoughts can be
said to truly occupy a person from this stage onwards--how to please God, how to get nearer
to Him, how to show practical gratitude. He may increase the flow of His Power to a soul till
she is in great distress, longing to leap out of the body owing to the immensity of God's attraction.
This attraction at times has a very real and sensible effect upon the body: it feels to counteract
gravity, it makes the body feel so light it is about to leave the ground; it affects walking,
and unaccountably changes it to staggering. To receive this attraction can be an ecstatic condition,
but is by no means ecstasy. So long as we have power to move the body by will we are not in
true ecstasy. In ecstasy the body feels to be disconnected in some unaccountable manner from
the will; it lies inert, though it knows itself and knows that it stills lives--which fundamentally
differentiates it from sleep, because in sleep we do not know our body, we do not know if we
are alive or dead, we know nothing. In ecstasy is no such blankness: merely the body is perforce
inert, it would be entirely forgotten but for its periods of distress.

Neither can ecstasy be confused with dreaming, by even the most simple person. In dreaming,
objects and events of a familiar type still surround us; the total inconsequence with which
they present themselves alone makes dream-living unlike actual living, for it remains fundamentally
of the same type--physical and full of persons, forms, objects, and word-thoughts. We can procure
sleep by willing it, but we cannot will to procure ecstasy: we find it totally independent of will.

The Attraction of God can be a penetrating pain, because the soul, terribly drawn to God, exceedingly
near Him, yet remains unsatisfied even in this close proximity. Why? Because she is being subjected
to one Force only--she longs, she remains near, and receives nothing. God is not bestowing
His Activity upon her, which is the way that she "knows" Him--she is not living the celestial life.

It is the combination of the two Forces working together simultaneously on and in the soul
which differentiates ecstasy and rapture from all other degrees of God-Consciousness. When
these two Powers work together, we experience celestial living, full Union, the bliss of Contact.
It cannot possibly be said that in ecstasy we see God: it is a question of "knowing" Him through
the higher part of the soul, in lesser or in deeper degrees.

X

If the Divine Lover gives such joys to the soul, how does the soul give joy to the Divine Lover?
Is she beautiful? She becomes so. It would be very happy for men in the conduct of their lives
and actions, were the same objects always conjoined together, and, we had nothing to fear but
the mistakes of our own judgment, without having any reason to apprehend the uncertainty of
nature. But as it is frequently found, that one observation is contrary to another, and that
causes and effects follow not in the same order, of which we have
I had experience, we are obliged to vary our reasoning on, account
of this uncertainty, and take into consideration the contrariety of
events.

The first question, that occurs on this head, is concerning the nature and causes of the contrariety.

But
however philosophers and the vulgar may differ in their explication
of the contrariety of events, their inferences from it are always
of the same kind, and founded on the same principles.

A contrariety of events in the past may give us a kind of hesitating
belief for the future after two several ways.

First, By producing an imperfect habit and transition from the present
impression to the related idea.

When the conjunction of any two objects is frequent, without being entirely constant, the mind
is determined to pass from one object to the other; but not with so entire a habit, as when the union is uninterrupted,
and all the instances we have ever met with are uniform and of a piece-.. We find from common experience,
in our actions as well as reasonings, that a constant perseverance in any course of life produces
a strong inclination and tendency to continue for the future; though there are habits of inferior
degrees of force, proportioned to the inferior degrees of steadiness and uniformity in our
conduct.

There is no doubt but this principle sometimes takes place, and produces
those inferences we draw from contrary phaenomena: though I am perswaded,
that upon examination we shall not find it to be the principle, that
most commonly influences the mind in this species of reasoning.

When we follow only the habitual determination of the mind, we make
the transition without any reflection, and interpose not a moment's
delay betwixt the view of one object and the belief of that, which
is often found to attend it.

As the custom depends not upon any deliberation, it operates immediately, without allowing
any time for reflection.

But this method of proceeding we have but few instances of in our
probable reasonings; and even fewer than in those, which are derived
from the uninterrupted conjunction of objects.

In the former species of reasoning we commonly take knowingly into
consideration the contrariety of past events; we compare the different
sides of the contrariety, and carefully weigh the experiments, which
we have on each side: Whence we may conclude, that our reasonings
of this kind arise not directly from the habit, but in an oblique
manner; which we must now endeavour to explain.

It is evident, that when an object is attended with contrary effects,
we judge of them only by our past experience, and always consider
those as possible, which we have observed to follow from it.



So the soul cries to Him, O mystery of love, was ever such sweet graciousness as lives in thee:
such exquisite felicity of giving and receiving, in which the giver and receiver in mysterious
rapture of generosity are oned! And this mystery of love is not in paucity of ways, but in
marvellous variety of ways and of degrees--the ways of friendship, the brother and the sister,
the mother and the child, the youth and the maiden, and Thyself and we.

Love makes the soul ponder on His tastes, His will, His nature. Does He prefer even in heaven
to possess Himself to Himself in His First Person? or are there parts of heaven where He is
ever willing to be possessed in His fulness: where He is eternally beheld in His Three Persons
by such as can endure Him? The soul believes it, and this is the goal she strives for both
now and hereafter.

Yet there is That of Him which is for ever Alone, which will never be known or shared by the
greatest of the Angels. The soul comprehends that He will have it so because of that Solitary
which sits within herself, she who is made after His likeness.

XIII

For many years before coming to Union with God, I found that it had become impossible to say
more than a little prayer of some five or six words, and these were said very slowly: at times
I was astonished at my inability, and ashamed that these pitiful shreds were all that I could
offer, and always the same thing too; I tried to vary it--I could not. When I tried to say
some fine sentence, when I tried even to ask for something, I could not; it all disappeared
in a feeling of such sweet love for God, and I merely said again the same old words of every
day. I loved. I could do nothing more than say so, and then stay there on my knees for a little
while, very near Him, fascinated, adoring. But God is not vexed with a soul when she cannot
say much. Is an earthly father vexed when his child, standing there before him, forgets the
words upon its lips, forgets to ask, because it loves him so? Far from it.

This prayer is the commencement, the foretaste, of Contemplation. A distinguishing mark between
this prayer and Contemplation is that in even the lowest degree of Contemplation God (if one
may so express the inexpressible) is Localised. Hitherto His Presence has been near--but we
cannot say how near, or where, and we cannot be sure of finding it. After Union we are certain
of finding God's Presence everywhere, and at any time. He may at times be far away, or pay
no attention to us; but we know whereabouts He is, and we can go and wait outside that place
where He has hidden Himself and which is no place (but a figure of speech): He merely disappears
from our consciousness, but not so entirely but that we can partly find Him. All this cannot
be explained, but after Union God is as present to the soul in Contemplation (and far more
so because of the great poignancy of it) as is a fellow-creature whom we actually see and touch,
much more so because between ourself and a fellow-creature, however dear, is always a barrier:
try as we may there is always a dividing line between two persons. We are two: we remain two.
But when we meet God there is nothing between us and God, nothing whatever divides us, and
yet we are not lost in God--that is to say, we do not disappear as a living individual consciousness,
but our consciousness is increased to a prodigious degree, and we are One with God.

XIV

This Oneness, in a tiny degree, can be experienced by two persons who are in close spiritual
sympathy when both are simultaneously and powerfully animated by very loving thoughts of Christ,
or are working together, and giving on account of Christ: then a fluid interchange of sympathies
and interests takes place in which the barriers of individuality go down.

This same fluid interchange in a still lesser degree takes place in ordinary friendship between
two friends of similar tastes; but this interchange must always be with the mental and the
higher part of us, it can never take place because of the merely physical, for in the physical,
dependent as it is upon senses, barriers always exist: we see this in the union of lovers--their
union is merely a transitory self-gratification, although it may include another self in that
it is mutual; but more frequently it is not even mutual, and what is a pleasure to one is at
the moment distasteful to the other, though the one can easily conceal from the other that
it is so, proving how complete the duality of consciousness and of feeling remains between
two individuals who depend upon contiguity of substance (or the sense of touch) for their union,
and not upon spiritual similarity: in spiritual similarity alone is identity of feeling and
personality and perfect union to be found, and in this identity deceit is impossible.

XV

The more we investigate the question of satisfactions the more we find that these, in order
to be permanent, must take place upon a very high level, upon a plane above materialism. However
much we may with our sense of taste enjoy a dinner to-day, it will be no joy whatever even
a week hence. The natural everyday facts should (and are intended to) prove to us the futility
of giving so much time and thought to the pleasures of the flesh: these pleasures lead nowhere,
they end abruptly, they are very limited, being confined to five senses, and consequently,
owing to a necessity of continual repetition, satiety supervenes, and there remains nothing
else to turn to. Yet when this happens we are really very fortunate, because it may be a cause
of our searching amongst our higher faculties for our gratifications.

XVI

The soul finds it bitterly hard to rid herself of selfishness and self-will: she gets rid of
one form, only to find herself falling to another. When first my soul reknew the Joy of God
I said to myself, "I will hide it in my own bosom, I will keep it all to myself. I am become
independent of all creatures, I want none of them, I cannot bear the sight or the sound of
them, how joyfully I leave them all behind!--I want only my God--I want--But what is all this?--I
want, I will, I, I, I, I!" Later the days come when God hides Himself from me: I can go and
wait at His threshold (because when she knows the way He never denies the soul the threshold,
though He denies her Himself). I may pour out all the sweetness of my love, but he makes no
response; I may sing to Him all day: He will not hear; I may give Him all that I am or have,
and He will not communicate Himself to me. Then I remember all the years of my striving, I
remember the stress, the sweat of all that climb to His footstool--the sweat that at times
was like drops of blood wrung out of the soul, out of the heart, out of the mind; and yet all
forgotten in the instant of the rapture of Finding. Did He then beckon and draw and delight
the soul only to madden with the anguish of more hiding and more striving: was He to be found
only that He might again be lost? My soul sickened with fear, and I said, Love is a calamity;
who can release me from the anguish of it? O God, since I may no more possess Thee, grant that
I may shortly pass into the dust and for ever be no more, so that I may escape this pain of
knowing Thy Perfections and my own necessity for Thee; and I mourned for Him till my health went.

Weeks passed, and three words came constantly to me: "Visit my sick." But I did not listen:
I was sick myself with a deadly wound. Almost every day the same three words came; but I turned
away resentfully from them, saying to myself, "What have the sick to do with me? I am weary
of sick people: I have been so much with them. Must I accept the sick in place of the ecstasy
of God? I mourn for the loss of God. I can cheer no sick."

The words came again, with excessive gentleness, and the gentleness was like the gentleness
of Christ, and it pierced. So that day I go to the village and visit the sick again, and I
look at them tenderly and lovingly, and tenderly and lovingly they look at me, and some say,
"It is as if God came into the house with you"; and tears come to my eyes, and I say, "It may
be so, because He sent me," and they gaze at me lovingly, and lovingly I gaze at them; and
it seems to me that I can no longer tell where "they" cease and where "I" begin, and the sweetness,
the peculiar sweetness, of Christ pierces me through from my head to my feet--that sweetness
that I have not known for weeks. And so I comprehend that Holy Love is not alone just Thee
and me, but it is also Thee and me and the others, and Thee and the others and me.

* * *

I wanted my own way. The way I wanted was to be free in order to worship and bless God in a
beautiful place, in some place that I should choose. I wanted to worship Him, and to sing Him
the Song of the Soul from some quiet hill among the olive trees by the Mediterranean Sea. I
wanted this marvellous, this almost terrible, joy of meeting God in a beautiful place that
I should choose: I wanted it so that it became spiritual greed--spiritual self-indulgence.

Duty, heavy-winged duty, prevented my taking the journey; duty to an always-contrary relation,
now unwell. It was only a little thing--just a journey prevented, but it crossed my self-will;
and in an impatient, detestable way that I have, I wanted to push all duty, even all human
relationships, anywhere upon one side, or over the edge of the world, so they might all fall
together out of my sight and I be free!

Because I thought these thoughts, I came to the Place of Tribulation. And the Messenger came,
and he said, "Escape, and the way is consenting." But I said, "No, I will not have that way,
I will escape by some other way." So I tried every other way, but found it guarded by something
which seemed to be armed with a hammer; but I persisted: then for days and nights my soul stood
up to the hammers and received terrible blows, and still I persisted--I would find a way to
escape that should please my will. But I could not eat, I could not sleep, the flesh visibly
lessened on my bones, and at last I loathed myself and my own will and my own soul, and I cried
to God, "Shall I never be through with this terrible struggle with self-will?" and groaned
aloud in my despair.

Then the words that were sent long ago to a saint, and that he was inspired to write down to
help us all, now came and did their work for me through him: "My grace is sufficient for thee."
And so I found it, and more than sufficient--when I consented.

Who is it, what is it, that so punishes the soul? Is it God? No. Patiently, lovingly He waits. We
are conscious, that we ourselves, in adapting means to ends, are guided by reason and design, and that
it is not ignorantly nor casually we perform those actions, which tend to self-preservation,
to the obtaining pleasure, and avoiding pain.

Put aside these wretched, these sometimes awful and terrible, battles and punishments, shrink
from them when they come, and we may put aside salvation. Accept them--stand up to the hammer
and take the blows and learn: consent to the sword that pierces up to the hilt, and what do
we come to?--The Blisses of God.

PART V

I

After coming to Union with God, our prayers become entirely changed, not only in the manner
of presenting them, but changed also in what is presented. Petitioning is a hard thing. I had
found it easy to pray for others whether I loved them or not, with the lips and with some of
the heart; but I found that I could not do it in the new way, with all my heart, mind, soul,
and strength, so that everything else fled away into nothing and was no more, except that for
which I petitioned God. A perfect concentration for the welfare of a stranger or of some cause
was a very hard thing; yet I was made aware that I must learn to do it.

