
He could resume it now if he chose, for neither that nor any other contact can defile him;
but he does not choose.

There are several other stages, I believe, but I do not remember what they are.  But he has
been through them.  Throughout the long course he was perfecting himself in holy learning,
and writing commentaries upon the sacred books.  He was also meditating upon Brahma, and he
does that now.

White marble relief-portraits of him are sold all about India.  He lives in a good house in
a noble great garden in Benares, all meet and proper to his stupendous rank.  Necessarily he
does not go abroad in the streets.  Deities would never be able to move about handily in any
country.  If one whom we recognized and adored as a god should go abroad in our streets, and
the day it was to happen were known, all traffic would be blocked and business would come to
a standstill.

This god is comfortably housed, and yet modestly, all things considered, for if he wanted to
live in a palace he would only need to speak and his worshipers would gladly build it.  Sometimes
he sees devotees for a moment, and comforts them and blesses them, and they kiss his feet and
go away happy.  Rank is nothing to him, he being a god.  To him all men are alike.  He sees
whom he pleases and denies himself to whom he pleases. Sometimes he sees a prince and denies
himself to a pauper; at other times he receives the pauper and turns the prince away.  However,
he does not receive many of either class.  He has to husband his time for his meditations.
I think he would receive Rev. Mr. Parker at any time.  I think he is sorry for Mr. Parker,
and I think Mr. Parker is sorry for him; and no doubt this compassion is good for both of them.

When we arrived we had to stand around in the garden a little while and wait, and the outlook
was not good, for he had been turning away Maharajas that day and receiving only the riff-raff,
and we belonged in between, somewhere.  But presently, a servant came out saying it was all
right, he was coming.

And sure enough, he came, and I saw him--that object of the worship of millions.  It was a
strange sensation, and thrilling.  I wish I could feel it stream through my veins again.  And
yet, to me he was not a god, he was only a Taj.  The thrill was not my thrill, but had come
to me secondhand from those invisible millions of believers.  By a hand-shake with their god
I had ground-circuited their wire and got their monster battery's whole charge.

He was tall and slender, indeed emaciated.  He had a clean cut and conspicuously intellectual
face, and a deep and kindly eye.  He looked many years older than he really was, but much study
and meditation and fasting and prayer, with the arid life he had led as hermit and beggar,
could account for that.  He is wholly nude when he receives natives, of whatever rank they
may be, but he had white cloth around his loins now, a concession to Mr. Parker's Europe prejudices,
no doubt.

As soon as I had sobered down a little we got along very well together, and I found him a most
pleasant and friendly deity.  He had heard a deal about Chicago, and showed a quite remarkable
interest in it, for a god. It all came of the World's Fair and the Congress of Religions. 
If India knows about nothing else American, she knows about those, and will keep them in mind
one while.

He proposed an exchange of autographs, a delicate attention which made me believe in him, but
I had been having my doubts before.  He wrote his in his book, and I have a reverent regard
for that book, though the words run from right to left, and so I can't read it.  It was a mistake
to print in that way.  It contains his voluminous comments on the Hindoo holy writings, and
if I could make them out I would try for perfection myself.  I gave him a copy of Huckleberry
Finn.  I thought it might rest him up a little to mix it in along with his meditations on Brahma,
for he looked tired, and I knew that if it didn't do him any good it wouldn't do him any harm.

He has a scholar meditating under him--Mina Bahadur Rana--but we did not see him.  He wears
clothes and is very imperfect.  He has written a little pamphlet about his master, and I have
that.  It contains a wood-cut of the master and himself seated on a rug in the garden.  The
portrait of the master is very good indeed.  The posture is exactly that which Brahma himself
affects, and it requires long arms and limber legs, and can be accumulated only by gods and
the india-rubber man.  There is a life-size marble relief of Shri 108, S.B.S.  in the garden.
It represents him in this same posture.

Dear me!  It is a strange world.  Particularly the Indian division of it. This pupil, Mina
Bahadur Rana, is not a commonplace person, but a man of distinguished capacities and attainments,
and, apparently, he had a fine worldly career in front of him.  He was serving the Nepal Government
in a high capacity at the Court of the Viceroy of India, twenty years ago.  He was an able
man, educated, a thinker, a man of property.  But the longing to devote himself to a religious
life came upon him, and he resigned his place, turned his back upon the vanities and comforts
of the world, and went away into the solitudes to live in a hut and study the sacred writings
and meditate upon virtue and holiness and seek to attain them. This sort of religion resembles
ours.  Christ recommended the rich to give away all their property and follow Him in poverty,
not in worldly comfort.  American and English millionaires do it every day, and thus verify
and confirm to the world the tremendous forces that lie in religion.  Yet many people scoff
at them for this loyalty to duty, and many will scoff at Mina Bahadur Rana and call him a crank.
Like many Christians of great character and intellect, he has made the study of his Scriptures
and the writing of books of commentaries upon them the loving labor of his life.  Like them,
he has believed that his was not an idle and foolish waste of his life, but a most worthy and
honorable employment of it.  Yet, there are many people who will see in those others, men worthy
of homage and deep reverence, but in him merely a crank.  But I shall not.  He has my reverence.
And I don't offer it as a common thing and poor, but as an unusual thing and of value.  The
ordinary reverence, the reverence defined and explained by the dictionary costs nothing. Reverence
for one's own sacred things--parents, religion, flag, laws, and respect for one's own beliefs--these
are feelings which we cannot even help.  They come natural to us; they are involuntary, like
breathing. There is no personal merit in breathing.  But the reverence which is difficult,
and which has personal merit in it, is the respect which you pay, without compulsion, to the
political or religious attitude of a man whose beliefs are not yours.  You can't revere his
gods or his politics, and no one expects you to do that, but you could respect his belief in
them if you tried hard enough; and you could respect him, too, if you tried hard enough.  But
it is very, very difficult; it is next to impossible, and so we hardly ever try.  If the man
doesn't believe as we do, we say he is a crank, and that settles it.  I mean it does nowadays,
because now we can't burn him.

We are always canting about people's "irreverence," always charging this offense upon somebody
or other, and thereby intimating that we are better than that person and do not commit that
offense ourselves.  Whenever we do this we are in a lying attitude, and our speech is cant;
for none of us are reverent--in a meritorious way; deep down in our hearts we are all irreverent.
There is probably not a single exception to this rule in the earth.  There is probably not
one person whose reverence rises higher than respect for his own sacred things; and therefore,
it is not a thing to boast about and be proud of, since the most degraded savage has that --and,
like the best of us, has nothing higher.  To speak plainly, we despise all reverences and all
objects of reverence which are outside the pale of our own list of sacred things.  And yet,
with strange inconsistency, we are shocked when other people despise and defile the things
which are holy to us.  Suppose we should meet with a paragraph like the following, in the newspapers:

"Yesterday a visiting party of the British nobility had a picnic at Mount Vernon, and in the
tomb of Washington they ate their luncheon, sang popular songs, played games, and danced waltzes
and polkas."

Should we be shocked?  Should we feel outraged?  Should we be amazed? Should we call the performance
a desecration?  Yes, that would all happen.  We should denounce those people in round terms,
and call them hard names.  The pork-millionaires would be denounced in round terms; they would
be called hard names.

In the tomb at Mount Vernon lie the ashes of America's most honored son; in the Abbey, the
ashes of England's greatest dead; the tomb of tombs, the costliest in the earth, the wonder
of the world, the Taj, was built by a great Emperor to honor the memory of a perfect wife and
perfect mother, one in whom there was no spot or blemish, whose love was his stay and support,
whose life was the light of the world to him; in it her ashes lie, and to the Mohammedan millions
of India it is a holy place; to them it is what Mount Vernon is to Americans, it is what the
Abbey is to the English.

Were there any Americans among those lunch parties?  If they were invited, there were.

If my imagined lunch-parties in Westminster and the tomb of Washington should take place, the
incident would cause a vast outbreak of bitter eloquence about Barbarism and Irreverence; and
it would come from two sets of people who would go next day and dance in the Taj if they had
a chance.

As we took our leave of the Benares god and started away we noticed a group of natives waiting
respectfully just within the gate--a Rajah from somewhere in India, and some people of lesser
consequence.  The god beckoned them to come, and as we passed out the Rajah was kneeling and
reverently kissing his sacred feet.

If Barnum--but Barnum's ambitions are at rest.  This god will remain in the holy peace and
seclusion of his garden, undisturbed.  Barnum could not have gotten him, anyway.  Still, he
would have found a substitute that would answer.

CHAPTER LIV.

Do not undervalue the headache.  While it is at its sharpest it seems a
bad investment; but when relief begins, the unexpired remainder is worth
$4 a minute.
                                  --Pudd'nhead Wilson's New Calendar.

A comfortable railway journey of seventeen and a half hours brought us to the capital of India,
which is likewise the capital of Bengal--Calcutta. Like Bombay, it has a population of nearly
a million natives and a small gathering of white people.  It is a huge city and fine, and is
called the City of Palaces.  It is rich in historical memories; rich in British achievement--military,
political, commercial; rich in the results of the miracles done by that brace of mighty magicians,
Clive and Hastings.  And has a cloud kissing monument to one Ochterlony.

It is a fluted candlestick 250 feet high.  This lingam is the only large monument in Calcutta,
I believe.  It is a fine ornament, and will keep Ochterlony in mind.

Wherever you are, in Calcutta, and for miles around, you can see it; and always when you see
it you think of Ochterlony.  And so there is not an hour in the day that you do not think of
Ochterlony and wonder who he was.  It is good that Clive cannot come back, for he would think
it was for Plassey; and then that great spirit would be wounded when the revelation came that
it was not.  Clive would find out that it was for Ochterlony; and he would think Ochterlony
was a battle.  And he would think it was a great one, too, and he would say, "With three thousand
I whipped sixty thousand and founded the Empire--and there is no monument; this other soldier
must have whipped a billion with a dozen and saved the world."

But he would be mistaken.  Ochterlony was a man, not a battle.  And he did good and honorable
service, too; as good and honorable service as has been done in India by seventy-five or a
hundred other Englishmen of courage, rectitude, and distinguished capacity.  For India has
been a fertile breeding-ground of such men, and remains so; great men, both in war and in the
civil service, and as modest as great.  But they have no monuments, and were not expecting
any.  Ochterlony could not have been expecting one, and it is not at all likely that he desired
one--certainly not until Clive and Hastings should be supplied.  Every day Clive and Hastings
lean on the battlements of heaven and look down and wonder which of the two the monument is
for; and they fret and worry because they cannot find out, and so the peace of heaven is spoiled
for them and lost. But not for Ochterlony.  Ochterlony is not troubled.  He doesn't suspect
that it is his monument.  Heaven is sweet and peaceful to him.  There is a sort of unfairness
about it all.

Indeed, if monuments were always given in India for high achievements, duty straitly performed,
and smirchless records, the landscape would be monotonous with them.  The handful of English
in India govern the Indian myriads with apparent ease, and without noticeable friction, through
tact, training, and distinguished administrative ability, reinforced by just and liberal laws--and
by keeping their word to the native whenever they give it.

England is far from India and knows little about the eminent services performed by her servants
there, for it is the newspaper correspondent who makes fame, and he is not sent to India but
to the continent, to report the doings of the princelets and the dukelets, and where they are
visiting and whom they are marrying.  Often a British official spends thirty or forty years
in India, climbing from grade to grade by services which would make him celebrated anywhere
else, and finishes as a vice-sovereign, governing a great realm and millions of subjects; then
he goes home to England substantially unknown and unheard of, and settles down in some modest
corner, and is as one extinguished.  Ten years later there is a twenty-line obituary in the
London papers, and the reader is paralyzed by the splendors of a career which he is not sure
that he had ever heard of before.  But meanwhile he has learned all about the continental princelets
and dukelets.

The average man is profoundly ignorant of countries that lie remote from his own.  When they
are mentioned in his presence one or two facts and maybe a couple of names rise like torches
in his mind, lighting up an inch or two of it and leaving the rest all dark.  The mention of
Egypt suggests some Biblical facts and the Pyramids-nothing more.  The mention of South Africa
suggests Kimberly and the diamonds and there an end. Formerly the mention, to a Hindoo, of
America suggested a name--George Washington--with that his familiarity with our country was
exhausted. Latterly his familiarity with it has doubled in bulk; so that when America is mentioned
now, two torches flare up in the dark caverns of his mind and he says, "Ah, the country of
the great man Washington; and of the Holy City--Chicago."  For he knows about the Congress
of Religion, and this has enabled him to get an erroneous impression of Chicago.

When India is mentioned to the citizen of a far country it suggests Clive, Hastings, the Mutiny,
Kipling, and a number of other great events; and the mention of Calcutta infallibly brings
up the Black Hole.  And so, when that citizen finds himself in the capital of India he goes
first of all to see the Black Hole of Calcutta--and is disappointed.

The Black Hole was not preserved; it is gone, long, long ago.  It is strange.  Just as it stood,
it was itself a monument; a ready-made one. It was finished, it was complete, its materials
were strong and lasting, it needed no furbishing up, no repairs; it merely needed to be let
alone. It was the first brick, the Foundation Stone, upon which was reared a mighty Empire--the
Indian Empire of Great Britain.  It was the ghastly episode of the Black Hole that maddened
the British and brought Clive, that young military marvel, raging up from Madras; it was the
seed from which sprung Plassey; and it was that extraordinary battle, whose like had not been
seen in the earth since Agincourt, that laid deep and strong the foundations of England's colossal
Indian sovereignty.

And yet within the time of men who still live, the Black Hole was torn down and thrown away
as carelessly as if its bricks were common clay, not ingots of historic gold.  There is no
accounting for human beings.

The supposed site of the Black Hole is marked by an engraved plate.  I saw that; and better
that than nothing.  The Black Hole was a prison--a cell is nearer the right word--eighteen
feet square, the dimensions of an ordinary bedchamber; and into this place the victorious Nabob
of Bengal packed 146 of his English prisoners.  There was hardly standing room for them; scarcely
a breath of air was to be got; the time was night, the weather sweltering hot.  Before the
dawn came, the captives were all dead but twenty-three.  Mr. Holwell's long account of the
awful episode was familiar to the world a hundred years ago, but one seldom sees in print even
an extract from it in our day.  Among the striking things in it is this.  Mr. Holwell, perishing
with thirst, kept himself alive by sucking the perspiration from his sleeves.  It gives one
a vivid idea of the situation.  He presently found that while he was busy drawing life from
one of his sleeves a young English gentleman was stealing supplies from the other one.  Holwell
was an unselfish man, a man of the most generous impulses; he lived and died famous for these
fine and rare qualities; yet when he found out what was happening to that unwatched sleeve,
he took the precaution to suck that one dry first.  The miseries of the Black Hole were able
to change even a nature like his.  But that young gentleman was one of the twenty-three survivors,
and he said it was the stolen perspiration that saved his life.  From the middle of Mr. Holwell's
narrative I will make a brief excerpt:

     "Then a general prayer to Heaven, to hasten the approach of the
     flames to the right and left of us, and put a period to our misery.
     But these failing, they whose strength and spirits were quite
     exhausted laid themselves down and expired quietly upon their
     fellows: others who had yet some strength and vigor left made a last
     effort at the windows, and several succeeded by leaping and
     scrambling over the backs and heads of those in the first rank, and
     got hold of the bars, from which there was no removing them.  Many
     to the right and left sunk with the violent pressure, and were soon
     suffocated; for now a steam arose from the living and the dead,
     which affected us in all its circumstances as if we were forcibly
     held with our heads over a bowl full of strong volatile spirit of
     hartshorn, until suffocated; nor could the effluvia of the one be
     distinguished from the other, and frequently, when I was forced by
     the load upon my head and shoulders to hold my face down, I was
     obliged, near as I was to the window, instantly to raise it again to
     avoid suffocation.  I need not, my dear friend, ask your
     commiseration, when I tell you, that in this plight, from half an
     hour past eleven till near two in the morning, I sustained the
     weight of a heavy man, with his knees in my back, and the pressure
     of his whole body on my head.  A Dutch surgeon who had taken his
     seat upon my left shoulder, and a Topaz (a black Christian soldier)
     bearing on my right; all which nothing could have enabled me to
     support but the props and pressure equally sustaining me all around.
     The two latter I frequently dislodged by shifting my hold on the
     bars and driving my knuckles into their ribs; but my friend above
     stuck fast, held immovable by two bars.

     "I exerted anew my strength and fortitude; but the repeated trials
     and efforts I made to dislodge the insufferable incumbrances upon me
     at last quite exhausted me; and towards two o'clock, finding I must
     quit the window or sink where I was, I resolved on the former,
     having bore, truly for the sake of others, infinitely more for life
     than the best of it is worth.  In the rank close behind me was an
     officer of one of the ships, whose name was Cary, and who had
     behaved with much bravery during the siege (his wife, a fine woman,
     though country born, would not quit him, but accompanied him into
     the prison, and was one who survived).  This poor wretch had been
     long raving for water and air; I told him I was determined to give
     up life, and recommended his gaining my station.  On my quitting it
     he made a fruitless attempt to get my place; but the Dutch surgeon,
     who sat on my shoulder, supplanted him.  Poor Cary expressed his
     thankfulness, and said he would give up life too; but it was with
     the utmost labor we forced our way from the window (several in the
     inner ranks appearing to me dead standing, unable to fall by the
     throng and equal pressure around).  He laid himself down to die; and
     his death, I believe, was very sudden; for he was a short, full,
     sanguine man.  His strength was great; and, I imagine, had he not
     retired with me, I should never have been able to force my way.  I
     was at this time sensible of no pain, and little uneasiness; I can
     give you no better idea of my situation than by repeating my simile
     of the bowl of spirit of hartshorn.  I found a stupor coming on
     apace, and laid myself down by that gallant old man, the Rev. Mr.
     Jervas Bellamy, who laid dead with his son, the lieutenant, hand in
     hand, near the southernmost wall of the prison.  When I had lain
     there some little time, I still had reflection enough to suffer some
     uneasiness in the thought that I should be trampled upon, when dead,
     as I myself had done to others.  With some difficulty I raised
     myself, and gained the platform a second time, where I presently
     lost all sensation; the last trace of sensibility that I have been
     able to recollect after my laying down, was my sash being uneasy
     about my waist, which I untied, and threw from me.  Of what passed
     in this interval, to the time of my resurrection from this hole of
     horrors, I can give you no account."

There was plenty to see in Calcutta, but there was not plenty of time for it.  I saw the fort
that Clive built; and the place where Warren Hastings and the author of the Junius Letters
fought their duel; and the great botanical gardens; and the fashionable afternoon turnout in
the Maidan; and a grand review of the garrison in a great plain at sunrise; and a military
tournament in which great bodies of native soldiery exhibited the perfection of their drill
at all arms, a spectacular and beautiful show occupying several nights and closing with the
mimic storming of a native fort which was as good as the reality for thrilling and accurate
detail, and better than the reality for security and comfort; we had a pleasure excursion on
the 'Hoogly' by courtesy of friends, and devoted the rest of the time to social life and the
Indian museum.  One should spend a month in the museum, an enchanted palace of Indian antiquities.
Indeed, a person might spend half a year among the beautiful and wonderful things without exhausting
their interest.

It was winter.  We were of Kipling's "hosts of tourists who travel up and down India in the
cold weather showing how things ought to be managed." It is a common expression there, "the
cold weather," and the people think there is such a thing.  It is because they have lived there
half a lifetime, and their perceptions have become blunted.  When a person is accustomed to
138 in the shade, his ideas about cold weather are not valuable.  I had read, in the histories,
that the June marches made between Lucknow and Cawnpore by the British forces in the time of
the Mutiny were made weather--138 in the shade and had taken it for historical embroidery.
I had read it again in Serjeant-Major Forbes-Mitchell's account of his military experiences
in the Mutiny --at least I thought I had--and in Calcutta I asked him if it was true, and he
said it was.  An officer of high rank who had been in the thick of the Mutiny said the same.
As long as those men were talking about what they knew, they were trustworthy, and I believed
them; but when they said it was now "cold weather," I saw that they had traveled outside of
their sphere of knowledge and were floundering.  I believe that in India "cold weather" is
merely a conventional phrase and has come into use through the necessity of having some way
to distinguish between weather which will melt a brass door-knob and weather which will only
make it mushy. It was observable that brass ones were in use while I was in Calcutta, showing
that it was not yet time to change to porcelain; I was told the change to porcelain was not
usually made until May.  But this cold weather was too warm for us; so we started to Darjeeling,
in the Himalayas--a twenty-four hour journey.

CHAPTER LV.

FROM DIARY:

February 14.  We left at 4:30 P.M.  Until dark we moved through rich vegetation, then changed
to a boat and crossed the Ganges.

