OUR OLD HOME

A Series of English Sketches

by

Nathaniel Hawthorne

To Franklin Pierce,

As a Slight Memorial of a College Friendship, prolonged through Manhood, and retaining all
its Vitality in our Autumnal Years,

This Volume is inscribed by  NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE.

TO A FRIEND.

I have not asked your consent, my dear General, to the foregoing inscription, because it would
have been no inconsiderable disappointment to me had you withheld it; for I have long desired
to connect your name with some book of mine, in commemoration of an early friendship that has
grown old between two individuals of widely dissimilar pursuits and fortunes.  I only wish
that the offering were a worthier one than this volume of sketches, which certainly are not
of a kind likely to prove interesting to a statesman in retirement, inasmuch as they meddle
with no matters of policy or government, and have very little to say about the deeper traits
of national character.  In their humble way, they belong entirely to aesthetic literature,
and can achieve no higher success than to represent to the American reader a few of the external
aspects of English scenery and life, especially those that are touched with the antique charm
to which our countrymen are more susceptible than are the people among whom it is of native growth.

I once hoped, indeed, that so slight a volume would not be all that I might write.  These and
other sketches, with which, in a somewhat rougher form than I have given them here, my journal
was copiously filled, were intended for the side-scenes and backgrounds and exterior adornment
of a work of fiction of which the plan had imperfectly developed itself in my mind, and into
which I ambitiously proposed to convey more of various modes of truth than I could have grasped
by a direct effort.  Of course, I should not mention this abortive project, only that it has
been utterly thrown aside and will never now be accomplished.  The Present, the Immediate,
the Actual, has proved too potent for me.  It takes away not only my scanty faculty, but even
my desire for imaginative composition, and leaves me sadly content to scatter a thousand peaceful
fantasies upon the hurricane that is sweeping us all along with it, possibly, into a Limbo
where our nation and its polity may be as literally the fragments of a shattered dream as my
unwritten Romance.  But I have far better hopes for our dear country; and for my individual
share of the catastrophe, I afflict myself little, or not at all, and shall easily find room
for the abortive work on a certain ideal shelf, where are reposited many other shadowy volumes
of mine, more in number, and very much superior in quality, to those which I have succeeded
in rendering actual.

To return to these poor Sketches; some of my friends have told me that they evince an asperity
of sentiment towards the English people which I ought not to feel, and which it is highly inexpedient
to express.  The charge surprises me, because, if it be true, I have written from a shallower
mood than I supposed.  I seldom came into personal relations with an Englishman without beginning
to like him, and feeling my favorable impression wax stronger with the progress of the acquaintance.
I never stood in an English crowd without being conscious of hereditary sympathies.  Nevertheless,
it is undeniable that an American is continually thrown upon his national antagonism by some
acrid quality in the moral atmosphere of England.  These people think so loftily of themselves,
and so contemptuously of everybody else, that it requires more generosity than I possess to
keep always in perfectly good-humor with them.  Jotting down the little acrimonies of the moment
in my journal, and transferring them thence (when they happened to be tolerably well expressed)
to these pages, it is very possible that I may have said things which a profound observer of
national character would hesitate to sanction, though never any, I verily believe, that had
not more or less of truth.  If they be true, there is no reason in the world why they should
not be said.  Not an Englishman of them all ever spared America for courtesy's sake or kindness;
nor, in my opinion, would it contribute in the least to our mutual advantage and comfort if
we were to besmear one another all over with butter and honey.  At any rate, we must not judge
of an Englishman's susceptibilities by our own, which, likewise, I trust, are of a far less
sensitive texture than formerly.

And now farewell, my dear friend; and excuse (if you think it needs any excuse) the freedom
with which I thus publicly assert a personal friendship between a private individual and a
statesman who has filled what was then the most august position in the world.  But I dedicate
my book to the Friend, and shall defer a colloquy with the Statesman till some calmer and sunnier
hour.  Only this let me say, that, with the record of your life in my memory, and with a sense
of your character in my deeper consciousness as among the few things that time has left as
it found them, I need no assurance that you continue faithful forever to that grand idea of
an irrevocable Union, which, as you once told me, was the earliest that your brave father taught
you.  For other men there may be a choice of paths,--for you, but one; and it rests among my
certainties that no man's loyalty is more steadfast, no man's hopes or apprehensions on behalf
of our national existence more deeply heartfelt, or more closely intertwined with his possibilities
of personal happiness, than those of FRANKLIN PIERCE.

THE WAYSIDE, July 2, 1863.

CONTENTS.

Consular Experiences Leamington Spa About Warwick Recollections of a Gifted Woman Lichfield
and Uttoxeter Pilgrimage to Old Boston Near Oxford Some of the Haunts of Burns A London Suburb
Up the Thames Outside Glimpses of English Poverty Civic Banquets.

OUR OLD HOME.

CONSULAR EXPERIENCES.

The Consulate of the United States, in my day, was located in Washington Buildings (a shabby
and smoke-stained edifice of four stories high, thus illustriously named in honor of our national
establishment), at the lower corner of Brunswick Street, contiguous to the Gorec Arcade, and
in the neighborhood of scone of the oldest docks.  This was by no means a polite or elegant
portion of England's great commercial city, nor were the apartments of the American official
so splendid as to indicate the assumption of much consular pomp on his part.  A narrow and
ill-lighted staircase gave access to an equally narrow and ill-lighted passageway on the first
floor, at the extremity of which, surmounting a door-frame, appeared an exceedingly stiff pictorial
representation of the Goose and Gridiron, according to the English idea of those ever-to-be-honored
symbols.  The staircase and passageway were often thronged, of a morning, with a set of beggarly
and piratical-looking scoundrels (I do no wrong to our own countrymen in styling them so, for
not one in twenty was a genuine American), purporting to belong to our mercantile marine, and
chiefly composed of Liverpool Blackballers and the scum of every maritime nation on earth;
such being the seamen by whose assistance we then disputed the navigation of the world with
England.  These specimens of a most unfortunate class of people were shipwrecked crews in quest
of bed, board, and clothing, invalids asking permits for the hospital, bruised and bloody wretches
complaining of ill-treatment by their officers, drunkards, desperadoes, vagabonds, and cheats,
perplexingly intermingled with an uncertain proportion of reasonably honest men.  All of them
(save here and there a poor devil of a kidnapped landsman in his shore-going rags) wore red
flannel shirts, in which they had sweltered or shivered throughout the voyage, and all required
consular assistance in one form or another.

Any respectable visitor, if he could make up his mind to elbow a passage among these sea-monsters,
was admitted into an outer office, where he found more of the same species, explaining their
respective wants or grievances to the Vice-Consul and clerks, while their shipmates awaited
their turn outside the door.  Passing through this exterior court, the stranger was ushered
into an inner privacy, where sat the Consul himself, ready to give personal attention to such
peculiarly difficult and more important cases as might demand the exercise of (what we will
courteously suppose to be) his own higher judicial or administrative sagacity.

It was an apartment of very moderate size, painted in imitation of oak, and duskily lighted
by two windows looking across a by-street at the rough brick-side of an immense cotton warehouse,
a plainer and uglier structure than ever was built in America.  On the walls of the room hung
a large map of the United States (as they were, twenty years ago, but seem little likely to
be, twenty years hence), and a similar one of Great Britain, with its territory so provokingly
compact, that we may expect it to sink sooner than sunder.  Farther adornments were some rude
engravings of our naval victories in the War of 1812, together with the Tennessee State House,
and a Hudson River steamer, and a colored, life-size lithograph of General Taylor, with an
honest hideousness of aspect, occupying the place of honor above the mantel-piece.  On the
top of a bookcase stood a fierce and terrible bust of General Jackson, pilloried in a military
collar which rose above his ears, and frowning forth immitigably at any Englishman who might
happen to cross the threshold.  I am afraid, however, that the truculence of the old General's
expression was utterly thrown away on this stolid and obdurate race of men; for, when they
occasionally inquired whom this work of art represented, I was mortified to find that the younger
ones had never heard of the battle of New Orleans, and that their elders had either forgotten
it altogether, or contrived to misremember, and twist it wrong end foremost into something
like an English victory.  They have caught from the old Romans (whom they resemble in so many
other characteristics) this excellent method of keeping the national glory intact by sweeping
all defeats and humiliations clean out of their memory.  Nevertheless, my patriotism forbade
me to take down either the bust, or the pictures, both because it seemed no more than right
that an American Consulate (being a little patch of our nationality imbedded into the soil
and institutions of England) should fairly represent the American taste in the fine arts, and
because these decorations reminded me so delightfully of an old-fashioned American barber's shop.

One truly English object was a barometer hanging on the wall, generally indicating one or another
degree of disagreeable weather, and so seldom pointing to Fair, that I began to consider that
portion of its circle as made superfluously.  The deep chimney, with its grate of bituminous
coal, was English too, as was also the chill temperature that sometimes called for a fire at
midsummer, and the foggy or smoky atmosphere which often, between November and March, compelled
me to set the gas aflame at noonday.  I am not aware of omitting anything important in the
above descriptive inventory, unless it be some book-shelves filled with octavo volumes of the
American Statutes, and a good many pigeon-holes stuffed with dusty communications from former
Secretaries of State, and other official documents of similar value, constituting part of the
archives of the Consulate, which I might have done my successor a favor by flinging into the
coal-grate.  Yes; there was one other article demanding prominent notice: the consular copy
of the New Testament, bound in black morocco, and greasy, I fear, with a daily succession of
perjured kisses; at least, I can hardly hope that all the ten thousand oaths, administered
by me between two breaths, to all sorts of people and on all manner of worldly business, were
reckoned by the swearer as if taken at his soul's peril.

Such, in short, was the dusky and stifled chamber in which I spent wearily a considerable portion
of more than four good years of my existence.  At first, to be quite frank with the reader,
I looked upon it as not altogether fit to be tenanted by the commercial representative of so
great and prosperous a country as the United States then were; and I should speedily have transferred
my headquarters to airier and loftier apartments, except for the prudent consideration that
my government would have left me thus to support its dignity at my own personal expense. Besides,
a long line of distinguished predecessors, of whom the latest is now a gallant general under
the Union banner, had found the locality good enough for them; it might certainly be tolerated,
therefore, by an individual so little ambitious of external magnificence as myself.  So I settled
quietly down, striking some of my roots into such soil as I could find, adapting myself to
circumstances, and with so much success, that, though from first to last I hated the very sight
of the little room, I should yet have felt a singular kind of reluctance in changing it for
a better.

Hither, in the course of my incumbency, came a great variety of visitors, principally Americans,
but including almost every other nationality on earth, especially the distressed and downfallen
ones like those of Poland and Hungary.  Italian bandits (for so they looked), proscribed conspirators
from Old Spain, Spanish-Americans, Cubans who processed to have stood by Lopez and narrowly
escaped his fate, scarred French soldiers of the Second Republic,--in a word, all sufferers,
or pretended ones, in the cause of Liberty, all people homeless in the widest sense, those
who never had a country or had lost it, those whom their native land had impatiently flung
off for planning a better system of things than they were born to,--a multitude of these and,
doubtless, an equal number of jail-birds, outwardly of the same feather, sought the American
Consulate, in hopes of at least a bit of bread, and, perhaps, to beg a passage to the blessed
shores of Freedom.  In most cases there was nothing, and in any case distressingly little,
to be done for them; neither was I of a proselyting disposition, nor desired to make my Consulate
a nucleus for the vagrant discontents of other lands.  And yet it was a proud thought, a forcible
appeal to the sympathies of an American, that these unfortunates claimed the privileges of
citizenship in our Republic on the strength of the very same noble misdemeanors that had rendered
them outlaws to their native despotisms.  So I gave them what small help I could.  Methinks
the true patriots and martyr-spirits of the whole world should have been conscious of a pang
near the heart, when a deadly blow was aimed at the vitality of a country which they have felt
to be their own in the last resort.

As for my countrymen, I grew better acquainted with many of our national characteristics during
those four years than in all my preceding life. Whether brought more strikingly out by the
contrast with English manners, or that my Yankee friends assumed an extra peculiarity from
a sense of defiant patriotism, so it was that their tones, sentiments, and behavior, even their
figures and cast of countenance, all seemed chiselled in sharper angles than ever I had imagined
them to be at home.  It impressed me with an odd idea of having somehow lost the property of
my own person, when I occasionally heard one of them speaking of me as "my Consul"! They often
came to the Consulate in parties of half a dozen or more, on no business whatever, but merely
to subject their public servant to a rigid examination, and see how he was getting on with
his duties.  These interviews were rather formidable, being characterized by a certain stiffness
which I felt to be sufficiently irksome at the moment, though it looks laughable enough in
the retrospect.  It is my firm belief that these fellow-citizens, possessing a native tendency
to organization, generally halted outside of the door to elect a speaker, chairman, or moderator,
and thus approached me with all the formalities of a deputation from the American people. 
After salutations on both sides,-- abrupt, awful, and severe on their part, and deprecatory
on mine,--and the national ceremony of shaking hands being duly gone through with, the interview
proceeded by a series of calm and well-considered questions or remarks from the spokesman (no
other of the guests vouchsafing to utter a word), and diplomatic responses from the Consul,
who sometimes found the investigation a little more searching than he liked.  I flatter myself,
however, that, by much practice, I attained considerable skill in this kind of intercourse,
the art of which lies in passing off commonplaces for new and valuable truths, and talking
trash and emptiness in such a way that a pretty acute auditor might mistake it for something
solid.  If there be any better method of dealing with such junctures,--when talk is to be created
out of nothing, and within the scope of several minds at once, so that you cannot apply yourself
to your interlocutor's individuality,--I have not learned it.

Sitting, as it were, in the gateway between the Old World and the New, where the steamers and
packets landed the greater part of our wandering countrymen, and received them again when their
wanderings were done, I saw that no people on earth have such vagabond habits as ourselves.
The Continental races never travel at all if they can help it; nor does an Englishman ever
think of stirring abroad, unless he has the money to spare, or proposes to himself some definite
advantage from the journey; but it seemed to me that nothing was more common than for a young
American deliberately to spend all his resources in an aesthetic peregrination about Europe,
returning with pockets nearly empty to begin the world in earnest.  It happened, indeed, much
oftener than was at all agreeable to myself, that their funds held out just long enough to
bring them to the door of my Consulate, where they entered as if with an undeniable right to
its shelter and protection, and required at my hands to be sent home again.  In my first simplicity,--finding
them gentlemanly in manners, passably educated, and only tempted a little beyond their means
by a laudable desire of improving and refining themselves, or, perhaps for the sake of getting
better artistic instruction in music, painting, or sculpture than our country could supply,--I
sometimes took charge of them on my private responsibility, since our government gives itself
no trouble about its stray children, except the seafaring class. But, after a few such experiments,
discovering that none of these estimable and ingenuous young men, however trustworthy they
might appear, ever dreamed of reimbursing the Consul, I deemed it expedient to take another
course with them.  Applying myself to some friendly shipmaster, I engaged homeward passages
on their behalf, with the understanding that they were to make themselves serviceable on shipboard;
and I remember several very pathetic appeals from painters and musicians, touching the damage
which their artistic fingers were likely to incur from handling the ropes.  But my observation
of so many heavier troubles left me very little tenderness for their finger-ends.  In time
I grew to be reasonably hard-hearted, though it never was quite possible to leave a countryman
with no shelter save an English poorhouse, when, as he invariably averred, he had only to set
foot on his native soil to be possessed of ample funds.  It was my ultimate conclusion, however,
that American ingenuity may be pretty safely left to itself, and that, one way or another,
a Yankee vagabond is certain to turn up at his own threshold, if he has any, without help of
a Consul, and perhaps be taught a lesson of foresight that may profit him hereafter.

Among these stray Americans, I met with no other case so remarkable as that of an old man,
who was in the habit of visiting me once in a few months, and soberly affirmed that he had
been wandering about England more than a quarter of a century (precisely twenty-seven years,
I think), and all the while doing his utmost to get home again.  Herman Melville, in his excellent
novel or biography of "Israel Potter," has an idea somewhat similar to this.  The individual
now in question was a mild and patient, but very ragged and pitiable old fellow, shabby beyond
description, lean and hungry-looking, but with a large and somewhat red nose.  He made no complaint
of his ill-fortune, but only repeated in a quiet voice, with a pathos of which he was himself
evidently unconscious, "I want to get home to Ninety-second Street, Philadelphia."  He described
himself as a printer by trade, and said that he had come over when he was a younger man, in
the hope of bettering himself, and for the sake of seeing the Old Country, but had never since
been rich enough to pay his homeward passage.  His manner and accent did not quite convince
me that he was an American, and I told him so; but he steadfastly affirmed, "Sir, I was born
and have lived in Ninety-second Street, Philadelphia," and then went on to describe some public
edifices and other local objects with which he used to be familiar, adding, with a simplicity
that touched me very closely, "Sir, I had rather be there than here!"  Though I still manifested
a lingering doubt, he took no offence, replying with the same mild depression as at first,
and insisting again and again on Ninety-second Street.  Up to the time when I saw him, he still
got a little occasional job-work at his trade, but subsisted mainly on such charity as he met
with in his wanderings, shifting from place to place continually, and asking assistance to
convey him to his native land. Possibly he was an impostor, one of the multitudinous shapes
of English vagabondism, and told his falsehood with such powerful simplicity, because, by many
repetitions, he had convinced himself of its truth.  But if, as I believe, the tale was fact,
how very strange and sad was this old man's fate!  Homeless on a foreign shore, looking always
towards his country, coming again and again to the point whence so many were setting sail for
it,--so many who would soon tread in Ninety-second Street,-- losing, in this long series of
years, some of the distinctive characteristics of an American, and at last dying and surrendering
his clay to be a portion of the soil whence he could not escape in his lifetime.

He appeared to see that he had moved me, but did not attempt to press his advantage with any
new argument, or any varied form of entreaty.  He had but scanty and scattered thoughts in
his gray head, and in the intervals of those, like the refrain of an old ballad, came in the
monotonous burden of his appeal, "If I could only find myself in Ninety-second Street, Philadelphia!"
But even his desire of getting home had ceased to be an ardent one (if, indeed, it had not
always partaken of the dreamy sluggishness of his character), although it remained his only
locomotive impulse, and perhaps the sole principle of life that kept his blood from actual torpor.

The poor old fellow's story seemed to me almost as worthy of being chanted in immortal song
as that of Odysseus or Evangeline.  I took his case into deep consideration, but dared not
incur the moral responsibility of sending him across the sea, at his age, after so many years
of exile, when the very tradition of him had passed away, to find his friends dead, or forgetful,
or irretrievably vanished, and the whole country become more truly a foreign land to him than
England was now,-- and even Ninety-second Street, in the weedlike decay and growth of our localities,
made over anew and grown unrecognizable by his old eyes. That street, so patiently longed for,
had transferred itself to the New Jerusalem, and he must seek it there, contenting his slow
heart, meanwhile, with the smoke-begrimed thoroughfares of English towns, or the green country
lanes and by-paths with which his wanderings had made him familiar; for doubtless he had a
beaten track and was the "long-remembered beggar" now, with food and a roughly hospitable greeting
ready for him at many a farm-house door, and his choice of lodging under a score of haystacks.
In America, nothing awaited him but that worst form of disappointment which comes under the
guise of a long-cherished and late-accomplished purpose, and then a year or two of dry and
barren sojourn in an almshouse, and death among strangers at last, where he had imagined a
circle of familiar faces.  So I contented myself with giving him alms, which he thankfully
accepted, and went away with bent shoulders and an aspect of gentle forlornness; returning
upon his orbit, however, after a few months, to tell the same sad and quiet story of his abode
in England for more than twenty-seven years, in all which time he had been endeavoring, and
still endeavored as patiently as ever, to find his way home to Ninety-second Street, Philadelphia.

I recollect another case, of a more ridiculous order, but still with a foolish kind of pathos
entangled in it, which impresses me now more forcibly than it did at the moment.  One day,
a queer, stupid, good-natured, fat-faced individual came into my private room, dressed in a
sky-blue, cut-away coat and mixed trousers, both garments worn and shabby, and rather too small
for his overgrown bulk.  After a little preliminary talk, he turned out to be a country shopkeeper
(from Connecticut, I think), who had left a flourishing business, and come over to England
purposely and solely to have an interview with the Queen. Some years before he had named his
two children, one for her Majesty and the other for Prince Albert, and had transmitted photographs
of the little people, as well as of his wife and himself, to the illustrious godmother.  The
Queen had gratefully acknowledged the favor in a letter under the hand of her private secretary.
Now, the shopkeeper, like a great many other Americans, had long cherished a fantastic notion
that he was one of the rightful heirs of a rich English estate; and on the strength of her
Majesty's letter and the hopes of royal patronage which it inspired, he had shut up his little
country-store and come over to claim his inheritance.  On the voyage, a German fellow-passenger
had relieved him of his money on pretence of getting it favorably exchanged, and had disappeared
immediately on the ship's arrival; so that the poor fellow was compelled to pawn all his clothes,
except the remarkably shabby ones in which I beheld him, and in which (as he himself hinted,
with a melancholy, yet good-natured smile) he did not look altogether fit to see the Queen.
I agreed with him that the bobtailed coat and mixed trousers constituted a very odd-looking
court-dress, and suggested that it was doubtless his present purpose to get back to Connecticut
as fast as possible.  But no!  The resolve to see the Queen was as strong in him as ever; and
it was marvellous the pertinacity with which he clung to it amid raggedness and starvation,
and the earnestness of his supplication that I would supply him with funds for a suitable appearance
at Windsor Castle.

I never had so satisfactory a perception of a complete booby before in my life; and it caused
me to feel kindly towards him, and yet impatient and exasperated on behalf of common-sense,
which could not possibly tolerate that such an unimaginable donkey should exist.  I laid his
absurdity before him in the very plainest terms, but without either exciting his anger or shaking
his resolution.  "O my dear man," quoth he, with good-natured, placid, simple, and tearful
stubbornness, "if you could but enter into my feelings and see the matter from beginning to
end as I see it!"  To confess the truth, I have since felt that I was hard-hearted to the poor
simpleton, and that there was more weight in his remonstrance than I chose to be sensible of,
at the time; for, like many men who have been in the habit of making playthings or tools of
their imagination and sensibility, I was too rigidly tenacious of what was reasonable in the
affairs of real life.  And even absurdity has its rights, when, as in this case, it has absorbed
a human being's entire nature and purposes.  I ought to have transmitted him to Mr. Buchanan,
in London, who, being a good-natured old gentleman, and anxious, just then, to gratify the
universal Yankee nation, might, for the joke's sake, have got him admittance to the Queen,
who had fairly laid herself open to his visit, and has received hundreds of our countrymen
on infinitely slighter grounds.  But I was inexorable, being turned to flint by the insufferable
proximity of a fool, and refused to interfere with his business in any way except to procure
him a passage home.  I can see his face of mild, ridiculous despair, at this moment, and appreciate,
better than I could then, how awfully cruel he must have felt my obduracy to be.  For years
and years, the idea of an interview with Queen Victoria had haunted his poor foolish mind;
and now, when he really stood on English ground, and the palace-door was hanging ajar for him,
he was expected to turn brick, a penniless and bamboozled simpleton, merely because an iron-hearted
consul refused to lend him thirty shillings (so low had his demand ultimately sunk) to buy
a second-class ticket on the rail for London!

He visited the Consulate several times afterwards, subsisting on a pittance that I allowed
him in the hope of gradually starving him back to Connecticut, assailing me with the old petition
at every opportunity, looking shabbier at every visit, but still thoroughly good-tempered,
mildly stubborn, and smiling through his tears, not without a perception of the ludicrousness
of his own position.  Finally, he disappeared altogether, and whither he had wandered, and
whether he ever saw the Queen, or wasted quite away in the endeavor, I never knew; but I remember
unfolding the "Times," about that period, with a daily dread of reading an account of a ragged
Yankee's attempt to steal into Buckingham Palace, and how he smiled tearfully at his captors
and besought them to introduce him to her Majesty.  I submit to Mr. Secretary Seward that he
ought to make diplomatic remonstrances to the British Ministry, and require them to take such
order that the Queen shall not any longer bewilder the wits of our poor compatriots by responding
to their epistles and thanking them for their photographs.

One circumstance in the foregoing incident--I mean the unhappy storekeeper's notion of establishing
his claim to an English estate--was common to a great many other applications, personal or
by letter, with which I was favored by my countrymen.  The cause of this peculiar insanity
lies deep in the Anglo-American heart.  After all these bloody wars and vindictive animosities,
we have still an unspeakable yearning towards England.  When our forefathers left the old home,
they pulled up many of their roots, but trailed along with them others, which were never snapt
asunder by the tug of such a lengthening distance, nor have been torn out of the original soil
by the violence of subsequent struggles, nor severed by the edge of the sword.  Even so late
as these days, they remain entangled with our heart-strings, and might often have influenced
our national cause like the tiller-ropes of a ship, if the rough gripe of England had been
capable of managing so sensitive a kind of machinery. It has required nothing less than the
boorishness, the stolidity, the self-sufficiency, the contemptuous jealousy, the half-sagacity,
invariably blind of one eye and often distorted of the other, that characterize this strange
people, to compel us to be a great nation in our own right, instead of continuing virtually,
if not in name, a province of their small island.  What pains did they take to shake us off,
and have ever since taken to keep us wide apart from them!  It might seem their folly, but
was really their fate, or, rather, the Providence of God, who has doubtless a work for us to
do, in which the massive materiality of the English character would have been too ponderous
a dead-weight upon our progress.  And, besides, if England had been wise enough to twine our
new vigor round about her ancient strength, her power would have been too firmly established
ever to yield, in its due season, to the otherwise immutable law of imperial vicissitude. 
The earth might then have beheld the intolerable spectacle of a sovereignty and institutions,
imperfect, but indestructible.

Nationally, there has ceased to be any peril of so inauspicious and yet outwardly attractive
an amalgamation.  But as an individual, the American is often conscious of the deep-rooted
sympathies that belong more fitly to times gone by, and feels a blind pathetic tendency to
wander back again, which makes itself evident in such wild dreams as I have alluded to above,
about English inheritances.  A mere coincidence of names (the Yankee one, perhaps, having been
assumed by legislative permission), a supposititious pedigree, a silver mug on which an anciently
engraved coat-of-arms has been half scrubbed out, a seal with an uncertain crest, an old yellow
letter or document in faded ink, the more scantily legible the better,--rubbish of this kind,
found in a neglected drawer, has been potent enough to turn the brain of many an honest Republican,
especially if assisted by an advertisement for lost heirs, cut out of a British newspaper.
There is no estimating or believing, till we come into a position to know it, what foolery
lurks latent in the breasts of very sensible people.  Remembering such sober extravagances,
I should not be at all surprised to find that I am myself guilty of some unsuspected absurdity,
that may appear to me the most substantial trait in my character.

I might fill many pages with instances of this diseased American appetite for English soil.
A respectable-looking woman, well advanced in life, of sour aspect, exceedingly homely, but
decidedly New-Englandish in figure and manners, came to my office with a great bundle of documents,
at the very first glimpse of which I apprehended something terrible.  Nor was I mistaken. 
The bundle contained evidences of her indubitable claim to the site on which Castle Street,
the Town Hall, the Exchange, and all the principal business part of Liverpool have long been
situated; and with considerable peremptoriness, the good lady signified her expectation that
I should take charge of her suit, and prosecute it to judgment; not, however, on the equitable
condition of receiving half the value of the property recovered (which, in case of complete
success, would have made both of us ten or twenty fold millionaires), but without recompense
or reimbursement of legal expenses, solely as an incident of my official duty.  Another time
came two ladies, bearing a letter of emphatic introduction from his Excellency the Governor
of their native State, who testified in most satisfactory terms to their social respectability.
They were claimants of a great estate in Cheshire, and announced themselves as blood-relatives
of Queen Victoria,--a point, however, which they deemed it expedient to keep in the background
until their territorial rights should be established, apprehending that the Lord High Chancellor
might otherwise be less likely to come to a fair decision in respect to them, from a probable
disinclination to admit new members into the royal kin.  Upon my honor, I imagine that they
had an eye to the possibility of the eventual succession of one or both of them to the crown
of Great Britain through superiority of title over the Brunswick line; although, being maiden
ladies, like their predecessor Elizabeth, they could hardly have hoped to establish a lasting
dynasty upon the throne.  It proves, I trust, a certain disinterestedness on my part, that,
encountering them thus in the dawn of their fortunes, I forbore to put in a plea for a future
dukedom.

Another visitor of the same class was a gentleman of refined manners, handsome figure, and
remarkably intellectual aspect.  Like many men of an adventurous cast, he had so quiet a deportment,
and such an apparent disinclination to general sociability, that you would have fancied him
moving always along some peaceful and secluded walk of life.  Yet, literally from his first
hour, he had been tossed upon the surges of a most varied and tumultuous existence, having
been born at sea, of American parentage, but on board of a Spanish vessel, and spending many
of the subsequent years in voyages, travels, and outlandish incidents and vicissitudes, which,
methought, had hardly been paralleled since the days of Gulliver or De Foe.  When his dignified
reserve was overcome, he had the faculty of narrating these adventures with wonderful eloquence,
working up his descriptive sketches with such intuitive perception of the picturesque points
that the whole was thrown forward with a positively illusive effect, like matters of your own
visual experience.  In fact, they were so admirably done that I could never more than half
believe them, because the genuine affairs of life are not apt to transact themselves so artistically.
Many of his scenes were laid in the East, and among those seldom-visited archipelagoes of the
Indian Ocean, so that there was an Oriental fragrance breathing through his talk and an odor
of the Spice Islands still lingering in his garments.  He had much to say of the delightful
qualities of the Malay pirates, who, indeed, carry on a predatory warfare against the ships
of all civilized nations, and cut every Christian throat among their prisoners; but (except
for deeds of that character, which are the rule and habit of their life, and matter of religion
and conscience with them) they are a gentle-natured people, of primitive innocence and integrity.

But his best story was about a race of men (if men they were) who seemed so fully to realize
Swift's wicked fable of the Yahoos, that my friend was much exercised with psychological speculations
whether or no they had any souls.  They dwelt in the wilds of Ceylon, like other savage beasts,
hairy, and spotted with tufts of fur, filthy, shameless, weaponless (though warlike in their
individual bent), tool-less, houseless, language-less, except for a few guttural sounds, hideously
dissonant, whereby they held some rudest kind of communication among themselves. They lacked
both memory and foresight, and were wholly destitute of government, social institutions, or
law or rulership of any description, except the immediate tyranny of the strongest; radically
untamable, moreover, save that the people of the country managed to subject a few of the less
ferocious and stupid ones to outdoor servitude among their other cattle.  They were beastly
in almost all their attributes, and that to such a degree that the observer, losing sight of
any link betwixt them and manhood, could generally witness their brutalities without greater
horror than at those of some disagreeable quadruped in a menagerie.  And yet, at times, comparing
what were the lowest general traits in his own race with what was highest in these abominable
monsters, he found a ghastly similitude that half compelled him to recognize them as human
brethren.

After these Gulliverian researches, my agreeable acquaintance had fallen under the ban of the
Dutch government, and had suffered (this, at least, being matter of fact) nearly two years'
imprisonment, with confiscation of a large amount of property, for which Mr. Belmont, our minister
at the Hague, had just made a peremptory demand of reimbursement and damages. Meanwhile, since
arriving in England on his way to the United States, he had been providentially led to inquire
into the circumstances of his birth on shipboard, and had discovered that not himself alone,
but another baby, had come into the world during the same voyage of the prolific vessel, and
that there were almost irrefragable reasons for believing that these two children had been
assigned to the wrong mothers. Many reminiscences of his early days confirmed him in the idea
that his nominal parents were aware of the exchange.  The family to which he felt authorized
to attribute his lineage was that of a nobleman, in the picture-gallery of whose country-seat
(whence, if I mistake not, our adventurous friend had just returned) he had discovered a portrait
bearing a striking resemblance to himself.  As soon as he should have reported the outrageous
action of the Dutch government to President Pierce and the Secretary of State, and recovered
the confiscated property, he purposed to return to England and establish his claim to the nobleman's
title and estate.

I had accepted his Oriental fantasies (which, indeed, to do him justice, have been recorded
by scientific societies among the genuine phenomena of natural history), not as matters of
indubitable credence, but as allowable specimens of an imaginative traveller's vivid coloring
and rich embroidery on the coarse texture and dull neutral tints of truth.  The English romance
was among the latest communications that he intrusted to my private ear; and as soon as I heard
the first chapter,--so wonderfully akin to what I might have wrought out of my own head, not
unpractised in such figments,--I began to repent having made myself responsible for the future
nobleman's passage homeward in the next Collins steamer. Nevertheless, should his English rent-roll
fall a little behindhand, his Dutch claim for a hundred thousand dollars was certainly in the
hands of our government, and might at least be valuable to the extent of thirty pounds, which
I had engaged to pay on his behalf.  But I have reason to fear that his Dutch riches turned
out to be Dutch gilt, or fairy gold, and his English country-seat a mere castle in the air,--which
I exceedingly regret, for he was a delightful companion and a very gentlemanly man.

A Consul, in his position of universal responsibility, the general adviser and helper, sometimes
finds himself compelled to assume the guardianship of personages who, in their own sphere,
are supposed capable of superintending the highest interests of whole communities.  An elderly
Irishman, a naturalized citizen, once put the desire and expectation of all our penniless vagabonds
into a very suitable phrase, by pathetically entreating me to be a "father to him"; and, simple
as I sit scribbling here, I have acted a father's part, not only by scores of such unthrifty
old children as himself, but by a progeny of far loftier pretensions.  It may be well for persons
who are conscious of any radical weakness in their character, any besetting sin, any unlawful
propensity, any unhallowed impulse, which (while surrounded with the manifold restraints that
protect a man from that treacherous and lifelong enemy, his lower self, in the circle of society
where he is at home) they may have succeeded in keeping under the lock and key of strictest
propriety,--it may be well for them, before seeking the perilous freedom of a distant land,
released from the watchful eyes of neighborhoods and coteries, lightened of that wearisome
burden, an immaculate name, and blissfully obscure after years of local prominence,--it may
be well for such individuals to know that when they set foot on a foreign shore, the long-imprisoned
Evil, scenting a wild license in the unaccustomed atmosphere, is apt to grow riotous in its
iron cage.  It rattles the rusty barriers with gigantic turbulence, and if there be an infirm
joint anywhere in the framework, it breaks madly forth, compressing the mischief of a lifetime
into a little space.

A parcel of letters had been accumulating at the Consulate for two or three weeks, directed
to a certain Doctor of Divinity, who had left America by a sailing-packet and was still upon
the sea.  In due time, the vessel arrived, and the reverend Doctor paid me a visit.  He was
a fine-looking middle-aged gentleman, a perfect model of clerical propriety, scholar-like,
yet with the air of a man of the world rather than a student, though overspread with the graceful
sanctity of a popular metropolitan divine, a part of whose duty it might be to exemplify the
natural accordance between Christianity and good-breeding.  He seemed a little excited, as
an American is apt to be on first arriving in England, but conversed with intelligence as well
as animation, making himself so agreeable that his visit stood out in considerable relief from
the monotony of my daily commonplace.  As I learned from authentic sources, he was somewhat
distinguished in his own region for fervor and eloquence in the pulpit, but was now compelled
to relinquish it temporarily for the purpose of renovating his impaired health by an extensive
tour in Europe. Promising to dine with me, he took up his bundle of letters and went away.

The Doctor, however, failed to make his appearance at dinner-time, or to apologize the next
day for his absence; and in the course of a day or two more, I forgot all about him, concluding
that he must have set forth on his Continental travels, the plan of which he had sketched out
at our interview.  But, by and by, I received a call from the master of the vessel in which
he had arrived.  He was in some alarm about his passenger, whose luggage remained on shipboard,
but of whom nothing had been heard or seen since the moment of his departure from the Consulate.
We conferred together, the captain and I, about the expediency of setting the police on the
traces (if any were to be found) of our vanished friend; but it struck me that the good captain
was singularly reticent, and that there was something a little mysterious in a few points that
he hinted at rather than expressed; so that, scrutinizing the affair carefully, I surmised
that the intimacy of life on shipboard might have taught him more about the reverend gentleman
than, for some reason or other, he deemed it prudent to reveal.  At home, in our native country,
I would have looked to the Doctor's personal safety and left his reputation to take care of
itself, knowing that the good fame of a thousand saintly clergymen would amply dazzle out any
lamentable spot on a single brother's character.  But in scornful and invidious England, on
the idea that the credit of the sacred office was measurably intrusted to my discretion, I
could not endure, for the sake of American Doctors of Divinity generally, that this particular
Doctor should cut an ignoble figure in the police reports of the English newspapers, except
at the last necessity.  The clerical body, I flatter myself, will acknowledge that I acted
on their own principle.  Besides, it was now too late; the mischief and violence, if any had
been impending, were not of a kind which it requires the better part of a week to perpetrate;
and to sum up the entire matter, I felt certain, from a good deal of somewhat similar experience,
that, if the missing Doctor still breathed this vital air, he would turn up at the Consulate
as soon as his money should be stolen or spent.

Precisely a week after this reverend person's disappearance, there came to my office a tall,
middle-aged gentleman in a blue military surtout, braided at the seams, but out at elbows,
and as shabby as if the wearer had been bivouacking in it throughout a Crimean campaign.  It
was buttoned up to the very chin, except where three or four of the buttons were lost; nor
was there any glimpse of a white shirt-collar illuminating the rusty black cravat.  A grisly
mustache was just beginning to roughen the stranger's upper lip.  He looked disreputable to
the last degree, but still had a ruined air of good society glimmering about him, like a few
specks of polish on a sword-blade that has lain corroding in a mud-puddle. I took him to be
some American marine officer, of dissipated habits, or perhaps a cashiered British major, stumbling
into the wrong quarters through the unrectified bewilderment of last night's debauch.  He greeted
me, however, with polite familiarity, as though we had been previously acquainted; whereupon
I drew coldly back (as sensible people naturally do, whether from strangers or former friends,
when too evidently at odds with fortune) and requested to know who my visitor might be, and
what was his business at the Consulate.  "Am I then so changed?" he exclaimed with a vast depth
of tragic intonation; and after a little blind and bewildered talk, behold! the truth flashed
upon me.  It was the Doctor of Divinity!  If I had meditated a scene or a coup de theatre,
I could not have contrived a more effectual one than by this simple and genuine difficulty
of recognition.  The poor Divine must have felt that he had lost his personal identity through
the misadventures of one little week. And, to say the truth, he did look as if, like Job, on
account of his especial sanctity, he had been delivered over to the direst temptations of Satan,
and proving weaker than the man of Uz, the Arch Enemy had been empowered to drag him through
Tophet, transforming him, in the process, from the most decorous of metropolitan clergymen
into the rowdiest and dirtiest of disbanded officers.  I never fathomed the mystery of his
military costume, but conjectured that a lurking sense of fitness had induced him to exchange
his clerical garments for this habit of a sinner; nor can I tell precisely into what pitfall,
not more of vice than terrible calamity, he had precipitated himself,--being more than satisfied
to know that the outcasts of society can sink no lower than this poor, desecrated wretch had sunk.

The opportunity, I presume, does not often happen to a layman, of administering moral and religious
reproof to a Doctor of Divinity; but finding the occasion thrust upon me, and the hereditary
Puritan waxing strong in my breast, I deemed it a matter of conscience not to let it pass entirely
unimproved.  The truth is, I was unspeakably shocked and disgusted.  Not, however, that I was
then to learn that clergymen are made of the same flesh and blood as other people, and perhaps
lack one small safeguard which the rest of us possess, because they are aware of their own
peccability, and therefore cannot look up to the clerical class for the proof of the possibility
of a pure life on earth, with such reverential confidence as we are prone to do.  But I remembered
the innocent faith of my boyhood, and the good old silver-headed clergyman, who seemed to me
as much a saint then on earth as he is now in heaven, and partly for whose sake, through all
these darkening years, I retain a devout, though not intact nor unwavering respect for the
entire fraternity.  What a hideous wrong, therefore, had the backslider inflicted on his brethren,
and still more on me, who much needed whatever fragments of broken reverence (broken, not as
concerned religion, but its earthly institutions and professors) it might yet be possible to
patch into a sacred image!  Should all pulpits and communion-tables have thenceforth a stain
upon them, and the guilty one go unrebuked for it? So I spoke to the unhappy man as I never
thought myself warranted in speaking to any other mortal, hitting him hard, doing my utmost
to find out his vulnerable part, and prick him into the depths of it.  And not without more
effect than I had dreamed of, or desired!

No doubt, the novelty of the Doctor's reversed position, thus standing up to receive such a
fulmination as the clergy have heretofore arrogated the exclusive right of inflicting, might
give additional weight and sting to the words which I found utterance for.  But there was another
reason (which, had I in the least suspected it, would have closed my lips at once) for his
feeling morbidly sensitive to the cruel rebuke that I administered.  The unfortunate man had
come to me, laboring under one of the consequences of his riotous outbreak, in the shape of
delirium tremens; he bore a hell within the compass of his own breast, all the torments of
which blazed up with tenfold inveteracy when I thus took upon myself the Devil's office of
stirring up the red-hot embers.  His emotions, as well as the external movement and expression
of them by voice, countenance, and gesture, were terribly exaggerated by the tremendous vibration
of nerves resulting from the disease.  It was the deepest tragedy I ever witnessed.  I know
sufficiently, from that one experience, how a condemned soul would manifest its agonies; and
for the future, if I have anything to do with sinners, I mean to operate upon them through
sympathy, and not rebuke.  What had I to do with rebuking him?  The disease, long latent in
his heart, had shown itself in a frightful eruption on the surface of his life.  That was all!
Is it a thing to scold the sufferer for?

To conclude this wretched story, the poor Doctor of Divinity, having been robbed of all his
money in this little airing beyond the limits of propriety, was easily persuaded to give up
the intended tour and return to his bereaved flock, who, very probably, were thereafter conscious
of an increased unction in his soul-stirring eloquence, without suspecting the awful depths
into which their pastor had dived in quest of it.  His voice is now silent.  I leave it to
members of his own profession to decide whether it was better for him thus to sin outright,
and so to be let into the miserable secret what manner of man he was, or to have gone through
life outwardly unspotted, making the first discovery of his latent evil at the judgment-seat.
It has occurred to me that his dire calamity, as both he and I regarded it, might have been
the only method by which precisely such a man as himself, and so situated, could be redeemed.
He has learned, ere now, how that matter stood.

For a man, with a natural tendency to meddle with other people's business, there could not
possibly be a more congenial sphere than the Liverpool Consulate.  For myself, I had never
been in the habit of feeling that I could sufficiently comprehend any particular conjunction
of circumstances with human character, to justify me in thrusting in my awkward agency among
the intricate and unintelligible machinery of Providence.  I have always hated to give advice,
especially when there is a prospect of its being taken.  It is only one-eyed people who love
to advise, or have any spontaneous promptitude of action.  When a man opens both his eyes,
he generally sees about as many reasons for acting in any one way as in any other, and quite
as many for acting in neither; and is therefore likely to leave his friends to regulate their
own conduct, and also to remain quiet as regards his especial affairs till necessity shall
prick him onward.  Nevertheless, the world and individuals flourish upon a constant succession
of blunders.  The secret of English practical success lies in their characteristic faculty
of shutting one eye, whereby they get so distinct and decided a view of what immediately concerns
them that they go stumbling towards it over a hundred insurmountable obstacles, and achieve
a magnificent triumph without ever being aware of half its difficulties.  If General McClellan
could but have shut his left eye, the right one would long ago have guided us into Richmond.
Meanwhile, I have strayed far away from the Consulate, where, as I was about to say, I was
compelled, in spite of my disinclination, to impart both advice and assistance in multifarious
affairs that did not personally concern me, and presume that I effected about as little mischief
as other men in similar contingencies.  The duties of the office carried me to prisons, police-courts,
hospitals, lunatic asylums, coroner's inquests, death-beds, funerals, and brought me in contact
with insane people, criminals, ruined speculators, wild adventurers, diplomatists, brother-consuls,
and all manner of simpletons and unfortunates, in greater number and variety than I had ever
dreamed of as pertaining to America; in addition to whom there was an equivalent multitude
of English rogues, dexterously counterfeiting the genuine Yankee article.  It required great
discrimination not to be taken in by these last-mentioned scoundrels; for they knew how to
imitate our national traits, had been at great pains to instruct themselves as regarded American
localities, and were not readily to be caught by a cross-examination as to the topographical
features, public institutions, or prominent inhabitants of the places where they pretended
to belong. The best shibboleth I ever hit upon lay in the pronunciation of the word "been,"
which the English invariably make to rhyme with "green," and we Northerners, at least (in accordance,
I think, with the custom of Shakespeare's time), universally pronounce "bin."

All the matters that I have been treating of, however, were merely incidental, and quite distinct
from the real business of the office.  A great part of the wear and tear of mind and temper
resulted from the bad relations between the seamen and officers of American ships.  Scarcely
a morning passed, but that some sailor came to show the marks of his ill-usage on shipboard.
Often, it was a whole crew of them, each with his broken head or livid bruise, and all testifying
with one voice to a constant series of savage outrages during the voyage; or, it might be,
they laid an accusation of actual murder, perpetrated by the first or second officers with
many blows of steel-knuckles, a rope's end, or a marline-spike, or by the captain, in the twinkling
of an eye, with a shot of his pistol.  Taking the seamen's view of the case, you would suppose
that the gibbet was hungry for the murderers.  Listening to the captain's defence, you would
seem to discover that he and his officers were the humanest of mortals, but were driven to
a wholesome severity by the mutinous conduct of the crew, who, moreover, had themselves slain
their comrade in the drunken riot and confusion of the first day or two after they were shipped.
Looked at judicially, there appeared to be no right side to the matter, nor any right side
possible in so thoroughly vicious a system as that of the American mercantile marine.  The
Consul could do little, except to take depositions, hold forth the greasy Testament to be profaned
anew with perjured kisses, and, in a few instances of murder or manslaughter, carry the case
before an English magistrate, who generally decided that the evidence was too contradictory
to authorize the transmission of the accused for trial in America.  The newspapers all over
England contained paragraphs, inveighing against the cruelties of American shipmasters.  The
British Parliament took up the matter (for nobody is so humane as John Bull, when his benevolent
propensities are to be gratified by finding fault with his neighbor), and caused Lord John
Russell to remonstrate with our government on the outrages for which it was responsible before
the world, and which it failed to prevent or punish.  The American Secretary of State, old
General Cass, responded, with perfectly astounding ignorance of the subject, to the effect
that the statements of outrages had probably been exaggerated, that the present laws of the
United States were quite adequate to deal with them, and that the interference of the British
Minister was uncalled for.

The truth is, that the state of affairs was really very horrible, and could be met by no laws
at that time (or I presume now) in existence.  I once thought of writing a pamphlet on the
subject, but quitted the Consulate before finding time to effect my purpose; and all that phase
of my life immediately assumed so dreamlike a consistency that I despaired of making it seem
solid or tangible to the public.  And now it looks distant and dim, like troubles of a century
ago.  The origin of the evil lay in the character of the seamen, scarcely any of whom were
American, but the offscourings and refuse of all the seaports of the world, such stuff as piracy
is made of, together with a considerable intermixture of returning emigrants, and a sprinkling
of absolutely kidnapped American citizens.  Even with such material, the ships were very inadequately
manned.  The shipmaster found himself upon the deep, with a vast responsibility of property
and human life upon his hands, and no means of salvation except by compelling his inefficient
and demoralized crew to heavier exertions than could reasonably be required of the same number
of able seamen.  By law he had been intrusted with no discretion of judicious punishment, he
therefore habitually left the whole matter of discipline to his irresponsible mates, men often
of scarcely a superior quality to the crew.  Hence ensued a great mass of petty outrages, unjustifiable
assaults, shameful indignities, and nameless cruelty, demoralizing alike to the perpetrators
and the sufferers; these enormities fell into the ocean between the two countries, and could
be punished in neither.  Many miserable stories come back upon my memory as I write; wrongs
that were immense, but for which nobody could be held responsible, and which, indeed, the closer
you looked into them, the more they lost the aspect of wilful misdoing and assumed that of
an inevitable calamity.  It was the fault of a system, the misfortune of an individual. Be
that as it may, however, there will be no possibility of dealing effectually with these troubles
as long as we deem it inconsistent with our national dignity or interests to allow the English
courts, under such restrictions as may seem fit, a jurisdiction over offences perpetrated on
board our vessels in mid-ocean.

In such a life as this, the American shipmaster develops himself into a man of iron energies,
dauntless courage, and inexhaustible resource, at the expense, it must be acknowledged, of
some of the higher and gentler traits which might do him excellent service in maintaining his
authority. The class has deteriorated of late years on account of the narrower field of selection,
owing chiefly to the diminution of that excellent body of respectably educated New England
seamen, from the flower of whom the officers used to be recruited.  Yet I found them, in many
cases, very agreeable and intelligent companions, with less nonsense about them than landsmen
usually have, eschewers of fine-spun theories, delighting in square and tangible ideas, but
occasionally infested with prejudices that stuck to their brains like barnacles to a ship's
bottom.  I never could flatter myself that I was a general favorite with them.  One or two,
perhaps, even now, would scarcely meet me on amicable terms.  Endowed universally with a great
pertinacity of will, they especially disliked the interference of a consul with their management
on shipboard; notwithstanding which I thrust in my very limited authority at every available
opening, and did the utmost that lay in my power, though with lamentably small effect, towards
enforcing a better kind of discipline. They thought, no doubt (and on plausible grounds enough,
but scarcely appreciating just that one little grain of hard New England sense, oddly thrown
in among the flimsier composition of the Consul's character), that he, a landsman, a bookman,
and, as people said of him, a fanciful recluse, could not possibly understand anything of the
difficulties or the necessities of a shipmaster's position.  But their cold regards were rather
acceptable than otherwise, for it is exceedingly awkward to assume a judicial austerity in
the morning towards a man with whom you have been hobnobbing over night.

With the technical details of the business of that great Consulate (for great it then was,
though now, I fear, wofully fallen off, and perhaps never to be revived in anything like its
former extent), I did not much interfere.  They could safely be left to the treatment of two
as faithful, upright, and competent subordinates, both Englishmen, as ever a man was fortunate
enough to meet with, in a line of life altogether new and strange to him.  I had come over
with instructions to supply both their places with Americans, but, possessing a happy faculty
of knowing my own interest and the public's, I quietly kept hold of them, being little inclined
to open the consular doors to a spy of the State Department or an intriguer for my own office.
The venerable Vice-Consul, Mr. Pearce, had witnessed the successive arrivals of a score of
newly appointed Consuls, shadowy and short-lived dignitaries, and carried his reminiscences
back to the epoch of Consul Maury, who was appointed by Washington, and has acquired almost
the grandeur of a mythical personage in the annals of the Consulate.  The principal clerk,
Mr. Wilding, who has since succeeded to the Vice-Consulship, was a man of English integrity,--not
that the English are more honest than ourselves, but only there is a certain sturdy reliableness
common among them, which we do not quite so invariably manifest in just these subordinate positions,--of
English integrity, combined with American acuteness of intellect, quick-wittedness, and diversity
of talent.  It seemed an immense pity that he should wear out his life at a desk, without a
step in advance from year's end to year's end, when, had it been his luck to be born on our
side of the water, his bright faculties and clear probity would have insured him eminent success
in whatever path he night adopt.  Meanwhile, it would have been a sore mischance to me, had
any better fortune on his part deprived me of Mr. Wilding's services.

A fair amount of common-sense, some acquaintance with the United States Statutes, an insight
into character, a tact of management, a general knowledge of the world, and a reasonable but
not too inveterately decided preference for his own will and judgment over those of interested
people,--these natural attributes and moderate acquirements will enable a consul to perform
many of his duties respectably, but not to dispense with a great variety of other qualifications,
only attainable by long experience.  Yet, I think, few consuls are so well accomplished.  An
appointment of whatever grade, in the diplomatic or consular service of America, is too often
what the English call a "job"; that is to say, it is made on private and personal grounds,
without a paramount eye to the public good or the gentleman's especial fitness for the position.
It is not too much to say (of course allowing for a brilliant exception here and there), that
an American never is thoroughly qualified for a foreign post, nor has time to make himself
so, before the revolution of the political wheel discards him from his office.  Our country
wrongs itself by permitting such a system of unsuitable appointments, and, still more, of removals
for no cause, just when the incumbent might be beginning to ripen into usefulness.  Mere ignorance
of official detail is of comparatively small moment; though it is considered indispensable,
I presume, that a man in any private capacity shall be thoroughly acquainted with the machinery
and operation of his business, and shall not necessarily lose his position on having attained
such knowledge.  But there are so many more important things to be thought of, in the qualifications
of a foreign resident, that his technical dexterity or clumsiness is hardly worth mentioning.

One great part of a consul's duty, for example, should consist in building up for himself a
recognized position in the society where he resides, so that his local influence might be felt
in behalf of his own country, and, so far as they are compatible (as they generally are to
the utmost extent), for the interests of both nations.  The foreign city should know that it
has a permanent inhabitant and a hearty well-wisher in him.  There are many conjunctures (and
one of them is now upon us) where a long-established, honored, and trusted American citizen,
holding a public position under our government in such a town as Liverpool, might go far towards
swaying and directing the sympathies of the inhabitants. He might throw his own weight into
the balance against mischief makers; he might have set his foot on the first little spark of
malignant purpose, which the next wind may blow into a national war.  But we wilfully give
up all advantages of this kind.  The position is totally beyond the attainment of an American;
there to-day, bristling all over with the porcupine quills of our Republic, and gone to-morrow,
just as he is becoming sensible of the broader and more generous patriotism which might almost
amalgamate with that of England, without losing an atom of its native force and flavor.  In
the changes that appear to await us, and some of which, at least, can hardly fail to be for
good, let us hope for a reform in this matter.

For myself, as the gentle reader would spare me the trouble of saying, I was not at all the
kind of man to grow into such an ideal Consul as I have here suggested.  I never in my life
desired to be burdened with public influence.  I disliked my office from the first, and never
came into any good accordance with it.  Its dignity, so far as it had any, was an encumbrance;
the attentions it drew upon me (such as invitations to Mayor's banquets and public celebrations
of all kinds, where, to my horror, I found myself expected to stand up and speak) were--as
I may say without incivility or ingratitude, because there is nothing personal in that sort
of hospitality--a bore.  The official business was irksome, and often painful.  There was nothing
pleasant about the whole affair, except the emoluments; and even those, never too bountifully
reaped, were diminished by more than half in the second or third year of my incumbency.  All
this being true, I was quite prepared, in advance of the inauguration of Mr. Buchanan, to send
in my resignation.  When my successor arrived, I drew the long, delightful breath which first
made me thoroughly sensible what an unnatural life I had been leading, and compelled me to
admire myself for having battled with it so sturdily. The newcomer proved to be a very genial
and agreeable gentleman, an F. F. V., and, as he pleasantly acknowledged, a Southern Fire Eater,
--an announcement to which I responded, with similar good-humor and self-complacency, by parading
my descent from an ancient line of Massachusetts Puritans.  Since our brief acquaintanceship,
my fire-eating friend has had ample opportunities to banquet on his favorite diet, hot and
hot, in the Confederate service.  For myself, as soon as I was out of office, the retrospect
began to look unreal.  I could scarcely believe that it was I,--that figure whom they called
a Consul,--but a sort of Double Ganger, who had been permitted to assume my aspect, under which
he went through his shadowy duties with a tolerable show of efficiency, while my real self
had lain, as regarded my proper mode of being and acting, in a state of suspended animation.

The same sense of illusion still pursues me.  There is some mistake in this matter.  I have
been writing about another man's consular experiences, with which, through some mysterious
medium of transmitted ideas, I find myself intimately acquainted, but in which I cannot possibly
have had a personal interest.  Is it not a dream altogether? The figure of that poor Doctor
of Divinity looks wonderfully lifelike; so do those of the Oriental adventurer with the visionary
coronet above his brow, and the moonstruck visitor of the Queen, and the poor old wanderer,
seeking his native country through English highways and by-ways for almost thirty years; and
so would a hundred others that I might summon up with similar distinctness.  But were they
more than shadows?  Surely, I think not.  Nor are these present pages a bit of intrusive autobiography.
Let not the reader wrong me by supposing it.  I never should have written with half such unreserve,
had it been a portion of this life congenial with my nature, which I am living now, instead
of a series of incidents and characters entirely apart from my own concerns, and on which the
qualities personally proper to me could have had no bearing.  Almost the only real incidents,
as I see them now, were the visits of a young English friend, a scholar and a literary amateur,
between whom and myself there sprung up an affectionate, and, I trust, not transitory regard.
He used to come and sit or stand by my fireside, talking vivaciously and eloquently with me
about literature and life, his own national characteristics and mine, with such kindly endurance
of the many rough republicanisms wherewith I assailed him, and such frank and amiable assertion
of all sorts of English prejudices and mistakes, that I understood his countrymen infinitely
the better for him, and was almost prepared to love the intensest Englishman of them all, for
his sake.  It would gratify my cherished remembrance of this dear friend, if I could manage,
without offending him, or letting the public know it, to introduce his name upon my page. 
Bright was the illumination of my dusky little apartment, as often as he made his appearance there!

The English sketches which I have been offering to the public comprise a few of the more external
and therefore more readily manageable things that I took note of, in many escapes from the
imprisonment of my consular servitude.  Liverpool, though not very delightful as a place of
residence, is a most convenient and admirable point to get away from. London is only five hours
off by the fast train.  Chester, the most curious town in England, with its encompassing wall,
its ancient rows, and its venerable cathedral, is close at hand.  North Wales, with all its
hills and ponds, its noble sea-scenery, its multitude of gray castles and strange old villages,
may be glanced at in a summer day or two.  The lakes and mountains of Cumberland and Westmoreland
may be reached before dinner-time.  The haunted and legendary Isle of Man, a little kingdom
by itself, lies within the scope of an afternoon's voyage.  Edinburgh or Glasgow are attainable
over night, and Loch Lomond betimes in the morning.  Visiting these famous localities, and
a great many others, I hope that I do not compromise my American patriotism by acknowledging
that I was often conscious of a fervent hereditary attachment to the native soil of our forefathers,
and felt it to be our own Old Home.

LEAMINGTON SPA.

In the course of several visits and stays of considerable length we acquired a homelike feeling
towards Leamington, and came back thither again and again, chiefly because we had been there
before.  Wandering and wayside people, such as we had long since become, retain a few of the
instincts that belong to a more settled way of life, and often prefer familiar and commonplace
objects (for the very reason that they are so) to the dreary strangeness of scenes that might
be thought much better worth the seeing.  There is a small nest of a place in Leamington--at
No. 10, Lansdowne Circus--upon which, to this day, my reminiscences are apt to settle as one
of the coziest nooks in England or in the world; not that it had any special charm of its own,
but only that we stayed long enough to know it well, and even to grow a little tired of it.
In my opinion, the very tediousness of home and friends makes a part of what we love them for;
if it be not mixed in sufficiently with the other elements of life, there may be mad enjoyment,
but no happiness.

The modest abode to which I have alluded forms one of a circular range of pretty, moderate-sized,
two-story houses, all built on nearly the same plan, and each provided with its little grass-plot,
its flowers, its tufts of box trimmed into globes and other fantastic shapes, and its verdant
hedges shutting the house in from the common drive and dividing it from its equally cosey neighbors.
Coming out of the door, and taking a turn round the circle of sister-dwellings, it is difficult
to find your way back by any distinguishing individuality of your own habitation.  In the centre
of the Circus is a space fenced in with iron railing, a small play-place and sylvan retreat
for the children of the precinct, permeated by brief paths through the fresh English grass,
and shadowed by various shrubbery; amid which, if you like, you may fancy yourself in a deep
seclusion, though probably the mark of eye-shot from the windows of all the surrounding houses.
But, in truth, with regard to the rest of the town and the world at large, all abode here is
a genuine seclusion; for the ordinary stream of life does not run through this little, quiet
pool, and few or none of the inhabitants seem to be troubled with any business or outside activities.
I used to set them down as half-pay officers, dowagers of narrow income, elderly maiden ladies,
and other people of respectability, but small account, such as hang on the world's skirts rather
than actually belong to it.  The quiet of the place was seldom disturbed, except by the grocer
and butcher, who came to receive orders, or by the cabs, hackney-coaches, and Bath-chairs,
in which the ladies took an infrequent airing, or the livery-steed which the retired captain
sometimes bestrode for a morning ride, or by the red-coated postman who went his rounds twice
a day to deliver letters, and again in the evening, ringing a hand-bell, to take letters for
the mail.  In merely mentioning these slight interruptions of its sluggish stillness, I seem
to myself to disturb too much the atmosphere of quiet that brooded over the spot; whereas its
impression upon me was, that the world had never found the way hither, or had forgotten it,
and that the fortunate inhabitants were the only ones who possessed the spell-word of admittance.
Nothing could have suited me better, at the time; for I had been holding a position of public
servitude, which imposed upon me (among a great many lighter duties) the ponderous necessity
of being universally civil and sociable.

Nevertheless, if a man were seeking the bustle of society, he might find it more readily in
Leamington than in most other English towns. Perhaps when their legs ache terribly, the carriages are not
such bad things. We can hardly judge dispassionately in such a matter, we who can float and fly!"
and the delicate Ambrosia, springing up, floated softly round the bay, and then returned smiling
to her companions. "It made me almost ill to think of aching legs," observed she, "how I do
pity the mortal race!"

"How pretty you looked as the sun shone golden upon your white robe," exclaimed Leila, "It was a sight
for a mortal painter to die of!"

"A genius for painting would be a grand Fairy gift," observed Ianthe.

"Too doubtful of success," answered Euphrosyne, "and the Musician's power the same; besides musicians
always die young and with exhausted minds. The art is too much for mortal nerves."

"Their atmosphere is too thick," said Leila. "How tired I am of your discussions! Let us sing!
Whatever music may be to them, it is food to us."

Then all those beautiful Fairies arose and joining hands on the rocks they sang to the now
dying Sun a chorus of Fairy Land! Now and then these ravishing melodies are permitted to reach
to mortal ears: chiefly in dreams to the sick and sorrowful, for Fairies have great compassion on
such, and allow them a distant taste of this, the most exquisite of their enjoyments.

There was no more discussion that night, nor did they argue much the next morning. There was
the rising sun to welcome from the sleeping caves on the eastern side of their country, and the bath
to be enjoyed, and their wings to plume, and sweet odours to gather from the early flowers;
and the time passed so quickly, they only met to take a hurried leave. "We must understand each
other however, before we separate," said Euphrosyne.

"Dear Ianthe, your Gift is Beauty?" "It is." "And mine is Riches,"
said Euphrosyne.

"All the pleasures of life shall be at my Godchild's feet," said another Fairy, laughing.
"If that will not ensure happiness, I know not what will." Ambrosia held back--"Your choice,
dear Sister?" asked Euphrosyne.

"Come! we have no time to lose."

"It must remain a secret," was the reply. "Our discourse yesterday evening was so thoughtful,
so sad, I could not sleep. I arose hours before you this morning, ere daylight streaked the
sky. Dear Sisters, how shocked you will be to hear I wept; but now I have determined. If my
gift succeed I will tell you all about it, or you shall guess it yourselves; for I now propose
that our Fairy Gifts this year shall be a sort of experiment on human happiness. Let us from
time to time visit in company our young charges, and let the result--that is, which of our Gifts
is proved to confer the greatest amount of happiness, be written in the archives of our kingdom
for the future benefit of the mortal race."

A murmur of approbation rose, sweet as the vibration of a harp-chord through the assembly.

There was no time for enquiry about the other gifts: the travelling Fairies arose and beat their
gauzy wings upon the western breeze. A melodious rushing was just audible; the distant murmurs
of the earthly sea the most resemble that sweet dream of sound. In a few moments the departing
sisters became invisible, and those who remained returned to float by the sea shore, or make sweet
music in the bowers of their enchanted land.

* * * * *

Time is a very odd sort of thing, dear readers.

We neither know whence it comes nor whither it goes;--nay we know nothing about it in fact except that
there is one little moment of it called the present, which we have as it were in our hands
to make use of--but beyond this we can give no account of, even that little moment. It is ours
to use, but not to understand. There is one thing in the world, however, quite as wonderful, and
quite as common, and that is, the Wind. Did it never strike you how strange it was that the strongest
thing in the world should be invisible? The nice breezes we feel in summer and the roughest
blasts we feel in winter in England are not so extremely strong you will say: but I am speaking,
besides these, of the winds called hurricanes that arise in the West Indian Islands, and in
other places in the world. These dreadful hurricanes have at times done as much mischief as
earthquakes and lightning. They tear down the strongest trees, overthrow the firmest houses
and spread ruin and desolation around, and yet this terrible power, so tremendous, and against
which the cleverest contrivances can provide no defence, is as invisible
as the great Maker of Heaven and Earth.

How unbelieving many people would look if you told them of a dreadful creature that was coming
to the world, which could be heard to roar, be felt to knock down every thing in its path--men,
women and children, houses, churches, towers, castles, cities, and trees the most firmly rooted--and
yet which you could never catch the faintest glimpse of, for it was always invisible, even when
it roared the loudest! As invisible then, as when in its mildest moods, it, as it were, purred
softly over the country like a cat. How the good people would laugh, and tell you you were very
silly to believe in such a thing. Yet I think this is not at all an incorrect description of the
great invisible Power WIND. Now the lesson we may learn from this is to be humble-minded; for
since we live in the constant presence of a Power we cannot see, we ought to feel it is equally
possible other Powers may exist of which our other senses cannot take cognizance. There is
an old proverb--"Seeing is believing"--but you perceive, dear readers, we are forced to believe
in the wind though we never see him at all.

To return to Time who is travelling fast on while I am rambling after the wind, he has puzzled
the artists a good deal I should say, for with all their skill at representation they have
never hit upon any better idea of him than an old Man with wings. An old man with wings! Can
you fancy anything so unnatural! One can quite understand beautiful young Angels with wings. Youth
and power and swiftness belong to them. Also Fairies with wings are quite comprehensible creatures;
for one fancies them so light and airy and transparent, living upon honey dew and ambrosia, that
wings wherewith to fly seem their natural appendages. But the decrepitude of old age and the
wings of youth and power are a strange mixture:--a bald head, and a Fairy's swiftness!--how
ridiculous it seems, and so I think I may well say Time is a very odd sort of thing.

Among those who have to deal with Time, few are more puzzled how to manage him than we story-tellers.
In my first chapter, for instance, I gave you a half-hour's conversation among some Fairies, but I think
you would be very angry with me were I to give you as exactly every half-hour that passed over
the heads of the little girls with Fairy Godmothers, till they grew up. How you would scold,
dear little readers, if I were to enter into a particular description of each child's Nurse,
and tell whether Miss Aurora, Miss Julia, Miss Hermione, &c. &c. &c. were brought up on baked
flour, groat-gruel, rusks, tops and bottoms, or revalenta food!

Whether they took more castor-oil, or rhubarb and magnesia; whether they squalled on those occasions
or were very good. When they cut their teeth and how, together with all the &c. and ups and downs of
Nursery life which large families, such as you and I belong to, go through daily.

Well then, suppose I altogether pass over a period of ten years, and enter into no minute particulars
respecting that portion of Time. You must know that the Fairies had agreed that all the children
should have the same (and rather a large) amount of intellect, or what you would call cleverness:
that is to say, they were all equally capable of learning anything they chose to learn: also
they had all fair health, plenty to eat and drink, and all the so called "necessary" comforts of
life.

Now then to our story.

At the end of ten years the Fairies agreed to go and have a peep how their charges were going on.
They quite knew that nothing decisive could be found out, till the
children had come to years of discretion and were their own mistresses.

Still they thought it would amuse them just to go and see how the charms were working, as it were;
so, away they went.

Now picture to yourselves a nice large nursery, much such a one as your own, in which several children
are playing.

The eldest, a girl of ten, you may see yonder lounging--gracefully perhaps--but still lounging
in a rocking chair which she is swinging backwards and forwards, having set it in motion by the action
of her foot on the floor. What a lovely face! I do not think you ever saw one so handsome except
in a print in one of Mamma's best picture books.

All the features are perfectly good and in proportion, and the dark blue eyes are fringed by the
longest eyelashes ever seen. The hair of this little girl too--look at it, as the soft chestnut
ringlets wave about on her shoulders as she swings, and show the round richness of the curls.

Now
if you ask about the expression on her face, I must tell you it was rather languid and "pensieroso."
Pensieroso is an Italian word really meaning thoughtful--but this little girl was not thinking,
for then the expression of her face would have been much stronger and firmer and less languid;
but the word has got to be used for a sort of awake-dreamy state when one lets thoughts float
lazily along without having any energy to dwell upon them, and see whether they are good or bad.

The
thought that was passing through this little girl's head at the time I mention and which made her look
so languid and pensieroso, was

"I wish it was 6 o'clock."

Now here you are ready to laugh, I know, for there was nothing to look so languid about, in
"I wish it was six o'clock!" but the fact was this: at half-past six the little girl's Mamma
was expecting a large party to dinner and the little girl was to dress at six and be ready to go
down and see the company:--I might add and to be seen by them; for the little girl was, as you
will have guessed, the beautiful Aurora herself, and there had been plenty of foolish people, though
her good Mamma was not one of them, to tell her how pretty she was and how much people admired her.

It
is a very pleasant thing to be admired, both for children and grown up people. "The love of
approbation," as it is called, i.e. the wish to be approved of and admired is a feeling which is
very strong in most people; not in quite all, perhaps, but in most people certainly. But like
all other powers of the mind considered apart from the influence of the heart and conscience,
it is capable of being used to a very bad or a very good purpose. Thus you may remember what
our Saviour says of the Pharisees who stood praying at the corners of the streets that they might be seen
of men: Verily, they had their reward--viz: that men admired them:
whereas those who do good deeds and pray privately, i.e. unseen and
unadmired by men, should verily have their reward in that day when
God who seeth in secret himself shall reward them openly.

Here you see is the same strong feeling,--love of approbation, exercised in a wrong and a right
direction. The Pharisees wish for the approbation of men, good people
wish for the approbation of God.

Now, love of approbation exists about much smaller matters than I have just been mentioning.
But I would warn my young readers, that, to be always thinking, and bothering yourselves as
to what other people are thinking about you, is one of the most uncomfortable and injurious
habits a person can get into. It makes them so selfish and egotistical. And here was one of
Aurora's dangers. Because she knew she was pretty, she was always wondering what other people
were thinking about her, a habit which so far from contributing to what the good Fairy had
wished, viz. her happiness, was constantly spoiling her comfort from hour to hour. And here,
at ten years old, was this little lady swinging languidly and idly on the rocking chair, wishing
it was six o'clock, instead of enjoying, as she might so well have done, that small portion of
time, time present, which is, as I told you before, the only bit of him we can ever lay hold
of, as it were. Of time present, just then, she thought nothing. She would have said, (had she been
asked), that the old gentleman moved very slowly in spite of his wings, for her eye was fixed on
that delightful time future, six o'clock.

Well! at last the clock struck, and Aurora sprang from her chair,--her whole face altered in a moment.
"Now, Nurse, I may dress, may I not?" she exclaimed, radiant with animation, and all the languor
and dreaminess gone over like a cloud from before the sun. And it is true that just then Aurora
was happy. It was a pleasant task to her to arrange and smooth that curling hair, and to put
on the simple white dress she knew set off her beauty so well. But alas! for the happiness
caused by thoughts of one's self! The toilet over, she ran down to her Mamma, and was welcomed with
a smile of fondness and approbation. Indeed, when she was happy, a sweeter face could not be
seen, for she was not a naughty child, and if it had not been for the Fairy gift, I do think
she would have been a very nice one.

The Fairies who invisibly had witnessed all I have described to you, were not so loud in their
admiration of Aurora as you or I might have been. They are so handsome themselves, they think
but little of earthly beauty, and even Ianthe could not conscientiously say, "What a happy
looking little girl she is." That was just the one thing that was wanting: ay, and it continued
wanting even after the room was filled with company, and she was petted, and caressed, and praised
on every side. Her spirits became very high, however, and she enjoyed herself much; and it is
perhaps only very very critical folk, bent on spying out a fault, that could have detected
the little clouds of anxiety that now and then shot across her face.

A thought of whether her curls were all right, or her dress untumbled, &c. just now and then
disturbed the charm, and prevented her forgetting herself sufficiently to allow her to be quite
at ease and happy, and she would glance at herself in the mirror, and put back the hair from
her brow, lest Mrs. I-know-not-who, who was just then entering the room, should not think her
quite as lovely as Mrs. Somebody-else did, who had very foolishly been saying so rather in a loud tone
to her Mamma.

At last the fatal time arrived to go to bed. Aurora was much too sensible to cry, or be cross, you
must know, but as she closed the door of the drawing-room and left the gay company, a sigh
very heavy for so young a heart to have breathed, escaped her, and it was slowly she retraced
her steps up stairs. She was in reality tired, for it was later than her usual bed-time, and
when she went into her room she threw herself on the chair and yawned. The young Nurse who attended
to undress her, asked her if she had enjoyed herself. "Oh yes!" was her ready answer. "All is
so bright, and gay, and entertaining among those ladies, and they are so good-natured to me,"--(another
sigh coupled with the recollection of, and how much they admire me!)--"But I do so hate being
a little girl, and having to go to bed. I wish the time would come quicker for me to be grown up,
and be down stairs altogether, and talk, and enjoy myself all the evening!" Oh, Aurora, Aurora,
with that dissatisfied face where is your beauty? with that discontented mind where is your happiness?

"Your
charm is not working perfectly, Sister," observed Euphrosyne to Ianthe.

"Her's is not the age for perfect happiness and enjoyment as a beauty, remember," replied Ianthe,
"and she feels this herself."

"Man never is but always to be blest," cried Ambrosia laughing. "You see I can quote their own
poets against them."

"You are prejudging now, Ambrosia, wait till another ten years is over; but we must see our little
beauty through the twenty-four hours." Ianthe now waved a tiny wand in a circle around Aurora's
head,--the long eyelashes sank over her eyes, and the beautiful child fell into a sweet and placid
sleep.

Morning, which awakens all young creatures to life, enjoyment, and action, awoke Aurora among the
rest, and she arose in health and strength, and the full glow of animal spirits. "This is
happiness, however," exclaimed Ianthe to her companions, as the young girl sprang about, carolling
to herself the while. And so it was, for at that moment no forecastings into futurity disturbed
the comfort of present pleasure: but an accidental glimpse of her face caught in a looking-glass
as she passed, recalled Aurora to the recollection of HERSELF! and the admiration she had obtained
the evening before. At first some pleasure attended the remembrance, and she gazed with a childish
triumph at her pretty face in the glass. In a few minutes, however, the voice of her Governess
calling her to lessons disturbed the egotistical amusement, and the charming Aurora frowned--yes,
frowned! and looked cross at the looking-glass before she quitted the apartment.

And now, dear little readers, let me remind you that Aurora was a
clever little girl, for the Fairy had taken care of that.

She had every faculty for learning, and no real dislike to it; but this unlucky Fairy gift
was in the way of every thing she did, for it took away her interest in every thing but herself;
and so, though she got through her lessons respectably, it was with many yawns, and not a
few sighs, and wonderings what Mamma was doing; and did the Governess think there would soon
be another dinner party? and didn't the Governess, when she was a little girl, wish very much
she was a grown up woman? and, finally, she wished she had been able to talk when she was a baby at
her christening, because then me would have begged the Fairy Godmother to give her the gift of
growing up to be a young lady very quick indeed, and of learning every thing without any trouble
at all! And so saying, Aurora yawned and laid down her book, and
the poor Governess could hardly keep her temper at such repeated interruptions
to the subject in hand.

"My dear," she exclaimed, "Fairies have no
power to counteract what God, has ordained, and he has ordained that
we enjoy but little what we get at without labour and trouble."

"Ah
taisez-vous donc ma chère!" cried Aurora, flopping her ears with her
hands, and running round the room shaking her long curls furiously.
"Vous me faites absolument frémir! Excuse my French, but I am certain
you are the eldest daughter of the old woman in the wood, and you
are just now dropping vipers, toads, newts, and efts from your mouth
at every word you utter!"

The good-natured Governess laughed heartily
at the joke, for they had just been reading the old French fairy tale
of "Les deux Fées," and the application amused her; but she shook
her head gravely at Aurora afterwards, and reminded her that no serious
truth was well answered by a joke, however droll.

A bell rings, a
carriage is at the door. Miss Aurora is wanted. Visiters! Ah! here
is happiness again! But it lasts but a short time, and the reaction
is the same as before--drooping eyes, languid eyelids, and a sigh.

Books,
drawing, music, work, even domestic recreations, all deprived of their
charm through this idolatry of self!

The curtain closed over this
scene.

"A charming child, Ianthe, but for your Fairy Gift, which
is spoiling her."

"I repeat to you we are no judges yet. Now for
riches, Euphrosyne!"

* * * * *

At the same hour of evening, and
under the same circumstances, of a party about to assemble, let me
introduce you to a beautiful little boudoir or up-stairs sitting-room
adjoining an equally pretty sleeping apartment in a magnificent house
in a town. The passages are carpeted all over, and so are the boudoir
and the sleeping-room, and they are furnished with sofas, easy chairs,
and every description of luxurious comfort; and all this for the accommodation
of a little girl of ten years old, who in one of the easy chairs is
lying back in front of the fire, with her tiny feet on a bright brass
fender. She has a gold watch in her hand, which is suspended round
her neck by a chain of the same material, and she is playing with
it, and with the seals, and pretty ornaments hung to it, that jingle
as she moves her hand. Ever and anon she glances at the face of the
watch.

But life is very easy to her, and the chair is very soft,
and her feet are very warm. At last, however, she gets up and rings
a silver bell that is on the mantel-piece. A servant answers the summons.
"It is time for me to dress, I believe, Annette; the company are expected
to-day at half past six. Has my new frock come home?"

"Yes, Miss."

"Let
me look at it."

A delicate blue satin, trimmed with the finest lace,
is produced from a band-box.

"It is very pretty, I think, Annette."

"It
is downright beautiful, Miss."

"And so expensive," pursued the little
girl whose name was Julia, "that I don't think any one else I know
is likely to imitate it, which is my greatest comfort!"

And so saying,
the rich Miss Julia ---- (an only daughter), whose comfort seemed
to depend on no one else being as comfortable as herself, commenced
her toilet, i.e. her maid both commenced and finished it for her,
for those who can command the unlimited assistance of servants are
apt to be very idle in helping themselves.  The nave was divided from the side aisles of the church by pointed
arches resting on very sturdy pillars: it was good to see how solemnly they held themselves
to their age-long task of supporting that lowly roof.  There was a small organ, suited in size
to the vaulted hollow, which it weekly filled with religious sound.  On the opposite wall of
the church, between two windows, was a mural tablet of white marble, with an inscription in
black letters,--the only such memorial that I could discern, although many dead people doubtless
lay beneath the floor, and had paved it with their ancient tombstones, as is customary in old
English churches.  There were no modern painted windows, flaring with raw colors, nor other
gorgeous adornments, such as the present taste for mediaeval restoration often patches upon
the decorous simplicity of the gray village-church. It is probably the worshipping-place of
no more distinguished a congregation than the farmers and peasantry who inhabit the houses
and cottages which I have just described.  Had the lord of the manor been one of the parishioners,
there would have been an eminent pew near the chancel, walled high about, curtained, and softly
cushioned, warmed by a fireplace of its own, and distinguished by hereditary tablets and escutcheons
on the enclosed stone pillar.

A well-trodden path led across the churchyard, and the gate being on the latch, we entered,
and walked round among the graves and monuments.  The latter were chiefly head-stones, none
of which were very old, so far as was discoverable by the dates; some, indeed, in so ancient
a cemetery, were disagreeably new, with inscriptions glittering like sunshine in gold letters.
The ground must have been dug over and over again, innumerable times, until the soil is made
up of what was once human clay, out of which have sprung successive crops of gravestones, that
flourish their allotted time, and disappear, like the weeds and flowers in their briefer period.
The English climate is very unfavorable to the endurance of memorials in the open air.  Twenty
years of it suffice to give as much antiquity of aspect, whether to tombstone or edifice, as
a hundred years of our own drier atmosphere,--so soon do the drizzly rains and constant moisture
corrode the surface of marble or freestone.  Sculptured edges loose their sharpness in a year
or two; yellow lichens overspread a beloved name, and obliterate it while it is yet fresh upon
some survivor's heart.  Time gnaws an English gravestone with wonderful appetite; and when
the inscription is quite illegible, the sexton takes the useless slab away, and perhaps makes
a hearthstone of it, and digs up the unripe bones which it ineffectually tried to memorialize,
and gives the bed to another sleeper.  In the Charter Street burial-ground at Salem, and in
the old graveyard on the hill at Ipswich, I have seen more ancient gravestones, with legible
inscriptions on them, than in any English churchyard.

And yet this same ungenial climate, hostile as it generally is to the long remembrance of departed
people, has sometimes a lovely way of dealing with the records on certain monuments that lie
horizontally in the open air.  The rain falls into the deep incisions of the letters, and has
scarcely time to be dried away before another shower sprinkles the flat stone again, and replenishes
those little reservoirs.  The unseen, mysterious seeds of mosses find their way into the lettered
furrows, and are made to germinate by the continual moisture and watery sunshine of the English
sky; and by and by, in a year, or two years, or many years, behold the complete inscription--

     Here Lieth the body,

and all the rest of the tender falsehood--beautifully embossed in raised letters of living
green, a bas-relief of velvet moss on the marble slab! It becomes more legible, under the skyey
influences, after the world has forgotten the deceased, than when it was fresh from the stone-cutter's
hands.  It outlives the grief of friends.  I first saw an example of this in Bebbington churchyard,
in Cheshire, and thought that Nature must needs have had a special tenderness for the person
(no noted man, however, in the world's history) so long ago laid beneath that stone, since
she took such wonderful pains to "keep his memory green."  Perhaps the proverbial phrase just
quoted may have had its origin in the natural phenomenon here described.

While we rested ourselves on a horizontal monument, which was elevated just high enough to
be a convenient seat, I observed that one of the gravestones lay very close to the church,--so
close that the droppings of the eaves would fall upon it.  It seemed as if the inmate of that
grave had desired to creep under the church-wall.  On closer inspection, we found an almost
illegible epitaph on the stone, and with difficulty made out this forlorn verse:--

    "Poorly lived,
     And poorly died,
     Poorly buried,
     And no one cried."

It would be hard to compress the story of a cold and luckless life, death, and burial into
fewer words, or more impressive ones; at least, we found them impressive, perhaps because we
had to re-create the inscription by scraping away the lichens from the faintly traced letters.
The grave was on the shady and damp side of the church, endwise towards it, the head-stone
being within about three feet of the foundation-wall; so that, unless the poor man was a dwarf,
he must have been doubled up to fit him into his final resting-place.  No wonder that his epitaph
murmured against so poor a burial as this!  His name, as well as I could make it out, was Treeo,--John
Treeo, I think,--and he died in 1810, at the age of seventy-four.  The gravestone is so overgrown
with grass and weeds, so covered with unsightly lichens, and so crumbly with time and foul
weather, that it is questionable whether anybody will ever be at the trouble of deciphering
it again.  But there is a quaint and sad kind of enjoyment in defeating (to such slight degree
as my pen may do it) the probabilities of oblivion for poor John Treeo, and asking a little
sympathy for him, half a century after his death, and making him better and more widely known,
at least, than any other slumberer in Lillington churchyard: he having been, as appearances
go, the outcast of them all.

You find similar old churches and villages in all the neighboring country, at the distance
of every two or three miles; and I describe them, not as being rare, but because they are so
common and characteristic.  The village of Whitnash, within twenty minutes' walk of Leamington,
looks as secluded, as rural, and as little disturbed by the fashions of to-day, as if Dr. Jephson
had never developed all those Parades and Crescents out of his magic well.  I used to wonder
whether the inhabitants had ever yet heard of railways, or, at their slow rate of progress,
had even reached the epoch of stage-coaches.  As you approach the village, while it is yet
unseen, you observe a tall, overshadowing canopy of elm-tree tops, beneath which you almost
hesitate to follow the public road, on account of the remoteness that seems to exist between
the precincts of this old-world community and the thronged modern street out of which you have
so recently emerged.  Venturing onward, however, you soon find yourself in the heart of Whitnash,
and see an irregular ring of ancient rustic dwellings surrounding the village-green, on one
side of which stands the church, with its square Norman tower and battlements, while close
adjoining is the vicarage, made picturesque by peaks and gables.  At first glimpse, none of
the houses appear to be less than two or three centuries old, and they are of the ancient,
wooden-framed fashion, with thatched roofs, which give them the air of birds' nests, thereby
assimilating them closely to the simplicity of nature.

The church-tower is mossy and much gnawed by time; it has narrow loopholes up and down its
front and sides, and an arched window over the low portal, set with small panes of glass, cracked,
dim, and irregular, through which a bygone age is peeping out into the daylight.  Some of those
old, grotesque faces, called gargoyles, are seen on the projections of the architecture.  The
churchyard is very small, and is encompassed by a gray stone fence that looks as ancient as
the church itself.  In front of the tower, on the village-green, is a yew-tree of incalculable
age, with a vast circumference of trunk, but a very scanty head of foliage; though its boughs
still keep some of the vitality which perhaps was in its early prime when the Saxon invaders
founded Whitnash.  A thousand years is no extraordinary antiquity in the lifetime of a yew.
We were pleasantly startled, however, by discovering an exuberance of more youthful life than
we had thought possible in so old a tree; for the faces of two children laughed at us out of
an opening in the trunk, which had become hollow with long decay.  On one side of the yew stood
a framework of worm-eaten timber, the use and meaning of which puzzled me exceedingly, till
I made it out to be the village-stocks; a public institution that, in its day, had doubtless
hampered many a pair of shank-bones, now crumbling in the adjacent churchyard.  It is not to
be supposed, however, that this old-fashioned mode of punishment is still in vogue among the
good people of Whitnash.  The vicar of the parish has antiquarian propensities, and had probably
dragged the stocks out of some dusty hiding-place, and set them up on their former site as
a curiosity.

I disquiet myself in vain with the effort to hit upon some characteristic feature, or assemblage
of features, that shall convey to the reader the influence of hoar antiquity lingering into
the present daylight, as I so often felt it in these old English scenes.  It is only an American
who can feel it; and even he begins to find himself growing insensible to its effect, after
a long residence in England.  But while you are still new in the old country, it thrills you
with strange emotion to think that this little church of Whitnash, humble as it seems, stood
for ages under the Catholic faith, and has not materially changed since Wickcliffe's days,
and that it looked as gray as now in Bloody Mary's time, and that Cromwell's troopers broke
off the stone noses of those same gargoyles that are now grinning in your face.  So, too, with
the immemorial yew-tree: you see its great roots grasping hold of the earth like gigantic claws,
clinging so sturdily that no effort of time can wrench them away; and there being life in the
old tree, you feel all the more as if a contemporary witness were telling you of the things
that have been. It has lived among men, and been a familiar object to them, and seen them brought
to be christened and married and buried in the neighboring church and churchyard, through so
many centuries, that it knows all about our race, so far as fifty generations of the Whitnash
people can supply such knowledge.

And, after all, what a weary life it must have been for the old tree! Tedious beyond imagination!
Such, I think, is the final impression on the mind of an American visitor, when his delight
at finding something permanent begins to yield to his Western love of change, and he becomes
sensible of the heavy air of a spot where the forefathers and foremothers have grown up together,
intermarried, and died, through a long succession of lives, without any intermixture of new
elements, till family features and character are all run in the same inevitable mould.  Life
is there fossilized in its greenest leaf.  The man who died yesterday or ever so long ago walks
the village-street to day, and chooses the same wife that he married a hundred years since,
and must be buried again to-morrow under the same kindred dust that has already covered him
half a score of times.  The stone threshold of his cottage is worn away with his hobnailed
footsteps, shuffling over it from the reign of the first Plantagenet to that of Victoria. 
Better than this is the lot of our restless countrymen, whose modern instinct bids them tend
always towards "fresh woods and pastures new."  Rather than such monotony of sluggish ages,
loitering on a village-green, toiling in hereditary fields, listening to the parson's drone
lengthened through centuries in the gray Norman church, let us welcome whatever change may
come,--change of place, social customs, political institutions, modes of worship,--trusting,
that, if all present things shall vanish, they will but make room for better systems, and for
a higher type of man to clothe his life in them, and to fling them off in turn.

Nevertheless, while an American willingly accepts growth and change as the law of his own national
and private existence, he has a singular tenderness for the stone-incrusted institutions of
the mother-country. 'Tis then, that dread laments they hear, Who pass by night that way; Which
the scar'd traveller, so clear, Hears till returning day; When re-embarks sad Isabel, That spectre
shade so fair; Then dashing in the water's swell, She vanishes in air.

No trace remains in Sol's bright ray, Of boat or awful spright; For grief--or guilt conceived by day,
Conspicuous is at night. Thus Isabel's unearthly woe, Remain'd for many years; But as our superstitions
go, So go unfounded fears

CAROLINE MAXWELL.

* * * * *

HARVEST HOME.

(To the Editor of the Mirror.)

Sir,--Wishing to add to your numerous accounts of our local customs,
I send you a description of the manner of celebrating harvest home
in Westmoreland.

The farmers of Appleby, Kirby, Thore, and many of the neighbouring and low towns thereabout,
devote the last day of the harvest to mirth and festivity. The men generally endeavour to get the
corn all in pretty early in the day; and at the last cart-load the horses are decked by the
men with ears of corn and flowers and ribands; and then the lasses'
straw- bonnets, who, in return, perform the same compliments on them.
Thus they move on through the lanes and roads, till they reach the
farm-yard, shouting, "Harvest Home," and singing songs in their way.
When they reach the farm-yard, they set up an exulting shout, and
ale is distributed to them by their master. About nine o'clock, a
supper is prepared for them in their master's house. A wheat-sheaf
is brought, and placed in the middle of the room, decorated with ribands
and flowers, and corn is hung in various parts of the room. The supper
mostly consists of some good old English dish, (of which there is
plenty,) and the jolly farmer presides at the head of the table. After
the cloth is cleared, liquor in abundance is brought forward, and
the "president" sings, (not a Non Nobis Domine,) but a good, true,
mirth-stirring song, and then the fun commences; singing and dancing
alternately occupy the evening, and the bottle circulates speedily,
and the festival generally breaks up about midnight.  Hatton, so far as I could discover,
has no public-house, no shop, no contiguity of roofs (as in most English villages, however
small), but is merely an ancient neighborhood of farm-houses, spacious, and standing wide apart,
each within its own precincts, and offering a most comfortable aspect of orchards, harvest-fields,
barns, stacks, and all manner of rural plenty.  It seemed to be a community of old settlers,
among whom everything had been going on prosperously since an epoch beyond the memory of man;
and they kept a certain privacy among themselves, and dwelt on a cross-road, at the entrance
of which was a barred gate, hospitably open, but still impressing me with a sense of scarcely
warrantable intrusion.  After all, in some shady nook of those gentle Warwickshire slopes there
may have been a denser and more populous settlement, styled Hatton, which I never reached.

Emerging from the by-road, and entering upon one that crossed it at right angles and led to
Warwick, I espied the church of Dr. Parr.  Like the others which I have described, it had a
low stone tower, square, and battlemented at its summit: for all these little churches seem
to have been built on the same model, and nearly at the same measurement, and have even a greater
family-likeness than the cathedrals.  As I approached, the bell of the tower (a remarkably
deep-toned bell, considering how small it was) flung its voice abroad, and told me that it
was noon.  The church stands among its graves, a little removed from the wayside, quite apart
from any collection of houses, and with no signs of vicarage; it is a good deal shadowed by
trees, and not wholly destitute of ivy.  The body of the edifice, unfortunately (and it is
an outrage which the English church-wardens are fond of perpetrating), has been newly covered
with a yellowish plaster or wash, so as quite to destroy the aspect of antiquity, except upon
the tower, which wears the dark gray hue of many centuries.  The chancel-window is painted
with a representation of Christ upon the Cross, and all the other windows are full of painted
or stained glass, but none of it ancient, nor (if it be fair to judge from without of what
ought to be seen within) possessing any of the tender glory that should be the inheritance
of this branch of Art, revived from mediaeval times.  I stepped over the graves, and peeped
in at two or three of the windows, and saw the snug interior of the church glimmering through
the many-colored panes, like a show of commonplace objects under the fantastic influence of
a dream: for the floor was covered with modern pews, very like what we may see in a New England
meeting-house, though, I think, a little more favorable than those would be to the quiet slumbers
of the Hatton farmers and their families.  Those who slept under Dr. Parr's preaching now prolong
their nap, I suppose, in the churchyard round about, and can scarcely have drawn much spiritual
benefit from any truths that he contrived to tell them in their lifetime.  It struck me as
a rare example (even where examples are numerous) of a man utterly misplaced, that this enormous
scholar, great in the classic tongues, and inevitably converting his own simplest vernacular
into a learned language, should have been set up in this homely pulpit, and ordained to preach
salvation to a rustic audience, to whom it is difficult to imagine how he could ever have spoken
one available word.

Almost always, in visiting such scenes as I have been attempting to describe, I had a singular
sense of having been there before.  The ivy-grown English churches (even that of Bebbington,
the first that I beheld) were quite as familiar to me, when fresh from home, as the old wooden
meeting-house in Salem, which used, on wintry Sabbaths, to be the frozen purgatory of my childhood.
This was a bewildering, yet very delightful emotion fluttering about me like a faint summer
wind, and filling my imagination with a thousand half-remembrances, which looked as vivid as
sunshine, at a side-glance, but faded quite away whenever I attempted to grasp and define them.
Of course, the explanation of the mystery was, that history, poetry, and fiction, books of
travel, and the talk of tourists, had given me pretty accurate preconceptions of the common
objects of English scenery, and these, being long ago vivified by a youthful fancy, had insensibly
taken their places among the images of things actually seen.  Yet the illusion was often so
powerful, that I almost doubted whether such airy remembrances might not be a sort of innate
idea, the print of a recollection in some ancestral mind, transmitted, with fainter and fainter
impress through several descents, to my own.  I felt, indeed, like the stalwart progenitor
in person, returning to the hereditary haunts after more than two hundred years, and finding
the church, the hall, the farm-house, the cottage, hardly changed during his long absence,--the
same shady by-paths and hedge-lanes, the same veiled sky, and green lustre of the lawns and
fields,--while his own affinities for these things, a little obscured by disuse, were reviving
at every step.

An American is not very apt to love the English people, as a whole, on whatever length of acquaintance.
I fancy that they would value our regard, and even reciprocate it in their ungracious way,
if we could give it to them in spite of all rebuffs; but they are beset by a curious and inevitable
infelicity, which compels them, as it were, to keep up what they seem to consider a wholesome
bitterness of feeling between themselves and all other nationalities, especially that of America.
They will never confess it; nevertheless, it is as essential a tonic to them as their bitter
ale.  Therefore,--and possibly, too, from a similar narrowness in his own character,--an American
seldom feels quite as if he were at home among the English people.  If he do so, he has ceased
to be an American.  But it requires no long residence to make him love their island, and appreciate
it as thoroughly as they themselves do.  For my part, I used to wish that we could annex it,
transferring their thirty millions of inhabitants to some convenient wilderness in the great
West, and putting half or a quarter as many of ourselves into their places. The change would
be beneficial to both parties.  We, in our dry atmosphere, are getting too nervous, haggard,
dyspeptic, extenuated, unsubstantial, theoretic, and need to be made grosser.  John Bull, on
the other hand, has grown bulbous, long-bodied, short-legged, heavy-witted, material, and,
in a word, too intensely English. I was free to go whither I would, and swiftly.

After leisurely deliberation I selected one surrounded by wide fields which appeared to be
as level as a floor. But as I descended the landscape widened, billowing into hills and folding
into valleys. By sheer good luck, nothing more, I made a landing
without accident.

My Caudron barely missed colliding with a hedge of fruit trees, rolled
down a long incline, and stopped not ten feet short of a small stream.

The experience taught me the folly of choosing landing-ground from high altitudes. I needn't
have landed, of course, but I was then so much an amateur that the buffeting of cross-currents
of air near the ground awed me into it, come what might. The village was out of sight over the
crest of the hill.

However, thinking that some one must have seen me, I decided to await developments where I was.

Very
soon I heard a shrill, jubilant shout. A boy of eight or ten years was running along the ridge
as fast as he could go. Outlined against the sky, he reminded me of silhouettes I had seen in Paris
shops, of children dancing, the very embodiment of joy in movement. He turned and waved to
some one behind, whom I could not see, then came on again, stopping a short distance away, and
looking at me with an air of awe, which, having been a small boy myself, I was able to understand
and appreciate. I said, "Bonjour, mon petit," as cordially as I could, but he just stood there
and gazed without saying a word. Then the others began to appear: scores of children, and old
men as well, and women of all ages, some with babies in their arms, and young girls. The whole
village came, I am sure. I was mightily impressed by the haleness of the old men and women, which
one rarely sees in America. Some of them were evidently well over seventy, and yet, with one
or two exceptions, they had sound limbs, clear eyes, and healthy complexions. As for the young
girls, many of them were exceptionally pretty; and the children were sturdy youngsters, not the
wan, thin-legged little creatures one sees in Paris. In fact, all of these people appeared to
belong to a different race from that of the Parisians, to come from finer, more vigorous stock.

They were very curious, but equally courteous, and stood in a large
circle around my machine, waiting for me to make my wishes known.

For several minutes I pretended to be busy attending to dials and valves inside the car. While trying
to screw my courage up to the point of making a verbless explanation of my difficulty, some one
pushed through the crowd, and to my great relief began speaking to me. It was Monsieur the Mayor.
As best I could, I explained that I had lost my way and had found it necessary to come down for
the purpose of making inquiries. I knew that it was awful French, but hoped that it would be intelligible,
in part at least. However, the Mayor understood not a word, and I knew by the curious expression
in his eyes that he must be wondering from what weird province I hailed. After a moment's thought he
said, "Vous êtes Anglais, monsieur?" with a smile of very real pleasure. I said, "Non, monsieur,
Américain."

That magic word! What potency it has in France, the more so at that time, perhaps, for America
had placed herself definitely upon the side of the Allies only a short time before. I enjoyed that
moment. I might have had the village for the asking. I willingly accepted the rôle of ambassador
of the American people.  It might rather seem as if the sleepy river (being Shakespeare's Avon, and often, no
doubt, the mirror of his gorgeous visions) were dreaming now of a lordly residence that stood
here many centuries ago; and this fantasy is strengthened, when you observe that the image
in the tranquil water has all the distinctness of the actual structure.  Either might be the
reflection of the other.  Wherever Time has gnawed one of the stones, you see the mark of his
tooth just as plainly in the sunken reflection.  Each is so perfect, that the upper vision
seems a castle in the air, and the lower one an old stronghold of feudalism, miraculously kept
from decay in an enchanted river.

A ruinous and ivy-grown bridge, that projects from the bank a little on the hither side of
the castle, has the effect of making the scene appear more entirely apart from the every-day
world, for it ends abruptly in the middle of the stream,--so that, if a cavalcade of the knights
and ladies of romance should issue from the old walls, they could never tread on earthly ground,
any more than we, approaching from the side of modern realism, can overleap the gulf between
our domain and theirs.  Yet, if we seek to disenchant ourselves, it may readily be done.  Crossing
the bridge on which we stand, and passing a little farther on, we come to the entrance of the
castle, abutting on the highway, and hospitably open at certain hours to all curious pilgrims
who choose to disburse half a crown or so toward the support of the earl's domestics.  The
sight of that long series of historic rooms, full of such splendors and rarities as a great
English family necessarily gathers about itself, in its hereditary abode, and in the lapse
of ages, is well worth the money, or ten times as much, if indeed the value of the spectacle
could be reckoned in money's-worth. But after the attendant has hurried you from end to end
of the edifice, repeating a guide-book by rote, and exorcising each successive hall of its
poetic glamour and witchcraft by the mere tone in which he talks about it, you will make the
doleful discovery that Warwick Castle has ceased to be a dream.  It is better, methinks, to
linger on the bridge, gazing at Caesar's Tower and Guy's Tower in the dim English sunshine
above, and in the placid Avon below, and still keep them as thoughts in your own mind, than
climb to their summits, or touch even a stone of their actual substance.  They will have all
the more reality for you, as stalwart relics of immemorial time, if you are reverent enough
to leave them in the intangible sanctity of a poetic vision.

From the bridge over the Avon, the road passes in front of the castle-gate, and soon enters
the principal street of Warwick, a little beyond St. John's School-House, already described.
Chester itself, most antique of English towns, can hardly show quainter architectural shapes
than many of the buildings that border this street.  They are mostly of the timber-and-plaster
kind, with bowed and decrepit ridge-poles, and a whole chronology of various patchwork in their
walls; their low-browed doorways open upon a sunken floor; their projecting stories peep, as
it were, over one another's shoulders, and rise into a multiplicity of peaked gables; they
have curious windows, breaking out irregularly all over the house, some even in the roof, set
in their own little peaks, opening lattice-wise, and furnished with twenty small panes of lozenge-shaped
glass.  The architecture of these edifices (a visible oaken framework, showing the whole skeleton
of the house,--as if a man's bones should be arranged on his outside, and his flesh seen through
the interstices) is often imitated by modern builders, and with sufficiently picturesque effect.
The objection is, that such houses, like all imitations of bygone styles, have an air of affectation;
they do not seem to be built in earnest; they are no better than playthings, or overgrown baby-houses,
in which nobody should be expected to encounter the serious realities of either birth or death.
Besides, originating nothing, we leave no fashions for another age to copy, when we ourselves
shall have grown antique.

Old as it looks, all this portion of Warwick has overbrimmed, as it were, from the original
settlement, being outside of the ancient wall.  The street soon runs under an arched gateway,
with a church or some other venerable structure above it, and admits us into the heart of the
town. At one of my first visits, I witnessed a military display.  A regiment of Warwickshire
militia, probably commanded by the Earl, was going through its drill in the market-place; and
on the collar of one of the officers was embroidered the Bear and Ragged Staff, which has been
the cognizance of the Warwick earldom from time immemorial.  The soldiers were sturdy young
men, with the simple, stolid, yet kindly faces of English rustics, looking exceedingly well
in a body, but slouching into a yeoman-like carriage and appearance the moment they were dismissed
from drill. Squads of them were distributed everywhere about the streets, and sentinels were
posted at various points; and I saw a sergeant, with a great key in his hand (big enough to
have been the key of the castle's main entrance when the gate was thickest and heaviest), apparently
setting a guard.  Thus, centuries after feudal times are past, we find warriors still gathering
under the old castle-walls, and commanded by a feudal lord, just as in the days of the King-Maker,
who, no doubt, often mustered his retainers in the same market-place where I beheld this modern
regiment.

The interior of the town wears a less old-fashioned aspect than the suburbs through which we
approach it; and the High Street has shops with modern plate-glass, and buildings with stuccoed
fronts, exhibiting as few projections to hang a thought or sentiment upon as if an architect
of to-day had planned them.  And, indeed, so far as their surface goes, they are perhaps new
enough to stand unabashed in an American street; but behind these renovated faces, with their
monotonous lack of expression, there is probably the substance of the same old town that wore
a Gothic exterior in the Middle Ages.  The street is an emblem of England itself. What seems
new in it is chiefly a skilful and fortunate adaptation of what such a people as ourselves
would destroy.  The new things are based and supported on sturdy old things, and derive a massive
strength from their deep and immemorial foundations, though with such limitations and impediments
as only an Englishman could endure.  But he likes to feel the weight of all the past upon his
back; and, moreover, the antiquity that overburdens him has taken root in his being, and has
grown to be rather a hump than a pack, so that there is no getting rid of it without tearing
his whole structure to pieces.  In my judgment, as he appears to be sufficiently comfortable
under the mouldy accretion, he had better stumble on with it as long as he can.  He presents
a spectacle which is by no means without its charm for a disinterested and unencumbered observer.

When the old edifice, or the antiquated custom or institution, appears in its pristine form,
without any attempt at intermarrying it with modern fashions, an American cannot but admire
the picturesque effect produced by the sudden cropping up of an apparently dead-and-buried
state of society into the actual present, of which he is himself a part.  We need not go far
in Warwick without encountering an instance of the kind. Proceeding westward through the town,
we find ourselves confronted by a huge mass of natural rock, hewn into something like architectural
shape, and penetrated by a vaulted passage, which may well have been one of King Cymbeline's
original gateways; and on the top of the rock, over the archway, sits a small old church, communicating
with an ancient edifice, or assemblage of edifices, that look down from a similar elevation
on the side of the street.  A range of trees half hides the latter establishment from the sun.
It presents a curious and venerable specimen of the timber-and-plaster style of building, in
which some of the finest old houses in England are constructed; the front projects into porticos
and vestibules, and rises into many gables, some in a row, and others crowning semi-detached
portions of the structure; the windows mostly open on hinges, but show a delightful irregularity
of shape and position; a multiplicity of chimneys break through the roof at their own will,
or, at least, without any settled purpose of the architect.  The whole affair looks very old,--so
old indeed that the front bulges forth, as if the timber framework were a little weary, at
last, of standing erect so long; but the state of repair is so perfect, and there is such an
indescribable aspect of continuous vitality within the system of this aged house, that you
feel confident that there may be safe shelter yet, and perhaps for centuries to come, under
its time-honored roof.  And on a bench, sluggishly enjoying the sunshine, and looking into
the street of Warwick as from a life apart, a few old men are generally to be seen, wrapped
in long cloaks, on which you may detect the glistening of a silver badge representing the Bear
and Ragged Staff.  These decorated worthies are some of the twelve brethren of Leicester's
Hospital,--a community which subsists to-day under the identical modes that were established
for it in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and of course retains many features of a social life
that has vanished almost everywhere else.

The edifice itself dates from a much older period than the charitable institution of which
it is now the home.  It was the seat of a religious fraternity far back in the Middle Ages,
and continued so till Henry VIII. turned all the priesthood of England out of doors, and put
the most unscrupulous of his favorites into their vacant abodes.  In many instances, the old
monks had chosen the sites of their domiciles so well, and built them on such a broad system
of beauty and convenience, that their lay-occupants found it easy to convert them into stately
and comfortable homes; and as such they still exist, with something of the antique reverence
lingering about them.  The structure now before us seems to have been first granted to Sir
Nicholas Lestrange, who perhaps intended, like other men, to establish his household gods in
the niches whence he had thrown down the images of saints, and to lay his hearth where an altar
had stood.  But there was probably a natural reluctance in those days (when Catholicism, so
lately repudiated, must needs have retained an influence over all but the most obdurate characters)
to bring one's hopes of domestic prosperity and a fortunate lineage into direct hostility with
the awful claims of the ancient religion.  At all events, there is still a superstitious idea,
betwixt a fantasy and a belief, that the possession of former Church-property has drawn a curse
along with it, not only among the posterity of those to whom it was originally granted, but
wherever it has subsequently been transferred, even if honestly bought and paid for.  There
are families, now inhabiting some of the beautiful old abbeys, who appear to indulge a species
of pride in recording the strange deaths and ugly shapes of misfortune that have occurred among
their predecessors, and may be supposed likely to dog their own pathway down the ages of futurity.
Whether Sir Nicholas Lestrange, in the beef-eating days of Old Harry and Elizabeth, was a nervous
man, and subject to apprehensions of this kind, I cannot tell; but it is certain that he speedily
rid himself of the spoils of the Church, and that, within twenty years afterwards, the edifice
became the property of the famous Dudley, Earl of Leicester, brother of the Earl of Warwick.
He devoted the ancient religious precinct to a charitable use, endowing it with an ample revenue,
and making it the perpetual home of twelve poor, honest, and war-broken soldiers, mostly his
own retainers, and natives either of Warwickshire or Gloucestershire.  These veterans, or others
wonderfully like them, still occupy their monkish dormitories and haunt the time-darkened corridors
and galleries of the hospital, leading a life of old-fashioned comfort, wearing the old-fashioned
cloaks, and burnishing the identical silver badges which the Earl of Leicester gave to the
original twelve.  He is said to have been a bad man in his day; but he has succeeded in prolonging
one good deed into what was to him a distant future.

On the projecting story, over the arched entrance, there is the date, 1571, and several coats-of-arms,
either the Earl's or those of his kindred, and immediately above the doorway a stone sculpture
of the Bear and Ragged Staff.

Passing through the arch, we find ourselves in a quadrangle, or enclosed court, such as always
formed the central part of a great family residence in Queen Elizabeth's time, and earlier.
There can hardly be a more perfect specimen of such an establishment than Leicester's Hospital.
The quadrangle is a sort of sky-roofed hall, to which there is convenient access from all parts
of the house.  The four inner fronts, with their high, steep roofs and sharp gables, look into
it from antique windows, and through open corridors and galleries along the sides; and there
seems to be a richer display of architectural devices and ornaments, quainter carvings in oak,
and more fantastic shapes of the timber framework, than on the side toward the street.  On
the wall opposite the arched entrance are the following inscriptions, comprising such moral
rules, I presume, as were deemed most essential for the daily observance of the community:
"Honor all Men"--"Fear God"--"Honor the King"--"Love the Brotherhood"; and again, as if this
latter injunction needed emphasis and repetition among a household of aged people soured with
the hard fortune of their previous lives,--"Be kindly affectioned one to another." He was a man of
the highest rank of genius, far from being immaculate in his youth, brave, sincere, a true friend,
possessed of rich learning, a clear and sparkling style, a great wit, and the most powerful Freethinker
of his age.

A. C.

CONDORCET.

In the history of the French Revolution, we read of a multitude of sections, each ruled by a man,
and each man representing a philosophy. Not that each man was the contriver of a system, but
the effervescence of one. As true as Robespierre was the advocate of Rousseau, as Marat was
the Wilkes of Paris, as Danton was the Paine, and Mirabeau the expediency-politician of reflex
England, so true is it that Condorcet was the type of the philosophic
Girondists, the offspring of Voltaire.

The two great schools of metaphysics fought out the battle on the theatre of the Constituent
Assembly, in a spirit as bitterly uncompromising as when under different phraseological terms,
they met in the arguments of the School-men, or further in the womb of history, on the forum of
Athens. It is a fact no less true than singular, that after each mental excitement amongst the
savons, whether in ancient or in modern times, after the literary shock has passed away, the people
are innoculated with the strife, and, destitute of the moderation of their leaders, fight for
that doctrine which they conceive oppresses their rights. The French Revolution was one of
those struggles. It gave rise to epoch-men. Not men who originated a doctrine, but those who
attempted to carry it out. Condorcet was one of those men. He was the successor of Voltaire
in the Encyclopædic warfare. The philosopher amongst the orators. Destitute of the amazing
versatility of the sage of Ferney, he imbibed the prophet's antipathy to superstition, and
after a brilliant career, fell in the wild onslaught of passion. The Revolution was the arena
on which was fought the battle involving the question whether Europe was to be ruled for a century
by Christianity or Infidelity. The irresolution of Robespierre lost to us the victory of the
first passage of arms, equally as decisive as Lafayette in 1830, and Lamartine in 1848, being
Liberals, lost in each case the social Republic by their vacillating policy. The true Freethinkers
of that age were the Girondists.

With their heroic death, the last barrier to despotism disappeared; the Consulate became the
only logical path for gilded chains and empire. With the ostracism of the Republicans by Napoleon
the Little, a Parallel is completed between the two eras of French history.

The family name of Condorcet was Caritat. His father was a scion of an aristocratic family,
and an officer in the army. The son who gave honor to the family, was born in the year 1743, at Ribemont,
in Picardy. His father dying early, left his son to be educated with his wife, under the guardianship
of his brother, the Bishop of Lisieux, a celebrated Jesuit. The mother of Condorcet was extremely
superstitious, and in one of her fanatic ecstasies, offered up her son at the shrine of the Virgin
Mary. How this act was performed we cannot relate; but it is a notorious fact that until his
twelfth year, the embryo philosopher was clothed in female attire,
and had young ladies for companions, which, M. Arago says, "accounts
for many peculiarities in the physique and the morale of his manhood."
The abstinence from all rude, boyish sports, checked the proper muscular
development of his limbs; the head and trunk were on a large scale,
but the legs were so meagre that they seemed unfit to carry what was
above them; and, in fact, he never could partake in any strong exercises,
or undergo the bodily fatigues to which healthy men willingly expose
themselves. On the other hand, he had imbibed the tenderness of a
delicate damsel, retaining to the last a deep horror for affliction
pain on the inferior animals.

In 1775, he entered the Jesuit Academy
at Rheiras. Three years afterwards, he was transferred to the College
of Navarre, in Paris, and soon made himself the most distinguished
scholar there.  Gazing into this pleasant
interior, it seemed to me, that, among these venerable surroundings, availing himself of whatever
was good in former things, and eking out their imperfection with the results of modern ingenuity,
the Master might lead a not unenviable life.  On the cloistered side of the quadrangle, where
the dark oak panels made the enclosed space dusky, I beheld a curtained window reddened by
a great blaze from within, and heard the bubbling and squeaking of something-- doubtless very
nice and succulent--that was being cooked at the kitchen-fire.  I think, indeed, that a whiff
or two of the savory fragrance reached my nostrils; at all events, the impression grew upon
me that Leicester's Hospital is one of the jolliest old domiciles in England.

I was about to depart, when another old woman, very plainly dressed, but fat, comfortable,
and with a cheerful twinkle in her eyes, came in through the arch, and looked curiously at
me.  This repeated apparition of the gentle sex (though by no means under its loveliest guise)
had still an agreeable effect in modifying my ideas of an institution which I had supposed
to be of a stern and monastic character.  She asked whether I wished to see the hospital, and
said that the porter, whose office it was to attend to visitors, was dead, and would be buried
that very day, so that the whole establishment could not conveniently be shown me.  She kindly
invited me, however, to visit the apartment occupied by her husband and herself; so I followed
her up the antique staircase, along the gallery, and into a small, oak-panelled parlor, where
sat an old man in a long blue garment, who arose and saluted me with much courtesy.  He seemed
a very quiet person, and yet had a look of travel and adventure, and gray experience, such
as I could have fancied in a palmer of ancient times, who might likewise have worn a similar
costume.  The little room was carpeted and neatly furnished; a portrait of its occupant was
hanging on the wall; and on a table were two swords crossed,--one, probably, his own battle-weapon,
and the other, which I drew half out of the scabbard, had an inscription on the blade, purporting
that it had been taken from the field of Waterloo.  My kind old hostess was anxious to exhibit
all the particulars of their housekeeping, and led me into the bedroom, which was in the nicest
order, with a snow-white quilt upon the bed; and in a little intervening room was a washing
and bathing apparatus; a convenience (judging from the personal aspect and atmosphere of such
parties) seldom to be met with in the humbler ranks of British life.

The old soldier and his wife both seemed glad of somebody to talk with; but the good woman
availed herself of the privilege far more copiously than the veteran himself, insomuch that
he felt it expedient to give her an occasional nudge with his elbow in her well-padded ribs.
"Don't you be so talkative!" quoth he; and, indeed, he could hardly find space for a word,
and quite as little after his admonition as before.  Her nimble tongue ran over the whole system
of life in the hospital.  The brethren, she said, had a yearly stipend (the amount of which
she did not mention), and such decent lodgings as I saw, and some other advantages, free; and,
instead of being pestered with a great many rules, and made to dine together at a great table,
they could manage their little household matters as they liked, buying their own dinners and
having them cooked in the general kitchen, and eating them snugly in their own parlors.  "And,"
added she, rightly deeming this the crowning privilege, "with the Master's permission, they
can have their wives to take care of them; and no harm comes of it; and what more can an old
man desire?"  It was evident enough that the good dame found herself in what she considered
very rich clover, and, moreover, had plenty of small occupations to keep her from getting rusty
and dull; but the veteran impressed me as deriving far less enjoyment from the monotonous ease,
without fear of change or hope of improvement, that had followed upon thirty years of peril
and vicissitude.  I fancied, too, that, while pleased with the novelty of a stranger's visit,
he was still a little shy of becoming a spectacle for the stranger's curiosity; for, if he
chose to be morbid about the matter, the establishment was but an almshouse, in spite of its
old-fashioned magnificence, and his fine blue cloak only a pauper's garment, with a silver
badge on it that perhaps galled his shoulder.  In truth, the badge and the peculiar garb, though
quite in accordance with the manners of the Earl of Leicester's age, are repugnant to modern
prejudices, and might fitly and humanely be abolished.

A year or two afterwards I paid another visit to the hospital, and found a new porter established
in office, and already capable of talking like a guide-book about the history, antiquities,
and present condition of the charity.  He informed me that the twelve brethren are selected
from among old soldiers of good character, whose other resources must not exceed an income
of five pounds; thus excluding all commissioned officers, whose half-pay would of course be
more than that amount.  They receive from the hospital an annuity of eighty pounds each, besides
their apartments, a garment of fine blue cloth, an annual abundance of ale, and a privilege
at the kitchen-fire; so that, considering the class from which they are taken, they may well
reckon themselves among the fortunate of the earth. Furthermore, they are invested with political
rights, acquiring a vote for member of Parliament in virtue either of their income or brotherhood.
On the other hand, as regards their personal freedom or conduct, they are subject to a supervision
which the Master of the hospital might render extremely annoying, were he so inclined; but
the military restraint under which they have spent the active portion of their lives makes
it easier for them to endure the domestic discipline here imposed upon their age. The porter
bore his testimony (whatever were its value) to their being as contented and happy as such
a set of old people could possibly be, and affirmed that they spent much time in burnishing
their silver badges, and were as proud of them as a nobleman of his star.  These badges, by
the by, except one that was stolen and replaced in Queen Anne's time, are the very same that
decorated the original twelve brethren.

I have seldom met with a better guide than my friend the porter.  He appeared to take a genuine
interest in the peculiarities of the establishment, and yet had an existence apart from them,
so that he could the better estimate what those peculiarities were.  To be sure, his knowledge
and observation were confined to external things, but, so far, had a sufficiently extensive
scope.  He led me up the staircase and exhibited portions of the timber framework of the edifice
that are reckoned to be eight or nine hundred years old, and are still neither worm-eaten nor
decayed; and traced out what had been a great hall in the days of the Catholic fraternity,
though its area is now filled up with the apartments of the twelve brethren; and pointed to
ornaments of sculptured oak, done in an ancient religious style of art, but hardly visible
amid the vaulted dimness of the roof.  Thence we went to the chapel--the Gothic church which
I noted several pages back--surmounting the gateway that stretches half across the street.
Here the brethren attend daily prayer, and have each a prayer-book of the finest paper, with
a fair, large type for their old eyes.  The interior of the chapel is very plain, with a picture
of no merit for an altar-piece, and a single old pane of painted glass in the great eastern
window, representing,--no saint, nor angel, as is customary in such cases,--but that grim sinner,
the Earl of Leicester.  Nevertheless, amid so many tangible proofs of his human sympathy, one
comes to doubt whether the Earl could have been such a hardened reprobate, after all.

We ascended the tower of the chapel, and looked down between its battlements into the street,
a hundred feet below us; while clambering half-way up were foxglove-flowers, weeds, small shrubs,
and tufts of grass, that had rooted themselves into the roughnesses of the stone foundation.
Far around us lay a rich and lovely English landscape, with many a church-spire and noble country-seat,
and several objects of high historic interest.  Edge Hill, where the Puritans defeated Charles
I., is in sight on the edge of the horizon, and much nearer stands the house where Cromwell
lodged on the night before the battle.  Right under our eyes, and half enveloping the town
with its high-shouldering wall, so that all the closely compacted streets seemed but a precinct
of the estate, was the Earl of Warwick's delightful park, a wide extent of sunny lawns, interspersed
with broad contiguities of forest-shade.  Some of the cedars of Lebanon were there,--a growth
of trees in which the Warwick family take an hereditary pride.  The two highest towers of the
castle heave themselves up out of a mass of foliage, and look down in a lordly manner upon
the plebeian roofs of the town, a part of which are slate-covered (these are the modern houses),
and a part are coated with old red tiles, denoting the more ancient edifices.  A hundred and
sixty or seventy years ago, a great fire destroyed a considerable portion of the town, and
doubtless annihilated many structures of a remote antiquity; at least, there was a possibility
of very old houses in the long past of Warwick, which King Cymbeline is said to have founded
in the year ONE of the Christian era!

And this historic fact or poetic fiction, whichever it may be, brings to mind a more indestructible
reality than anything else that has occurred within the present field of our vision; though
this includes the scene of Guy of Warwick's legendary exploits, and some of those of the Round
Table, to say nothing of the Battle of Edge Hill.  For perhaps it was in the landscape now
under our eyes that Posthumus wandered with the King's daughter, the sweet, chaste, faithful,
and courageous Imogen, the tenderest and womanliest woman that Shakespeare ever made immortal
in the world.  The silver Avon, which we see flowing so quietly by the gray castle, may have
held their images in its bosom.

The day, though it began brightly, had long been overcast, and the clouds now spat down a few
spiteful drops upon us, besides that the east-wind was very chill; so we descended the winding
tower-stair, and went next into the garden, one side of which is shut in by almost the only
remaining portion of the old city-wall.  A part of the garden-ground is devoted to grass and
shrubbery, and permeated by gravel-walks, in the centre of one of which is a beautiful stone
vase of Egyptian sculpture, that formerly stood on the top of a Nilometer, or graduated pillar
for measuring the rise and fall of the river Nile.  On the pedestal is a Latin inscription
by Dr. Parr, who (his vicarage of Hatton being so close at hand) was probably often the Master's
guest, and smoked his interminable pipe along these garden-walks.  Of the vegetable-garden,
which lies adjacent, the lion's share is appropriated to the Master, and twelve small, separate
patches to the individual brethren, who cultivate them at their own judgment and by their own
labor; and their beans and cauliflowers have a better flavor, I doubt not, than if they had
received them directly from the dead hand of the Earl of Leicester, like the rest of their
food.  In the farther part of the garden is an arbor for the old men's pleasure and convenience,
and I should like well to sit down among them there, and find out what is really the bitter
and the sweet of such a sort of life.  As for the old gentlemen themselves, they put me queerly
in mind of the Salem Custom-House, and the venerable personages whom I found so quietly at
anchor there.

The Master's residence, forming one entire side of the quadrangle, fronts on the garden, and
wears an aspect at once stately and homely.  It can hardly have undergone any perceptible change
within three centuries; but the garden, into which its old windows look, has probably put off
a great many eccentricities and quaintnesses, in the way of cunningly clipped shrubbery, since
the gardener of Queen Elizabeth's reign threw down his rusty shears and took his departure.
The present Master's name is Harris; he is a descendant of the founder's family, a gentleman
of independent fortune, and a clergyman of the Established Church, as the regulations of the
hospital require him to be.  I know not what are his official emoluments; but, according to
an English precedent, an ancient charitable fund is certain to be held directly for the behoof
of those who administer it, and perhaps incidentally, in a moderate way, for the nominal beneficiaries;
and, in the case before us, the twelve brethren being so comfortably provided for, the Master
is likely to be at least as comfortable as all the twelve together.  Yet I ought not, even
in a distant land, to fling an idle gibe against a gentleman of whom I really know nothing,
except that the people under his charge bear all possible tokens of being tended and cared
for as sedulously as if each of them sat by a warm fireside of his own, with a daughter bustling
round the hearth to make ready his porridge and his titbits.  It is delightful to think of
the good life which a suitable man, in the Master's position, has an opportunity to lead,--linked
to time-honored customs, welded in with an ancient system, never dreaming of radical change,
and bringing all the mellowness and richness of the past down into these railway-days, which
do not compel him or his community to move a whit quicker than of yore. Everybody can appreciate
the advantages of going ahead; it might be well, sometimes, to think whether there is not a
word or two to be said in favor of standing still or going to sleep.

From the garden we went into the kitchen, where the fire was burning hospitably, and diffused
a genial warmth far and wide, together with the fragrance of some old English roast-beef, which,
I think, must at that moment have been done nearly to a turn.  The kitchen is a lofty, spacious,
and noble room, partitioned off round the fireplace, by a sort of semicircular oaken screen,
or rather, an arrangement of heavy and high-backed settles, with an ever-open entrance between
them, on either side of which is the omnipresent image of the Bear and Ragged Staff, three
feet high, and excellently carved in oak, now black with time and unctuous kitchen-smoke. 
The ponderous mantel-piece, likewise of carved oak, towers high towards the dusky ceiling,
and extends its mighty breadth to take in a vast area of hearth, the arch of the fireplace
being positively so immense that I could compare it to nothing but the city gateway.  Above
its cavernous opening were crossed two ancient halberds, the weapons, possibly, of soldiers
who had fought under Leicester in the Low Countries; and elsewhere on the walls were displayed
several muskets, which some of the present inmates of the hospital may have levelled against
the French.  Another ornament of the mantel-piece was a square of silken needlework or embroidery,
faded nearly white, but dimly representing that wearisome Bear and Ragged Staff, which we should
hardly look twice at, only that it was wrought by the fair fingers of poor Amy Robsart, and
beautifully framed in oak from Kenilworth Castle, at the expense of a Mr. Conner, a countryman
of our own.  Certainly, no Englishman would be capable of this little bit of enthusiasm.  Finally,
the kitchen-firelight glistens on a splendid display of copper flagons, all of generous capacity,
and one of them about as big as a half-barrel; the smaller vessels contain the customary allowance
of ale, and the larger one is filled with that foaming liquor on four festive occasions of
the year, and emptied amain by the jolly brotherhood.  I should be glad to see them do it;
but it would be an exploit fitter for Queen Elizabeth's age than these degenerate times.

The kitchen is the social hall of the twelve brethren.  In the daytime, they bring their little
messes to be cooked here, and eat them in their own parlors; but after a certain hour, the
great hearth is cleared and swept, and the old men assemble round its blaze, each with his
tankard and his pipe, and hold high converse through the evening.  If the Master be a fit man
for his office, methinks he will sometimes sit down sociably among them; for there is an elbow-chair
by the fireside which it would not demean his dignity to fill, since it was occupied by King
James at the great festival of nearly three centuries ago.  A sip of the ale and a whiff of
the tobacco-pipe would put him in friendly relations with his venerable household; and then
we can fancy him instructing them by pithy apothegms and religious texts which were first uttered
here by some Catholic priest and have impregnated the atmosphere ever since.  If a joke goes
round, it shall be of an elder coinage than Joe Miller's, as old as Lord Bacon's collection,
or as the jest-book that Master Slender asked for when he lacked small-talk for sweet Anne
Page.  No news shall be spoken of later than the drifting ashore, on the northern coast, of
some stern-post or figure-head, a barnacled fragment of one of the great galleons of the Spanish
Armada.  What a tremor would pass through the antique group, if a damp newspaper should suddenly
be spread to dry before the fire!  They would feel as if either that printed sheet or they
themselves must be an unreality.  What a mysterious awe, if the shriek of the railway-train,
as it reaches the Warwick station, should ever so faintly invade their ears!  Movement of any
kind seems inconsistent with the stability of such an institution.  Nevertheless, I trust that
the ages will carry it along with them; because it is such a pleasant kind of dream for an
American to find his way thither, and behold a piece of the sixteenth century set into our
prosaic times, and then to depart, and think of its arched doorway as a spell-guarded entrance
which will never be accessible or visible to him any more.

Not far from the market-place of Warwick stands the great church of St. Mary's: a vast edifice,
indeed, and almost worthy to be a cathedral. People who pretend to skill in such matters say
that it is in a poor style of architecture, though designed (or, at least, extensively restored)
by Sir Christopher Wren; but I thought it very striking, with its wide, high, and elaborate
windows, its tall towers, its immense length, and (for it was long before I outgrew this Americanism,
the love of an old thing merely for the sake of its age) the tinge of gray antiquity over the
whole.  Once, while I stood gazing up at the tower, the clock struck twelve with a very deep
intonation, and immediately some chivies began to play, and kept up their resounding music
for five minutes, as measured by the hand upon the dial.  It was a very delightful harmony,
as airy as the notes of birds, and seemed, a not unbecoming freak of half-sportive fancy in
the huge, ancient, and solemn church; although I have seen an old-fashioned parlor-clock that
did precisely the same thing, in its small way.

The great attraction of this edifice is the Beauchamp (or, as the English, who delight in vulgarizing
their fine old Norman names, call it, the Beechum) Chapel, where the Earls of Warwick and their
kindred have been buried, from four hundred years back till within a recent period. It is a
stately and very elaborate chapel, with a large window of ancient painted glass, as perfectly
preserved as any that I remember seeing in England, and remarkably vivid in its colors.  Here
are several monuments with marble figures recumbent upon them, representing the Earls in their
knightly armor, and their dames in the ruffs and court-finery of their day, looking hardly
stiffer in stone than they must needs have been in their starched linen and embroidery.  The
renowned Earl of Leicester of Queen Elizabeth's time, the benefactor of the hospital, reclines
at full length on the tablet of one of these tombs, side by side with his Countess,--not Amy
Robsart, but a lady who (unless I have confused the story with some other mouldy scandal) is
said to have avenged poor Amy's murder by poisoning the Earl himself.  Be that as it may, both
figures, and especially the Earl, look like the very types of ancient Honor and Conjugal Faith.
In consideration of his long-enduring kindness to the twelve brethren, I cannot consent to
believe him as wicked as he is usually depicted; and it seems a marvel, now that so many well-established
historical verdicts have been reversed, why some enterprising writer does not make out Leicester
to have been the pattern nobleman of his age.

In the centre of the chapel is the magnificent memorial of its founder, Richard Beauchamp,
Earl of Warwick in the time of Henry VI.  On a richly ornamented altar-tomb of gray marble
lies the bronze figure of a knight in gilded armor, most admirably executed: for the sculptors
of those days had wonderful skill in their own style, and could make so lifelike an image of
a warrior, in brass or marble, that, if a trumpet were sounded over his tomb, you would expect
him to start up and handle his sword. The Earl whom we now speak of, however, has slept soundly
in spite of a more serious disturbance than any blast of a trumpet, unless it were the final
one.  Some centuries after his death, the floor of the chapel fell down and broke open the
stone coffin in which he was buried; and among the fragments appeared the anciently entombed
Earl of Warwick, with the color scarcely faded out of his cheeks, his eyes a little sunken,
but in other respects looking as natural as if he had died yesterday.  But exposure to the
atmosphere appeared to begin and finish the long-delayed process of decay in a moment, causing
him to vanish like a bubble; so, that, almost before there had been time to wonder at him,
there was nothing left of the stalwart Earl save his hair.  This sole relic the ladies of Warwick
made prize of, and braided it into rings and brooches for their own adornment; and thus, with
a chapel and a ponderous tomb built on purpose to protect his remains, this great nobleman
could not help being brought untimely to the light of day, nor even keep his lovelocks on his
skull after he had so long done with love.  There seems to be a fatality that disturbs people
in their sepulchres, when they have been over-careful to render them magnificent and impregnable,--as
witness the builders of the Pyramids, and Hadrian, Augustus, and the Scipios, and most other
personages whose mausoleums have been conspicuous enough to attract the violator; and as for
dead men's hair, I have seen a lock of King Edward the Fourth's, of a reddish-brown color,
which perhaps was once twisted round the delicate forefinger of Mistress Shore.

The direct lineage of the renowned characters that lie buried in this splendid chapel has long
been extinct.  The earldom is now held by the Grevilles, descendants of the Lord Brooke who
was slain in the Parliamentary War; and they have recently (that is to say, within a century)
built a burial-vault on the other side of the church, calculated (as the sexton assured me,
with a nod as if he were pleased) to afford suitable and respectful accommodation to as many
as fourscore coffins. Thank Heaven, the old man did not call them "CASKETS"!--a vile modern
phrase, which compels a person of sense and good taste to shrink more disgustfully than ever
before from the idea of being buried at all.  But as regards those eighty coffins, only sixteen
have as yet been contributed; and it may be a question with some minds, not merely whether
the Grevilles will hold the earldom of Warwick until the full number shall be made up, but
whether earldoms and all manner of lordships will not have faded out of England long before
those many generations shall have passed from the castle to the vault.  I hope not.  A titled
and landed aristocracy, if anywise an evil and an encumbrance, is so only to the nation which
is doomed to bear it on its shoulders; and an American, whose sole relation to it is to admire
its picturesque effect upon society, ought to be the last man to quarrel with what affords
him so much gratuitous enjoyment.  Nevertheless, conservative as England is, and though I scarce
ever found an Englishman who seemed really to desire change, there was continually a dull sound
in my ears as if the old foundations of things were crumbling away.  Some time or other,--by
no irreverent effort of violence, but, rather, in spite of all pious efforts to uphold a heterogeneous
pile of institutions that will have outlasted their vitality,--at some unexpected moment, there
must come a terrible crash.  The sole reason why I should desire it to happen in my day is,
that I might be there to see!  But the ruin of my own country is, perhaps, all that I am destined
to witness; and that immense catastrophe (though I am strong in the faith that there is a national
lifetime of a thousand years in us yet) would serve any man well enough as his final spectacle
on earth.

If the visitor is inclined to carry away any little memorial of Warwick, he had better go to
an Old Curiosity Shop in the High Street, where there is a vast quantity of obsolete gewgaws,
great and small, and many of them so pretty and ingenious that you wonder how they came to
be thrown aside and forgotten.  As regards its minor tastes, the world changes, but does not
improve; it appears to me, indeed, that there have been epochs of far more exquisite fancy
than the present one, in matters of personal ornament, and such delicate trifles as we put
upon a drawing-room table, a mantel-piece, or a whatnot.  The shop in question is near the
East Gate, but is hardly to be found without careful search, being denoted only by the name
of "REDFERN," painted not very conspicuously in the top-light of the door.  Immediately on
entering, we find ourselves among a confusion of old rubbish and valuables, ancient armor,
historic portraits, ebony cabinets inlaid with pearl, tall, ghostly clocks, hideous old china,
dim looking-glasses in frames of tarnished magnificence,--a thousand objects of strange aspect,
and others that almost frighten you by their likeness in unlikeness to things now in use. It
is impossible to give an idea of the variety of articles, so thickly strewn about that we can
scarcely move without overthrowing some great curiosity with a crash, or sweeping away some
small one hitched to our sleeves.  Three stories of the entire house are crowded in like manner.
The collection, even as we see it exposed to view, must have been got together at great cost;
but the real treasures of the establishment lie in secret repositories, whence they are not
likely to be drawn forth at an ordinary summons; though, if a gentleman with a competently
long purse should call for them, I doubt not that the signet-ring of Joseph's friend Pharaoh,
or the Duke of Alva's leading-staff, or the dagger that killed the Duke of Buckingham (all
of which I have seen), or any other almost incredible thing, might make its appearance.  Gold
snuff-boxes, antique gems, jewelled goblets, Venetian wine-glasses (which burst when poison
is poured into them, and therefore must not be used for modern wine-drinking), jasper-handled
knives, painted Sevres teacups,--in short, there are all sorts of things that a virtuoso ransacks
the world to discover.

It would be easier to spend a hundred pounds in Mr. Redfern's shop than to keep the money in
one's pocket; but, for my part, I contented myself with buying a little old spoon of silver-gilt,
and fantastically shaped, and got it at all the more reasonable rate because there happened
to be no legend attached to it.  I could supply any deficiency of that kind at much less expense
than regilding the spoon!

RECOLLECTIONS OF A GIFTED WOMAN.

From Leamington to Stratford-on-Avon the distance is eight or nine miles, over a road that
seemed to me most beautiful.  Not that I can recall any memorable peculiarities; for the country,
most of the way, is a succession of the gentlest swells and subsidences, affording wide and
far glimpses of champaign scenery here and there, and sinking almost to a dead level as we
draw near Stratford.  Any landscape in New England, even the tamest, has a more striking outline,
and besides would have its blue eyes open in those lakelets that we encounter almost from mile
to mile at home, but of which the Old Country is utterly destitute; or it would smile in our
faces through the medium of the wayside brooks that vanish under a low stone arch on one side
of the road, and sparkle out again on the other.  Neither of these pretty features is often
to be found in an English scene.  The charm of the latter consists in the rich verdure of the
fields, in the stately wayside trees and carefully kept plantations of wood, and in the old
and high cultivation that has humanized the very sods by mingling so much of man's toil and
care among them.  To an American there is a kind of sanctity even in an English turnip-field,
when he thinks how long that small square of ground has been known and recognized as a possession,
transmitted from father to son, trodden often by memorable feet, and utterly redeemed from
savagery by old acquaintanceship with civilized eyes.  The wildest things in England are more
than half tame.  The trees, for instance, whether in hedge-row, park, or what they call forest,
have nothing wild about them.  They are never ragged; there is a certain decorous restraint
in the freest outspread of their branches, though they spread wider than any self-nurturing
tree; they are tall, vigorous, bulky, with a look of age-long life, and a promise of more years
to come, all of which will bring them into closer kindred with the race of man.  Somebody or
other has known them from the sapling upward; and if they endure long enough, they grow to
be traditionally observed and honored, and connected with the fortunes of old families, till,
like Tennyson's Talking Oak, they babble with a thousand leafy tongues to ears that can understand
them.

An American tree, however, if it could grow in fair competition with an English one of similar
species, would probably be the more picturesque object of the two.  The Warwickshire elm has
not so beautiful a shape as those that overhang our village street; and as for the redoubtable
English oak, there is a certain John Bullism in its figure, a compact rotundity of foliage,
a lack of irregular and various outline, that make it look wonderfully like a gigantic cauliflower.
Its leaf, too, is much smaller than that of most varieties of American oak; nor do I mean to
doubt that the latter, with free leave to grow, reverent care and cultivation, and immunity
from the axe, would live out its centuries as sturdily as its English brother, and prove far
the nobler and more majestic specimen of a tree at the end of them.  Still, however one's Yankee
patriotism may struggle against the admission, it must be owned that the trees and other objects
of an English landscape take hold of the observer by numberless minute tendrils, as it were,
which, look as closely as we choose, we never find in an American scene.  The parasitic growth
is so luxuriant, that the trunk of the tree, so gray and dry in our climate, is better worth
observing than the boughs and foliage; a verdant messiness coats it all over; so that it looks
almost as green as the leaves; and often, moreover, the stately stem is clustered about, high
upward, with creeping and twining shrubs, the ivy, and sometimes the mistletoe, close-clinging
friends, nurtured by the moisture and never too fervid sunshine, and supporting themselves
by the old tree's abundant strength.  We call it a parasitical vegetation; but, if the phrase
imply any reproach, it is unkind to bestow it on this beautiful affection and relationship
which exist in England between one order of plants and another: the strong tree being always
ready to give support to the trailing shrub, lift it to the sun, and feed it out of its own
heart, if it crave such food; and the shrub, on its part, repaying its foster-father with an
ample luxuriance of beauty, and adding Corinthian grace to the tree's lofty strength.  No bitter
winter nips these tender little sympathies, no hot sun burns the life out of them; and therefore
they outlast the longevity of the oak, and, if the woodman permitted, would bury it in a green
grave, when all is over.

Should there be nothing else along the road to look at, an English hedge might well suffice
to occupy the eyes, and, to a depth beyond what he would suppose, the heart of an American.
We often set out hedges in our own soil, but might as well set out figs or pineapples and expect
to gather fruit of them.  Something grows, to be sure, which we choose to call a hedge; but
it lacks the dense, luxuriant variety of vegetation that is accumulated into the English original,
in which a botanist would find a thousand shrubs and gracious herbs that the hedgemaker never
thought of planting there.  Among them, growing wild, are many of the kindred blossoms of the
very flowers which our pilgrim fathers brought from England, for the sake of their simple beauty
and homelike associations, and which we have ever since been cultivating in gardens. There
is not a softer trait to be found in the character of those stern men than that they should
have been sensible of these flower-roots clinging among the fibres of their rugged hearts,
and have felt the necessity of bringing them over sea and making them hereditary in the new
land, instead of trusting to what rarer beauty the wilderness might have in store for them.

Or, if the roadside has no hedge, the ugliest stone fence (such as, in America, would keep
itself bare and unsympathizing till the end of time) is sure to be covered with the small handiwork
of Nature; that careful mother lets nothing go naked there, and if she cannot provide clothing,
gives at least embroidery.  No sooner is the fence built than she adopts and adorns it as a
part of her original plan, treating the hard, uncomely construction as if it had all along
been a favorite idea of her own.  A little sprig of ivy may be seen creeping up the side of
the low wall and clinging fast with its many feet to the rough surface; a tuft of grass roots
itself between two of the stones, where a pinch or two of wayside dust has been moistened into
nutritious soil for it; a small bunch of fern grows in another crevice; a deep, soft, verdant
moss spreads itself along the top and over all the available inequalities of the fence; and
where nothing else will grow, lichens stick tenaciously to the bare stones and variegate the
monotonous gray with hues of yellow and red. Finally, a great deal of shrubbery clusters along
the base of the stone wall, and takes away the hardness of its outline; and in due time, as
the upshot of these apparently aimless or sportive touches, we recognize that the beneficent
Creator of all things, working through his handmaiden whom we call Nature, has deigned to mingle
a charm of divine gracefulness even with so earthly an institution as a boundary fence.  The
clown who wrought at it little dreamed what fellow-laborer he had.

The English should send us photographs of portions of the trunks of trees, the tangled and
various products of a hedge, and a square foot of an old wall.  They can hardly send anything
else so characteristic. Their artists, especially of the later school, sometimes toil to depict
such subjects, but are apt to stiffen the lithe tendrils in the process. The poets succeed
better, with Tennyson at their head, and often produce ravishing effects by dint of a tender
minuteness of touch, to which the genius of the soil and climate artfully impels them: for,
as regards grandeur, there are loftier scenes in many countries than the best that England
can show; but, for the picturesqueness of the smallest object that lies under its gentle gloom
and sunshine, there is no scenery like it anywhere.

In the foregoing paragraphs I have strayed away to a long distance from the road to Stratford-on-Avon;
for I remember no such stone fences as I have been speaking of in Warwickshire, nor elsewhere
in England, except among the Lakes, or in Yorkshire, and the rough and hilly countries to the
north of it.  Hedges there were along my road, however, and broad, level fields, rustic hamlets,
and cottages of ancient date,--from the roof of one of which the occupant was tearing away
the thatch, and showing what an accumulation of dust, dirt, mouldiness, roots of weeds, families
of mice, swallows' nests, and hordes of insects had been deposited there since that old straw
was new.  Estimating its antiquity from these tokens, Shakespeare himself, in one of his morning
rambles out of his native town, might have seen the thatch laid on; at all events, the cottage-walls
were old enough to have known him as a guest.  A few modern villas were also to be seen, and
perhaps there were mansions of old gentility at no great distance, but hidden among trees;
for it is a point of English pride that such houses seldom allow themselves to be visible from
the high-road.  In short, I recollect nothing specially remarkable along the way, nor in the
immediate approach to Stratford; and yet the picture of that June morning has a glory in my
memory, owing chiefly, I believe, to the charm of the English summer-weather, the really good
days of which are the most delightful that mortal man can ever hope to be favored with.  Such
a genial warmth!  A little too warm, it might be, yet only to such a degree as to assure an
American (a certainty to which he seldom attains till attempered to the customary austerity
of an English summer-day) that he was quite warm enough.  And after all, there was an unconquerable
freshness in the atmosphere, which every little movement of a breeze shook over me like a dash
of the ocean-spray.  Such days need bring us no other happiness than their own light and temperature.
No doubt, I could not have enjoyed it so exquisitely, except that there must be still latent
in us Western wanderers (even after an absence of two centuries and more), an adaptation to
the English climate which makes us sensible of a motherly kindness in its scantiest sunshine,
and overflows us with delight at its more lavish smiles.

The spire of Shakespeare's church--the Church of the Holy Trinity--begins to show itself among
the trees at a little distance from Stratford.  Next we see the shabby old dwellings, intermixed
with mean-looking houses of modern date; and the streets being quite level, you are struck
and surprised by nothing so much as the tameness of the general scene, as if Shakespeare's
genius were vivid enough to have wrought pictorial splendors in the town where he was born.
Here and there, however, a queer edifice meets your eye, endowed with the individuality that
belongs only to the domestic architecture of times gone by; the house seems to have grown out
of some odd quality in its inhabitant, as a sea-shell is moulded from within by the character
of its innate; and having been built in a strange fashion, generations ago, it has ever since
been growing stranger and quainter, as old humorists are apt to do.  Here, too (as so often
impressed me in decayed English towns), there appeared to be a greater abundance of aged people
wearing small-clothes and leaning on sticks than you could assemble on our side of the water
by sounding a trumpet and proclaiming a reward for the most venerable.  I tried to account
for this phenomenon by several theories: as, for example, that our new towns are unwholesome
for age and kill it off unseasonably; or that our old men have a subtile sense of fitness,
and die of their own accord rather than live in an unseemly contrast with youth and novelty
but the secret may be, after all, that hair-dyes, false teeth, modern arts of dress, and other
contrivances of a skin-deep youthfulness, have not crept into these antiquated English towns,
and so people grow old without the weary necessity of seeming younger than they are.

After wandering through two or three streets, I found my way to Shakespeare's birthplace, which
is almost a smaller and humbler house than any description can prepare the visitor to expect;
so inevitably does an august inhabitant make his abode palatial to our imaginations, receiving
his guests, indeed, in a castle in the air, until we unwisely insist on meeting him among the
sordid lanes and alleys of lower earth. The portion of the edifice with which Shakespeare had
anything to do is hardly large enough, in the basement, to contain the butcher's stall that
one of his descendants kept, and that still remains there, windowless, with the cleaver-cuts
in its hacked counter, which projects into the street under a little penthouse-roof, as if
waiting for a new occupant.

The upper half of the door was open, and, on my rapping at it, a young person in black made
her appearance and admitted me; she was not a menial, but remarkably genteel (an American characteristic)
for an English girl, and was probably the daughter of the old gentlewoman who takes care of
the house.  This lower room has a pavement of gray slabs of stone, which may have been rudely
squared when the house was new, but are now all cracked, broken, and disarranged in a most
unaccountable way. One does not see how any ordinary usage, for whatever length of time, should
have so smashed these heavy stones; it is as if an earthquake had burst up through the floor,
which afterwards had been imperfectly trodden down again.  The room is whitewashed and very
clean, but wofully shabby and dingy, coarsely built, and such as the most poetical imagination
would find it difficult to idealize.  In the rear of this apartment is the kitchen, a still
smaller room, of a similar rude aspect; it has a great, rough fireplace, with space for a large
family under the blackened opening of the chimney, and an immense passageway for the smoke,
through which Shakespeare may have seen the blue sky by day and the stars glimmering down at
him by night.  It is now a dreary spot where the long-extinguished embers used to be.  A glowing
fire, even if it covered only a quarter part of the hearth, might still do much towards making
the old kitchen cheerful.  But we get a depressing idea of the stifled, poor, sombre kind of
life that could have been lived in such a dwelling, where this room seems to have been the
gathering-place of the family, with no breadth or scope, no good retirement, but old and young
huddling together cheek by jowl.  What a hardy plant was Shakespeare's genius, how fatal its
development, since it could not be blighted in such an atmosphere! It only brought human nature
the closer to him, and put more unctuous earth about his roots.

Thence I was ushered up stairs to the room in which Shakespeare is supposed to have been born:
though, if you peep too curiously into the matter, you may find the shadow of an ugly doubt
on this, as well as most other points of his mysterious life.  It is the chamber over the butcher's
shop, and is lighted by one broad window containing a great many small, irregular panes of
glass.  The floor is made of planks, very rudely hewn, and fitting together with little neatness;
the naked beams and rafters, at the sides of the room and overhead, bear the original marks
of the builder's broad-axe, with no evidence of an attempt to smooth off the job.  Again we
have to reconcile ourselves to the smallness of the space enclosed by these illustrious walls,--a
circumstance more difficult to accept, as regards places that we have heard, read, thought,
and dreamed much about, than any other disenchanting particular of a mistaken ideal.  A few
paces--perhaps seven or eight--take us from end to end of it.  So low it is, that I could easily
touch the ceiling, and might have done so without a tiptoe-stretch, had it been a good deal
higher; and this humility of the chamber has tempted a vast multitude of people to write their
names overhead in pencil.  Every inch of the sidewalls, even into the obscurest nooks and corners,
is covered with a similar record; all the window-panes, moreover, are scrawled with diamond
signatures, among which is said to be that of Walter Scott; but so many persons have sought
to immortalize themselves in close vicinity to his name, that I really could not trace him
out.  Methinks it is strange that people do not strive to forget their forlorn little identities,
in such situations, instead of thrusting them forward into the dazzle of a great renown, where,
if noticed, they cannot but be deemed impertinent.

This room, and the entire house, so far as I saw it, are whitewashed and exceedingly clean;
nor is there the aged, musty smell with which old Chester first made me acquainted, and which
goes far to cure an American of his excessive predilection for antique residences.  An old
lady, who took charge of me up stairs, had the manners and aspect of a gentlewoman, and talked
with somewhat formidable knowledge and appreciative intelligence about Shakespeare.  Arranged
on a table and in chairs were various prints, views of houses and scenes connected with Shakespeare's
memory, together with editions of his works and local publications about his home and haunts,
from the sale of which this respectable lady perhaps realizes a handsome profit.  At any rate,
I bought a good many of them, conceiving that it might be the civillest way of requiting her
for her instructive conversation and the trouble she took in showing me the house.  It cost
me a pang (not a curmudgeonly, but a gentlemanly one) to offer a downright fee to the lady-like
girl who had admitted me; but I swallowed my delicate scruples with some little difficulty,
and she digested hers, so far as I could observe, with no difficulty at all.  In fact, nobody
need fear to hold out half a crown to any person with whom he has occasion to speak a word
in England.

I should consider it unfair to quit Shakespeare's house without the frank acknowledgment that
I was conscious of not the slightest emotion while viewing it, nor any quickening of the imagination.
This has often happened to me in my visits to memorable places.  Whatever pretty and apposite
reflections I may have made upon the subject had either occurred to me before I ever saw Stratford,
or have been elaborated since.  It is pleasant, nevertheless, to think that I have seen the
place; and I believe that I can form a more sensible and vivid idea of Shakespeare as a flesh-and-blood
individual now that I have stood on the kitchen-hearth and in the birth-chamber; but I am not
quite certain that this power of realization is altogether desirable in reference to a great
poet.  The Shakespeare whom I met there took various guises, but had not his laurel on.  He
was successively the roguish boy,--the youthful deer-stealer,-- the comrade of players,--the
too familiar friend of Davenant's mother,-- the careful, thrifty, thriven man of property who
came back from London to lend money on bond, and occupy the best house in Stratford,--the mellow,
red-nosed, autumnal boon-companion of John a' Combe,--and finally (or else the Stratford gossips
belied him), the victim of convivial habits, who met his death by tumbling into a ditch on
his way home from a drinking-bout, and left his second-best bed to his poor wife.

I feel, as sensibly as the reader can, what horrible impiety it is to remember these things,
be they true or false.  In either case, they ought to vanish out of sight on the distant ocean-line
of the past, leaving a pure, white memory, even as a sail, though perhaps darkened with many
stains, looks snowy white on the far horizon.  But I draw a moral from these unworthy reminiscences
and this embodiment of the poet, as suggested by some of the grimy actualities of his life.
It is for the high interests of the world not to insist upon finding out that its greatest
men are, in a certain lower sense, very much the same kind of men as the rest of us, and often
a little worse; because a common mind cannot properly digest such a discovery, nor ever know
the true proportion of the great man's good and evil, nor how small a part of him it was that
touched our muddy or dusty earth.  Thence comes moral bewilderment, and even intellectual loss,
in regard to what is best of him.  When Shakespeare invoked a curse on the man who should stir
his bones, he perhaps meant the larger share of it for him or them who should pry into his
perishing earthliness, the defects or even the merits of the character that he wore in Stratford,
when he had left mankind so much to muse upon that was imperishable and divine.  Heaven keep
me from incurring any part of the anathema in requital for the irreverent sentences above written!

From Shakespeare's house, the next step, of course, is to visit his burial-place.  The appearance
of the church is most venerable and beautiful, standing amid a great green shadow of lime-trees,
above which rises the spire, while the Gothic battlements and buttresses and vast arched windows
are obscurely seen through the boughs.  The Avon loiters past the churchyard, an exceedingly
sluggish river, which might seem to have been considering which way it should flow ever since
Shakespeare left off paddling in it and gathering the large forget-me-nots that grow among
its flags and water-weeds.

An old man in small-clothes was waiting at the gate; and inquiring whether I wished to go in,
he preceded me to the church-porch, and rapped.  I could have done it quite as effectually
for myself; but it seems, the old people of the neighborhood haunt about the churchyard, in
spite of the frowns and remonstrances of the sexton, who grudges them the half-eleemosynary
sixpence which they sometimes get from visitors.  I was admitted into the church by a respectable-looking
and intelligent man in black, the parish-clerk, I suppose, and probably holding a richer incumbency
than his vicar, if all the fees which he handles remain in his own pocket.  He was already
exhibiting the Shakespeare monuments to two or three visitors, and several other parties came
in while I was there.

The poet and his family are in possession of what may be considered the very best burial-places
that the church affords.  They lie in a row, right across the breadth of the chancel, the foot
of each gravestone being close to the elevated floor on which the altar stands.  Nearest to
the side-wall, beneath Shakespeare's bust, is a slab bearing a Latin inscription addressed
to his wife, and covering her remains; then his own slab, with the old anathematizing stanza
upon it; then that of Thomas Nash, who married his granddaughter; then that of Dr. Hall, the
husband of his daughter Susannah; and, lastly, Susannah's own.  Shakespeare's is the commonest-looking
slab of all, being just such a flag-stone as Essex Street in Salem used to be paved with, when
I was a boy.  Moreover, unless my eyes or recollection deceive me, there is a crack across
it, as if it had already undergone some such violence as the inscription deprecates.  Unlike
the other monuments of the family, it bears no name, nor am I acquainted with the grounds or
authority on which it is absolutely determined to be Shakespeare's; although, being in a range
with those of his wife and children, it might naturally be attributed to him.  But, then, why
does his wife, who died afterwards, take precedence of him and occupy the place next his bust?
And where are the graves of another daughter and a son, who have a better right in the family
row than Thomas Nash, his grandson-in-law?  Might not one or both of them have been laid under
the nameless stone?  But it is dangerous trifling with Shakespeare's dust; so I forbear to
meddle further with the grave (though the prohibition makes it tempting), and shall let whatever
bones be in it rest in peace.  Yet I must needs add that the inscription on the bust seems
to imply that Shakespeare's grave was directly underneath it.

The poet's bust is affixed to the northern wall of the church, the base of it being about a
man's height, or rather more, above the floor of the chancel.  The features of this piece of
sculpture are entirely unlike any portrait of Shakespeare that I have ever seen, and compel
me to take down the beautiful, lofty-browed, and noble picture of him which has hitherto hung
in my mental portrait-gallery.  The bust cannot be said to represent a beautiful face or an
eminently noble head; but it clutches firmly hold of one's sense of reality and insists upon
your accepting it, if not as Shakespeare the poet, yet as the wealthy burgher of Stratford,
the friend of John a' Combe, who lies yonder in the corner.  I know not what the phrenologists
say to the bust.  The forehead is but moderately developed, and retreats somewhat, the upper
part of the skull rising pyramidally; the eyes are prominent almost beyond the penthouse of
the brow; the upper lip is so long that it must have been almost a deformity, unless the sculptor
artistically exaggerated its length, in consideration, that, on the pedestal, it must be foreshortened
by being looked at from below.  On the whole, Shakespeare must have had a singular rather than
a prepossessing face; and it is wonderful how, with this bust before its eyes, the world has
persisted in maintaining an erroneous notion of his appearance, allowing painters and sculptors
to foist their idealized nonsense on its all, instead of the genuine man.  For my part, the
Shakespeare of my mind's eye is henceforth to be a personage of a ruddy English complexion,
with a reasonably capacious brow, intelligent and quickly observant eyes, a nose curved slightly
outward, a long, queer upper lip, with the mouth a little unclosed beneath it, and cheeks considerably
developed in the lower part and beneath the chin.  But when Shakespeare was himself (for nine
tenths of the time, according to all appearances, he was but the burgher of Stratford), he
doubtless shone through this dull mask and transfigured it into the face of an angel.

Fifteen or twenty feet behind the row of Shakespeare gravestones is the great east-window of
the church, now brilliant with stained glass of recent manufacture.  On one side of this window,
under a sculptured arch of marble, lies a full-length marble figure of John a' Combe, clad
in what I take to be a robe of municipal dignity, and holding its hands devoutly clasped. 
It is a sturdy English figure, with coarse features, a type of ordinary man whom we smile to
see immortalized in the sculpturesque material of poets and heroes; but the prayerful attitude
encourages us to believe that the old usurer may not, after all, have had that grim reception
in the other world which Shakespeare's squib foreboded for him.  By the by, till I grew somewhat
familiar with Warwickshire pronunciation, I never understood that the point of those ill-natured
lines was a pun.  "'Oho!' quoth the Devil, ''t is my John a' Combe'"--that is, "My John has come!"

Close to the poet's bust is a nameless, oblong, cubic tomb, supposed to be that of a clerical
dignitary of the fourteenth century.  The church has other mural monuments and altar-tombs,
one or two of the latter upholding the recumbent figures of knights in armor and their dames,
very eminent and worshipful personages in their day, no doubt, but doomed to appear forever
intrusive and impertinent within the precincts which Shakespeare has made his own.  His renown
is tyrannous, and suffers nothing else to be recognized within the scope of its material presence,
unless illuminated by some side-ray from himself.  The clerk informed me that interments no
longer take place in any part of the church.  And it is better so; for methinks a person of
delicate individuality, curious about his burial-place, and desirous of six feet of earth for
himself alone, could never endure to be buried near Shakespeare, but would rise up at midnight
and grope his way out of the church-door, rather than sleep in the shadow of so stupendous
a memory.

I should hardly have dared to add another to the innumerable descriptions of Stratford-on-Avon,
if it had not seemed to me that this would form a fitting framework to some reminiscences of
a very remarkable woman.  Her labor, while she lived, was of a nature and purpose outwardly
irreverent to the name of Shakespeare, yet, by its actual tendency, entitling her to the distinction
of being that one of all his worshippers who sought, though she knew it not, to place the richest
and stateliest diadem upon his brow.  We Americans, at least, in the scanty annals of our literature,
cannot afford to forget her high and conscientious exercise of noble faculties, which, indeed,
if you look at the matter in one way, evolved only a miserable error, but, more fairly considered,
produced a result worth almost what it cost her.  Her faith in her own ideas was so genuine,
that, erroneous as they were, it transmuted them to gold, or, at all events, interfused a large
proportion of that precious and indestructible substance among the waste material from which
it can readily be sifted.

The only time I ever saw Miss Bacon was in London, where she had lodgings in Spring Street,
Sussex Gardens, at the house of a grocer, a portly, middle-aged, civil, and friendly man, who,
as well as his wife, appeared to feel a personal kindness towards their lodger.  I was ushered
up two (and I rather believe three) pair of stairs into a parlor somewhat humbly furnished,
and told that Miss Bacon would come soon.  There were a number of books on the table, and,
looking into them, I found that every one had some reference, more or less immediate, to her
Shakespearian theory,--a volume of Raleigh's "History of the World," a volume of Montaigne,
a volume of Lord Bacon's letters, a volume of Shakespeare's plays; and on another table lay
a large roll of manuscript, which I presume to have been a portion of her work.  To be sure,
there was a pocket-Bible among the books, but everything else referred to the one despotic
idea that had got possession of her mind; and as it had engrossed her whole soul as well as
her intellect, I have no doubt that she had established subtile connections between it and
the Bible likewise.  As is apt to be the case with solitary students, Miss Bacon probably read
late and rose late; for I took up Montaigne (it was Hazlitt's translation) and had been reading
his journey to Italy a good while before she appeared.

I had expected (the more shame for me, having no other ground of such expectation than that
she was a literary woman) to see a very homely, uncouth, elderly personage, and was quite agreeably
disappointed by her aspect.  She was rather uncommonly tall, and had a striking and expressive
face, dark hair, dark eyes, which shone with an inward light as soon as she began to speak,
and by and by a color came into her cheeks and made her look almost young.  Not that she really
was so; she must have been beyond middle age: and there was no unkindness in coming to that
conclusion, because, making allowance for years and ill-health, I could suppose her to have
been handsome and exceedingly attractive once. Though wholly estranged from society, there
was little or no restraint or embarrassment in her manner: lonely people are generally glad
to give utterance to their pent-up ideas, and often bubble over with them as freely as children
with their new-found syllables.  I cannot tell how it came about, but we immediately found
ourselves taking a friendly and familiar tone together, and began to talk as if we had known
one another a very long while.  A little preliminary correspondence had indeed smoothed the
way, and we had a definite topic in the contemplated publication of her book.

She was very communicative about her theory, and would have been much more so had I desired
it; but, being conscious within myself of a sturdy unbelief, I deemed it fair and honest rather
to repress than draw her out upon the subject.  Unquestionably, she was a monomaniac; these
overmastering ideas about the authorship of Shakespeare's plays, and the deep political philosophy
concealed beneath the surface of them, had completely thrown her off her balance; but at the
same time they had wonderfully developed her intellect, and made her what she could not otherwise
have become.  It was a very singular phenomenon: a system of philosophy growing up in thus
woman's mind without her volition,-- contrary, in fact, to the determined resistance of her
volition,--and substituting itself in the place of everything that originally grew there. 
To have based such a system on fancy, and unconsciously elaborated it for herself, was almost
as wonderful as really to have found it in the plays.  But, in a certain sense, she did actually
find it there.  Shakespeare has surface beneath surface, to an immeasurable depth, adapted
to the plummet-line of every reader; his works present many phases of truth, each with scope
large enough to fill a contemplative mind. Poor Madeline was very sorry, for she wanted her little
boy to be brave, but somehow or other he had got very silly about his fears of being in the
dark, and she could not succeed in curing him of his folly.

"My dear Roderick," she would say sometimes, "if I send in some candles, will you go into the
drawing room?"

"O yes, Mamma."

"Then do you really mean to say you think the Candles take care of you?"

"No, Mamma."

"Then why won't you go into the room without; you know there is a fire?

"Because it is so dark, Mamma."

Here was a difficulty indeed; for you see he would come back to the old point, and would not listen
to reason.

One day some conversation of this sort having passed between them,
Madeline, as she was wont to do, asked him if God could not take care
of him by night as well as by day; in the dark as well as in light,
for "the darkness and light are both alike to him."

"Oh yes," cried poor Roderick, with great animation, "and I can tell you a story about that. There was,
once upon a time, a little Boy and a Nurse who went out walking, and they walked so long they
got benighted in a very dark wood, and because it was so dark the Nurse screamed and was very
much frightened; and the little boy said, 'Nurse, why are you frightened? Don't be frightened;
I am not frightened. God can take care of us in the dark as well as in the light,'"

"Oh Roderick! what a pretty story," cried his Mamma.

And so thought Roderick; for his eye glistened and his cheek flushed as he came to the conclusion.

And
here, dear readers, was the worst difficulty of all; for though Roderick's reason was quite convinced
that God could take care of him in the dark, he still could not bear to be in the dark without
the help of candles besides, though he quite knew they could not take care of him at all.
So you see by this that Reason, though it may convince a person he
is wrong, cannot put him right.

There wants some other help for that. And here let me just stop a moment to beg you to beware
of bad habits; for you see they become at last more powerful than reason itself.

I do not know how Roderick first got into his foolish habit, and it does not much matter. I
know he at one time had a fancy there was something unpleasant about the pipes that carried
the water about the house, and he would not for a long time go by the pipes alone. Now, how you
laugh! well, but he got out of that nonsense; and I hope to be able to tell you that he got
out of the other too: but at the time I speak of, he made his Mamma full of sorrow for his want
of sense and courage.

It must be admitted that there were one or two excuses to be made for the child. There was
a great contrast between the Town House and the Sea Castle. The Town House was full of lights.
All the sitting rooms were generally lighted, for a great deal of company came there, and there
were always lights along the passages; and the nursery windows looked into a square, and the
square was lighted up by lamps every night; and it was one of Roderick's greatest pleasures
to watch the lamplighter running quickly up the tall ladder to the lamps to light them, and
then popping down again equally hurriedly, and running along (ladder and all) to the next
lamp post, and so on, till the square was brilliant all round; and very often, as Roderick
lay in his little bed watching the glimmering thrown by these pretty lamps on the nursery
wall, he used to think and think of his friend the nimble lamplighter, till he dropped fast
asleep. You see, therefore, he had very little to try his courage in the Town House, and there
was seldom or never any fuss about his fears till the move to the Sea Castle took place; and
then there were no more lamps and lamplighters, and no more comfortable glimmerings from his bright
pets the lamps after he went to bed; and he used to get silly directly, and declare that he saw
bears whenever he shut his eyes; and he seemed to expect to find lions and tigers under the
sofas, by the fuss he made when he was asked to go into the rooms.

Certainly there was a grand old fashioned lamp in the hall of the Sea Castle; but the hall itself
was so big, and went up so high, that the light in one part only seemed to make the shadow
and darkness of the other part look blacker still; so that I must confess there was something
gloomy about the house. Then, too, there were those two turrets with the winding staircases,
and as Roderick had never dared to do any thing more than peep in at the low entrance doors below,
where he saw nothing but four or five steps going up into complete blackness, he had got a sort of
notion there must be something horrid about them.

Well; it was soon after this little boy's sixth birthday, that the family arrived at the Sea-Castle,
and it so happened, that, on the day after their arrival, there was some very stormy and dismal
weather. The wind howled very loudly, and there was a good deal of rain; and Lady Madeline wished
they had waited a week or two longer.

The sky was so charged and heavy, too, that they found the house very dark, even by day-light; and
Roderick, who was a little tired with his journey the day before, began to fancy all kinds
of nonsense; talked more about seeing bears than ever; and finally cried tremendously at going
to bed, declaring he was sure there was a tiger in the coal-pan. Now you know, my dears, this
was a bit of great nonsense; for Roderick knew quite well that there are no wild beasts in England
but what are kept in very strong cages; and that the men who take wild-beast shows round the
country can by no means afford to let their tigers sleep in nursery coal-pans!

Poor Madeline never liked to see any of her children go to bed in tears. And Roderick was so
gay and merry generally, it seemed quite unnatural in him; but though at last he left off crying,
she could not persuade him to be cheerful, and smile; for he declared that as soon as ever she took
her candle away, he could not help seeing those unlucky bears. Was there ever any thing so
silly before! She reasoned with him, but to no purpose. He always said he quite believed in
God's presence, and His being able to take care of him; but, as I said before, his bad habit
had got the better of his good sense, and he finished off every thing that could be said,
by seeing bears, and dreading a tiger in the coal-pan.

"What are we to do with that child?" cried Madeline to her husband, as they were going to bed.
"He is beginning as foolishly as ever this year, in spite of being a year older. I really shall
at last be inclined to think that in spite of all her fair promises of friendship and assistance,
and of never injuring the family, the Fairy Eudora must secretly frighten the child in some
way we don't know of."

"No such thing, my dear Madeline; I cannot for a moment believe it;" said her husband. "I have
a better opinion of your relations, the Fairies, than you have yourself.

I am sure Eudora would not break her word for the world; and there is no mystery about Roderick's
folly. He is full of fancies of all sorts,--some pretty, and some silly ones; and we must do every
thing we can to cure him of the silly ones. It certainly is a very hard matter to accomplish, for I perceive
he admits the truth of every thing you say, and yet is as silly as ever at the end. I heartily
wish the Fairy Eudora would interfere to cure him of his nonsense!"

"And so do I, if she could, and would," sighed Madeline; "but she has quite deserted us. Besides,
if she were to come, I don't see how she could possibly do any good. Fairies cannot change little
boys' hearts; and I must confess I never yet got any good myself from having a Fairy ancestress,
and I have no confidence in them.--Still," pursued the good lady, as she laid her head on her
pillow, "I am not able, it appears, to convince Roderick myself; and therefore I feel, with
you, that I wish the Fairy would come and try."

"I fear it is in vain to say so now, Madeline. We have wished the poor creature out of the way
so often for the last ten years, that it is not very likely a single wish the other way will bring
her to us."

"No, indeed," murmured the Fairy Eudora, who at that moment was standing on the shore of the Fairy
Island; "you are a pretty pair, you two, to think of such a thing! I begged to be allowed to
come about the place years ago, and you didn't refuse; but you always kept me away by wishing
I mightn't come; and now, because you are puzzled to know what to do with your silly child,
you want me with you for the first time these ten years!

Oh, you selfish people, don't fancy I'll come near you!" And the justly angry Fairy stamped
her foot in indignation, and retired into private apartments in the palace.

Do not be surprised at what you have just heard, my dear children; for though you may have
never thought about the power and importance of wishes, there is, I assure you, a great deal
of both one and the other belonging to them. Some people talk, indeed, of "mere wishes," as
if they were trifles light as air; but it is not so. To prove this, first think what importance
is attached to them in the Scriptures. Wishes are a sort of porch or doorway to actions. In
the Tenth Commandment we are forbidden to wish for what belongs to our neighbour;--for who is so likely
to break the Eighth Commandment, and steal, as the man who breaks the Tenth, and wishes for any
thing that is not his?

And so, all the evil in the world begins by wishing something wrong; and if you can cure yourself
of wishing wrongly, you will very seldom do wrong.

Now you see, I am sure, how important wishes are for evil; but they are equally strong for good.
For, if you wish well to any one, you have opened the first door to doing him a kindness.
And if you heartily wish to be good, you have opened the first gate on the road of becoming
so. Of course, wishes will not do every thing; but they do a great deal.

And there is another thing. They never fall to the ground unnoticed.

Though you and I cannot look into each other's hearts, or hear the wishes breathed there,
there is One who hears them all. Good wishes, my dear children, all ascend upwards to the throne
of Grace, like sweet perfume. They are all accepted and remembered; and, I fear I must add,
that bad wishes go up too, and are noted in His book who takes account of all we do.

Be sure, therefore, that you encourage your hearts in a habit of good, and kind, and charitable
wishes; and if ever the bad ones come into your head, pray against them, and drive them away.

Meanwhile do not be surprized that in Fairy tales, Fairies are supposed to hear wishes concerning
themselves. And so Eudora heard those about her coming and curing the child of his folly;
and as I have told you, she was very indignant at the selfishness of both Lady Madeline and
her husband.

A few days after the family had taken up their residence in the Sea Castle, the weather began
to improve; and, though the wind lasted, the sun came out; and all the children and the nurses
went walking on the sands. As it was the first time that year, you may guess what shouting and
delight there was; how the little spades dug away at holes for the sea-water to come up in,
and how the children caught at the sea-weeds that were scattered on the lands to carry home to
their Mamma; how they picked up shells, and gambolled about in all directions, declaring that
they had never known the Sea Castle Home so delightful before. By degrees they had strayed
to a considerable distance along the sands, with the nurses, when, alas! the latter perceived
that a storm was coming on, and it caught them long before they reached home. A strong wind blew
off the sea, and they had difficulty in keeping their feet, and at last two or three of the children
were almost hidden in a cloud of sand, which a violent gust suddenly drove against them. All
the little party cried lustily, because the sand had blown into their eyes, and made them smart,
and sad work there was in getting them home again.

But they reached home at last, dripping with wet from hailstones, and their eyes all red and disfigured
by the sand and wind. None, however, were so bad as those I have mentioned, who had been so
covered over by the sand that it had even got down their necks, and made them uncomfortable
all over. Among these was Roderick, who cried a great deal more than he ought to have done,
as the nurses thought, and did not stop and declare himself comfortable as the rest did, after
the sand had been washed out of his eyes with rose water. In fact he kept crying more or less all
the afternoon, saying his eyes hurt him so, and at last he could get no relief but by holding them
shut.

Now it is just possible you may have heard of a complaint of the eyes called Ophthalmia, which
comes on sometimes in very hot countries, India for instance; and sometimes in travelling across
the deserts of Arabia, where the sand gets into the eyes, and irritates them very much; it can
very often be cured, but not always, and when it cannot, it ends in blindness. Lady Madeline
knew all about the complaint; and, therefore, you will not be surprised to hear that when she
found her little boy's eyes did not get better, and that he persisted in keeping them shut, because
they then became easy, she thought it right to send to some miles' distance for a doctor,
who accordingly arrived at the Sea Castle before nightfall. But when he came he shook his head
very much, for he could not understand what was the matter; and when he persuaded Roderick to
lift up his eyelids, to let him see his eyes, he could perceive nothing amiss but a little redness,
which the wind and sand quite accounted for. Still the child was uneasy, and would keep his eyes
shut; so the Doctor thought he must try something, and he used some lotions common in such cases;
but, as they did no good, the kind old gentleman, at Madeline's request, consented to sit by
the little boy's bedside at night; when, all at once, as he was carefully dabbing his eyes with
rosewater, he perceived that the child was fast asleep.

The Doctor was delighted, and went to his mother, who was then with her husband, and said that as Roderick
had gone to sleep so nicely, he had no doubt that his eyes would be well when he awoke in the morning,
and so he took his leave, for he had other patients to visit.

It was then between twelve and one o'clock, and Lady Madeline, much comforted in heart, went to bed.
At an early hour next morning, however, she went to Roderick's bedside, and perceived he was
just waking.

To the question of "How are you, my darling?" his cheerful joyous voice made answer, "Oh, quite
well, Mamma, and I've such a funny dream to tell you, and my eyes don't hurt me a bit, not a
bit! but I'm afraid to open them for fear they should. I can tell you something so funny the Doctor said
last night, Mamma." "Never mind about the doctor, you rogue," cried Madeline, "I see you are
all right, only just open your dear old eyes, that I may tell Papa I have seen them when I
go back to dress."

"Then I will, Mamma, to please you!" and up sat the pretty child in his bed, and opened wide his
blue eyes. There was no redness--it was all gone--but

"Mamma! where are you," cried Roderick, "I have opened my eyes, and they don't hurt--but it is
quite dark: isn't the night over?..."

Oh, my dear readers! there was a stream of sunshine on the lovely face and bright hair of little
Roderick as he spoke, and the poor blue eyes were turned up to his mother, looking vainly
for her face. You cannot wonder if I add that she sank down fainting on the bed; and when Roderick's
scream of terror brought the nurses to them, she was carried away insensible from the room.

Her darling was utterly blind.

* * * * *

And now imagine to yourselves how the afflicted parents sent for the best doctors the country afforded,
and how one thing after another was tried--but, alas! every thing in vain, for the medical
men were all quite puzzled. Still some people gave them hopes, and in spite of many disappointments,
they went on trying to hope for several months.

At last they settled to leave the sea castle and go to the great town sooner than usual, thinking
some of the doctors there might be cleverer than the country ones. But they had no better success.
Perhaps now you would like to know how Roderick behaved. When his Mamma fell on his bed, at
first he thought she was dead, and it was with the greatest difficulty he could be made to
believe any thing else, and he cried, and cried, and was very sad till his Mamma was well enough
for him to be taken to her, and then do you know, poor fellow, he was so much pleased to hear
her speak, and be kissed by her, that he still had no time to think about himself. Only he begged
to sit close to her, and have hold either of her hand or gown, and make her say something to
him every now and then. And so it was that the fright and shock he had had about thinking she was dead,
had made so strong an impression on him that for several days the making himself sure she was
alive was a constant occupation and interest; and so much did he think about it that it was considered
best for his little bed to be brought into the room where his Mamma slept, and put near hers, so that
he could talk to her when he awoke and got frightened about her again. And thus passed many
days in which every body thought a great deal more about his eyes than he did himself. Besides
from the cheerful things they said to him he quite expected to be better some day; and so weeks
and months passed, and by the time the hope of recovering his sight began to fade away, and nobody
any longer dared to say they expected it, he was beginning to get used to his condition, and to
find out amusements in new ways. Thus mercifully does a kind Providence
temper people's minds to the afflictions He sends. They are often
more dreadful to think of than to bear; for God can give patience
and cheerfulness and comfort to those that do not grumble and repine.

Madeline
only exacted one promise from her husband, namely, that he would not
allow the doctors to use any very severe and violent measures with
her little boy, and this being settled, she struggled to bear the
trouble with resignation. After the first alternations of hopes and
fears were over, the Mother's mind took a new turn. "It is our chief
duty now," she said, "to make our child's life as happy as it is possible
to be with blindness, and therefore," added she to the elder children,
"we must try our best to teach him to do all the nice things he can
without seeing." That day she asked him to come and hold worsted for
her to wind, and he was quite delighted to find that with some blunders,
and once or twice slipping it off his fingers, he could manage it
very well. Then the children undertook to teach him how to play at
ball, and you cannot think how clever he became. At first certainly
they had always to pick up his ball for him when it fell, and who
was not glad to do it for poor brother Roderick? but by degrees he
could judge by the sound in what direction it had tumbled, and he
would often succeed in finding it before any one could come up to
it. Then there was laughing and scrambling without end. Reading aloud
to him was the easiest thing of all, but the little folks were not
satisfied with that alone. They made a sort of pet of the blind brother,
and were as proud of teaching him to do any thing fresh, as you would
be of teaching your dog to sit up and shake hands, or perform any
wonderful feat. It was their constant amusement; and by degrees Roderick
could play at all sorts of games with them, ay, and run after them,
and catch them too as well as you could do, for he soon got to remember
how the furniture in the great hall and all the rooms stood, and he
could run about without hurting himself in a wonderful manner. And
when it was evening and grew dark, he got on better than they did,
for, if they couldn't see, they were clumsy, whereas he was learning
to do without seeing at all.

Such of my readers as have seen one
of those excellent institutions called "blind schools," will not wonder
at any thing I have said, but on the contrary, will know that I have
not told half or a quarter of what may be done to teach blind children
a variety of employments. At those schools you may see children making
beautiful baskets of various-coloured strips of osier arranged in
patterns; and they never forget on which side of them the different
colours are laid, and this work they can go on with quite fast, even
while you stand talking to them--and they learn to do many many other
nice things also besides basket making.

Of late years too they have
begun to read in books made on purpose for them, with the letters
raised above the rest of the paper, so that they can feel the shapes
with their fingers. Is not this wonderful? And they can be taught
all these things much more easily than you would imagine, for it is
really true that when one of the senses has been taken away, the others
by having all the exercise thrown upon them, become so sharp and acute,
they do twice their usual work, if I may so express it. This is a
merciful dispensation of Providence, which renders the loss of the
one that is gone much less hard to bear. And does it not teach us
also, what a valuable thing constant practice is? Neither you nor
I can feel or hear half so clearly as blind people can, who practise
feeling and hearing on so many occasions where we save ourselves the
trouble, by using sight instead.

To return to Roderick. You perhaps
expected to hear that he fretted and petted very much after he was
first blind, but really it was not so; and though occasionally he
may have grumbled a little, it was only when he was slightly peevish,
as children will sometimes be, and I believe he would have found something
to grumble about then, even if he had seen as well as you do.

Besides,
as I said before, the knowledge of his misfortune came upon him by
degrees; and after he had got used to it, he did not think much about
it. When the family moved to the great town, Roderick had as it were
to begin his blind lessons over again, for he had to learn to remember
all about the rooms and the furniture there; but with a kind little
brother or sister always at hand to help him he soon became expert
in the town house too, and could run up and down the long flights
of stairs with the nimblest of them.  They have held a certain intercourse with man for immemorial years; and, most probably,
the stag that Shakespeare killed was one of the progenitors of this very herd, and may himself
have been a partly civilized and humanized deer, though in a less degree than these remote
posterity. They are a little wilder than sheep, but they do not snuff the air at the approach
of human beings, nor evince much alarm at their pretty close proximity; although if you continue
to advance, they toss their heads and take to their heels in a kind of mimic terror, or something
akin to feminine skittishness, with a dim remembrance or tradition, as it were, of their having
come of a wild stock.  They have so long been fed and protected by man, that they must have
lost many of their native instincts, and, I suppose, could not live comfortably through, even
an English winter without human help.  One is sensible of a gentle scorn at them for such dependency,
but feels none the less kindly disposed towards the half-domesticated race; and it may have
been his observation of these tamer characteristics in the Charlecote herd that suggested to
Shakespeare the tender and pitiful description of a wounded stag, in "As You Like It."

At a distance of some hundreds of yards from Charlecote Hall, and almost hidden by the trees
between it and the roadside, is an old brick archway and porter's lodge.  In connection with
this entrance there appears to have been a wall and an ancient moat, the latter of which is
still visible, a shallow, grassy scoop along the base of an embankment of the lawn.  About
fifty yards within the gateway stands the house, forming three sides of a square, with three
gables in a row on the front, and on each of the two wings; and there are several towers and
turrets at the angles, together with projecting windows, antique balconies, and other quaint
ornaments suitable to the half-Gothic taste in which the edifice was built.  Over the gateway
is the Lucy coat-of-arms, emblazoned in its proper colors.  The mansion dates from the early
days of Elizabeth, and probably looked very much the same as now when Shakespeare was brought
before Sir Thomas Lucy for outrages among his deer.  The impression is not that of gray antiquity,
but of stable and time-honored gentility, still as vital as ever.

It is a most delightful place.  All about the house and domain there is a perfection of comfort
and domestic taste, an amplitude of convenience, which could have been brought about only by
the slow ingenuity and labor of many successive generations, intent upon adding all possible
improvement to the home where years gone by and years to come give a sort of permanence to
the intangible present.  An American is sometimes tempted to fancy that only by this long process
can real homes be produced.  One man's lifetime is not enough for the accomplishment of such
a work of art and nature, almost the greatest merely temporary one that is confided to him;
too little, at any rate,--yet perhaps too long when he is discouraged by the idea that he must
make his house warm and delightful for a miscellaneous race of successors, of whom the one
thing certain is, that his own grandchildren will not be among them.  Such repinings as are
here suggested, however, come only from the fact, that, bred in English habits of thought,
as most of us are, we have not yet modified our instincts to the necessities of our new forms
of life.  A lodging in a wigwam or under a tent has really as many advantages, when we come
to know them, as a home beneath the roof-tree of Charlecote Hall. But, alas! our philosophers
have not yet taught us what is best, nor have our poets sung us what is beautifulest, in the
kind of life that we must lead; and therefore we still read the old English wisdom, and harp
upon the ancient strings.  And thence it happens, that, when we look at a time-honored hall,
it seems more possible for men who inherit such a home, than for ourselves, to lead noble and
graceful lives, quietly doing good and lovely things as their daily work, and achieving deeds
of simple greatness when circumstances require them.  I sometimes apprehend that our institutions
may perish before we shall have discovered the most precious of the possibilities which they
involve.

LICHFIELD AND UTTOXETER.

After my first visit to Leamington Spa, I went by an indirect route to Lichfield, and put up
at the Black Swan.  Had I known where to find it, I would much rather have established myself
at the inn formerly kept by the worthy Mr. Boniface, so famous for his ale in Farquhar's time.
The Black Swan is an old-fashioned hotel, its street-front being penetrated by an arched passage,
in either side of which is an entrance door to the different parts of the house, and through
which, and over the large stones of its pavement, all vehicles and horsemen rumble and clatter
into an enclosed courtyard, with a thunderous uproar among the contiguous rooms and chambers.
I appeared to be the only guest of the spacious establishment, but may have had a few fellow-lodgers
hidden in their separate parlors, and utterly eschewing that community of interests which is
the characteristic feature of life in an American hotel.  At any rate, I had the great, dull,
dingy, and dreary coffee-room, with its heavy old mahogany chairs and tables, all to myself,
and not a soul to exchange a word with, except the waiter, who, like most of his class in England,
had evidently left his conversational abilities uncultivated.  No former practice of solitary
living, nor habits of reticence, nor well-tested self-dependence for occupation of mind and
amusement, can quite avail, as I now proved, to dissipate the ponderous gloom of an English
coffee-room under such circumstances as these, with no book at hand save the county-directory,
nor any newspaper but a torn local journal of five days ago.  So I buried myself, betimes,
in a huge heap of ancient feathers (there is no other kind of bed in these old inns), let my
head sink into an unsubstantial pillow, and slept a stifled sleep, infested with such a fragmentary
confusion of dreams that I took them to be a medley, compounded of the night-troubles of all
my predecessors in that same unrestful couch.  And when I awoke, the musty odor of a bygone
century was in my nostrils,--a faint, elusive smell, of which I never had any conception before
crossing the Atlantic.

In the morning, after a mutton-chop and a cup of chiccory in the dusky coffee-room, I went
forth and bewildered myself a little while among the crooked streets, in quest of one or two
objects that had chiefly attracted me to the spot.  The city is of very ancient date, and its
name in the old Saxon tongue has a dismal import that would apply well, in these days and forever
henceforward, to many an unhappy locality in our native land.  Lichfield signifies "The Field
of the Dead Bodies,"--an epithet, however, which the town did not assume in remembrance of
a battle, but which probably sprung up by a natural process, like a sprig of rue or other funereal
weed, out of the graves of two princely brothers, sons of a pagan king of Mercia, who were
converted by St. Chad, and afterwards martyred for their Christian faith.  Nevertheless, I
was but little interested in the legends of the remote antiquity of Lichfield, being drawn
thither partly to see its beautiful cathedral, and still more, I believe, because it was the
birthplace of Dr. Johnson, with whose sturdy English character I became acquainted, at a very
early period of my life, through the good offices of Mr. Boswell.  In truth, he seems as familiar
to my recollection, and almost as vivid in his personal aspect to my mind's eye, as the kindly
figure of my own grandfather.  It is only a solitary child,--left much to such wild modes of
culture as he chooses for himself while yet ignorant what culture means, standing on tiptoe
to pull down books from no very lofty shelf, and then shutting himself up, as it were, between
the leaves, going astray through the volume at his own pleasure, and comprehending it rather
by his sensibilities and affections than his intellect,--that child is the only student that
ever gets the sort of intimacy which I am now thinking of, with a literary personage.  I do
not remember, indeed, ever caring much about any of the stalwart Doctor's grandiloquent productions,
except his two stern and masculine poems, "London," and "The Vanity of Human Wishes"; it was
as a man, a talker, and a humorist, that I knew and loved him, appreciating many of his qualities
perhaps more thoroughly than I do now, though never seeking to put my instinctive perception
of his character into language.

Beyond all question, I might have had a wiser friend than he.  The atmosphere in which alone
he breathed was dense; his awful dread of death showed how much muddy imperfection was to be
cleansed out of him, before he could be capable of spiritual existence; he meddled only with
the surface of life, and never cared to penetrate further than to ploughshare depth; his very
sense and sagacity were but a one-eyed clear-sightedness. I laughed at him, sometimes, standing
beside his knee.  And yet, considering that my native propensities were towards Fairy Land,
and also how much yeast is generally mixed up with the mental sustenance of a New-Englander,
it may not have been altogether amiss, in those childish and boyish days, to keep pace with
this heavy-footed traveller and feed on the gross diet that he carried in his knapsack.  It
is wholesome food even now.  And, then, how English!  Many of the latent sympathies that enabled
me to enjoy the Old Country so well, and that so readily amalgamated themselves with the American
ideas that seemed most adverse to them, may have been derived from, or fostered and kept alive
by, the great English moralist.  Never was a descriptive epithet more nicely appropriate than
that!  Dr. Johnson's morality was as English an article as a beefsteak.

The city of Lichfield (only the cathedral-towns are called cities, in England) stands on an
ascending site.  It has not so many old gabled houses as Coventry, for example, but still enough
to gratify an American appetite for the antiquities of domestic architecture.  The people,
too, have an old-fashioned way with them, and stare at the passing visitor, as if the railway
had not yet quite accustomed them to the novelty of strange faces moving along their ancient
sidewalks.  The old women whom I met, in several instances, dropt me a courtesy; and as they
were of decent and comfortable exterior, and kept quietly on their way without pause or further
greeting, it certainly was not allowable to interpret their little act of respect as a modest
method of asking for sixpence; so that I had the pleasure of considering it a remnant of the
reverential and hospitable manners of elder times, when the rare presence of a stranger might
be deemed worth a general acknowledgment.  Positively, coming from such humble sources, I took
it all the more as a welcome on behalf of the inhabitants, and would not have exchanged it
for an invitation from the mayor and magistrates to a public dinner.  Yet I wish, merely for
the experiment's sake, that I could have emboldened myself to hold out the aforesaid sixpence
to at least one of the old ladies.

In my wanderings about town, I came to an artificial piece of water, called the Minster Pool.
It fills the immense cavity in a ledge of rock, whence the building-materials of the cathedral
were quarried out a great many centuries ago.  I should never have guessed the little lake
to be of man's creation, so very pretty and quietly picturesque an object has it grown to be,
with its green banks, and the old trees hanging over its glassy surface, in which you may see
reflected some of the battlements of the majestic structure that once lay here in unshaped
stone.  Some little children stood on the edge of the Pool, angling with pin-hooks; and the
scene reminded me (though really to be quite fair with the reader, the gist of the analogy
has now escaped me) of that mysterious lake in the Arabian Nights, which had once been a palace
and a city, and where a fisherman used to pull out the former inhabitants in the guise of enchanted
fishes.  There is no need of fanciful associations to make the spot interesting.  It was in
the porch of one of the houses, in the street that runs beside the Minster Pool, that Lord
Brooke was slain, in the time of the Parliamentary war, by a shot from the battlements of the
cathedral, which was then held by the Royalists as a fortress.  The incident is commemorated
by an inscription on a stone, inlaid into the wall of the house.

I know not what rank the Cathedral of Lichfield holds among its sister edifices in England,
as a piece of magnificent architecture.  Except that of Chester (the grim and simple nave of
which stands yet unrivalled in my memory), and one or two small ones in North Wales, hardly
worthy of the name of cathedrals, it was the first that I had seen.  To my uninstructed vision,
it seemed the object best worth gazing at in the whole world; and now, after beholding a great
many more, I remember it with less prodigal admiration only because others are as magnificent
as itself.  The traces remaining in my memory represent it as airy rather than massive.  A
multitude of beautiful shapes appeared to be comprehended within its single outline; it was
a kind of kaleidoscopic mystery, so rich a variety of aspects did it assume from each altered
point of view, through the presentation of a different face, and the rearrangement of its peaks
and pinnacles and the three battlemented towers, with the spires that shot heavenward from
all three, but one loftier than its fellows.  Thus it impressed you, at every change, as a
newly created structure of the passing moment, in which yet you lovingly recognized the half-vanished
structure of the instant before, and felt, moreover, a joyful faith in the indestructible existence
of all this cloudlike vicissitude.  A Gothic cathedral is surely the most wonderful work which
mortal man has yet achieved, so vast, so intricate, and so profoundly simple, with such strange,
delightful recesses in its grand figure, so difficult to comprehend within one idea, and yet
all so consonant that it ultimately draws the beholder and his universe into its harmony. 
It is the only thing in the world that is vast enough and rich enough.

Not that I felt, or was worthy to feel, an unmingled enjoyment in gazing at this wonder.  I
could not elevate myself to its spiritual height, any more than I could have climbed from the
ground to the summit of one of its pinnacles.  Ascending but a little way, I continually fell
back and lay in a kind of despair, conscious that a flood of uncomprehended beauty was pouring
down upon me, of which I could appropriate only the minutest portion.  After a hundred years,
incalculably as my higher sympathies might be invigorated by so divine an employment, I should
still be a gazer from below and at an awful distance, as yet remotely excluded from the interior
mystery.  But it was something gained, even to have that painful sense of my own limitations,
and that half-smothered yearning to soar beyond them.  The cathedral showed me how earthly
I was, but yet whispered deeply of immortality.  After all, this was probably the best lesson
that it could bestow, and, taking it as thoroughly as possible home to my heart, I was fain
to be content.  If the truth must be told, my ill-trained enthusiasm soon flagged, and I began
to lose the vision of a spiritual or ideal edifice behind the time-worn and weather-stained
front of the actual structure.  Whenever that is the case, it is most reverential to look another
way; but the mood disposes one to minute investigation, and I took advantage of it to examine
the intricate and multitudinous adornment that was lavished on the exterior wall of this great
church.  Everywhere, there were empty niches where statues had been thrown down, and here and
there a statue still lingered in its niche; and over the chief entrance, and extending across
the whole breadth of the building, was a row of angels, sainted personages, martyrs, and kings,
sculptured in reddish stone.  Being much corroded by the moist English atmosphere, during four
or five hundred winters that they had stood there, these benign and majestic figures perversely
put me in mind of the appearance of a sugar image, after a child has been holding it in his
mouth.  The venerable infant Time has evidently found them sweet morsels.

Inside of the minster there is a long and lofty nave, transepts of the same height, and side-aisles
and chapels, dim nooks of holiness, where in Catholic times the lamps were continually burning
before the richly decorated shrines of saints.  In the audacity of my ignorance, as I humbly
acknowledge it to have been, I criticised this great interior as too much broken into compartments,
and shorn of half its rightful impressiveness by the interposition of a screen betwixt the
nave and chancel.  It did not spread itself in breadth, but ascended to the roof in lofty narrowness.
One large body of worshippers might have knelt down in the nave, others in each of the transepts,
and smaller ones in the side-aisles, besides an indefinite number of esoteric enthusiasts in
the mysterious sanctities beyond the screen.  Thus it seemed to typify the exclusiveness of
sects rather than the worldwide hospitality of genuine religion.  I had imagined a cathedral
with a scope more vast.  These Gothic aisles, with their groined arches overhead, supported
by clustered pillars in long vistas up and down, were venerable and magnificent, but included
too much of the twilight of that monkish gloom out of which they grew.  It is no matter whether
I ever came to a more satisfactory appreciation of this kind of architecture; the only value
of my strictures being to show the folly of looking at noble objects in the wrong mood, and
the absurdity of a new visitant pretending to hold any opinion whatever on such subjects, instead
of surrendering himself to the old builder's influence with childlike simplicity.

A great deal of white marble decorates the old stonework of the aisles, in the shape of altars,
obelisks, sarcophagi, and busts.  Most of these memorials are commemorative of people locally
distinguished, especially the deans and canons of the Cathedral, with their relatives and families;
and I found but two monuments of personages whom I had ever heard of,-- one being Gilbert Wahnesley
and the other Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, a literary acquaintance of my boyhood.  It was really
pleasant to meet her there; for after a friend has lain in the grave far into the second century,
she would be unreasonable to require any melancholy emotions in a chance interview at her tombstone.
It adds a rich charm to sacred edifices, this time-honored custom of burial in churches, after
a few years, at least, when the mortal remains have turned to dust beneath the pavement, and
the quaint devices and inscriptions still speak to you above.  The statues, that stood or reclined
in several recesses of the Cathedral, had a kind of life, and I regarded them with an odd sort
of deference, as if they were privileged denizens of the precinct.  It was singular, too, how
the memorial of the latest buried person, the man whose features went familiar in the streets
of Lichfield only yesterday, seemed precisely as much at home here as his mediaeval predecessors.
Henceforward he belonged in the Cathedral like one of its original pillars.  Methought this
impression in my fancy might be the shadow of a spiritual fact.  The dying melt into the great
multitude of the Departed as quietly as a drop of water into the ocean, and, it may be are
conscious of no unfamiliarity with their new circumstances, but immediately become aware of
an insufferable strangeness in the world which they have quitted.  Death has not taken them
away, but brought them home.

The vicissitudes and mischances of sublunary affairs, however, have not ceased to attend upon
these marble inhabitants; for I saw the upper fragment of a sculptured lady, in a very old-fashioned
garb, the lower half of whom had doubtless been demolished by Cromwell's soldiers when they
took the Minster by storm.  And there lies the remnant of this devout lady on her slab, ever
since the outrage, as for centuries before, with a countenance of divine serenity and her hands
clasped in prayer, symbolizing a depth of religious faith which no earthly turmoil or calamity
could disturb.  Another piece of sculpture (apparently a favorite subject in the Middle Ages,
for I have seen several like it in other cathedrals) was a reclining skeleton, as faithfully
representing an open-work of bones as could well be expected in a solid block of marble, and
at a period, moreover, when the mysteries of the human frame were rather to be guessed at than
revealed.  Whatever the anatomical defects of his production, the old sculptor had succeeded
in making it ghastly beyond measure.  How much mischief has been wrought upon us by this invariable
gloom of the Gothic imagination; flinging itself like a death-scented pall over our conceptions
of the future state, smothering our hopes, hiding our sky, and inducing dismal efforts to raise
the harvest of immortality out of what is most opposite to it,--the grave!

The Cathedral service is performed twice every day at ten o'clock and at four.  When I first
entered, the choristers (young and old, but mostly, I think, boys, with voices inexpressibly
sweet and clear, and as fresh as bird-notes) were just winding up their harmonious labors,
and soon came thronging through a side-door from the chancel into the nave.  They were all
dressed in long white robes, and looked like a peculiar order of beings, created on purpose
to hover between the roof and pavement of that dim, consecrated edifice, and illuminate it
with divine melodies, reposing themselves, meanwhile, on the heavy grandeur of the organ-tones
like cherubs on a golden cloud.  All at once, however, one of the cherubic multitude pulled
off his white gown, thus transforming himself before my very eyes into a commonplace youth
of the day, in modern frock-coat and trousers of a decidedly provincial cut.  This absurd little
incident, I verily believe, had a sinister effect in putting me at odds with the proper influences
of the Cathedral, nor could I quite recover a suitable frame of mind during my stay there.
But, emerging into the open air, I began to be sensible that I had left a magnificent interior
behind me, and I have never quite lost the perception and enjoyment of it in these intervening
years.

A large space in the immediate neighborhood of the Cathedral is called the Close, and comprises
beautifully kept lawns and a shadowy walk bordered by the dwellings of the ecclesiastical dignitaries
of the diocese.  All this row of episcopal, canonical, and clerical residences has an air of
the deepest quiet, repose, and well-protected though not inaccessible seclusion.  They seemed
capable of including everything that a saint could desire, and a great many more things than
most of us sinners generally succeed in acquiring.  Their most marked feature is a dignified
comfort, looking as if no disturbance or vulgar intrusiveness could ever cross their thresholds,
encroach upon their ornamented lawns, or straggle into the beautiful gardens that surround
them with flower-beds and rich clumps of shrubbery.  The episcopal palace is a stately mansion
of stone, built somewhat in the Italian style, and bearing on its front the figures 1637, as
the date of its erection.  A large edifice of brick, which, if I remember, stood next to the
palace, I took to be the residence of the second dignitary of the Cathedral; and, in that case,
it must have been the youthful home of Addison, whose father was Dean of Lichfield.  I tried
to fancy his figure on the delightful walk that extends in front of those priestly abodes,
from which and the interior lawns it is separated by an open-work iron fence, lined with rich
old shrubbery, and overarched by a minster-aisle of venerable trees.  This path is haunted
by the shades of famous personages who have formerly trodden it.  Johnson must have been familiar
with it, both as a boy, and in his subsequent visits to Lichfield, an illustrious old man.
Miss Seward, connected with so many literary reminiscences, lived in one of the adjacent houses.
Tradition says that it was a favorite spot of Major Andre, who used to pace to and fro under
these trees waiting, perhaps, to catch a last angel-glimpse of Honoria Sueyd, before he crossed
the ocean to encounter his dismal doom from an American court-martial.  David Garrick, no doubt,
scampered along the path in his boyish days, and, if he was an early student of the drama,
must often have thought of those two airy characters of the "Beaux' Stratagem," Archer and
Aimwell, who, on this very ground, after attending service at the cathedral, contrive to make
acquaintance with the ladies of the comedy.  These creatures of mere fiction have as positive
a substance now as the sturdy old figure of Johnson himself.  They live, while realities have
died.  The shadowy walk still glistens with their gold-embroidered memories.

Seeking for Johnson's birthplace, I found it in St. Mary's Square, which is not so much a square
as the mere widening of a street.  The house is tall and thin, of three stories, with a square
front and a roof rising steep and high.  On a side-view, the building looks as if it had been
cut in two in the midst, there being no slope of the roof on that side.  A ladder slanted against
the wall, and a painter was giving a livelier line to the plaster.  In a corner-room of the
basement, where old Michael Johnson may be supposed to have sold books, is now what we should
call a dry-goods store, or, according to the English phrase, a mercer's and haberdasher's shop.
The house has a private entrance on a cross-street, the door being accessible by several much-worn
stone steps, which are bordered by an iron balustrade.  I set my foot on the steps and laid
my hand on the balustrade, where Johnson's hand and foot must many a time have been, and ascending
to the door, I knocked once, and again, and again, and got no admittance.  Going round to the
shop-entrance, I tried to open it, but found it as fast bolted as the gate of Paradise.  It
is mortifying to be so balked in one's little enthusiasms; but looking round in quest of somebody
to make inquiries of, I was a good deal consoled by the sight of Dr. Johnson himself, who happened,
just at that moment, to be sitting at his case nearly in the middle of St. Mary's Square, with
his face turned towards his father's house.

Of course, it being almost fourscore years since the Doctor laid aside his weary bulk of flesh,
together with the ponderous melancholy that had so long weighed him down, the intelligent reader
will at once comprehend that he was marble in his substance, and seated in a marble chair,
on an elevated stone pedestal.  In short, it was a statue, sculptured by Lucas, and placed
here in 1838, at the expense of Dr. Law, the reverend chancellor of the diocese.

The figure is colossal (though perhaps not much more so than the mountainous Doctor himself)
and looks down upon the spectator from its pedestal of ten or twelve feet high, with a broad
and heavy benignity of aspect, very like in feature to Sir Joshua Reynolds's portrait of Johnson,
but calmer and sweeter in expression.  Several big books are piled up beneath his chair, and,
if I mistake not, he holds a volume in his hand, thus blinking forth at the world out of his
learned abstraction, owllike, yet benevolent at heart.  The statue is immensely massive, a
vast ponderosity of stone, not finely spiritualized, nor, indeed, fully humanized, but rather
resembling a great stone-bowlder than a man.  You must look with the eyes of faith and sympathy,
or, possibly, you might lose the human being altogether, and find only a big stone within your
mental grasp.  On the pedestal are three bas-reliefs.  In the first, Johnson is represented
as hardly more than a baby, bestriding an old man's shoulders, resting his chin on the bald
head which he embraces with his little arms, and listening earnestly to the High-Church eloquence
of Dr. Sacheverell.  In the second tablet, he is seen riding to school on the shoulders of
two of his comrades, while another boy supports him in the rear.

The third bas-relief possesses, to my mind, a great deal of pathos, to which my appreciative
faculty is probably the more alive, because I have always been profoundly impressed by the
incident here commemorated, and long ago tried to tell it for the behoof of childish readers.
It shows Johnson in the market-place of Uttoxeter, doing penance for an act of disobedience
to his father, committed fifty years before.  He stands bareheaded, a venerable figure, and
a countenance extremely sad and woebegone, with the wind and rain driving hard against him,
and thus helping to suggest to the spectator the gloom of his inward state.  Some market-people
and children gaze awe-stricken into his face, and an aged man and woman, with clasped and uplifted
hands, seem to be praying for him.  These latter personages (whose introduction by the artist
is none the less effective, because, in queer proximity, there are some commodities of market-day
in the shape of living ducks and dead poultry) I interpreted to represent the spirits of Johnson's
father and mother, lending what aid they could to lighten his half-century's burden of remorse.

I had never heard of the above-described piece of sculpture before; it appears to have no reputation
as a work of art, nor am I at all positive that it deserves any.  For me, however, it did as
much as sculpture could, under the circumstances, even if the artist of the Libyan Sibyl had
wrought it, by reviving my interest in the sturdy old Englishman, and particularly by freshening
my perception of a wonderful beauty and pathetic tenderness in the incident of the penance.
So, the next day, I left Lichfield for Uttoxeter, on one of the few purely sentimental pilgrimages
that I ever undertook, to see the very spot where Johnson had stood.  Boswell, I think, speaks
of the town (its name is pronounced Yuteoxeter) as being about nine miles off from Lichfield,
but the county-map would indicate a greater distance; and by rail, passing from one line to
another, it is as much as eighteen miles.  I have always had an idea of old Michael Johnson
sending his literary merchandise by carrier's wagon, journeying to Uttoxeter afoot on market-day
morning, selling books through the busy hours, and returning to Lichfield at night.  This could
not possibly have been the case.

Arriving at the Uttoxeter station, the first objects that I saw, with a green field or two
between them and me, were the tower and gray steeple of a church, rising among red-tiled roofs
and a few scattered trees.  A very short walk takes you from the station up into the town.
It had been my previous impression that the market-place of Uttoxeter lay immediately roundabout
the church; and, if I remember the narrative aright, Johnson, or Boswell in his behalf, describes
his father's book-stall as standing in the market-place, close beside the sacred edifice. 
It is impossible for me to say what changes may have occurred in the topography of the town,
during almost a century and a half since Michael Johnson retired from business, and ninety
years, at least, since his son's penance was performed.  But the church has now merely a street
of ordinary width passing around it, while the market-place, though near at hand, neither forms
a part of it nor is really contiguous, nor would its throng and bustle be apt to overflow their
boundaries and surge against the churchyard and the old gray tower.  Nevertheless, a walk of
a minute or two brings a person from the centre of the market-place to the church-door; and
Michael Johnson might very conveniently have located his stall and laid out his literary ware
in the corner at the tower's base; better there, indeed, than in the busy centre of an agricultural
market. But the picturesque arrangement and full impressiveness of the story absolutely require
that Johnson shall not have done his penance in a corner, ever so little retired, but shall
have been the very nucleus of the crowd,--the midmost man of the market-place,--a central image
of Memory and Remorse, contrasting with and overpowering the petty materialism around him.
He himself, having the force to throw vitality and truth into what persons differently constituted
might reckon a mere external ceremony, and an absurd one, could not have failed to see this
necessity.  I am resolved, therefore, that the true site of Dr. Johnson's penance was in the
middle of the market-place.

That important portion of the town is a rather spacious and irregularly shaped vacuity, surrounded
by houses and shops, some of them old, with red-tiled roofs, others wearing a pretence of newness,
but probably as old in their inner substance as the rest.  The people of Uttoxeter seemed very
idle in the warm summer-day, and were scattered in little groups along the sidewalks, leisurely
chatting with one another, and often turning about to take a deliberate stare at my humble
self; insomuch that I felt as if my genuine sympathy for the illustrious penitent, and my many
reflections about him, must have imbued me with some of his own singularity of mien.  If their
great-grandfathers were such redoubtable starers in the Doctor's day, his penance was no light
one.  This curiosity indicates a paucity of visitors to the little town, except for market
purposes, and I question if Uttoxeter ever saw an American before. The only other thing that
greatly impressed me was the abundance of public-houses, one at every step or two Red Lions,
White Harts, Bulls' Heads, Mitres, Cross Keys, and I know not what besides.  These are probably
for the accommodation of the farmers and peasantry of the neighborhood on market-day, and content
themselves with a very meagre business on other days of the week.  At any rate, I was the only
guest in Uttoxeter at the period of my visit, and had but an infinitesimal portion of patronage
to distribute among such a multitude of inns.  The reader, however, will possibly be scandalized
to learn what was the first, and, indeed, the only important affair that I attended to, after
coming so far to indulge a solemn and high emotion, and standing now on the very spot where
my pious errand should have been consummated.  I stepped into one of the rustic hostelries
and got my dinner,--bacon and greens, some mutton-chops, juicier and more delectable than all
America could serve up at the President's table, and a gooseberry pudding; a sufficient meal
for six yeomen, and good enough for a prince, besides a pitcher of foaming ale, the whole at
the pitiful small charge of eighteen-pence!

Dr. Johnson would have forgiven me, for nobody had a heartier faith in beef and mutton than
himself.  And as regards my lack of sentiment in eating my dinner,--it was the wisest thing
I had done that day.  A sensible man had better not let himself be betrayed into these attempts
to realize the things which he has dreamed about, and which, when they cease to be purely ideal
in his mind, will have lost the truest of their truth, the loftiest and profoundest part of
their power over his sympathies.  Facts, as we really find them, whatever poetry they may involve,
are covered with a stony excrescence of prose, resembling the crust on a beautiful sea-shell,
and they never show their most delicate and divinest colors until we shall have dissolved away
their grosser actualities by steeping them long in a powerful menstruum of thought. And seeking
to actualize them again, we do but renew the crust.  If this were otherwise,--if the moral
sublimity of a great fact depended in any degree on its garb of external circumstances, things
which change and decay,--it could not itself be immortal and ubiquitous, and only a brief point
of time and a little neighborhood would be spiritually nourished by its grandeur and beauty.

Such were a few of the reflections which I mingled with my ale, as I remember to have seen
an old quaffer of that excellent liquor stir up his cup with a sprig of some bitter and fragrant
herb.  Meanwhile I found myself still haunted by a desire to get a definite result out of my
visit to Uttoxeter.  The hospitable inn was called the Nag's Head, and standing beside the
market-place, was as likely as any other to have entertained old Michael Johnson in the days
when he used to come hither to sell books.  He, perhaps, had dined on bacon and greens, and
drunk his ale, and smoked his pipe, in the very room where I now sat, which was a low, ancient
room, certainly much older than Queen Anne's time, with a red-brick floor, and a white-washed
ceiling, traversed by bare, rough beams, the whole in the rudest fashion, but extremely neat.
Neither did it lack ornament, the walls being hung with colored engravings of prize oxen and
other pretty prints, and the mantel-piece adorned with earthen-ware figures of shepherdesses
in the Arcadian taste of long ago. Michael Johnson's eyes might have rested on that selfsame
earthen image, to examine which more closely I had just crossed the brick pavement of the room.
And, sitting down again, still as I sipped my ale, I glanced through the open window into the
sunny market-place, and wished that I could honestly fix on one spot rather than another, as
likely to have been the holy site where Johnson stood to do his penance.

How strange and stupid it is that tradition should not have marked and kept in mind the very
place!  How shameful (nothing less than that) that there should be no local memorial of this
incident, as beautiful and touching a passage as can be cited out of any human life!  No inscription
of it, almost as sacred as a verse of Scripture on the wall of the church!  No statue of the
venerable and illustrious penitent in the market-place to throw a wholesome awe over its earthliness,
its frauds and petty wrongs of which the benumbed fingers of conscience can make no record,
its selfish competition of each man with his brother or his neighbor, its traffic of soul-substance
for a little worldly gain!  Such a statue, if the piety of the people did not raise it, might
almost have been expected to grow up out of the pavement of its own accord on the spot that
had been watered by the rain that dripped from Johnson's garments, mingled with his remorseful
tears.

Long after my visit to Uttoxeter, I was told that there were individuals in the town who could
have shown me the exact, indubitable spot where Johnson performed his penance.  I was assured,
moreover, that sufficient interest was felt in the subject to have induced certain local discussions
as to the expediency of erecting a memorial.  With all deference to my polite informant, I
surmise that there is a mistake, and decline, without further and precise evidence, giving
credit to either of the above statements.  The inhabitants know nothing, as a matter of general
interest, about the penance, and care nothing for the scene of it.  If the clergyman of the
parish, for example, had ever heard of it, would he not have used the theme, time and again,
wherewith to work tenderly and profoundly on the souls committed to his charge?  If parents
were familiar with it, would they not teach it to their young ones at the fireside, both to
insure reverence to their own gray hairs, and to protect the children from such unavailing
regrets as Johnson bore upon his heart for fifty years?  If the site were ascertained, would
not the pavement thereabouts be worn with reverential footsteps?  Would not every town-born
child be able to direct the pilgrim thither?  While waiting at the station, before my departure,
I asked a boy who stood near me,--an intelligent and gentlemanly lad, twelve or thirteen years
old, whom I should take to be a clergyman's son,--I asked him if he had ever heard the story
of Dr. Johnson, how he stood an hour doing penance near that church, the spire of which rose
before us.  The boy stared and answered,--

"No!'

"Were you born in Uttoxeter?"

"Yes."

I inquired if no circumstance such as I had mentioned was known or talked about among the inhabitants.

"No," said the boy; "not that I ever heard of."

Just think of the absurd little town, knowing nothing of the only memorable incident which
ever happened within its boundaries since the old Britons built it, this sad and lovely story,
which consecrates the spot (for I found it holy to my contemplation, again, as soon as it lay
behind me) in the heart of a stranger from three thousand miles over the sea!  It but confirms
what I have been saying, that sublime and beautiful facts are best understood when etherealized
by distance.

PILGRIMAGE TO OLD BOSTON.

We set out at a little past eleven, and made our first stage to Manchester.  We were by this
time sufficiently Anglicized to reckon the morning a bright and sunny one; although the May
sunshine was mingled with water, as it were, and distempered with a very bitter east-wind.

Lancashire is a dreary county (all, at least, except its hilly portions), and I have never
passed through it without wishing myself anywhere but in that particular spot where I then
happened to be.  A few places along our route were historically interesting; as, for example,
Bolton, which was the scene of many remarkable events in the Parliamentary War, and in the
market-square of which one of the Earls of Derby was beheaded.  We saw, along the wayside,
the never-failing green fields, hedges, and other monotonous features of an ordinary English
landscape.  There were little factory villages, too, or larger towns, with their tall chimneys,
and their pennons of black smoke, their ugliness of brick-work, and their heaps of refuse matter
from the furnace, which seems to be the only kind of stuff which Nature cannot take back to
herself and resolve into the elements, when man has thrown it aside.  These hillocks of waste
and effete mineral always disfigure the neighborhood of iron-mongering towns, and, even after
a considerable antiquity, are hardly made decent with a little grass.

At a quarter to two we left Manchester by the Sheffield and Lincoln Railway.  The scenery grew
rather better than that through which we had hitherto passed, though still by no means very
striking; for (except in the show-districts, such as the Lake country, or Derbyshire) English
scenery is not particularly well worth looking at, considered as a spectacle or a picture.
It has a real, homely charm of its own, no doubt; and the rich verdure, and the thorough finish
added by human art, are perhaps as attractive to an American eye as any stronger feature could
be.  Our journey, however, between Manchester and Sheffield was not through a rich tract of
country, but along a valley walled in by bleak, ridgy hills extending straight as a rampart,
and across black moorlands with here and there a plantation of trees.  Sometimes there were
long and gradual ascents, bleak, windy, and desolate, conveying the very impression which the
reader gets from many passages of Miss Bronte's novels, and still more from those of her two
sisters.  Old stone or brick farm-houses, and, once in a while, an old church-tower, were visible;
but these are almost too common objects to be noticed in an English landscape.

On a railway, I suspect, what little we do see of the country is seen quite amiss, because
it was never intended to be looked at from any point of view in that straight line; so that
it is like looking at the wrong side of a piece of tapestry.  The old highways and foot-paths
were as natural as brooks and rivulets, and adapted themselves by an inevitable impulse to
the physiognomy of the country; and, furthermore, every object within view of them had some
subtile reference to their curves and undulations; but the line of a railway is perfectly artificial,
and puts all precedent things at sixes-and-sevens.  At any rate, be the cause what it may,
there is seldom anything worth seeing within the scope of a railway traveller's eye; and if
there were, it requires an alert marksman to take a flying shot at the picturesque.

At one of the stations (it was near a village of ancient aspect, nestling round a church, on
a wide Yorkshire moor) I saw a tall old lady in black, who seemed to have just alighted from
the train.  She caught my attention by a singular movement of the head, not once only, but
continually repeated, and at regular intervals, as if she were making a stern and solemn protest
against some action that developed itself before her eyes, and were foreboding terrible disaster,
if it should be persisted in.  Of course, it was nothing more than a paralytic or nervous affection;
yet one might fancy that it had its origin in some unspeakable wrong, perpetrated half a lifetime
ago in this old gentlewoman's presence, either against herself or somebody whom she loved still
better.  Her features had a wonderful sternness, which, I presume, was caused by her habitual
effort to compose and keep them quiet, and thereby counteract the tendency to paralytic movement.
The slow, regular, and inexorable character of the motion--her look of force and self-control,
which had the appearance of rendering it voluntary, while yet it was so fateful-- have stamped
this poor lady's face and gesture into my memory; so that, some dark day or other, I am afraid
she will reproduce herself in a dismal romance.

The train stopped a minute or two, to allow the tickets to be taken, just before entering the
Sheffield station, and thence I had a glimpse of the famous town of razors and penknives, enveloped
in a cloud of its own diffusing.  My impressions of it are extremely vague and misty,--or,
rather, smoky: for Sheffield seems to me smokier than Manchester. Liverpool, or Birmingham,--smokier
than all England besides, unless Newcastle be the exception.  It might have been Pluto's own
metropolis, shrouded in sulphurous vapor; and, indeed, our approach to it had been by the Valley
of the Shadow of Death, through a tunnel three miles in length, quite traversing the breadth
and depth of a mountainous hill.

After passing Sheffield, the scenery became softer, gentler, yet more picturesque.  At one
point we saw what I believe to be the utmost northern verge of Sherwood Forest,--not consisting,
however, of thousand-year oaks, extant from Robin Hood's days, but of young and thriving plantations,
which will require a century or two of slow English growth to give them much breadth of shade.
Earl Fitzwilliam's property lies in this neighborhood, and probably his castle was hidden among
some soft depth of foliage not far off.  Farther onward the country grew quite level around
us, whereby I judged that we must now be in Lincolnshire; and shortly after six o'clock we
caught the first glimpse of the Cathedral towers, though they loomed scarcely huge enough for
our preconceived idea of them.  But, as we drew nearer, the great edifice began to assert itself,
making us acknowledge it to be larger than our receptivity could take in.

At the railway-station we found no cab (it being an unknown vehicle in Lincoln), but only an
omnibus belonging to the Saracen's Head, which the driver recommended as the best hotel in
the city, and took us thither accordingly.  It received us hospitably, and looked comfortable
enough; though, like the hotels of most old English towns, it had a musty fragrance of antiquity,
such as I have smelt in a seldom-opened London church where the broad-aisle is paved with tombstones.
The house was of an ancient fashion, the entrance into its interior court-yard being through
an arch, in the side of which is the door of the hotel.  There are long corridors, an intricate
arrangement of passages, and an up-and-down meandering of staircases, amid which it would be
no marvel to encounter some forgotten guest who had gone astray a hundred years ago, and was
still seeking for his bedroom while the rest of his generation were in their graves.  There
is no exaggerating the confusion of mind that seizes upon a stranger in the bewildering geography
of a great old-fashioned English inn.

This hotel stands in the principal street of Lincoln, and within a very short distance of one
of the ancient city-gates, which is arched across the public way, with a smaller arch for foot-passengers
on either side; the whole, a gray, time-gnawn, ponderous, shadowy structure, through the dark
vista of which you look into the Middle Ages.  The street is narrow, and retains many antique
peculiarities; though, unquestionably, English domestic architecture has lost its most impressive
features, in the course of the last century.  In this respect, there are finer old towns than
Lincoln: Chester, for instance, and Shrewsbury,--which last is unusually rich in those quaint
and stately edifices where the gentry of the shire used to make their winter abodes, in a provincial
metropolis. Almost everywhere, nowadays, there is a monotony of modern brick or stuccoed fronts,
hiding houses that are older than ever, but obliterating the picturesque antiquity of the street.

Between seven and eight o'clock (it being still broad daylight in these long English days)
we set out to pay a preliminary visit to the exterior of the Cathedral.  Passing through the
Stone Bow, as the city-gate close by is called, we ascended a street which grew steeper and
narrower as we advanced, till at last it got to be the steepest street I ever climbed,-- so
steep that any carriage, if left to itself, would rattle downward much faster than it could
possibly be drawn up.  Being almost the only hill in Lincolnshire, the inhabitants seem disposed
to make the most of it. "The party, in some vesture for that purpose, is presented by some confederate
or familiar to the prince of devills, sitting now in a throne of infernall majesty, appearing
in the form of a man, only labouring to hide his cloven foot. To whom, after bowing and homage
done, a petition is presented to be received into his association and protection; and first,
if the witch be outwardly Christian, baptism must be renounced, and
the party must be re-baptised in the devill's name, and a new name
is also imposed by him, and here must be godfathers too ... But above
all he is very busie with his long nails, in scraping and scratching
those places of the forehead where the signe of the crosse was made,
or where the chrisme was laid.

Instead of both which, he impresses or inures the mark of the beast (the devill's flesh brand)
upon one or other part of the body. Further, the witch (for her part) vows, either by word
of mouth, or peradventure by writing, (and that in her owne bloode,) to give both body and
soul to the devill, to deny and defy God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; but especially
the blessed Virgin, convitiating her with one infamous nickname or other; to abhor the word and
sacraments, but especially to spit at the saying of masse; to spurn at the crosse, and tread saints'
images under feet; and as much as possibly they may, to profane all saints' reliques, holy water,
consecrated salt, wax, &c.; to be sure to fast on Sundays, and eat flesh on Fridays; not to confess
their sins, whatsoever they do, especially to a priest; to separate from the Catholic church,
and despise his vicar's primacy; to attend the devill's nocturnal conventicles, sabbaths, and sacrifices;
to take him for their god, worship, invoke, and obey him; to devote their children to him, and to
labour all that they may to bring others into the same confederacy. Then the devill, for his
part, promises to be always present with them, to serve them at their beck; that they shall
have their wills upon any body; that they shall have what riches, honours, and pleasures they
can imagine; and if any be so wary as to think of their future being, he tells them they shall
be princes ruling in the aire, or shall be but turned into impes at worst. Then he preaches to
them to be mindful of their covenant, and not to fail to revenge themselves upon their enemies,
Then, he commends to them (for this purpose) an imp, or familiar in the shape of a cat, &c. After
this they shake hands, embrace in arms, dance, feast, and banquet, according as the devill hath
provided in imitation of the supper. After this they part, and a general meeting is held thrice
a year, on some holy day; they are "conveyed to it as swift as the
winds from the remotest parts of the earth, where they that have done
the most execrable mischiefe, and can brag of it, make most merry
with the devill;" while the "indiligent" are jeered and derided by
the devil and the others.

Non-attendance was severely punished by the culprits being beaten on the soles of the feet, whipped
with iron rods, "pinched and sucked by their familiars till their heart's blood come--till they
repent them of their sloth, &c."

In spite of all dilapidations, however, the effect of the west front of the Cathedral is still
exceedingly rich, being covered from massive base to airy summit with the minutest details
of sculpture and carving: at least, it was so once; and even now the spiritual impression of
its beauty remains so strong, that we have to look twice to see that much of it has been obliterated.
I have seen a cherry-stone carved all over by a monk, so minutely that it must have cost him
half a lifetime of labor; and this cathedral-front seems to have been elaborated in a monkish
spirit, like that cherry-stone.  Not that the result is in the least petty, but miraculously
grand, and all the more so for the faithful beauty of the smallest details.

An elderly maid, seeing us looking up at the west front, came to the door of an adjacent house,
and called to inquire if we wished to go into the Cathedral; but as there would have been a
dusky twilight beneath its roof, like the antiquity that has sheltered itself within, we declined
for the present.  So we merely walked round the exterior, and thought it more beautiful than
that of York; though, on recollection, I hardly deem it so majestic and mighty as that.  It
is vain to attempt a description, or seek even to record the feeling which the edifice inspires.
It does not impress the beholder as an inanimate object, but as something that has a vast,
quiet, long-enduring life of its own,--a creation which man did not build, though in some way
or other it is connected with him, and kindred to human nature.  In short, I fall straightway
to talking nonsense, when I try to express my inner sense of this and other cathedrals.

While we stood in the close, at the eastern end of the Minster, the clock chimed the quarters;
and then Great Tom, who hangs in the Rood Tower, told us it was eight o'clock, in far the sweetest
and mightiest accents that I ever heard from any bell,--slow, and solemn, and allowing the
profound reverberations of each stroke to die away before the next one fell.  It was still
broad daylight in that upper region of the town, and would be so for some time longer; but
the evening atmosphere was getting sharp and cool.  We therefore descended the steep street,--our
younger companion running before us, and gathering such headway that I fully expected him to
break his head against some projecting wall.

In the morning we took a fly (an English term for an exceedingly sluggish vehicle), and drove
up to the Minster by a road rather less steep and abrupt than the one we had previously climbed.
We alighted before the west front, and sent our charioteer in quest of the verger; but, as
he was not immediately to be found, a young girl let us into the nave.  We found it very grand,
it is needless to say, but not so grand, methought, as the vast nave of York Cathedral, especially
beneath the great central tower of the latter.  Unless a writer intends a professedly architectural
description, there is but one set of phrases in which to talk of all the cathedrals in England
and elsewhere.  They are alike in their great features: an acre or two of stone flags for a
pavement; rows of vast columns supporting a vaulted roof at a dusky height; great windows,
sometimes richly bedimmed with ancient or modern stained glass; and an elaborately carved screen
between the nave and chancel, breaking the vista that might else be of such glorious length,
and which is further choked up by a massive organ.--in spite of which obstructions, you catch
the broad, variegated glimmer of the painted east window, where a hundred saints wear their
robes of transfiguration.  Behind the screen are the carved oaken stalls of the Chapter and
Prebendaries, the Bishop's throne, the pulpit, the altar, and whatever else may furnish out
the Holy of Holies.  Nor must we forget the range of chapels (once dedicated to Catholic saints,
but which have now lost their individual consecration), nor the old monuments of kings, warriors,
and prelates, in the side-aisles of the chancel.  In close contiguity to the main body of the
Cathedral is the Chapter-House, which, here at Lincoln, as at Salisbury, is supported by one
central pillar rising from the floor, and putting forth branches like a tree, to hold up the
roof.  Adjacent to the Chapter-House are the cloisters, extending round a quadrangle, and paved
with lettered tombstones, the more antique of which have had their inscriptions half obliterated
by the feet of monks taking their noontide exercise in these sheltered walks, five hundred
years ago.  Some of these old burial-stones, although with ancient crosses engraved upon them,
have been made to serve as memorials to dead people of very recent date.

In the chancel, among the tombs of forgotten bishops and knights, we saw an immense slab of
stone purporting to be the monument of Catherine Swynford, wife of John of Gaunt; also, here
was the shrine of the little Saint Hugh, that Christian child who was fabled to have been crucified
by the Jews of Lincoln.  The Cathedral is not particularly rich in monuments; for it suffered
grievous outrage and dilapidation, both at the Reformation and in Cromwell's time.  This latter
iconoclast is in especially bad odor with the sextons and vergers of most of the old churches
which I have visited.  His soldiers stabled their steeds in the nave of Lincoln Cathedral,
and hacked and hewed the monkish sculptures, and the ancestral memorials of great families,
quite at their wicked and plebeian pleasure.  Nevertheless, there are some most exquisite and
marvellous specimens of flowers, foliage, and grapevines, and miracles of stone-work twined
about arches, as if the material had been as soft as wax in the cunning sculptor's hands,--the
leaves being represented with all their veins, so that you would almost think it petrified
Nature, for which he sought to steal the praise of Art.  Here, too, were those grotesque faces
which always grin at you from the projections of monkish architecture, as if the builders had
gone mad with their own deep solemnity, or dreaded such a catastrophe, unless permitted to
throw in something ineffably absurd.

Originally, it is supposed, all the pillars of this great edifice, and all these magic sculptures,
were polished to the utmost degree of lustre; nor is it unreasonable to think that the artists
would have taken these further pains, when they had already bestowed so much labor in working
out their conceptions to the extremest point.  But, at present, the whole interior of the Cathedral
is smeared over with a yellowish wash, the very meanest hue imaginable, and for which somebody's
soul has a bitter reckoning to undergo.

In the centre of the grassy quadrangle about which the cloisters perambulate is a small, mean
brick building, with a locked door.  Our guide,--I forgot to say that we had been captured
by a verger, in black, and with a white tie, but of a lusty and jolly aspect,--our guide unlocked
this door, and disclosed a flight of steps.  At the bottom appeared what I should have taken
to be a large square of dim, worn, and faded oil-carpeting, which might originally have been
painted of a rather gaudy pattern.  This was a Roman tessellated pavement, made of small colored
bricks, or pieces of burnt clay.  It was accidentally discovered here, and has not been meddled
with, further than by removing the superincumbent earth and rubbish.

Nothing else occurs to me, just now, to be recorded about the interior of the Cathedral, except
that we saw a place where the stone pavement had been worn away by the feet of ancient pilgrims
scraping upon it, as they knelt down before a shrine of the Virgin.  Leaving the Minster, we
now went along a street of more venerable appearance than we had heretofore seen, bordered
with houses, the high peaked roofs of which were covered with red earthen tiles.  It led us
to a Roman arch, which was once the gateway of a fortification, and has been striding across
the English street ever since the latter was a faint village-path, and for centuries before.
The arch is about four hundred yards from the Cathedral; and it is to be noticed that there
are Roman remains in all this neighborhood, some above ground, and doubtless innumerable more
beneath it; for, as in ancient Rome itself, an inundation of accumulated soil seems to have
swept over what was the surface of that earlier day.  The gateway which I am speaking about
is probably buried to a third of its height, and perhaps has as perfect a Roman pavement (if
sought for at the original depth) as that which runs beneath the Arch of Titus.  It is a rude
and massive structure, and seems as stalwart now as it could have been two thousand years ago;
and though Time has gnawed it externally, he has made what amends he could by crowning its
rough and broken summit with grass and weeds, and planting tufts of yellow flowers on the projections
up and down the sides.

There are the ruins of a Norman castle, built by the Conqueror, in pretty close proximity to
the Cathedral; but the old gateway is obstructed by a modern door of wood, and we were denied
admittance because some part of the precincts are used as a prison.  We now rambled about on
the broad back of the hill, which, besides the Minster and ruined castle, is the site of some
stately and queer old houses, and of many mean little hovels.  I suspect that all or most of
the life of the present day has subsided into the lower town, and that only priests, poor people,
and prisoners dwell in these upper regions.  In the wide, dry moat, at the base of the castle-wall,
are clustered whole colonies of small houses, some of brick, but the larger portion built of
old stones which once made part of the Norman keep, or of Roman structures that existed before
the Conqueror's castle was ever dreamed about.  They are like toadstools that spring up from
the mould of a decaying tree.  Ugly as they are, they add wonderfully to the picturesqueness
of the scene, being quite as valuable, in that respect, as the great, broad, ponderous ruin
of the castle-keep, which rose high above our heads, heaving its huge gray mass out of a bank
of green foliage and ornamental shrubbery, such as lilacs and other flowering plants, in which
its foundations were completely hidden.

After walking quite round the castle, I made an excursion through the Roman gateway, along
a pleasant and level road bordered with dwellings of various character.  One or two were houses
of gentility, with delightful and shadowy lawns before them; many had those high, red-tiled
roofs, ascending into acutely pointed gables, which seem to belong to the same epoch as some
of the edifices in our own earlier towns; and there were pleasant-looking cottages, very sylvan
and rural, with hedges so dense and high, fencing them in, as almost to hide them up to the
eaves of their thatched roofs.  In front of one of these I saw various images, crosses, and
relics of antiquity, among which were fragments of old Catholic tombstones, disposed by way
of ornament.

We now went home to the Saracen's Head; and as the weather was very unpropitious, and it sprinkled
a little now and then, I would gladly have felt myself released from further thraldom to the
Cathedral.  But it had taken possession of me, and would not let me be at rest; so at length
I found myself compelled to climb the hill again, between daylight and dusk.  A mist was now
hovering about the upper height of the great central tower, so as to dim and half obliterate
its battlements and pinnacles, even while I stood in the close beneath it.  It was the most
impressive view that I had had.  The whole lower part of the structure was seen with perfect
distinctness; but at the very summit the mist was so dense as to form an actual cloud, as well
defined as ever I saw resting on a mountain-top.  Really and literally, here was a "cloud-capt
tower."

The entire Cathedral, too, transfigured itself into a richer beauty and more imposing majesty
than ever.  The longer I looked, the better I loved it.  Its exterior is certainly far more
beautiful than that of York Minster; and its finer effect is due, I think, to the many peaks
in which the structure ascends, and to the pinnacles which, as it were, repeat and re-echo
them into the sky.  York Cathedral is comparatively square and angular in its general effect;
but in this at Lincoln there is a continual mystery of variety, so that at every glance you
are aware of a change, and a disclosure of something new, yet working an harmonious development
of what you have heretofore seen.  The west front is unspeakably grand, and may be read over
and over again forever, and still show undetected meanings, like a great, broad page of marvellous
writing in black-letter,--so many sculptured ornaments there are, blossoming out before your
eyes, and gray statues that have grown there since you looked last, and empty niches, and a
hundred airy canopies beneath which carved images used to be, and where they will show themselves
again, if you gaze long enough.--But I will not say another word about the Cathedral.

We spent the rest of the day within the sombre precincts of the Saracen's Head, reading yesterday's
"Times," "The Guide-Book of Lincoln," and "The Directory of the Eastern Counties."  Dismal
as the weather was, the street beneath our window was enlivened with a great bustle and turmoil
of people all the evening, because it was Saturday night, and they had accomplished their week's
toil, received their wages, and were making their small purchases against Sunday, and enjoying
themselves as well as they knew how.  A band of music passed to and fro several times, with
the rain-drops falling into the mouth of the brazen trumpet and pattering on the bass-drum;
a spirit-shop, opposite the hotel, had a vast run of custom; and a coffee-dealer, in the open
air, found occasional vent for his commodity, in spite of the cold water that dripped into
the cups. The whole breadth of the street, between the Stone Bow and the bridge across the
Witham, was thronged to overflowing, and humming with human life.

Observing in the Guide-Book that a steamer runs on the river Witham between Lincoln and Boston,
I inquired of the waiter, and learned that she was to start on Monday at ten o'clock.  Thinking
it might be an interesting trip, and a pleasant variation of our customary mode of travel,
we determined to make the voyage.  The Witham flows through Lincoln, crossing the main street
under an arched bridge of Gothic construction, a little below the Saracen's Head.  It has more
the appearance of a canal than of a river, in its passage through the town,-- being bordered
with hewn-stone mason-work on each side, and provided with one or two locks.  The steamer proved
to be small, dirty, and altogether inconvenient.  The early morning had been bright; but the
sky now lowered upon us with a sulky English temper, and we had not long put off before we
felt an ugly wind from the German Ocean blowing right in our teeth. There were a number of
passengers on board, country-people, such as travel by third-class on the railway; for, I suppose,
nobody but ourselves ever dreamt of voyaging by the steamer for the sake of what he might happen
upon in the way of river-scenery.

We bothered a good while about getting through a preliminary lock; nor, when fairly under way,
did we ever accomplish, I think, six miles an hour.  Constant delays were caused, moreover,
by stopping to take up passengers and freight,--not at regular landing-places, but anywhere
along the green banks.  The scenery was identical with that of the railway, because the latter
runs along by the river-side through the whole distance, or nowhere departs from it except
to make a short cut across some sinuosity; so that our only advantage lay in the drawling,
snail-like slothfulness of our progress, which allowed us time enough and to spare for the
objects along the shore.  Unfortunately, there was nothing, or next to nothing, to be seen,--the
country being one unvaried level over the whole thirty miles of our voyage,--not a hill in
sight, either near or far, except that solitary one on the summit of which we had left Lincoln
Cathedral.  And the Cathedral was our landmark for four hours or more, and at last rather faded
out than was hidden by any intervening object.

It would have been a pleasantly lazy day enough, if the rough and bitter wind had not blown
directly in our faces, and chilled us through, in spite of the sunshine that soon succeeded
a sprinkle or two of rain. These English east-winds, which prevail from February till June,
are greater nuisances than the east-wind of our own Atlantic coast, although they do not bring
mist and storm, as with us, but some of the sunniest weather that England sees.  Under their
influence, the sky smiles and is villanous.

The landscape was tame to the last degree, but had an English character that was abundantly
worth our looking at.  A green luxuriance of early grass; old, high-roofed farm-houses, surrounded
by their stone barns and ricks of hay and grain; ancient villages, with the square, gray tower
of a church seen afar over the level country, amid the cluster of red roofs; here and there
a shadowy grove of venerable trees, surrounding what was perhaps an Elizabethan hall, though
it looked more like the abode of some rich yeoman.  Once, too, we saw the tower of a mediaeval
castle, that of Tattershall, built, by a Cromwell, but whether of the Protector's family I
cannot tell.  But the gentry do not appear to have settled multitudinously in this tract of
country; nor is it to be wondered at, since a lover of the picturesque would as soon think
of settling in Holland.  The river retains its canal-like aspect all along; and only in the
latter part of its course does it become more than wide enough for the little steamer to turn
itself round,--at broadest, not more than twice that width.

The only memorable incident of our voyage happened when a mother-duck was leading her little
fleet of five ducklings across the river, just as our steamer went swaggering by, stirring
the quiet stream into great waves that lashed the banks on either side.  I saw the imminence
of the catastrophe, and hurried to the stern of the boat to witness its consummation, since
I could not possibly avert it.  The poor ducklings had uttered their baby-quacks, and striven
with all their tiny might to escape; four of them, I believe, were washed aside and thrown
off unhurt from the steamer's prow; but the fifth must have gone under the whole length of
the keel, and never could have come up alive.

At last, in mid-afternoon, we beheld the tall tower of Saint Botolph's Church (three hundred
feet high, the same elevation as the tallest tower of Lincoln Cathedral) looming in the distance.
At about half past four we reached Boston (which name has been shortened, in the course of
ages, by the quick and slovenly English pronunciation, from Botolph's town), and were taken
by a cab to the Peacock, in the market-place.  It was the best hotel in town, though a poor
one enough; and we were shown into a small, stifled parlor, dingy, musty, and scented with
stale tobacco-smoke,--tobacco-smoke two days old, for the waiter assured us that the room had
not more recently been fumigated.  An exceedingly grim waiter he was, apparently a genuine
descendant of the old Puritans of this English Boston, and quite as sour as those who people
the daughter-city in New England.  Our parlor had the one recommendation of looking into the
market-place, and affording a sidelong glimpse of the tall spire and noble old church.

In my first ramble about the town, chance led me to the river-side, at that quarter where the
port is situated.  Here were long buildings of an old-fashioned aspect, seemingly warehouses,
with windows in the high, steep roofs.  The Custom-House found ample accommodation within an
ordinary dwelling-house.  Two or three large schooners were moored along the river's brink,
which had here a stone margin; another large and handsome schooner was evidently just finished,
rigged and equipped for her first voyage; the rudiments of another were on the stocks, in a
shipyard bordering on the river.  Still another, while I was looking on, came up the stream,
and lowered her mainsail, from a foreign voyage.  An old man on the bank hailed her and inquired
about her cargo; but the Lincolnshire people have such a queer way of talking English that
I could not understand the reply.  Farther down the river, I saw a brig, approaching rapidly
under sail.  The whole scene made an odd impression of bustle, and sluggishness, and decay,
and a remnant of wholesome life; and I could not but contrast it with the mighty and populous
activity of our own Boston, which was once the feeble infant of this old English town;--the
latter, perhaps, almost stationary ever since that day, as if the birth of such an offspring
had taken away its own principle of growth.  I thought of Long Wharf, and Faneuil Hall, and
Washington Street, and the Great Elm, and the State House, and exulted lustily,--but yet began
to feel at home in this good old town, for its very name's sake, as I never had before felt,
in England.

The next morning we came out in the early sunshine (the sun must have been shining nearly four
hours, however, for it was after eight o'clock), and strolled about the streets, like people
who had a right to be there. The market-place of Boston is an irregular square, into one end
of which the chancel of the church slightly projects.  The gates of the churchyard were open
and free to all passengers, and the common footway of the townspeople seems to lie to and fro
across it.  It is paved, according to English custom, with flat tombstones; and there are also
raised or altar tombs, some of which have armorial hearings on them.  One clergyman has caused
himself and his wife to be buried right in the middle of the stone-bordered path that traverses
the churchyard; so that not an individual of the thousands who pass along this public way can
help trampling over him or her.  The scene, nevertheless, was very cheerful in the morning
sun: people going about their business in the day's primal freshness, which was just as fresh
here as in younger villages; children with milk-pails, loitering over the burial-stones; school-boys
playing leap-frog with the altar-tombs; the simple old town preparing itself for the day, which
would be like myriads of other days that had passed over it, but yet would be worth living
through.  And down on the churchyard, where were buried many generations whom it remembered
in their time, looked the stately tower of Saint Botolph; and it was good to see and think
of such an age-long giant, intermarrying the present epoch with a distant past, and getting
quite imbued with human nature by being so immemorially connected with men's familiar knowledge
and homely interests.  It is a noble tower; and the jackdaws evidently have pleasant homes
in their hereditary nests among its topmost windows, and live delightful lives, flitting and
cawing about its pinnacles and flying buttresses.  I should almost like to be a jackdaw myself,
for the sake of living up there.

In front of the church, not more than twenty yards off, and with a low brick wall between,
flows the river Witham.  On the hither bank a fisherman was washing his boat; and another skiff,
with her sail lazily half twisted, lay on the opposite strand.  The stream at this point is
about of such width, that, if the tall tower were to tumble over flat on its face, its top-stone
might perhaps reach to the middle of the channel. On the farther shore there is a line of antique-looking
houses, with roofs of red tile, and windows opening out of them,--some of these dwellings being
so ancient, that the Reverend Mr. Cotton, subsequently our first Boston minister, must have
seen them with his own bodily eyes, when he used to issue from the front-portal after service.
Indeed, there must be very many houses here, and even some streets, that bear much the aspect
that they did when the Puritan divine paced solemnly among them.

In our rambles about town, we went into a bookseller's shop to inquire if he had any description
of Boston for sale.  He offered me (or, rather, produced for inspection, not supposing that
I would buy it) a quarto history of the town, published by subscription, nearly forty years
ago. The bookseller showed himself a well-informed and affable man, and a local antiquary,
to whom a party of inquisitive strangers were a godsend. He had met with several Americans,
who, at various times, had come on pilgrimages to this place, and he had been in correspondence
with others. Happening to have heard the name of one member of our party, he showed us great
courtesy and kindness, and invited us into his inner domicile, where, as he modestly intimated,
he kept a few articles which it might interest us to see.  So we went with him through the
shop, up stairs, into the private part of his establishment; and, really, it was one of the
rarest adventures I ever met with, to stumble upon this treasure of a man, with his treasury
of antiquities and curiosities, veiled behind the unostentatious front of a bookseller's shop,
in a very moderate line of village business.  The two up-stair rooms into which he introduced
us were so crowded with inestimable articles, that we were almost afraid to stir for fear of
breaking some fragile thing that had been accumulating value for unknown centuries.

The apartment was hung round with pictures and old engravings, many of which were extremely
rare.  Premising that he was going to show us something very curious, Mr. Porter went into
the next room and returned with a counterpane of fine linen, elaborately embroidered with silk,
which so profusely covered the linen that the general effect was as if the main texture were
silken.  It was stained and seemed very old, and had an ancient fragrance.  It was wrought
all over with birds and flowers in a most delicate style of needlework, and among other devices,
more than once repeated, was the cipher, M. S.,--being the initials of one of the most unhappy
names that ever a woman bore.  This quilt was embroidered by the hands of Mary Queen of Scots,
during her imprisonment at Fotheringay Castle; and having evidently been a work of years, she
had doubtless shed many tears over it, and wrought many doleful thoughts and abortive schemes
into its texture, along with the birds and flowers.  As a counterpart to this most precious
relic, our friend produced some of the handiwork of a former Queen of Otaheite, presented by
her to Captain Cook; it was a bag, cunningly made of some delicate vegetable stuff, and ornamented
with feathers.  Next, he brought out a green silk waistcoat of very antique fashion, trimmed
about the edges and pocket-holes with a rich and delicate embroidery of gold and silver.  This
(as the possessor of the treasure proved, by tracing its pedigree till it came into his hands)
was once the vestment of Queen Elizabeth's Lord Burleigh; but that great statesman must have
been a person of very moderate girth in the chest and waist; for the garment was hardly more
than a comfortable fit for a boy of eleven, the smallest American of our party, who tried on
the gorgeous waistcoat.  Then, Mr. Porter produced some curiously engraved drinking-glasses,
with a view of Saint Botolph's steeple on one of them, and other Boston edifices, public or
domestic, on the remaining two, very admirably done.  These crystal goblets had been a present,
long ago, to an old master of the Free School from his pupils; and it is very rarely, I imagine,
that a retired schoolmaster can exhibit such trophies of gratitude and affection, won from
the victims of his birch rod.

Our kind friend kept bringing out one unexpected and wholly unexpectable thing after another,
as if he were a magician, and had only to fling a private signal into the air, and some attendant
imp would hand forth any strange relic we might choose to ask for.  He was especially rich
in drawings by the Old Masters, producing two or three, of exquisite delicacy, by Raphael,
one by Salvator, a head by Rembrandt, and others, in chalk or pen-and-ink, by Giordano, Benvenuto
Cellini, and hands almost as famous; and besides what were shown us, there seemed to be an
endless supply of these art-treasures in reserve.  On the wall hung a crayon-portrait of Sterne,
never engraved, representing him as a rather young man, blooming, and not uncomely; it was
the worldly face of a man fond of pleasure, but without that ugly, keen, sarcastic, odd expression
that we see in his only engraved portrait.  The picture is an original, and must needs be very
valuable; and we wish it might be prefixed to some new and worthier biography of a writer whose
character the world has always treated with singular harshness, considering how much it owes
him. There was likewise a crayon-portrait of Sterne's wife, looking so haughty and unamiable,
that the wonder is, not that he ultimately left her, but how he ever contrived to live a week
with such an awful woman.

After looking at these, and a great many more things than I can remember, above stairs, we
went down to a parlor, where this wonderful bookseller opened an old cabinet, containing numberless
drawers, and looking just fit to be the repository of such knick-knacks as were stored up in
it. He appeared to possess more treasures than he himself knew off, or knew where to find;
but, rummaging here and there, he brought forth things new and old: rose-nobles, Victoria crowns,
gold angels, double sovereigns of George IV., two-guinea pieces of George II.; a marriage-medal
of the first Napoleon, only forty-five of which were ever struck off, and of which even the
British Museum does not contain a specimen like this, in gold; a brass medal, three or four
inches in diameter, of a Roman emperor; together with buckles, bracelets, amulets, and I know
not what besides.  There was a green silk tassel from the fringe of Queen Mary's bed at Holyrood
Palace.  There were illuminated missals, antique Latin Bibles, and (what may seem of especial
interest to the historian) a Secret-Book of Queen Elizabeth, in manuscript, written, for aught
I know, by her own hand.  On examination, however, it proved to contain, not secrets of state,
but recipes for dishes, drinks, medicines, washes, and all such matters of housewifery, the
toilet, and domestic quackery, among which we were horrified by the title of one of the nostrums,
"How to kill a Fellow quickly"!  We never doubted that bloody Queen Bess might often have had
occasion for such a recipe, but wondered at her frankness, and at her attending to these anomalous
necessities in such a methodical way. The truth is, we had read amiss, and the Queen had spelt
amiss: the word was "Fellon,"--a sort of whitlow,--not "Fellow."

Our hospitable friend now made us drink a glass of wine, as old and genuine as the curiosities
of his cabinet; and while sipping it, we ungratefully tried to excite his envy, by telling
of various things, interesting to an antiquary and virtuoso, which we had seen in the course
of our travels about England.  We spoke, for instance, of a missal bound in solid gold and
set around with jewels, but of such intrinsic value as no setting could enhance, for it was
exquisitely illuminated, throughout, by the hand of Raphael himself.  We mentioned a little
silver case which once contained a portion of the heart of Louis XIV. nicely done up in spices,
but, to the owner's horror and astonishment, Dean Buckland popped the kingly morsel into his
mouth, and swallowed it.  We told about the black-letter prayer-book of King Charles the Martyr,
used by him upon the scaffold, taking which into our hands, it opened of itself at the Communion
Service; and there, on the left-hand page, appeared a spot about as large as a sixpence, of
a yellowish or brownish hue: a drop of the King's blood had fallen there.

Mr. Porter now accompanied us to the church, but first leading us to a vacant spot of ground
where old John Cotton's vicarage had stood till a very short time since.  According to our
friend's description, it was a humble habitation, of the cottage order, built of brick, with
a thatched roof.  The site is now rudely fenced in, and cultivated as a vegetable garden. 
In the right-hand aisle of the church there is an ancient chapel, which, at the time of our
visit, was in process of restoration, and was to be dedicated to Mr. Cotton, whom these English
people consider as the founder of our American Boston.  It would contain a painted memorial-window,
in honor of the old Puritan minister.  A festival in commemoration of the event was to take
place in the ensuing July, to which I had myself received an invitation, but I knew too well
the pains and penalties incurred by an invited guest at public festivals in England to accept
it.  It ought to be recorded (and it seems to have made a very kindly impression on our kinsfolk
here) that five hundred pounds had been contributed by persons in the United States, principally
in Boston, towards the cost of the memorial-window, and the repair and restoration of the chapel.

After we emerged from the chapel, Mr. Porter approached us with the vicar, to whom he kindly
introduced us, and then took his leave.  May a stranger's benediction rest upon him!  He is
a most pleasant man; rather, I imagine, a virtuoso than an antiquary; for he seemed to value
the Queen of Otaheite's bag as highly as Queen Mary's embroidered quilt, and to have an omnivorous
appetite for everything strange and rare.  Would that we could fill up his shelves and drawers
(if there are any vacant spaces left) with the choicest trifles that have dropped out of Time's
carpet-bag, or give him the carpet-bag itself, to take out what he will!

The vicar looked about thirty years old, a gentleman, evidently assured of his position (as
clergymen of the Established Church invariably are), comfortable and well-to-do, a scholar
and a Christian, and fit to be a bishop, knowing how to make the most of life without prejudice
to the life to come.  I was glad to see such a model English priest so suitably accommodated
with an old English church.  He kindly and courteously did the honors, showing us quite round
the interior, giving us all the information that we required, and then leaving us to the quiet
enjoyment of what we came to see.

The interior of Saint Botolph's is very fine and satisfactory, as stately, almost, as a cathedral,
and has been repaired--so far as repairs were necessary--in a chaste and noble style.  The
great eastern window is of modern painted glass, but is the richest, mellowest, and tenderest
modern window that I have ever seen: the art of painting these glowing transparencies in pristine
perfection being one that the world has lost. The vast, clear space of the interior church
delighted me.  There was no screen,--nothing between the vestibule and the altar to break the
long vista; even the organ stood aside,--though it by and by made us aware of its presence
by a melodious roar.  Around the walls there were old engraved brasses, and a stone coffin,
and an alabaster knight of Saint John, and an alabaster lady, each recumbent at full length,
as large as life, and in perfect preservation, except for a slight modern touch at the tips
of their noses.  In the chancel we saw a great deal of oaken work, quaintly and admirably carved,
especially about the seats formerly appropriated to the monks, which were so contrived as to
tumble down with a tremendous crash, if the occupant happened to fall asleep.

We now essayed to climb into the upper regions.  Up we went, winding and still winding round
the circular stairs, till we came to the gallery beneath the stone roof of the tower, whence
we could look down and see the raised Font, and my Talma lying on one of the steps, and looking
about as big as a pocket-handkerchief.  Then up again, up, up, up, through a yet smaller staircase,
till we emerged into another stone gallery, above the jackdaws, and far above the roof beneath
which we had before made a halt.  Then up another flight, which led us into a pinnacle of the
temple, but not the highest; so, retracing our steps, we took the right turret this time, and
emerged into the loftiest lantern, where we saw level Lincolnshire, far and near, though with
a haze on the distant horizon.  There were dusty roads, a river, and canals, converging towards
Boston, which--a congregation of red-tiled roofs--lay beneath our feet, with pygmy people creeping
about its narrow streets.  We were three hundred feet aloft, and the pinnacle on which we stood
is a landmark forty miles at sea.

Content, and weary of our elevation, we descended the corkscrew stairs and left the church;
the last object that we noticed in the interior being a bird, which appeared to be at home
there, and responded with its cheerful notes to the swell of the organ.  Pausing on the church-steps,
we observed that there were formerly two statues, one on each side of the doorway; the canopies
still remaining and the pedestals being about a yard from the ground.  Some of Mr. Cotton's
Puritan parishioners are probably responsible for the disappearance of these stone saints. The
children felt and expressed such hearty pleasure at the sight of her treasures. There were
such joyous exclamations; such bursts of delight; such springing and jumping about, that Julia
became infected with the general pleasure, and was a happy child herself. Yes! even though
the fillagree box had been shown off and admired. But what do children in general know about
the value of things and how much they cost? Ah, much more just in their judgments than we elders
are apt to be, a bird of Paradise such as adorned the top of Julia's cabinet, or a peacock's
tail, such as she had in a drawer, is to their unprejudiced eyes more desirable than the gold
of Ophir itself!

So now you see this triumph of simplicity over art, despoiled the fillagree box of all its horrors,
for the innocent children admired her shells yet more--unsophisticated, and insensible to
the long story about the value of the rubies, the maid of honour, and even the queen's hairs.

Still
the Fairies felt and saw that it was not Euphrosyne's gift, but rather the forgetfulness of it
which caused these hours of happiness to Julia, and somewhat puzzled as to the result they
left the votary of riches, not quite without a sensation that little Aglaia's proposal of moderate
health and enough riches to be "comfortable without being puzzled," was about the best thing
after all, though not much of a Fairy gift. And now, my little readers, I am beginning to get
rather tired of my story, and to feel that you may do so too. I think I am getting rather prosy,
so I must try and cut the matter short. Four out of the five Fairy gifts were like beauty and riches,
worldly advantages. For instance, there was the little girl who was to have every earthly pleasure
at her feet--i.e. she was to have every thing she wished for--why she was fifty times worse off than either
Aurora or Julia, for I will tell you whom she was like. She was like the fisherman's wife
in Grimm's German popular fairy tales, who had every thing she wished, and so at last wished to
be king of the sun and moon. I doubt not you remember her well, and how she was in consequence
sent back to her mud cottage. I think, therefore, I need not describe the young lady who had that
Fairy gift.

There was another who was to be loved wherever she went; but nothing is worth having that is had
so easily, and this child got so sick of being kissed and fondled and loved, that it was the greatest
nuisance to her possible, for disagreeable people loved her just as much as nice ones, and
for her part she hated them all alike. It was a very silly Fairy gift.

Come with me then to Ambrosia's God-daughter, whom they visited last, and whose Fairy gift the other
Fairies were to guess at!

Neither you nor I, my dears, ever heard a fairy-laugh. Doubtless it is a sweet and musical sound. You can
perhaps fancy it? Well then, do fancy it, and how it rang in silver peals when our fairy friends,
on entering the last nursery they had to visit, found Ambrosia's protégée in a flood of angry tears,
stamping her foot on the ground in a passion! "You naughty naughty girl!" exclaimed the old Nurse,
"you'll wake the baby and make your own eyes so red you won't be fit to be seen to night by
the company!"

"I don't care about my eyes being red, tho' I don't want to wake the poor baby," sobbed the little
girl, slightly softening her wrath: "but the cat has unravelled all the stocking I have been
knitting at for so many days, and I had nearly just finished it, and now it's all spoilt;" and she
roared with vexation. "Miss Hermione, if you go on so I shall certainly send for your Mamma,
and the baby will be quite poorly, he will! and we shall know who made him so," added Nurse
triumphantly. "I can't make the baby poorly with crying, Nurse, so that's nonsense you know,"
observed Hermione; "but I didn't mean to disturb him; only my stocking is gone, and I don't
know what to do." And here she sobbed afresh.

"Do! why ain't you going down to the ladies, and can't you be brushing your hair and washing your
face and getting ready?" "But it isn't time." "Well, but can't you get ready before the time
a little? and then, when you're dressed and look so clean and nice
and pretty, you can sit in the chair and we can look at you!" and
here the good old Nurse gave a knowing smile and nodded her head.

Hermione caught sight of the comical coaxing glance, and, in spite of her misfortune, burst
into a fit of laughter. "Hum, hum, hum! now you'll wake the poor thing by laughing, Miss Hermione.
I do wish you'd be quiet:" and here the Nurse rocked the child on her knee more vigorously
than ever.

"Then why don't you tell me what I am to do with my stocking," cried Hermione. "Oh well, I know
what I will do--something quite as quiet as a mouse. I will wind
up my poor worsted."

Hereupon the little girl picked up the puckered remains of her luckless grey stocking which
a facetious young cat had spent at least a quarter of an hour in ingeniously unravelling with
his claws. It was a tiresome tedious job we must admit, and required a strong effort of patient perseverance,
but Hermione soon became engrossed in its difficulties and a dead silence ensued. At last Nurse
who had while rocking the sleeping baby on her knee, been watching the child's proceedings,
suddenly exclaimed, "Well to be sure, Miss Hermione, you have such patience as I never before did see."

[The
Fairies exchanged glances.

"It is Patience, Ambrosia."

"What a hurry you are in!" was the reply.]

"No I haven't, Nurse, indeed," answered Hermione. "I had no patience at all when I was in a passion
with the cat just now."

"Well, I suppose there are two or three sorts of Patiences, Miss, then," persisted Nurse, "for
I'm certain you have some sorts. But, dear me, its ever so much past six o'clock, and you have to
be dressed by half-past. Do put away the worsted and get yourself ready, Miss, and call Jane to help
you."

Here the Nurse and Hermione nearly had a scuffle over the worsted. Hermione declared the cat
had spoilt her stocking; and the only comfort left to her now was to roll it comfortably up
into a ball. Nurse on the contrary insisted that it didn't signify a bit what became of the
worsted; she must dress and go down. The dispute ended by Hermione running off with the half
finished ball and its untidy remains, and cramming the whole concern into the pocket of her
best frock. "The people will soon be tired of talking to me," muttered she to herself, "and then
I can finish my ball quietly in the corner behind Mamma's chair."

The thought of this ingenious plan for her private amusement down stairs so tickled Hermione's
fancy that she was on the giggle the whole time she was being dressed.

"If Nurse did but know what was in the pocket of my best frock and how fat it is! how she would
scold, and what a fight we should have." And she could hardly refrain from loud laughter at the
thought. When she had got her frock on she sat down, and laying her arm over the fat pocket
asked Jane to touch up her curls: and while this operation was going on she began to talk to the
nurse.

"Nurse, should you think it a very nice thing to go to a dinner party and sit in chairs all round
a large room, where the coloured covers are taken away and everything looks very gay, and so tidy,
nobody is allowed to do anything but smile, and talk, and wear white kid gloves?"

"Very nice, Miss, it's so like a lady," was the Nurse's ready reply.

"Well then, I don't think it's nice at all, Nurse--I think it's very nasty and stupid."

"Dear, Miss Hermione, how you do talk; I hope you won't tell the ladies so when you get down
stairs."

"Oh dear no, that would be rude, and it's wrong to be rude, but to tell you the truth I don't know
what I shall do when I grow up if I am obliged to be so dull as that
is, very often."

"Goodness, Miss Hermione, to hear you talk one would think you'd better be a housemaid at once,
instead of a lady with nothing to do."

"Nurse, I should see no objection to be a housemaid at all, only that I am learning so many things
that wouldn't suit a housemaid; but without being a housemaid there are many pleasanter things
to do than to sit in that stupid sort of way. I like the room when all Papa's books and papers are
about, and when he is scribbling away so busy, and when Mamma has got her microscope out looking
at seaweeds or curiosities. I have a chance then myself. I don't like ladies who say nothing
but 'Pretty little dear, what a nice colour she has,' just to please Mamma."

What Nurse in England could be expected to enter into so philosophical an investigation of the
habits of society?

Hermione's did nothing but assure her it was time to be off, and she
only hoped she would sit still and talk prettily, and never trouble
her head whether it was stupid or not.

When Hermione got into the drawing room and saw the company seated as she had described to her
Nurse, she felt very much disposed to laugh again, but made an effort and composed herself.
Still her face was beaming with mirth and fun, and when some ladies said "What a happy looking
little girl," they were quite sincere. That sort of face too worked wonders, and her Mamma's friends
liked her much and talked pleasantly to her, and she was pleased and happy and quite forgot
the ball of worsted, as well as the ladies' white kid gloves. A young lady however who had her
arm round Hermione's waist and was playing with her, suddenly felt the round protuberance in
her pocket. "Ah you little rogue, what have you here?" "Its a secret," cried Hermione. "I think
I can unravel your mysterious secret, little girl, you are a favourite with the housekeeper,"
added she, whispering in Hermione's ear, "and she has just given you an orange."

"You are a very bad guesser of secrets," whispered Hermione in return.

"It's no such thing!"--"Then it's an apple." "No, nor an apple."--"Then it's a peach, and your
new frock will be spoilt." "No it isn't a peach either, and it's a secret." The young lady loved
fun, and a playful struggle ensued between her and Hermione; in the course of which the large
grey worsted ball and its long ravelled tail were drawn from the little pocket.

Hermione had now to tell the history of the ball, which she did naturally and honestly, but when
she added, quite seriously, that she intended, when they had done talking to her, to go behind
her Mamma's chair and finish winding it up, you may guess how they laughed.

"Come here, my little dear, and let me look at you," cried an elderly lady in spectacles, putting
out her hand and laying hold of Hermione's. "Why what an industrious little soul you must
be! a perfect pattern! There now! you may go behind my chair and finish your ball of worsted;
nobody wants to talk to you any longer."

This old lady was rather crabbed, and had not quite believed Hermione sincere, so she did this
to try her, and expected to see her pout and refuse. To her surprize, Hermione only said "Oh
thank you, ma'am," with a quite smiling face, and going behind the
chair, sat down on the floor to her worsted.

For a few moments the old lady kept thinking "It won't last long: she'll soon be glad of an excuse
to come out:" but no such thing happened; and just what Hermione expected did happen. The ladies
fell to talking among themselves, and in a very short time the presence of the little girl was
quite forgotten, even by the old lady, who was handed out to dinner, without once remembering
whom she had left behind her chair.

Hermione stayed in the room till her task was over, and then rushed up stairs to the nursery,
and stopping at the door, half opened it and rolled the great grey worsted ball so cleverly
in, that it hit the old Nurse's foot as she sat (once more rocking the baby) over the fire.
"Goodness, bless me! what ever is that?" Then, spying a laughing face at the door, "Oh dear heart,
it's you I declare, Miss Hermione! will you never leave off waking the baby? I thought a great
black dog was laying hold of my foot."

"Nurse," said Hermione, "your baby is always and always going to sleep; why doesn't he go, and
then I could have a bit of fun? You don't know where I finished winding the worsted ball!"

"Why goodness me, Miss Hermione, where?"

"Down in the drawing-room among all the fine ladies; so good night!" and off she ran to avoid
further explanation. A few words with her Governess; a sober time of evening prayer; and the
happy child laid her head on her pillow, and needed no Fairy wand to lull her to sleep. She
had been some time with her Governess in the morning before her Mamma coming to her there, heard
a loud discussion going on within.

The voices, however, were those of good-humour. "Hermione," said her Mother, "I am come to
say that your Governess told me yesterday you had been so very good for a long time over all
that you have had to do, that I have arranged for your having a holiday and a treat to-day,
and several of your young friends are coming to see you.

Among them is Aurora, the granddaughter of the old lady in spectacles, who, just before she
was going away at night, recollected you, and began to look for you behind her chair."

"Oh what a goose, Mamma!" "No, not a goose, my dear--only an oddity, but a very kind one too--for
she desired me to find out whether you really did roll up the whole of the ravelled worsted
last night; and if you really persevered till it was finished, I have something to give you
from her, but not otherwise. How was it?" "Oh, it's finished, Mamma; ask Nurse; for when I
rolled it against her foot last night, she took it for a great black dog." "Well then, I suppose
this is yours, Hermione; but, I must say, I never knew a gold thimble
earned so easily."

Yes, dear little readers, it was a pretty gold thimble, and round the bottom of it there was
a rim of white enamel, and on the enamel were gold letters.

"L'industrie ajoute à la beauté."

"Mamma," said Hermione, looking at it in delight, as she found it exactly fitted her finger,
"it's lovely; but, do you know, I think the old lady ought to have given it to her granddaughter,
Aurora, with such a motto." "My dear, she has had it, she told me, some months in her pocket secretly,
for the purpose you mention, but she cannot ever satisfy herself that Aurora has got the spirit
of real industry in her, and to bribe her to earn the thimble is not her object, so you see it
has accidentally fallen to your share."

And as she said this, Hermione's mother turned round to leave the
room; but before she had reached the door, her little girl stopped
her--"Mamma, do turn back."

"What is the matter, Hermione?"

"I've something I want to say to you."

"I am all attention, my dear, particularly as your face looks so unusually grave."

"Why, you and my Governess are always calling me good for doing my
lessons well, and now you are rewarding me for being good and all
that, and I don't see that I am good at all."

"Upon my word this is a very serious matter, Hermione; who or what has put this into your head?"

"I
read in a serious book lately, that nobody could be good without practising self-denial; and
that, to be really good, one must either do something that one does not like, or give up something
that one does; so that I am quite sure I cannot be good and deserve a reward when I do French
and music and drawing and work well, because I am so very fond of doing every thing I do do,
that every thing is a pleasure to me. And there is no struggle to do what is tiresome and no
other wish to give up. The only time when I have to try to be good at all, is when I have to leave off
one thing and go to another.

That is always a little disagreeable at first, but unfortunately the disagreeableness goes off in a
very few minutes, and I like the new employment as well as the last. This is what I was talking about
to my Governess when you came, and she laughed so loud I felt quite vexed."

"My dear Hermione," said her Mamma, "you have quite misapplied what you have read in the book.
Self-denial is always required of us, when we feel inclined to do
any thing that is wrong, but it does not apply to any aptitude you
may have for enjoying the occupations I require of you. That is only
a piece of good fortune for you; for to many little girls, doing lessons
is a very great act of self-denial, as they want to be doing something
else. But now, as you are so lucky in liking every thing you do, you
must practise your self-denial in some other way."

"How, Mamma?"

"In
not being vexed when your Governess laughs, and in not being in a
passion with the cat next time he unravels your stocking."

Hermione
blushed. "Oh, Mamma, I understand the difference now."

"But this
is not all, Hermione."

"Well, Mamma?"

"Why, as you are so fortunate
as to be always happy when employed, and as therefore there is no
goodness strictly speaking, in your doing your business so cheerfully
and well, you must do this, you must spend some portion of time every
day in making your energy of use to other people, and then you will
be doing active good if not practising self-denial."

"Oh, Mamma,
what a nice idea! Perhaps you will give me some needlework to do for
the poor women you give money to; and, besides, just now I can do
something actively useful and still a little really disagreeable,--really
it is, Mamma,--what makes you laugh?"

"Your resolution to do something
you don't like. What is it, Hermione?"

"To knit up again the stocking
the cat pulled out. I quite dislike the idea."

"Then set to work
by all means, Hermione. You will at least have the comfort of 'beginning
by a little aversion;' but I warn you beforehand, not to set your
heart upon the disagreeableness lasting very long, and if you find
yourself shortly, as happy as ever over the stocking, do not be puzzled
and vexed any more, but thank God as I do, that, so far at least,
you are spared one of the troubles of life. The trouble of an indolent,
discontented mind."

An affectionate embrace was exchanged between
Mother and Daughter; and the latter, with the assistance of her Governess,
recommenced the unlucky grey stocking, and was working assiduously
at it when her young friends arrived.

It was a curious sight to the
Fairies to see two of their god-daughters together, as they now did.
But the conviction was forced upon them, that, for the present at
least, Hermione had the balance of happiness in her favour. Whatever
their amusements were,--whether looking over curiosities, playing
with dolls, or any of the numerous games invented for the entertainment
of the young, Hermione's whole heart and attention were in the matter,
and she was as much engrossed as over learning at other times, and
quite happy. With poor Aurora it was not so; the childishness of the
play every now and then annoyed her; there was no food for her vanity,
in playing with children; they cared nothing about her beauty; the
gayest and most good-natured face has always the most charms for them,
and this did not suit Aurora at all, and ever and anon her thoughts
wandered, and her wishes too.

For ever straining into the future!

"I
cannot make out your Fairy gift at all, Ambrosia," said Euphrosyne,
"and I begin to suspect you have not given her one."

"We are all
growing philosophical, I perceive," said Ambrosia, smiling. "Who could
think you would have guessed that my happy child has had no Fairy
gift at all. But she has, I assure you. What do you say to the Philosopher's
Stone? It is quite clear that me has got something which TURNS EVERY
THING SHE TOUCHES INTO GOLD."

* * * * *

What is the Philosopher's
Stone? I hear my little readers exclaim. There is no such thing, my
dears, nor ever was; but the chymists in old times, who were very
ignorant, and yet knew that many wonderful things had been done by
the mixture of minerals and metals, and the curious effects some had
upon others, guessed that yet more wonderful things might be found
out by searching, and they got into their heads that it might be possible
to find, or make, a stone that would have the power of turning every
thing it touched into gold. In the same manner, the doctors of those
times fancied there might be such a thing made as a draught that would
turn old people into young ones again. This was called "The Elixir
of Life." But I do assure you these old fellows never did discover
either a Philosopher's Stone, or an Elixir of Life.

So this was only
a joke of Ambrosia's.

Now to go on and finish my story. It was ten
years more before the Fairies revisited their Godchildren in the lower
world, and this time they were to decide who had given the best Fairy
gift.

And I dare say you expect me to give you as long an account
of their visits to the young ladies of twenty, as I did of their peeps
at the little girls of ten. But I really do not think it worth while.
I would do so indeed in a minute if there were anything quite fresh
and new to describe. But on the faith of a story-teller I assure you,
it would be "the old story over again," only on an enlarged scale.

Did
you ever look at any interesting object first with your natural eyes,
and then through a microscope or magnifying glass?  Both walls and ceiling are white, and there are elaborate doorways and
fireplaces of white marble.  The floor is of oak, so highly polished that our feet slipped
upon it as if it had been New England ice.  At one end of the room stands a statue of Queen
Anne in her royal robes, which are so admirably designed and exquisitely wrought that the spectator
certainly gets a strong conception of her royal dignity; while the face of the statue, fleshy
and feeble, doubtless conveys a suitable idea of her personal character.  The marble of this
work, long as it has stood there, is as white as snow just fallen, and must have required most
faithful and religious care to keep it so.  As for the volumes of the library, they are wired
within the cases and turn their gilded backs upon the visitor, keeping their treasures of wit
and wisdom just as intangible as if still in the unwrought mines of human thought.

I remember nothing else in the palace, except the chapel, to which we were conducted last,
and where we saw a splendid monument to the first Duke and Duchess, sculptured by Rysbrack,
at the cost, it is said, of forty thousand pounds.  The design includes the statues of the
deceased dignitaries, and various allegorical flourishes, fantasies, and confusions; and beneath
sleep the great Duke and his proud wife, their veritable bones and dust, and probably all the
Marlboroughs that have since died.  It is not quite a comfortable idea, that these mouldy ancestors
still inhabit, after their fashion, the house where their successors spend the passing day;
but the adulation lavished upon the hero of Blenheim could not have been consummated, unless
the palace of his lifetime had become likewise a stately mausoleum over his remains,-- and
such we felt it all to be, after gazing at his tomb.

The next business was to see the private gardens.  An old Scotch under-gardener admitted us
and led the way, and seemed to have a fair prospect of earning the fee all by himself; but
by and by another respectable Scotchman made his appearance and took us in charge, proving
to be the head-gardener in person.  He was extremely intelligent and agreeable, talking both
scientifically and lovingly about trees and plants, of which there is every variety capable
of English cultivation. Positively, the Garden of Eden cannot have been more beautiful than
this private garden of Blenheim.  It contains three hundred acres, and by the artful circumlocution
of the paths, and the undulations, and the skilfully interposed clumps of trees, is made to
appear limitless.  The sylvan delights of a whole country are compressed into this space, as
whole fields of Persian roses go to the concoction of an ounce of precious attar.  The world
within that garden-fence is not the same weary and dusty world with which we outside mortals
are conversant; it is a finer, lovelier, more harmonious Nature; and the Great Mother lends
herself kindly to the gardener's will, knowing that he will make evident the half-obliterated
traits of her pristine and ideal beauty, and allow her to take all the credit and praise to
herself.  I doubt whether there is ever any winter within that precinct,--any clouds, except
the fleecy ones of summer.  The sunshine that I saw there rests upon my recollection of it
as if it were eternal.  The lawns and glades are like the memory of places where one has wandered
when first in love.

What a good and happy life might be spent in a paradise like this!  And yet, at that very moment,
the besotted Duke (ah! I have let out a secret which I meant to keep to myself; but the ten
shillings must pay for all) was in that very garden (for the guide told us so, and cautioned
our young people not to be too uproarious), and, if in a condition for arithmetic, was thinking
of nothing nobler than how many ten-shilling tickets had that day been sold.  Republican as
I am, I should still love to think that noblemen lead noble lives, and that all this stately
and beautiful environment may serve to elevate them a little way above the rest of us.  If
it fail to do so, the disgrace falls equally upon the whole race of mortals as on themselves;
because it proves that no more favorable conditions of existence would eradicate our vices
and weaknesses.  How sad, if this be so!  Even a herd of swine, eating the acorns under those
magnificent oaks of Blenheim, would be cleanlier and of better habits than ordinary swine.

Well, all that I have written is pitifully meagre, as a description of Blenheim; and I bate
to leave it without some more adequate expression of the noble edifice, with its rich domain,
all as I saw them in that beautiful sunshine; for, if a day had been chosen out of a hundred
years, it could not have been a finer one.  But I must give up the attempt; only further remarking
that the finest trees here were cedars, of which I saw one--and there may have been many such--immense
in girth, and not less than three centuries old.  I likewise saw a vast heap of laurel, two
hundred feet in circumference, all growing from one root; and the gardener offered to show
us another growth of twice that stupendous size. If the Great Duke himself had been buried
in that spot, his heroic heart could not have been the seed of a more plentiful crop of laurels.

We now went back to the Black Bear, and sat down to a cold collation, of which we ate abundantly,
and drank (in the good old English fashion) a due proportion of various delightful liquors.
A stranger in England, in his rambles to various quarters of the country, may learn little
in regard to wines (for the ordinary English taste is simple, though sound, in that particular),
but he makes acquaintance with more varieties of hop and malt liquor than he previously supposed
to exist.  I remember a sort of foaming stuff, called hop-champagne, which is very vivacious,
and appears to be a hybrid between ale and bottled cider.  Another excellent tipple for warm
weather is concocted by mixing brown-stout or bitter ale with ginger-beer, the foam of which
stirs up the heavier liquor from its depths, forming a compound of singular vivacity and sufficient
body.  But of all things ever brewed from malt (unless it be the Trinity Ale of Cambridge,
which I drank long afterwards, and which Barry Cornwall has celebrated in immortal verse),
commend me to the Archdeacon, as the Oxford scholars call it, in honor of the jovial dignitary
who first taught these erudite worthies how to brew their favorite nectar.  John Barleycorn
has given his very heart to this admirable liquor; it is a superior kind of ale, the Prince
of Ales, with a richer flavor and a mightier spirit than you can find elsewhere in this weary
world.  Much have we been strengthened and encouraged by the potent blood of the Archdeacon!

A few days after our excursion to Blenheim, the same party set forth, in two flies, on a tour
to some other places of interest in the neighborhood of Oxford.  It was again a delightful
day; and, in truth, every day, of late, had been so pleasant that it seemed as if each must
be the very last of such perfect weather; and yet the long succession had given us confidence
in as many more to come.  The climate of England has been shamefully maligned, its sulkiness
and asperities are not nearly so offensive as Englishmen tell us (their climate being the only
attribute of their country which they never overvalue); and the really good summer-weather
is the very kindest and sweetest that the world knows.

We first drove to the village of Cumnor, about six miles from Oxford, and alighted at the entrance
of the church.  Here, while waiting for the keys, we looked at an old wall of the churchyard,
piled up of loose gray stones which are said to have once formed a portion of Cumnor Hall,
celebrated in Mickle's ballad and Scott's romance.  The hall must have been in very close vicinity
to the church,--not more than twenty yards off; and I waded through the long, dewy grass of
the churchyard, and tried to peep over the wall, in hopes to discover some tangible and traceable
remains of the edifice.  But the wall was just too high to be overlooked, and difficult to
clamber over without tumbling down some of the stones; so I took the word of one of our party,
who had been here before, that there is nothing interesting on the other side.  The churchyard
is in rather a neglected state, and seems not to have been mown for the benefit of the parson's
cow; it contains a good many gravestones, of which I remember only some upright memorials of
slate to individuals of the name of Tabbs.

Soon a woman arrived with the key of the church-door, and we entered the simple old edifice,
which has the pavement of lettered tombstones, the sturdy pillars and low arches and other
ordinary characteristics of an English country church.  One or two pews, probably those of
the gentlefolk of the neighborhood, were better furnished than the rest, but all in a modest
style.  Near the high altar, in the holiest place, there is an oblong, angular, ponderous tomb
of blue marble, built against the wall, and surmounted by a carved canopy of the same material;
and over the tomb, and beneath the canopy, are two monumental brasses, such as we oftener see
inlaid into a church pavement.  On these brasses are engraved the figures of a gentleman in
armor and a lady in an antique garb, each about a foot high, devoutly kneeling in prayer; and
there is a long Latin inscription likewise cut into the enduring brass, bestowing the highest
eulogies on the character of Anthony Forster, who, with his virtuous dame, lies buried beneath
this tombstone.  His is the knightly figure that kneels above; and if Sir Walter Scott ever
saw this tomb, he must have had an even greater than common disbelief in laudatory epitaphs,
to venture on depicting Anthony Forster in such lines as blacken him in the romance.  For my
part, I read the inscription in full faith, and believe the poor deceased gentleman to be a
much-wronged individual, with good grounds for bringing an action of slander in the courts above.

But the circumstance, lightly as we treat it, has its serious moral. What nonsense it is, this
anxiety, which so worries us, about our good fame, or our bad fame, after death!  If it were
of the slightest real moment, our reputations would have been placed by Providence more in
our own power, and less in other people's, than we now find them to be.  If poor Anthony Forster
happens to have met Sir Walter in the other world, I doubt whether he has ever thought it worth
while to complain of the latter's misrepresentations.

We did not remain long in the church, as it contains nothing else of interest; and driving
through the village, we passed a pretty large and rather antique-looking inn, bearing the sign
of the Bear and Ragged Staff.  It could not be so old, however, by at least a hundred years,
as Giles Gosling's time; nor is there any other object to remind the visitor of the Elizabethan
age, unless it be a few ancient cottages, that are perhaps of still earlier date.  Cumnor is
not nearly so large a village, nor a place of such mark, as one anticipates from its romantic
and legendary fame; but, being still inaccessible by railway, it has retained more of a sylvan
character than we often find in English country towns. In this retired neighborhood the road
is narrow and bordered with grass, and sometimes interrupted by gates; the hedges grow in unpruned
luxuriance; there is not that close-shaven neatness and trimness that characterize the ordinary
English landscape.  The whole scene conveys the idea of seclusion and remoteness.  We met no
travellers, whether on foot or otherwise.

I cannot very distinctly trace out this day's peregrinations; but, after leaving Cumnor a few
miles behind us, I think we came to a ferry over the Thames, where an old woman served as ferryman,
and pulled a boat across by means of a rope stretching from shore to shore.  Our two vehicles
being thus placed on the other side, we resumed our drive,--first glancing, however, at the
old woman's antique cottage, with its stone floor, and the circular settle round the kitchen
fireplace, which was quite in the mediaeval English style.

We next stopped at Stanton Harcourt, where we were received at the parsonage with a hospitality
which we should take delight in describing, if it were allowable to make public acknowledgment
of the private and personal kindnesses which we never failed to find ready for our needs. An
American in an English house will soon adopt the opinion that the English are the very kindest
people on earth, and will retain that idea as long, at least, as he remains on the inner side
of the threshold. Their magnetism is of a kind that repels strongly while you keep beyond a
certain limit, but attracts as forcibly if you get within the magic line.

It was at this place, if I remember right, that I heard a gentleman ask a friend of mine whether
he was the author of "The Red Letter A"; and, after some consideration (for he did not seem
to recognize his own book, at first, under this improved title), our countryman responded,
doubtfully, that he believed so.  The gentleman proceeded to inquire whether our friend had
spent much time in America,--evidently thinking that he must have been caught young, and have
had a tincture of English breeding, at least, if not birth, to speak the language so tolerably,
and appear so much like other people.  This insular narrowness is exceedingly queer, and of
very frequent occurrence, and is quite as much a characteristic of men of education and culture
as of clowns.

Stanton Harcourt is a very curious old place.  It was formerly the seat of the ancient family
of Harcourt, which now has its principal abode at Nuneham Courtney, a few miles off.  The parsonage
is a relic of the family mansion, or castle, other portions of which are close at hand; for,
across the garden, rise two gray towers, both of them picturesquely venerable, and interesting
for more than their antiquity.  One of these towers, in its entire capacity, from height to
depth, constituted the kitchen of the ancient castle, and is still used for domestic purposes,
although it has not, nor ever had, a chimney; or we might rather say, it is itself one vast
chimney, with a hearth of thirty feet square, and a flue and aperture of the same size.  There
are two huge fireplaces within, and the interior walls of the tower are blackened with the
smoke that for centuries used to gush forth from them, and climb upward, seeking an exit through
some wide air-holes in the comical roof, full seventy feet above.  These lofty openings were
capable of being so arranged, with reference to the wind, that the cooks are said to have been
seldom troubled by the smoke; and here, no doubt, they were accustomed to roast oxen whole,
with as little fuss and ado as a modern cook would roast a fowl.  The inside of the tower is
very dim and sombre (being nothing but rough stone walls, lighted only from the apertures above
mentioned), and has still a pungent odor of smoke and soot, the reminiscence of the fires and
feasts of generations that have passed away.  Methinks the extremest range of domestic economy
lies between an American cooking-stove and the ancient kitchen, seventy dizzy feet in height
and all one fireplace, of Stanton Harcourt.

Now--the place being without a parallel in England, and therefore necessarily beyond the experience
of an American--it is somewhat remarkable, that, while we stood gazing at this kitchen, I was
haunted and perplexed by an idea that somewhere or other I had seen just this strange spectacle
before.--The height, the blackness, the dismal void, before my eyes, seemed as familiar as
the decorous neatness of my grandmother's kitchen; only my unaccountable memory of the scene
was lighted up with an image of lurid fires blazing all round the dim interior circuit of the
tower.  I had never before had so pertinacious an attack, as I could not but suppose it, of
that odd state of mind wherein we fitfully and teasingly remember some previous scene or incident,
of which the one now passing appears to be but the echo and reduplication. Though the explanation
of the mystery did not for some time occur to me, I may as well conclude the matter here. 
In a letter of Pope's, addressed to the Duke of Buckingham, there is an account of Stanton
Harcourt (as I now find, although the name is not mentioned), where he resided while translating
a part of the "Iliad."  It is one of the most admirable pieces of description in the language,--playful
and picturesque, with fine touches of humorous pathos,--and conveys as perfect a picture as
ever was drawn of a decayed English country-house; and among other rooms, most of which have
since crumbled down and disappeared, he dashes off the grim aspect of this kitchen,--which,
moreover, he peoples with witches, engaging Satan himself as headcook, who stirs the infernal
caldrons that seethe and bubble over the fires.  This letter, and others relative to his abode
here, were very familiar to my earlier reading, and, remaining still fresh at the bottom of
my memory, caused the weird and ghostly sensation that came over one on beholding the real
spectacle that had formerly been made so vivid to my imagination.

Our next visit was to the church which stands close by, and is quite as ancient as the remnants
of the castle.  In a chapel or side-aisle, dedicated to the Harcourts, are found some very
interesting family monuments,--and among them, recumbent on a tombstone, the figure of an armed
knight of the Lancastrian party, who was slain in the Wars of the Roses.  His features, dress,
and armor are painted in colors, still wonderfully fresh, and there still blushes the symbol
of the Red Rose, denoting the faction for which he fought and died.  His head rests on a marble
or alabaster helmet; and on the tomb lies the veritable helmet, it is to be presumed, which
he wore in battle,--a ponderous iron ease, with the visor complete, and remnants of the gilding
that once covered it. The crest is a large peacock, not of metal, but of wood.

Very possibly, this helmet was but an heraldic adornment of his tomb; and, indeed, it seems
strange that it has not been stolen before now, especially in Cromwell's time, when knightly
tombs were little respected, and when armor was in request.  However, it is needless to dispute
with the dead knight about the identity of his iron pot, and we may as well allow it to be
the very same that so often gave him the headache in his lifetime.  Leaning against the wall,
at the foot of the tomb, is the shaft of a spear, with a wofully tattered and utterly faded
banner appended to it,--the knightly banner beneath which he marshalled his followers in the
field.  As it was absolutely falling to pieces, I tore off one little bit, no bigger than a
finger-nail, and put it into my waistcoat-pocket; but seeking it subsequently, it was not to
be found.

On the opposite side of the little chapel, two or three yards from this tomb, is another monument,
on which lie, side by side, one of the same knightly race of Harcourts, and his lady.  The
tradition of the family is, that this knight was the standard-bearer of Henry of Richmond in
the Battle of Bosworth Field; and a banner, supposed to be the same that he carried, now droops
over his effigy.  It is just such a colorless silk rag as the one already described.  The knight
has the order of the Garter on his knee, and the lady wears it on her left arm, an odd place
enough for a garter; but, if worn in its proper locality, it could not be decorously visible.
The complete preservation and good condition of these statues, even to the minutest adornment
of the sculpture, and their very noses,--the most vulnerable part of a marble man, as of a
living one,--are miraculous.  Except in Westminster Abbey, among the chapels of the kings,
I have seen none so well preserved.  Perhaps they owe it to the loyalty of Oxfordshire, diffused
throughout its neighborhood by the influence of the University, during the great Civil War
and the rule of the Parliament.  It speaks well, too, for the upright and kindly character
of this old family, that the peasantry, among whom they had lived for ages, did not desecrate
their tombs, when it might have been done with impunity.

There are other and more recent memorials of the Harcourts, one of which is the tomb of the
last lord, who died about a hundred years ago.  His figure, like those of his ancestors, lies
on the top of his tomb, clad, not in armor, but in his robes as a peer.  The title is now extinct,
but the family survives in a younger branch, and still holds this patrimonial estate, though
they have long since quitted it as a residence.

We next went to see the ancient fish-ponds appertaining to the mansion, and which used to be
of vast dietary importance to the family in Catholic times, and when fish was not otherwise
attainable.  There are two or three, or more, of these reservoirs, one of which is of very
respectable size,--large enough, indeed, to be really a picturesque object, with its grass-green
borders, and the trees drooping over it, and the towers of the castle and the church reflected
within the weed-grown depths of its smooth mirror.  A sweet fragrance, as it were, of ancient
time and present quiet and seclusion was breathing all around; the sunshine of to-day had a
mellow charm of antiquity in its brightness.  These ponds are said still to breed abundance
of such fish as love deep and quiet waters; but I saw only some minnows, and one or two snakes,
which were lying among the weeds on the top of the water, sunning and bathing themselves at once.

I mentioned that there were two towers remaining of the old castle: the one containing the
kitchen we have already visited; the other, still more interesting, is next to be described.
It is some seventy feet high, gray and reverend, but in excellent repair, though I could not
perceive that anything had been done to renovate it.  The basement story was once the family
chapel, and is, of course, still a consecrated spot.  At one corner of the tower is a circular
turret, within which a narrow staircase, with worn steps of stone, winds round and round as
it climbs upward, giving access to a chamber on each floor, and finally emerging on the battlemented
roof.  Ascending this turret-stair, and arriving at the third story, we entered a chamber,
not large, though occupying the whole area of the tower, and lighted by a window on each side.
It was wainscoted from floor to ceiling with dark oak, and had a little fireplace in one of
the corners.  The window-panes were small and set in lead.  The curiosity of this room is,
that it was once the residence of Pope, and that he here wrote a considerable part of the translation
of Isomer, and likewise, no doubt, the admirable letters to which I have referred above.  The
room once contained a record by himself, scratched with a diamond on one of the window-panes
(since removed for safe-keeping to Nuneham Courtney, where it was shown me), purporting that
he had here finished the fifth book of the "Iliad" on such a day.

A poet has a fragrance about him, such as no other human being is gifted withal; it is indestructible,
and clings forevermore to everything that he has touched.  I was not impressed, at Blenheim,
with any sense that the mighty Duke still haunted the palace that was created for him; but
here, after a century and a half, we are still conscious of the presence of that decrepit little
figure of Queen Anne's time, although he was merely a casual guest in the old tower, during
one or two summer months. However brief the time and slight the connection, his spirit cannot
be exorcised so long as the tower stands.  In my mind, moreover, Pope, or any other person
with an available claim, is right in adhering to the spot, dead or alive; for I never saw a
chamber that I should like better to inhabit,--so comfortably small, in such a safe and inaccessible
seclusion, and with a varied landscape from each window.  One of them looks upon the church,
close at hand, and down into the green churchyard, extending almost to the foot of the tower;
the others have views wide and far, over a gently undulating tract of country.  If desirous
of a loftier elevation, about a dozen more steps of the turret-stair will bring the occupant
to the summit of the tower,--where Pope used to come, no doubt, in the summer evenings, and
peep--poor little shrimp that he was!-- through the embrasures of the battlement.

From Stanton Harcourt we drove--I forget how far--to a point where a boat was waiting for us
upon the Thames, or some other stream; for I am ashamed to confess my ignorance of the precise
geographical whereabout. We were, at any rate, some miles above Oxford, and, I should imagine,
pretty near one of the sources of England's mighty river.  It was little more than wide enough
for the boat, with extended oars, to pass, shallow, too, and bordered with bulrushes and water-weeds,
which, in some places, quite overgrew the surface of the river from bank to bank.  The shores
were flat and meadow-like, and sometimes, the boatman told us, are overflowed by the rise of
the stream.  The water looked clean and pure, but not particularly transparent, though enough
so to show us that the bottom is very much weedgrown; and I was told that the weed is an American
production, brought to England with importations of timber, and now threatening to choke up
the Thames and other English rivers.  I wonder it does not try its obstructive powers upon
the Merrimack, the Connecticut, or the Hudson,--not to speak of the St. Lawrence or the Mississippi!

It was an open boat, with cushioned seats astern, comfortably accommodating our party; the
day continued sunny and warm, and perfectly still; the boatman, well trained to his business,
managed the oars skilfully and vigorously; and we went down the stream quite as swiftly as
it was desirable to go, the scene being so pleasant, and the passing hours so thoroughly agreeable.
The river grew a little wider and deeper, perhaps, as we glided on, but was still an inconsiderable
stream: for it had a good deal more than a hundred miles to meander through before it should
bear fleets on its bosom, and reflect palaces and towers and Parliament houses and dingy and
sordid piles of various structure, as it rolled two and fro with the tide, dividing London
asunder.  Not, in truth, that I ever saw any edifice whatever reflected in its turbid breast,
when the sylvan stream, as we beheld it now, is swollen into the Thames at London.

Once, on our voyage, we had to land, while the boatman and some other persons drew our skiff
round some rapids, which we could not otherwise have passed; another time, the boat went through
a lock.  We, meanwhile, stepped ashore to examine the ruins of the old nunnery of Godstowe,
where Fair Rosamond secluded herself, after being separated from her royal lover.  There is
a long line of ruinous wall, and a shattered tower at one of the angles; the whole much ivy-grown,--brimming
over, indeed, with clustering ivy, which is rooted inside of the walls.  The nunnery is now,
I believe, held in lease by the city of Oxford, which has converted its precincts into a barn-yard.
The gate was under lock and key, so that we could merely look at the outside, and soon resumed
our places in the boat.

At three o'clock or thereabouts (or sooner or later,--for I took little heed of time, and only
wished that these delightful wanderings might last forever) we reached Folly Bridge, at Oxford.
Here we took possession of a spacious barge, with a house in it, and a comfortable dining-room
or drawing-room within the house, and a level roof, on which we could sit at ease, or dance
if so inclined.  These barges are common at Oxford,--some very splendid ones being owned by
the students of the different colleges, or by clubs.  They are drawn by horses, like canal-boats;
and a horse being attached to our own barge, he trotted off at a reasonable pace, and we slipped
through the water behind him, with a gentle and pleasant motion, which, save for the constant
vicissitude of cultivated scenery, was like no motion at all.  It was life without the trouble
of living; nothing was ever more quietly agreeable.  In this happy state of mind and body we
gazed at Christ Church meadows, as we passed, and at the receding spires and towers of Oxford,
and on a good deal of pleasant variety along the banks: young men rowing or fishing; troops
of naked boys bathing, as if this were Arcadia, in the simplicity of the Golden Age; country-houses,
cottages, water-side inns, all with something fresh about them, as not being sprinkled with
the dust of the highway.  We were a large party now; for a number of additional guests had
joined us at Folly Bridge, and we comprised poets, novelists, scholars, sculptors, painters,
architects, men and women of renown, dear friends, genial, outspoken, open-hearted Englishmen,--all
voyaging onward together, like the wise ones of Gotham in a bowl.  I remember not a single
annoyance, except, indeed, that a swarm of wasps came aboard of us and alighted on the head
of one of our young gentlemen, attracted by the scent of the pomatum which he had been rubbing
into his hair.  He was the only victim, and his small trouble the one little flaw in our day's
felicity, to put us in mind that we were mortal.

Meanwhile a table had been laid in the interior of our barge, and spread with cold ham, cold
fowl, cold pigeon-pie, cold beef, and other substantial cheer, such as the English love, and
Yankees too,--besides tarts, and cakes, and pears, and plums,--not forgetting, of course, a
goodly provision of port, sherry, and champagne, and bitter ale, which is like mother's milk
to an Englishman, and soon grows equally acceptable to his American cousin.  By the time these
matters had been properly attended to, we had arrived at that part of the Thames which passes
by Nuneham Courtney, a fine estate belonging to the Harcourts, and the present residence of
the family.  Here we landed, and, climbing a steep slope from the river-side, paused a moment
or two to look at an architectural object, called the Carfax, the purport of which I do not
well understand.  Thence we proceeded onward, through the loveliest park and woodland scenery
I ever saw, and under as beautiful a declining sunshine as heaven ever shed over earth, to
the stately mansion-house.

As we here cross a private threshold, it is not allowable to pursue my feeble narrative of
this delightful day with the same freedom as heretofore; so, perhaps, I may as well bring it
to a close.  I may mention, however, that I saw the library, a fine, large apartment, hung
round with portraits of eminent literary men, principally of the last century, most of whom
were familiar guests of the Harcourts.  The house itself is about eighty years old, and is
built in the classic style, as if the family had been anxious to diverge as far as possible
from the Gothic picturesqueness of their old abode at Stanton Harcourt.  The grounds were laid
out in part by Capability Brown, and seemed to me even more beautiful than those of Blenheim.
Mason the poet, a friend of the house, gave the design of a portion of the garden.  Of the
whole place I will not be niggardly of my rude Transatlantic praise, but be bold to say that
it appeared to me as perfect as anything earthly can he,--utterly and entirely finished, as
if the years and generations had done all that the hearts and minds of the successive owners
could contrive for a spot they dearly loved.  Such homes as Nuneham Courtney are among the
splendid results of long hereditary possession; and we Republicans, whose households melt away
like new-fallen snow in a spring morning, must content ourselves with our many counterbalancing
advantages, for this one, so apparently desirable to the far-projecting selfishness of our
nature, we are certain never to attain.

It must not be supposed, nevertheless, that Nuneham Courtney is one of the great show-places
of England.  It is merely a fair specimen of the better class of country-seats, and has a hundred
rivals, and many superiors, in the features of beauty, and expansive, manifold, redundant comfort,
which most impressed me.  A moderate man might be content with such a home,--that is all.

And now I take leave of Oxford without even an attempt to describe it,-- there being no literary
faculty, attainable or conceivable by me, which can avail to put it adequately, or even tolerably,
upon paper.  It must remain its own sole expression; and those whose sad fortune it may be
never to behold it have no better resource than to dream about gray, weather-stained, ivy-grown
edifices, wrought with quaint Gothic ornament, and standing around grassy quadrangles, where
cloistered walks have echoed to the quiet footsteps of twenty generations,--lawns and gardens
of luxurious repose, shadowed with canopies of foliage, and lit up with sunny glimpses through
archways of great boughs,--spires, towers, and turrets, each with its history and legend,--dimly
magnificent chapels, with painted windows of rare beauty and brilliantly diversified hues,
creating an atmosphere of richest gloom,--vast college-halls, high-windowed, oaken-panelled,
and hung round with portraits of the men, in every age, whom the University has nurtured to
be illustrious,--long vistas of alcoved libraries, where the wisdom and learned folly of all
time is shelved,--kitchens (we throw in this feature by way of ballast, and because it would
not be English Oxford without its beef and beer), with huge fireplaces, capable of roasting
a hundred joints at once,--and cavernous cellars, where rows of piled-up hogsheads seethe and
fume with that mighty malt-liquor which is the true milk of Alma Mater; make all these things
vivid in your dream, and you will never know nor believe how inadequate is the result to represent
even the merest outside of Oxford.

We feel a genuine reluctance to conclude this article without making our grateful acknowledgments,
by name, to a gentleman whose overflowing kindness was the main condition of all our sight-seeings
and enjoyments. Delightful as will always be our recollection of Oxford and its neighborhood,
we partly suspect that it owes much of its happy coloring to the genial medium through which
the objects were presented to us,--to the kindly magic of a hospitality unsurpassed, within
our experience, in the quality of making the guest contented with his host, with himself, and
everything about him.  He has inseparably mingled his image with our remembrance of the Spires
of Oxford.

SOME OF THE HAUNTS OF BURNS.

We left Carlisle at a little past eleven, and within the half-hour were at Gretna Green.  Thence
we rushed onward into Scotland through a flat and dreary tract of country, consisting mainly
of desert and bog, where probably the moss-troopers were accustomed to take refuge after their
raids into England.  Anon, however, the hills hove themselves up to view, occasionally attaining
a height which might almost be called mountainous. In about two hours we reached Dumfries,
and alighted at the station there.

Chill as the Scottish summer is reputed to be, we found it an awfully hot day, not a whit less
so than the day before; but we sturdily adventured through the burning sunshine up into the
town, inquiring our way to the residence of Burns.  The street leading from the station is
called Shakespeare Street; and at its farther extremity we read "Burns Street" on a corner-house,
the avenue thus designated having been formerly known as "Mill-Hole Brae."  It is a vile lane,
paved with small, hard stones from side to side, and bordered by cottages or mean houses of
whitewashed stone, joining one to another along the whole length of the street.  With not a
tree, of course, or a blade of grass between the paving-stones, the narrow lane was as hot
as Topbet, and reeked with a genuine Scotch odor, being infested with unwashed children, and
altogether in a state of chronic filth; although some women seemed to be hopelessly scrubbing
the thresholds of their wretched dwellings.  I never saw an outskirt of a town less fit for
a poet's residence, or in which it would be more miserable for any man of cleanly predilections
to spend his days.

We asked for Burns's dwelling; and a woman pointed across the street to a two-story house,
built of stone, and whitewashed, like its neighbors, but perhaps of a little more respectable
aspect than most of them, though I hesitate in saying so.  It was not a separate structure,
but under the same continuous roof with the next.  There was an inscription on the door, hearing
no reference to Burns, but indicating that the house was now occupied by a ragged or industrial
school.  On knocking, we were instantly admitted by a servant-girl, who smiled intelligently
when we told our errand, and showed us into a low and very plain parlor, not more than twelve
or fifteen feet square.  A young woman, who seemed to be a teacher in the school, soon appeared,
and told us that this had been Burns's usual sitting-room, and that he had written many of
his songs here.

She then led us up a narrow staircase into a little bedchamber over the parlor.  Connecting
with it, there is a very small room, or windowed closet, which Burns used as a study; and the
bedchamber itself was the one where he slept in his later lifetime, and in which he died at
last. Altogether, it is an exceedingly unsuitable place for a pastoral and rural poet to live
or die in,--even more unsatisfactory than Shakespeare's house, which has a certain homely picturesqueness
that contrasts favorably with the suburban sordidness of the abode before us. The narrow lane,
the paving-stones, and the contiguity of wretched hovels are depressing to remember; and the
steam of them (such is our human weakness) might almost make the poet's memory less fragrant.

As already observed, it was an intolerably hot day.  After leaving the house, we found our
way into the principal street of the town, which, it may be fair to say, is of very different
aspect from the wretched outskirt above described.  Entering a hotel (in which, as a Dumfries
guide-book assured us, Prince Charles Edward had once spent a night), we rested and refreshed
ourselves, and then set forth in quest of the mausoleum of Burns.

Coming to St. Michael's Church, we saw a man digging a grave, and, scrambling out of the hole,
he let us into the churchyard, which was crowded full of monuments.  Their general shape and
construction are peculiar to Scotland, being a perpendicular tablet of marble or other stone,
within a framework of the same material, somewhat resembling the frame of a looking-glass;
and, all over the churchyard, those sepulchral memorials rise to the height of ten, fifteen,
or twenty feet, forming quite an imposing collection of monuments, but inscribed with names
of small general significance.  It was easy, indeed, to ascertain the rank of those who slept
below; for in Scotland it is the custom to put the occupation of the buried personage (as "Skinner,"
"Shoemaker," "Flesher") on his tombstone.  As another peculiarity, wives are buried under their
maiden names, instead of those of their husbands; thus giving a disagreeable impression that
the married pair have bidden each other an eternal farewell on the edge of the grave.

There was a foot-path through this crowded churchyard, sufficiently well worn to guide us to
the grave of Burns; but a woman followed behind us, who, it appeared, kept the key of the mausoleum,
and was privileged to show it to strangers.  The monument is a sort of Grecian temple, with
pilasters and a dome, covering a space of about twenty feet square.  It was formerly open to
all the inclemencies of the Scotch atmosphere, but is now protected and shut in by large squares
of rough glass, each pane being of the size of one whole side of the structure.  The woman
unlocked the door, and admitted us into the interior.  Inlaid into the floor of the mausoleum
is the gravestone of Burns,--the very same that was laid over his grave by Jean Armour, before
this monument was built.  Displayed against the surrounding wall is a marble statue of Burns
at the plough, with the Genius of Caledonia summoning the ploughman to turn poet. Methought
it was not a very successful piece of work; for the plough was better sculptured than the man,
and the man, though heavy and cloddish, was more effective than the goddess.  Our guide informed
us that an old man of ninety, who knew Burns, certifies this statue to be very like the original.

The bones of the poet, and of Jean Armour, and of some of their children, lie in the vault
over which we stood.  Our guide (who was intelligent, in her own plain way, and very agreeable
to talk withal) said that the vault was opened about three weeks ago, on occasion of the burial
of the eldest son of Burns.  The poet's bones were disturbed, and the dry skull, once so brimming
over with powerful thought and bright and tender fantasies, was taken away, and kept for several
days by a Dumfries doctor.  It has since been deposited in a new leaden coffin, and restored
to the vault. We learned that there is a surviving daughter of Burns's eldest son, and daughters
likewise of the two younger sons,--and, besides these, an illegitimate posterity by the eldest
son, who appears to have been of disreputable life in his younger days.  He inherited his father's
failings, with some faint shadow, I have also understood, of the great qualities which have
made the world tender of his father's vices and weaknesses.

We listened readily enough to this paltry gossip, but found that it robbed the poet's memory
of some of the reverence that was its due. Indeed, this talk over his grave had very much the
same tendency and effect as the home-scene of his life, which we had been visiting just previously.
Beholding his poor, mean dwelling and its surroundings, and picturing his outward life and
earthly manifestations from these, one does not so much wonder that the people of that day
should have failed to recognize all that was admirable and immortal in a disreputable, drunken,
shabbily clothed, and shabbily housed man, consorting with associates of damaged character,
and, as his only ostensible occupation, gauging the whiskey, which he too often tasted.  Siding
with Burns, as we needs must, in his plea against the world, let us try to do the world a little
justice too.  It is far easier to know and honor a poet when his fame has taken shape in the
spotlessness of marble than when the actual man comes staggering before you, besmeared with
the sordid stains of his daily life.  For my part, I chiefly wonder that his recognition dawned
so brightly while he was still living.  There must have been something very grand in his immediate
presence, some strangely impressive characteristic in his natural behavior, to have caused
him to seem like a demigod so soon.

As we went back through the churchyard, we saw a spot where nearly four hundred inhabitants
of Dumfries were buried during the cholera year; and also some curious old monuments, with
raised letters, the inscriptions on which were not sufficiently legible to induce us to puzzle
them out; but, I believe, they mark the resting-places of old Covenanters, some of whom were
killed by Claverhouse and his fellow-ruffians.

St. Michael's Church is of red freestone, and was built about a hundred years ago, on an old
Catholic foundation.  Our guide admitted us into it, and showed us, in the porch, a very pretty
little marble figure of a child asleep, with a drapery over the lower part, from beneath which
appeared its two baby feet.  It was truly a sweet little statue; and the woman told us that
it represented a child of the sculptor, and that the baby (here still in its marble infancy)
had died more than twenty-six years ago.  "Many ladies," she said, "especially such as had
ever lost a child, had shed tears over it."  It was very pleasant to think of the sculptor
bestowing the best of his genius and art to re-create his tender child in stone, and to make
the representation as soft and sweet as the original; but the conclusion of the story has something
that jars with our awakened sensibilities.  A gentleman from London had seen the statue, and
was so much delighted with it that he bought it of the father-artist, after it had lain above
a quarter of a century in the church-porch.  So this was not the real, tender image that came
out of the father's heart; he had sold that truest one for a hundred guineas, and sculptured
this mere copy to replace it.  The first figure was entirely naked in its earthly and spiritual
innocence.  The copy, as I have said above, has a drapery over the lower limbs.  But, after
all, if we come to the truth of the matter, the sleeping baby may be as fully reposited in
the drawing-room of a connoisseur as in a cold and dreary church-porch.

We went into the church, and found it very plain and naked, without altar-decorations, and
having its floor quite covered with unsightly wooden pews.  The woman led us to a pew cornering
on one of the side-aisles, and, telling us that it used to be Burns's family-pew, showed us
his seat, which is in the corner by the aisle.  It is so situated, that a sturdy pillar hid
him from the pulpit, and from the minister's eye; "for Robin was no great friends with the
ministers," said she.  This touch--his seat behind the pillar, and Burns himself nodding in
sermon-time, or keenly observant of profane things--brought him before us to the life.  In
the corner-seat of the next pew, right before Burns, and not more than two feet off, sat the
young lady on whom the poet saw that unmentionable parasite which he has immortalized in song.
We were ungenerous enough to ask the lady's name, but the good woman could not tell it.  This
was the last thing which we saw in Dumfries worthy of record; and it ought to be noted that
our guide refused some money which my companion offered her, because I had already paid her
what she deemed sufficient.

At the railway-station we spent more than a weary hour, waiting for the train, which at last
came up, and took us to Mauchline.  We got into an omnibus, the only conveyance to be had,
and drove about a mile to the village, where we established ourselves at the Loudoun Hotel,
one of the veriest country inns which we have found in Great Britain.  The town of Mauchline,
a place more redolent of Burns than almost any other, consists of a street or two of contiguous
cottages, mostly whitewashed, and with thatched roofs.  It has nothing sylvan or rural in the
immediate village, and is as ugly a place as mortal man could contrive to make, or to render
uglier through a succession of untidy generations.  The fashion of paving the village street,
and patching one shabby house on the gable-end of another, quite shuts out all verdure and
pleasantness; but, I presume, we are not likely to see a more genuine old Scotch village, such
as they used to be in Burns's time, and long before, than this of Mauchline.  The church stands
about midway up the street, and is built of red freestone, very simple in its architecture,
with a square tower and pinnacles.  In this sacred edifice, and its churchyard, was the scene
of one of Burns's most characteristic productions, "The Holy Fair."

Almost directly opposite its gate, across the village street, stands Posie Nansie's inn, where
the "Jolly Beggars" congregated.  The latter is a two-story, red-stone, thatched house, looking
old, but by no means venerable, like a drunken patriarch.  It has small, old-fashioned windows,
and may well have stood for centuries,--though, seventy or eighty years ago, when Burns was
conversant with it, I should fancy it might have been something better than a beggars' alehouse.
The whole town of Mauchline looks rusty and time-worn,--even the newer houses, of which there
are several, being shadowed and darkened by the general aspect of the place.  When we arrived,
all the wretched little dwellings seemed to have belched forth their inhabitants into the warm
summer evening; everybody was chatting with everybody, on the most familiar terms; the bare-legged
children gambolled or quarrelled uproariously, and came freely, moreover, and looked into the
window of our parlor.  When we ventured out, we were followed by the gaze of the old town:
people standing in their doorways, old women popping their heads from the chamber-windows,
and stalwart men idle on Saturday at e'en, after their week's hard labor--clustering at the
street-corners, merely to stare at our unpretending selves.  Except in some remote little town
of Italy (where, besides, the inhabitants had the intelligible stimulus of beggary), I have
never been honored with nearly such an amount of public notice.

The next forenoon my companion put me to shame by attending church, after vainly exhorting
me to do the like; and, it being Sacrament Sunday, and my poor friend being wedged into the
farther end of a closely filled pew, he was forced to stay through the preaching of four several
sermons, and came back perfectly exhausted and desperate.  He was somewhat consoled, however,
on finding that he had witnessed a spectacle of Scotch manners identical with that of Burns's
"Holy Fair," on the very spot where the poet located that immortal description.  By way of
further conformance to the customs of the country, we ordered a sheep's head and the broth,
and did penance accordingly; and at five o'clock we took a fly, and set out for Burns's farm
of Moss Giel.

Moss Giel is not more than a mile from Mauchline, and the road extends over a high ridge of
land, with a view of far hills and green slopes on either side.  Just before we reached the
farm, the driver stopped to point out a hawthorn, growing by the wayside, which he said was
Burns's "Lousie Thorn"; and I devoutly plucked a branch, although I have really forgotten where
or how this illustrious shrub has been celebrated.  We then turned into a rude gateway, and
almost immediately came to the farm-house of Moss Giel, standing some fifty yards removed from
the high-road, behind a tall hedge of hawthorn, and considerably overshadowed by trees.  The
house is a whitewashed stone cottage, like thousands of others in England and Scotland, with
a thatched roof, on which grass and weeds have intruded a picturesque, though alien growth.
There is a door and one window in front, besides another little window that peeps out among
the thatch.  Close by the cottage, and extending back at right angles from it, so as to enclose
the farm-yard, are two other buildings of the same size, shape, and general appearance as the
house: any one of the three looks just as fit for a human habitation as the two others, and
all three look still more suitable for donkey-stables and pigsties.  As we drove into the farm-yard,
bounded on three sides by these three hovels, a large dog began to bark at us; and some women
and children made their appearance, but seemed to demur about admitting us, because the master
and mistress were very religious people, and had not yet come back from the Sacrament at Mauchline.

However, it would not do to be turned back from the very threshold of Robert Burns; and as
the women seemed to be merely straggling visitors, and nobody, at all events, had a right to
send us away, we went into the back door, and, turning to the right, entered a kitchen.  It
showed a deplorable lack of housewifely neatness, and in it there were three or four children,
one of whom, a girl eight or nine years old, held a baby in her arms.  She proved to be the
daughter of the people of the house, and gave us what leave she could to look about us.  Thence
we stepped across the narrow mid-passage of the cottage into the only other apartment below
stairs, a sitting-room, where we found a young man eating broad and cheese.  He informed us
that he did not live there, and had only called in to refresh himself on his way home from
church.  This room, like the kitchen, was a noticeably poor one, and, besides being all that
the cottage had to show for a parlor, it was a sleeping-apartment, having two beds, which might
be curtained off, on occasion.  The young man allowed us liberty (so far as in him lay) to
go up stairs.  Up we crept, accordingly; and a few steps brought us to the top of the staircase,
over the kitchen, where we found the wretchedest little sleeping-chamber in the world, with
a sloping roof under the thatch, and two beds spread upon the bare floor.  This, most probably,
was Burns's chamber; or, perhaps, it may have been that of his mother's servant-maid; and,
in either case, this rude floor, at one time or another, must have creaked beneath the poet's
midnight tread.  On the opposite side of the passage was the door of another attic-chamber,
opening which, I saw a considerable number of cheeses on the floor.

The whole house was pervaded with a frowzy smell, and also a dunghill odor; and it is not easy
to understand how the atmosphere of such a dwelling can be any more agreeable or salubrious
morally than it appeared to be physically.  No virgin, surely, could keep a holy awe about
her while stowed higgledy-piggledy with coarse-natured rustics into this narrowness and filth.
Such a habitation is calculated to make beasts of men and women; and it indicates a degree
of barbarism which I did not imagine to exist in Scotland, that a tiller of broad fields, like
the farmer of Mauchline, should have his abode in a pigsty.  It is sad to think of anybody--not
to say a poet, but any human being--sleeping, eating, thinking, praying, and spending all his
home-life in this miserable hovel; but, methinks, I never in the least knew how to estimate
the miracle of Burns's genius, nor his heroic merit for being no worse man, until I thus learned
the squalid hindrances amid which he developed himself.  Space, a free atmosphere, and cleanliness
have a vast deal to do with the possibilities of human virtue.

The biographers talk of the farm of Moss Giel as being damp and unwholesome; but, I do not
see why, outside of the cottage-walls, it should possess so evil a reputation.  It occupies
a high, broad ridge, enjoying, surely, whatever benefit can come of a breezy site, and sloping
far downward before any marshy soil is reached.  The high hedge, and the trees that stand beside
the cottage, give it a pleasant aspect enough to one who does not know the grimy secrets of
the interior; and the summer afternoon was now so bright that I shall remember the scene with
a great deal of sunshine over it.

Leaving the cottage, we drove through a field, which the driver told us was that in which Burns
turned up the mouse's nest.  It is the enclosure nearest to the cottage, and seems now to be
a pasture, and a rather remarkably unfertile one.  A little farther on, the ground was whitened
with an immense number of daisies,--daisies, daisies everywhere; and in answer to my inquiry,
the driver said that this was the field where Burns ran his ploughshare over the daisy.  If
so, the soil seems to have been consecrated to daisies by the song which he bestowed on that
first immortal one.  I alighted, and plucked a whole handful of these "wee, modest, crimson-tipped
flowers," which will be precious to many friends in our own country as coming from Burns's
farm, and being of the same race and lineage as that daisy which he turned into an amaranthine
flower while seeming to destroy it.

From Moss Giel we drove through a variety of pleasant scenes, some of which were familiar to
us by their connection with Burns. But, at the same time, the one sole end of existence is to be happy.
If a man cannot find happiness in life, if there is a great coalition against him, he is justified
in taking up arms against them; but, at the same time, it proves a greater amount of courage
"to bear up against the ills of life" than to madly leave it, and thus weaken the force of those
who wish to stem its injustice.

Charles Blount died, and with him expired much of the chivalry of Freethought. His friend, Charles
Gil-don, writing of him to a lady, says, "You know Astrea (Eliza,) and have an exact friendship
with her. You can attest her beauty, wit, honor, virtue, good humor,
and discretion.

You have been acquainted with the charms of her conversation and conduct, and condemn her,
only adhering to a national custom to the loss of so generous a friend, and so faithful a
lover. But custom and obedience meeting the more easily, betrayed her virtue into a crime.
I know my friend loved her to his last breath; and I know, therefore, that all who love his memory must,
for her sake, love and value her, as being a lady of that merit, that engaged the reason of
Philander (C. Blount) to so violent a passion for her."

The same writer says, "His father was Sir Henry Blount, the Socrates of the age, for his aversions
to the reigning sophisms and hypocrisies, eminent in all capacities: the best husband, father,
and master, extremely agreeably in conversation, and just in all his dealings. From such a
father our hero derived him self; to such a master owed his generous education, unmixed with the
nauseous methods and profane opinions of the schools. Nature gave him parts capable of the noblest
sciences, and his industrious studies bore a proportion to his capacities. He was a generous and
constant friend, an indulgent parent, and a kind master. His temper was open and free; his
conversation pleasant; his reflections just and modest; his repartees close--not scurrilous;
he had a great deal of wit, and no malice. His mind was large and noble--above the little designs
of most men; an enemy to dissimulation, and never feared to own his thoughts. He was a true Englishman,
and lover of the liberties of his country, and declared it in the worst of times. He was an enemy
to nothing but error, and none were his enemies that knew him, but those who sacrificed more
to mammon than reason."

This was the man who died, because a dominant priesthood insisted on a dogma which interfered with
a purely Secular rite, which blasted two hearts in a vain attempt
to perpetuate a system, which dashes its rude fingers, and tears out
the heart of human felicity to sprinkle the altar of superstition
with the gore of offended innocence.

Charles Blount was a Deist; as such, he believed in a God; which he described in his account
of a Deist's religion. Let us examine his thoughts, and see if they bear the interpretation which
Christianity has always placed upon them. Blount gives the Deist's opinion of God. He says, "Whatever
is adorable, amiable, and imitable by mankind, is in one Supreme,
perfect Being." An Atheist cannot object to this. He speaks in the
manner in which God is to be worshipped. He says, not by sacrifice,
or by a Mediator, but by a steady adherence to all that is great and
good and imitable in nature.  We found, after breakfast, that the first train
northward had already gone by, and that we must wait till nearly two o'clock for the next.
I merely ventured out once, during the forenoon, and took a brief walk through the village,
in which I have left little to describe.  Its chief business appears to be the manufacture
of snuff-boxes.  There are perhaps five or six shops, or more, including those licensed to
sell only tea and tobacco; the best of them have the characteristics of village stores in the
United States, dealing in a small way with an extensive variety of articles.  I peeped into
the open gateway of the churchyard, and saw that the ground was absolutely stuffed with dead
people, and the surface crowded with gravestones, both perpendicular and horizontal.  All Burns's
old Mauchline acquaintance are doubtless there, and the Armours among them, except Bonny Jean,
who sleeps by her poet's side.  The family of Armour is now extinct in Mauchline.

Arriving at the railway-station, we found a tall, elderly, comely gentleman walking to and
fro and waiting for the train.  He proved to be a Mr. Alexander,--it may fairly be presumed
the Alexander of Ballochmyle, a blood relation of the lovely lass.  Wonderful efficacy of a
poet's verse, that could shed a glory from Long Ago on this old gentleman's white hair!  These
Alexanders, by the by, are not an old family on the Ballochmyle estate; the father of the lass
having made a fortune in trade, and established himself as the first landed proprietor of his
name in these parts.  The original family was named Whitefoord.

Our ride to Ayr presented nothing very remarkable; and, indeed, a cloudy and rainy day takes
the varnish off the scenery and causes a woful diminution in the beauty and impressiveness
of everything we see.  Much of our way lay along a flat, sandy level, in a southerly direction.
We reached Ayr in the midst of hopeless rain, and drove to the King's Arms Hotel.  In the intervals
of showers I took peeps at the town, which appeared to have many modern or modern-fronted edifices;
although there are likewise tall, gray, gabled, and quaint-looking houses in the by-streets,
here and there, betokening an ancient place.  The town lies on both sides of the Ayr, which
is here broad and stately, and bordered with dwellings that look from their windows directly
down into the passing tide.

I crossed the river by a modern and handsome stone bridge, and recrossed it, at no great distance,
by a venerable structure of four gray arches, which must have bestridden the stream ever since
the early days of Scottish history.  These are the "Two Briggs of Ayr," whose midnight conversation
was overheard by Burns, while other auditors were aware only of the rush and rumble of the
wintry stream among the arches.  The ancient bridge is steep and narrow, and paved like a street,
and defended by a parapet of red freestone, except at the two ends, where some mean old shops
allow scanty room for the pathway to creep between.  Nothing else impressed me hereabouts,
unless I mention, that, during the rain, the women and girls went about the streets of Ayr
barefooted to save their shoes.

The next morning wore a lowering aspect, as if it felt itself destined to be one of many consecutive
days of storm.  After a good Scotch breakfast, however, of fresh herrings and eggs, we took
a fly, and started at a little past ten for the banks of the Doon.  On our way, at about two
miles from Ayr, we drew up at a roadside cottage, on which was an inscription to the effect
that Robert Burns was born within its walls. It is now a public-house; and, of course, we alighted
and entered its little sitting-room, which, as we at present see it, is a neat apartment, with
the modern improvement of a ceiling.  The walls are much overscribbled with names of visitors,
and the wooden door of a cupboard in the wainscot, as well as all the other wood-work of the
room, is cut and carved with initial letters.  So, likewise, are two tables, which, having
received a coat of varnish over the inscriptions, form really curious and interesting articles
of furniture.  I have seldom (though I do not, personally adopt this mode of illustrating my
bumble name) felt inclined to ridicule the natural impulse of most people thus to record themselves
at the shrines of poets and heroes.

On a panel, let into the wall in a corner of the room, is a portrait of Burns, copied from
the original picture by Nasmyth.  The floor of this apartment is of boards, which are probably
a recent substitute for the ordinary flag-stones of a peasant's cottage.  There is but one
other room pertaining to the genuine birthplace of Robert Burns: it is the kitchen, into which
we now went.  It has a floor of flag-stones, even ruder than those of Shakespeare's house,--though,
perhaps, not so strangely cracked and broken as the latter, over which the hoof of Satan himself
might seem to have been trampling.  A new window has been opened through the wall, towards
the road; but on the opposite side is the little original window, of only four small panes,
through which came the first daylight that shone upon the Scottish poet.  At the side of the
room, opposite the fireplace, is a recess, containing a bed, which can be hidden by curtains.
In that humble nook, of all places in the world, Providence was pleased to deposit the germ
of the richest, human life which mankind then had within its circumference.

These two rooms, as I have said, make up the whole sum and substance of Burns's birthplace:
for there were no chambers, nor even attics; and the thatched roof formed the only ceiling
of kitchen and sitting-room, the height of which was that of the whole house.  The cottage,
however, is attached to another edifice of the same size and description, as these little habitations
often are; and, moreover, a splendid addition has been made to it, since the poet's renown
began to draw visitors to the wayside alehouse.  The old woman of the house led us through
an entry, and showed a vaulted hall, of no vast dimensions, to be sure, but marvellously large
and splendid as compared with what might be anticipated from the outward aspect of the cottage.
It contained a bust of Burns, and was hung round with pictures and engravings, principally
illustrative of his life and poems.  In this part of the house, too, there is a parlor, fragrant
with tobacco-smoke; and, no doubt, many a noggin of whiskey is here quaffed to the memory of
the bard, who professed to draw so much inspiration from that potent liquor.

We bought some engravings of Kirk Alloway, the Bridge of Doon, and the monument, and gave the
old woman a fee besides, and took our leave.  A very short drive farther brought us within
sight of the monument, and to the hotel, situated close by the entrance of the ornamental grounds
within which the former is enclosed.  We rang the bell at the gate of the enclosure, but were
forced to wait a considerable time; because the old man, the regular superintendent of the
spot, had gone to assist at the laying of the corner-stone of a new kirk.  He appeared anon,
and admitted us, but immediately hurried away to be present at the concluding ceremonies, leaving
us locked up with Burns.

The enclosure around the monument is beautifully laid out as an ornamental garden, and abundantly
provided with rare flowers and shrubbery, all tended with loving care.  The monument stands
on an elevated site, and consists of a massive basement-story, three-sided, above which rises
a light and elegant Grecian temple,--a mere dome, supported on Corinthian pillars, and open
to all the winds.  The edifice is beautiful in itself; though I know not what peculiar appropriateness
it may have, as the memorial of a Scottish rural poet.

The door of the basement-story stood open; and, entering, we saw a bust of Burns in a niche,
looking keener, more refined, but not so warm and whole-souled as his pictures usually do.
I think the likeness cannot be good.  In the centre of the room stood a glass case, in which
were reposited the two volumes of the little Pocket Bible that Burns gave to Highland Mary,
when they pledged their troth to one another.  It is poorly printed, on coarse paper.  A verse
of Scripture, referring to the solemnity and awfulness of vows, is written within the cover
of each volume, in the poet's own hand; and fastened to one of the covers is a lock of Highland
Mary's golden hair.  This Bible had been carried to America--by one of her relatives, but was
sent back to be fitly treasured here.

There is a staircase within the monument, by which we ascended to the top, and had a view of
both Briggs of Doon; the scene of Tam O'Shanter's misadventure being close at hand.  Descending,
we wandered through the enclosed garden, and came to a little building in a corner, on entering
which, we found the two statues of Tam and Sutor Wat,--ponderous stone-work enough, yet permeated
in a remarkable degree with living warmth and jovial hilarity.  From this part of the garden,
too, we again beheld the old Brigg of Doon, over which Tam galloped in such imminent and awful
peril.  It is a beautiful object in the landscape, with one high, graceful arch, ivy-grown,
and shadowed all over and around with foliage.

When we had waited a good while, the old gardener came, telling us that he had heard an excellent
prayer at laying the corner-stone of the new kirk.  He now gave us some roses and sweetbrier,
and let us out from his pleasant garden.  We immediately hastened to Kirk Alloway, which is
within two or three minutes' walk of the monument.  A few steps ascend from the roadside, through
a gate, into the old graveyard, in the midst of which stands the kirk.  The edifice is wholly
roofless, but the side-walls and gable-ends are quite entire, though portions of them are evidently
modern restorations.  Never was there a plainer little church, or one with smaller architectural
pretension; no New England meeting-house has more simplicity in its very self, though poetry
and fun have clambered and clustered so wildly over Kirk Alloway that it is difficult to see
it as it actually exists.  By the by, I do not understand why Satan and an assembly of witches
should hold their revels within a consecrated precinct; but the weird scene has so established
itself in the world's imaginative faith that it must be accepted as an authentic incident,
in spite of rule and reason to the contrary. Possibly, some carnal minister, some priest of
pious aspect and hidden infidelity, had dispelled the consecration of the holy edifice by his
pretence of prayer, and thus made it the resort of unhappy ghosts and sorcerers and devils.

The interior of the kirk, even now, is applied to quite as impertinent a purpose as when Satan
and the witches used it as a dancing-hall; for it is divided in the midst by a wall of stone-masonry,
and each compartment has been converted into a family burial-place.  The name on one of the
monuments is Crawfurd; the other bore no inscription.  It is impossible not to feel that these
good people, whoever they may be, had no business to thrust their prosaic bones into a spot
that belongs to the world, and where their presence jars with the emotions, be they sad or
gay, which the pilgrim brings thither.  They slant us out from our own precincts, too,--from
that inalienable possession which Burns bestowed in free gift upon mankind, by taking it from
the actual earth and annexing it to the domain of imagination.  And here these wretched squatters
have lain down to their long sleep, after barring each of the two doorways of the kirk with
an iron grate!  May their rest be troubled, till they rise and let us in!

Kirk Alloway is inconceivably small, considering how large a space it fills in our imagination
before we see it.  I paced its length, outside of the wall, and found it only seventeen of
my paces, and not more than ten of them in breadth.  There seem to have been but very few windows,
all of which, if I rightly remember, are now blocked up with mason-work of stone.  One mullioned
window, tall and narrow, in the eastern gable, might have been seen by Tam O'Shanter, blazing
with devilish light, as he approached along the road from Ayr; and there is a small and square
one, on the side nearest the road, into which he might have peered, as he sat on horseback.
Indeed, I could easily have looked through it, standing on the ground, had not the opening
been walled up.  There is an odd kind of belfry at the peak of one of the gables, with the
small bell still hanging in it.  And this is all that I remember of Kirk Alloway, except that
the stones of its material are gray and irregular.

The road from Ayr passes Alloway Kirk, and crosses the Doon by a modern bridge, without swerving
much from a straight line.  To reach the old bridge, it appears to have made a bend, shortly
after passing the kirk, and then to have turned sharply towards the river.  The new bridge
is within a minute's walk of the monument; and we went thither, and leaned over its parapet
to admire the beautiful Doon, flowing wildly and sweetly between its deep and wooded banks.
I never saw a lovelier scene; although this might have been even lovelier, if a kindly sun
had shone upon it.  The ivy-grown, ancient bridge, with its high arch, through which we had
a picture of the river and the green banks beyond, was absolutely the most picturesque object,
in a quiet and gentle way, that ever blessed my eyes.  Bonny Doon, with its wooded banks, and
the boughs dipping into the water!

The memory of them, at this moment, affects me like the song of birds, and Burns crooning some
verses, simple and wild, in accordance with their native melody.

It was impossible to depart without crossing the very bridge of Tam's adventure; so we went
thither, over a now disused portion of the road, and, standing on the centre of the arch, gathered
some ivy-leaves from that sacred spot.  This done, we returned as speedily as might be to Ayr,
whence, taking the rail, we soon beheld Ailsa Craig rising like a pyramid out of the sea. 
Drawing nearer to Glasgow, Bell Lomond hove in sight, with a dome-like summit, supported by
a shoulder on each side.  But a man is better than a mountain; and we had been holding intercourse,
if not with the reality, at least with the stalwart ghost of one of Earth's memorable sons,
amid the scenes where he lived and sung.  We shall appreciate him better as a poet, hereafter;
for there is no writer whose life, as a man, has so much to do with his fame, and throws such
a necessary light, upon whatever he has produced.  Henceforth, there will be a personal warmth
for us in everything that he wrote; and, like his countrymen, we shall know him in a kind of
personal way, as if we had shaken hands with him, and felt the thrill of his actual voice.

A LONDON SUBURB.

One of our English summers looks, in the retrospect, as if it had been patched with more frequent
sunshine than the sky of England ordinarily affords; but I believe that it may be only a moral
effect,--a "light that never was on sea nor land," caused by our having found a particularly
delightful abode in the neighborhood of London.  In order to enjoy it, however, I was compelled
to solve the problem of living in two places at once,--an impossibility which I so far accomplished
as to vanish, at frequent intervals, out of men's sight and knowledge on one side of England,
and take my place in a circle of familiar faces on the other, so quietly that I seemed to have
been there all along.  It was the easier to get accustomed to our new residence, because it
was not only rich in all the material properties of a home, but had also the home-like atmosphere,
the household element, which is of too intangible a character to be let even with the most
thoroughly furnished lodging-house.  A friend had given us his suburban residence, with all
its conveniences, elegances, and snuggeries,--its drawing-rooms and library, still warm and
bright with the recollection of the genial presences that we had known there,-- its closets,
chambers, kitchen, and even its wine-cellar, if we could have availed ourselves of so dear
and delicate a trust,--its lawn and cosey garden-nooks, and whatever else makes up the multitudinous
idea of an English home,--he had transferred it all to us, pilgrims and dusty wayfarers, that
we might rest and take our ease during his summer's absence on the Continent.  We had long
been dwelling in tents, as it were, and morally shivering by hearths which, heap the bituminous
coal upon them as we might, no blaze could render cheerful.  I remember, to this day, the dreary
feeling with which I sat by our first English fireside, and watched the chill and rainy twilight
of an autumn day darkening down upon the garden; while the portrait of the preceding occupant
of the house (evidently a most unamiable personage in his lifetime) scowled inhospitably from
above the mantel-piece, as if indignant that an American should try to make himself at home
there. Possibly it may appease his sulky shade to know that I quitted his abode as much a stranger
as I entered it.  But mow, at last, we were in a genuine British home, where refined and warm-hearted
people had just been living their daily life, and had left us a summer's inheritance of slowly
ripened days, such as a stranger's hasty opportunities so seldom permit him to enjoy.

Within so trifling a distance of the central spot of all the world (which, as Americans have
at present no centre of their own, we may allow to be somewhere in the vicinity, we will say,
of St. Paul's Cathedral), it might have seemed natural that I should be tossed about by the
turbulence of the vast London whirlpool.  But I had drifted into a still eddy, where conflicting
movements made a repose, and, wearied with a good deal of uncongenial activity, I found the
quiet of my temporary haven more attractive than anything that the great town could offer.
I already knew London well; that is to say, I had long ago satisfied (so far as it was capable
of satisfaction) that mysterious yearning--the magnetism of millions of hearts operating upon
one--which impels every man's individuality to mingle itself with the immensest mass of human
life within his scope.  Day alter day, at an earlier period, I had trodden the thronged thoroughfares,
the broad, lonely squares, the lanes, alleys, and strange labyrinthine courts, the parks, the
gardens and enclosures of ancient studious societies, so retired and silent amid the city uproar,
the markets, the foggy streets along the river-side, the bridges,--I had sought all parts of
the metropolis, in short, with an unweariable and indiscriminating curiosity; until few of
the native inhabitants, I fancy, had turned so many of its corners as myself.  These aimless
wanderings (in which my prime purpose and achievement were to lose my way, and so to find it
the more surely) had brought one, at one time or another, to the sight and actual presence
of almost all the objects and renowned localities that I had read about, and which had made
London the dream-city of my youth.  I had found it better than my dream; for there is nothing
else in life comparable (in that species of enjoyment, I mean) to the thick, heavy, oppressive,
sombre delight which an American is sensible of, hardly knowing whether to call it a pleasure
or a pain, in the atmosphere of London.  The result was, that I acquired a home-feeling there,
as nowhere else in the world,--though afterwards I came to have a somewhat similar sentiment
in regard to Rome; and as long as either of those two great cities shall exist, the cities
of the Past and of the Present, a man's native soil may crumble beneath his feet without leaving
him altogether homeless upon earth.

Thus, having once fully yielded to its influence, I was in a manner free of the city, and could
approach or keep away from it as I pleased. Hence it happened, that, living within a quarter
of an hour's rush of the London Bridge Terminus, I was oftener tempted to spend a whole summer-day
in our garden than to seek anything new or old, wonderful or commonplace, beyond its precincts.
It was a delightful garden, of no great extent, but comprising a good many facilities for repose
and enjoyment, such as arbors and garden-seats, shrubbery, flower-beds, rose-bushes in a profusion
of bloom, pinks, poppies, geraniums, sweet-peas, and a variety of other scarlet, yellow, blue,
and purple blossoms, which I did not trouble myself to recognize individually, yet had always
a vague sense of their beauty about me.  The dim sky of England has a most happy effect on
the coloring of flowers, blending richness with delicacy in the same texture; but in this garden,
as everywhere else, the exuberance of English verdure had a greater charm than any tropical
splendor or diversity of hue.  The hunger for natural beauty might be satisfied with grass
and green leaves forever.  Conscious of the triumph of England in this respect, and loyally
anxious for the credit of my own country, it gratified me to observe what trouble and pains
the English gardeners are fain to throw away in producing a few sour plums and abortive pears
and apples,--as, for example, in this very garden, where a row of unhappy trees were spread
out perfectly flat against a brick wall, looking as if impaled alive, or crucified, with a
cruel and unattainable purpose of compelling them to produce rich fruit by torture.  For my
part, I never ate an English fruit, raised in the open air, that could compare in flavor with
a Yankee turnip.

The garden included that prime feature of English domestic scenery, a lawn.  It had been levelled,
carefully shorn, and converted into a bowling-green, on which we sometimes essayed to practise
the time-honored game of bowls, most unskilfully, yet not without a perception that it involves
a very pleasant mixture of exercise and ease, as is the case with most of the old English pastimes.
Our little domain was shut in by the house on one side, and in other directions by a hedge-fence
and a brick wall, which last was concealed or softened by shrubbery and the impaled fruit-trees
already mentioned.  Over all the outer region, beyond our immediate precincts, there was an
abundance of foliage, tossed aloft from the near or distant trees with which that agreeable
suburb is adorned.  The effect was wonderfully sylvan and rural, insomuch that we might have
fancied ourselves in the depths of a wooded seclusion; only that, at brief intervals, we could
hear the galloping sweep of a railway-train passing within a quarter of a mile, and its discordant
screech, moderated by a little farther distance, as it reached the Blackheath Station.  That
harsh, rough sound, seeking me out so inevitably, was the voice of the great world summoning
me forth.  I know not whether I was the more pained or pleased to be thus constantly put in
mind of the neighborhood of London; for, on the one hand, my conscience stung me a little for
reading a book, or playing with children in the grass, when there were so many better things
for an enlightened traveller to do,--while, at the same time, it gave a deeper delight to my
luxurious idleness, to contrast it with the turmoil which I escaped.  On the whole, however,
I do not repent of a single wasted hour, and only wish that I could have spent twice as many
in the same way; for the impression on my memory is, that I was as happy in that hospitable
garden as the English summer-day was long.

One chief condition of my enjoyment was the weather.  Italy has nothing like it, nor America.
There never was such weather except in England, where, in requital of a vast amount of horrible
east-wind between February and June, and a brown October and black November, and a wet, chill,
sunless winter, there are a few weeks of incomparable summer, scattered through July and August,
and the earlier portion of September, small in quantity, but exquisite enough to atone for
the whole year's atmospherical delinquencies.  After all, the prevalent sombreness may have
brought out those sunny intervals in such high relief, that I see them, in my recollection,
brighter than they really were: a little light makes a glory for people who live habitually
in a gray gloom.  The English, however, do not seem to know how enjoyable the momentary gleams
of their summer are; they call it broiling weather, and hurry to the seaside with red, perspiring
faces, in a state of combustion and deliquescence; and I have observed that even their cattle
have similar susceptibilities, seeking the deepest shade, or standing midleg deep in pools
and streams to cool themselves, at temperatures which our own cows would deem little more than
barely comfortable.  To myself, after the summer heats of my native land had somewhat effervesced
out of my blood and memory, it was the weather of Paradise itself.  It might be a little too
warm; but it was that modest and inestimable superabundance which constitutes a bounty of Providence,
instead of just a niggardly enough. During my first year in England, residing in perhaps the
most ungenial part of the kingdom, I could never be quite comfortable without a fire on the
hearth; in the second twelvemonth, beginning to get acclimatized, I became sensible of an austere
friendliness, shy, but sometimes almost tender, in the veiled, shadowy, seldom smiling summer;
and in the succeeding years,--whether that I had renewed my fibre with English beef and replenished
my blood with English ale, or whatever were the cause,--I grew content with winter and especially
in love with summer, desiring little more for happiness than merely to breathe and bask.  At
the midsummer which we are now speaking of, I must needs confess that the noontide sun came
down more fervently than I found altogether tolerable; so that I was fain to shift my position
with the shadow of the shrubbery, making myself the movable index of a sundial that reckoned
up the hours of an almost interminable day.

For each day seemed endless, though never wearisome.  As far as your actual experience is concerned,
the English summer-day has positively no beginning and no end.  When you awake, at any reasonable
hour, the sun is already shining through the curtains; you live through unnumbered hours of
Sabbath quietude, with a calm variety of incident softly etched upon their tranquil lapse;
and at length you become conscious that it is bedtime again, while there is still enough daylight
in the sky to make the pages of your book distinctly legible.  Night, if there be any such
season, hangs down a transparent veil through which the bygone day beholds its successor; or,
if not quite true of the latitude of London, it may be soberly affirmed of the more northern
parts of the island, that To-morrow is born before its Yesterday is dead.  They exist together
in the golden twilight, where the decrepit old day dimly discerns the face of the ominous infant;
and you, though a more mortal, may simultaneously touch them both with one finger of recollection
and another of prophecy. I cared not how long the day might be, nor how many of them.  I had
earned this repose by a long course of irksome toil and perturbation, and could have been content
never to stray out of the limits of that suburban villa and its garden.  If I lacked anything
beyond, it would have satisfied me well enough to dream about it, instead of struggling for
its actual possession.  At least, this was the feeling of the moment; although the transitory,
flitting, and irresponsible character of my life there was perhaps the most enjoyable element
of all, as allowing me much of the comfort of house and home without any sense of their weight
upon my back.  The nomadic life has great advantages, if we can find tents ready pitched for
us at every stage.

So much for the interior of our abode,--a spot of deepest quiet, within reach of the intensest
activity.  But, even when we stopped beyond our own gate, we were not shocked with any immediate
presence of the great world.  We were dwelling in one of those oases that have grown up (in
comparatively recent years, I believe) on the wide waste of Blackheath, which otherwise offers
a vast extent of unoccupied ground in singular proximity to the metropolis.  As a general thing,
the proprietorship of the soil seems to exist in everybody and nobody; but exclusive rights
have been obtained, here and there, chiefly by men whose daily concerns link them with London,
so that you find their villas or boxes standing along village streets which have often more
of an American aspect than the elder English settlements.  The scene is semi-rural.  Ornamental
trees overshadow the sidewalks, and grassy margins border the wheel-tracks.  The houses, to
be sure, have certain points of difference from those of an American village, bearing tokens
of architectural design, though seldom of individual taste; and, as far as possible, they stand
aloof from the street, and separated each from its neighbor by hedge or fence, in accordance
with the careful exclusiveness of the English character, which impels the occupant, moreover,
to cover the front of his dwelling with as much concealment of shrubbery as his limits will
allow.  Through the interstices, you catch glimpses of well-kept lawns, generally ornamented
with flowers, and with what the English call rock-work, being heaps of ivy-grown stones and
fossils, designed for romantic effect in a small way.  Two or three of such village streets
as are here described take a collective name,--as, for instance, Blackheath Park,--and constitute
a kind of community of residents, with gateways, kept by a policeman, and a semi-privacy, stepping
beyond which, you find yourself on the breezy heath.

On this great, bare, dreary common I often went astray, as I afterwards did on the Campagna
of Rome, and drew the air (tainted with London smoke though it might be) into my lungs by deep
inspirations, with a strange and unexpected sense of desert freedom.  The misty atmosphere
helps you to fancy a remoteness that perhaps does not quite exist.  During the little time
that it lasts, the solitude is as impressive as that of a Western prairie or forest; but soon
the railway shriek, a mile or two away, insists upon informing you of your whereabout; or you
recognize in the distance some landmark that you may have known,--an insulated villa, perhaps,
with its garden-wall around it, or the rudimental street of a new settlement which is sprouting
on this otherwise barren soil.  Half a century ago, the most frequent token of man's beneficent
contiguity might have been a gibbet, and the creak, like a tavern sign, of a murderer swinging
to and fro in irons.  Blackheath, with its highwaymen and footpads, was dangerous in those
days; and even now, for aught I know, the Western prairie may still compare favorably with
it as a safe region to go astray in.  When I was acquainted with Blackheath, the ingenious
device of garroting had recently come into fashion; and I can remember, while crossing those
waste places at midnight, and hearing footsteps behind me, to have been sensibly encouraged
by also hearing, not far off, the clinking hoof-tramp of one of the horse-patrols who do regular
duty there.  About sunset, or a little later, was the time when the broad and somewhat desolate
peculiarity of the heath seemed to me to put on its utmost impressiveness.  At that hour, finding
myself on elevated ground, I once had a view of immense London, four or five miles off, with
the vast Dome in the midst, and the towers of the two Houses of Parliament rising up into the
smoky canopy, the thinner substance of which obscured a mass of things, and hovered about the
objects that were most distinctly visible,--a glorious and sombre picture, dusky, awful, but
irresistibly attractive, like a young man's dream of the great world, foretelling at that distance
a grandeur never to be fully realized.

While I lived in that neighborhood, the tents of two or three sets of cricket-players were
constantly pitched on Blackheath, and matches were going forward that seemed to involve the
honor and credit of communities or counties, exciting an interest in everybody but myself,
who cared not what part of England might glorify itself at the expense of another.  It is necessary
to be born an Englishman, I believe, in order to enjoy this great national game; at any rate,
as a spectacle for an outside observer, I found it lazy, lingering, tedious, and utterly devoid
of pictorial effects.  Choice of other amusements was at hand.  Butts for archery were established,
and bows and arrows were to be let, at so many shots for a penny,--there being abundance of
space for a farther flight-shot than any modern archer can lend to his shaft.  Then there was
an absurd game of throwing a stick at crockery-ware, which I have witnessed a hundred times,
and personally engaged in once or twice, without ever having the satisfaction to see a bit
of broken crockery.  In other spots you found donkeys for children to ride, and ponies of a
very meek and patient spirit, on which the Cockney pleasure-seekers of both sexes rode races
and made wonderful displays of horsemanship.  By way of refreshment there was gingerbread (but,
as a true patriot, I must pronounce it greatly interior to our native dainty), and ginger-beer,
and probably stauncher liquor among the booth-keeper's hidden stores.  The frequent railway-trains,
as well as the numerous steamers to Greenwich, have made the vacant portions of Blackheath
a play-ground and breathing-place for the Londoners, readily and very cheaply accessible; so
that, in view of this broader use and enjoyment, I a little grudged the tracts that have been
filched away, so to speak, and individualized by thriving citizens. One sort of visitors especially
interested me: they were schools of little boys or girls, under the guardianship of their instructors,--
charity schools, as I often surmised from their aspect, collected among dark alleys and squalid
courts; and hither they were brought to spend a summer afternoon, these pale little progeny
of the sunless nooks of London, who had never known that the sky was any broader than that
narrow and vapory strip above their native lane.  I fancied that they took but a doubtful pleasure,
being half affrighted at the wide, empty space overhead and round about them, finding the air
too little medicated with smoke, soot, and graveyard exhalations, to be breathed with comfort,
and feeling shelterless and lost because grimy London, their slatternly and disreputable mother,
had suffered them to stray out of her arms.

Passing among these holiday people, we come to one of the gateways of Greenwich Park, opening
through an old brick wall.  It admits us from the bare heath into a scene of antique cultivation
and woodland ornament, traversed in all directions by avenues of trees, many of which bear
tokens of a venerable age.  These broad and well-kept pathways rise and decline over the elevations
and along the bases of gentle hills which diversify the whole surface of the Park.  The loftiest,
and most abrupt of them (though but of very moderate height) is one of the earth's noted summits,
and may hold up its head with Mont Blanc and Chimborazo, as being the site of Greenwich Observatory,
where, if all nations will consent to say so, the longitude of our great globe begins.  I used
to regulate my watch by the broad dial-plate against the Observatory wall, and felt it pleasant
to be standing at the very centre of Time and Space.

There are lovelier parks than this in the neighborhood of London, richer scenes of greensward
and cultivated trees; and Kensington, especially, in a summer afternoon, has seemed to me as
delightful as any place can or ought to be, in a world which, some time or other, we must quit.
But Greenwich, too, is beautiful,--a spot where the art of man has conspired with Nature, as
if he and the great mother had taken counsel together how to make a pleasant scene, and the
longest liver of the two had faithfully carried out their mutual design.  It has, likewise,
an additional charm of its own, because, to all appearance, it is the people's property and
play-ground in a much more genuine way than the aristocratic resorts in closer vicinity to
the metropolis.  It affords one of the instances in which the monarch's property is actually
the people's, and shows how much more natural is their relation to the sovereign than to the
nobility, which pretends to hold the intervening space between the two: for a nobleman makes
a paradise only for himself, and fills it with his own pomp and pride; whereas the people are
sooner or later the legitimate inheritors of whatever beauty kings and queens create, as now
of Greenwich Park.  On Sundays, when the sun shone, and even on those grim and sombre days
when, if it do not actually rain, the English persist in calling it fine weather, it was too
good to see how sturdily the plebeians trod under their own oaks, and what fulness of simple
enjoyment they evidently found there.  They were the people,--not the populace,-- specimens
of a class whose Sunday clothes are a distinct kind of garb from their week-day ones; and this,
in England, implies wholesome habits of life, daily thrift, and a rank above the lowest.  I
longed to be acquainted with them, in order to investigate what manner of folks they were,
what sort of households they kept, their politics, their religion, their tastes, and whether
they were as narrow-minded as their betters. There can be very little doubt of it: an Englishman
is English, in whatever rank of life, though no more intensely so, I should imagine, as an
artisan or petty shopkeeper, than as a member of Parliament.

The English character, as I conceive it, is by no means a very lofty one; they seem to have
a great deal of earth and grimy dust clinging about them, as was probably the case with the
stalwart and quarrelsome people who sprouted up out of the soil, after Cadmus had sown the
dragon's teeth.  And yet, though the individual Englishman is sometimes preternaturally disagreeable,
an observer standing aloof has a sense of natural kindness towards them in the lump.  They
adhere closer to the original simplicity in which mankind was created than we ourselves do;
they love, quarrel, laugh, cry, and turn their actual selves inside out, with greater freedom
than any class of Americans would consider decorous. It was often so with these holiday folks
in Greenwich Park; and, ridiculous as it may sound, I fancy myself to have caught very satisfactory
glimpses of Arcadian life among the Cockneys there, hardly beyond the scope of Bow-Bells, picnicking
in the grass, uncouthly gambolling on the broad slopes, or straying in motley groups or by
single pairs of love-making youths and maidens, along the sun-streaked avenues. Even the omnipresent
policemen or park-keepers could not disturb the beatific impression on my mind.  One feature,
at all events, of the Golden Age was to be seen in the herds of deer that encountered you in
the somewhat remoter recesses of the Park, and were readily prevailed upon to nibble a bit
of bread out of your hand.  But, though no wrong had ever been done them, and no horn had sounded
nor hound bayed at the heels of themselves or their antlered progenitors for centuries past,
there was still an apprehensiveness lingering in their hearts; so that a slight movement of
the hand or a step too near would send a whole squadron of them scampering away, just as a
breath scatters the winged seeds of a dandelion.

The aspect of Greenwich Park, with all those festal people wandering through it, resembled
that of the Borghese Gardens under the walls of Rome, on a Sunday or Saint's day; but, I am
not ashamed to say, it a little disturbed whatever grim ghost of Puritanic strictness might
be lingering in the sombre depths of a New England heart, among severe and sunless remembrances
of the Sabbaths of childhood, and pangs of remorse for ill-gotten lessons in the catechism,
and for erratic fantasies or hardly suppressed laughter in the middle of long sermons. He made one effort
to sing like the Master, but overpowered by a sense of incapacity, his voice failed, and he
felt disposed to cry.

"Why, Joachim, I thought you were such a clever creature you could imitate any thing," cried
the Mother.

No answer fell from the abashed boy, till a sudden thought revived him.

"But I can imitate the singing-master, Mother."

"Let me hear you, my dear child."

"Why it isn't exactly what you can hear," observed Joachim murmuringly; "but when he sings,
you have no idea what horrible faces he makes. Nay, it's true, indeed, he turns up his eyes,
shuts them, distorts his mouth, and swings about on the stool like the pendulum of a clock!"

And
Joachim performed all the grimaces and contortions to perfection, till his Aunt and Cousins
were convulsed with laughter.

"Well done," cried his Mother. "Now you are indeed like the cat in the German fable, Joachim!
who voted himself like the bear, because he could lick his paws after the same fashion, though
he could not imitate either his courage or his strength. Now let me look a little further
into your education. Bring me your drawing-book." It came, and there was page after page of odd and
ugly faces, strange noses, stranger eyes, squinting out of the book in hideous array.

"I suppose you will laugh again if I ask you if these are the beauties of your school, Joachim;--but
tell me seriously, are there no good, pleasant, or handsome faces among your schoolfellows?"

"Plenty,
Mother; one or two the Master calls models, and who often sit to him to be drawn from."

"Draw one of those faces for me, my dear; I am fond of beauty."

And the Mother placed the book in his hands, pointing to a blank page.

Joachim took a pencil, and sat down. Now he thought he should be able to please his Mother;
but, alas, he found to his surprise, that the fine faces he tried to recall had not left that
vivid impression on his brain which enabled him to represent them. On the contrary, he was tormented
and baffled by visions of the odd forms and grotesque countenances he had so often pictured.
He seized the Indian-rubber and rubbed out nose after nose to no purpose, for he never could replace
them with a better. Drawing was his favourite amusement; and this disappointment, where he expected
success, broke down his already depressed heart. He threw the book from him, and burst into a flood
of tears.

"Joachim! have you drawn him? What makes you cry?"

"I cannot draw him, Mother," sobbed the distressed boy.

"And why not? Just look here; here is an admirable likeness of squinting Joe, as you have named
him. Why cannot you draw the handsome boy?"

"Because his face is so handsome!" answered Joachim, still sobbing.

"My son," said his Mother gravely, "you have now a sad lesson to learn, but a necessary and a
wholesome one. Get up, desist from crying, and listen to me."

Poor Joachim, who loved his mother dearly, obeyed.

"Joachim! your Aunt, and your Cousins, and your schoolfellows have all called you clever. In
what does your cleverness consist? I will tell you. In the Reproduction of Deformity, Defects, Failings,
and Misfortunes of every sort, that fall under your observation. A worthy employment truly!
A noble ambition! But I will now tell you the truth about yourself. You never heard it before, and I
feel sure you will benefit now. A good or an evil Genie, I know not which, has bestowed upon
you a great power; and you have misused it. Do you know what that power is?"

Joachim shook his head, though he trembled all over, for he felt as if awaking from along dream,
to the recollection of the Genie.

"It is the power of Imitation, Joachim; I call it a great power, for it is essential to many
great and useful things. It is essential to the orator, the linguist, the artist, and the
musician. Nature herself teaches us the charm of imitation, when in the smooth and clear lake
you see the lovely landscape around mirrored and repeated.[5] What a lesson may we not read
in this sight! The commonest pond even that reflects the foliage of the tree that hangs over
it, is calling out to us to reproduce for the solace and ornament of life, the beautiful works
of God. But oh, my son, my dear son, you have abused this gift of Imitation, which might be
such a blessing and pleasure to you."

[5] Schiller.--"Der Künstler."

"You might, if you chose, imitate every thing that is good, and noble,
and virtuous, and beautiful; and you are, instead of that, reproducing
every aspect of deformity that crosses your path, until your brain
is so stamped with images of defects, ugliness, and uncouthness, that
your hand and head refuse their office, when I call upon you to reproduce
the beauties with which the world is graced."

I doubt if Joachim heard the latter part of his Mother's speech. At the recurrence to the old
sentence, a gleam of lightning seemed to shoot across his brain. Latent memories were aroused
as keenly as if the events had but just occurred, and he sank at his Mother's feet.

When she ceased to speak, he arose.

"Mother," said he, "I have been living in a cloud. I have been very wrong. Besides which, I
have a secret to tell you. Nay, my Aunt may hear. It has been a secret, and then it has been forgotten;
but now I remember all, and understand far more than I once did."

Here Joachim recounted to his Mother the whole story of her words to him, and his adventure with
the Genie and the bottle; and then, very slowly, and interrupted by many tears of repentance,
he repeated what the Genie had said about giving him the power of imitation, adding that the
use he made of it must depend on himself and the great Ruler of the heart and conscience.

There was a great fuss among the Cousins at the notion of Joachim having talked to a Genie;
and, to tell you the truth, this was all they thought about, and soon after took their leave.
The heart of Joachim's Mother was at rest, however: for though she knew how hard her son would
find it to alter what had become a habit of life, she knew that he was a good and pious boy,
and she saw that he was fully alive to his error.

"Oh Mother," said he, during the course of that evening, "how plain I see it all now! The boy
that stutters is a model of obedience and tenderness; I ought to have dwelt upon and imitated that,
and, oh! I thought only of his stuttering. The boy that walks so clumsily, as well as the great
fellow that lisps, are such industrious lads, and so advanced in learning, that the master
thinks both will be distinguished hereafter; and I, who--(oh, my poor mother, I must confess
to you)--hated to labour at any thing, and have got the boys to do my lessons for me;--I, instead
of imitating their industry, lost all my time in ridiculing their defects.--What shall--what shall I
do!"

The next morning poor Joachim said his prayers more humbly than he had ever before done in
his life; and, kissing his mother, went to school. The first thing he did on arriving was to go up
to the big boy, who had beaten him, and beg him to shake hands.

The big boy was pleased, and a grim smile lightened up his face. "But, old fellow," said he,
laying his hand on Joachim's shoulder, "take a friend's advice. There is good in all of us, depend
upon it. Look out for all that's good, and let the bad points take
care of themselves.

You won't get any handsomer, by squinting like poor Joe; nor speak any pleasanter for lisping
like me; nor walk any better for apeing hobbling. But the ugliest of us have some good about us.
Look out for that, my little lad; I do, or I should not be talking to you! I see that you are
honest and forgiving, though you are a monkey! There now, I must go on with my lessons! You do
yours!"

Never was better advice given, and Joachim took it well, and bore it bravely; but, oh, how hard
it was to his mind, accustomed for so long to wander away and seek amusement at wrong times, to
settle down resolutely and laboriously to study. He made a strong effort, however; and though he
had often to recall his thoughts, he in a measure succeeded.

After school-hours he begged the big boy to come and sit by him, and then he requested his old
friends and companions to listen to a story he had to tell them. They expected something funny,
and many a broad grin was seen; but poor Joachim's eyes were yet red with weeping, and his gay
voice was so subdued, the party soon became grave and wondering, and then Joachim told them every
thing. They were delighted to hear about the Genie, and were also pleased to find themselves
safe from Joachim's ridicule. It could not be expected they should all understand the story, but
the big boy did, and became Joachim's greatest friend and adviser.

That evening our little friend, exhausted with the efforts and excitement of his almost first
day of repentance, strolled out in a somewhat pensive mood to his favourite haunt, the sea shore.
A stormy sunset greeted his arrival on the beach, but the tide was ebbing, and he wandered on till
he reached some caverns among the cliffs. And there, as had often been his wont, he sat down
to gaze out upon the waste of waters safe and protected from harm. It is very probable that
he fell asleep--but the point could never be clearly known, for he always said it was no sleep
and no dream he had then, but that, whilst sitting in the inmost
recesses of the cave, he saw once more his old friend the Genie, who
after reproaching him with the bad use he had made of his precious
gift, gave him a world of good advice and instruction.

There is no doubt that after that time, Joachim was seen daily struggling against his bad habits; and
that by degrees he became able to exercise his mind in following after the good and beautiful
instead of after the bad and ugly. It was a hard task to him for many a long day to fix his
flighty thoughts down to the business in hand, and to dismiss from before his eyes the ridiculous
images that often presented themselves. But his Mother's wishes, or the Genie's advice, or something better
still, prevailed. And you cannot think, of what wonderful use the Genie's gift was to him then.
Once turned in a right direction and towards worthy objects, he found it like a sort of friend
at his right hand, helping him forward in some of the most interesting pursuits of life. Ah!
all the energy he had once bestowed on imitating lisps and stuttering, was now engaged in catching
the sounds of foreign tongues, and thus taking one step towards the citizenship of the world.
And instead of wasting time in gazing at the singing master's face, that he might ape its unnatural
distortions--it was now the sweet tones of skilful harmony to which he bent his attention, and
which he strove, and not in vain, to reproduce.

The portfolio which he brought home to his Mother at the end of another half-year, was crowded
with laborious and careful copies from the best models of beauty and grace. And not with those
only, for many a face could be found on its pages in which the Mother recognized some of her
son's old companions.

Portraits, not of the mere formation of mouths and noses, which in so many cases, viewed merely as
forms, are defective and unattractive, but portraits of the same faces, upon which the character
of the inward mind and heart was so stamped that it threw the mere shape of the features far
into the background.

Thus with the pursuit of his favourite art, Joachim combined "that most excellent gift of charity;"
for it was now his pride and pleasure to make the charm of expression from "the good points"
his old friend had talked about, triumph over any physical defects. The very spirit and soul
of the best sort of portrait painting. And here, my dear young readers, I would fain call your
attention to the fact of how one right habit produces another. The more Joachim laboured over
seizing the good expression of the faces he drew from, the more he was led to seek after and
find out the good points themselves whence the expression arose; and thus at last it became a
Habit with him to try and discover every thing that was excellent and commendable in the characters
of those he met; a very different plan from that pursued by many of us, who in our intercourse with
each other, are but too apt to fasten with eagle-eye accuracy on failings and faults. Which
is a very grave error, and a very misleading one, for if it does nothing else, it deprives us
of all the good we should get by a daily habit of contemplating what is worthy our regard and remembrance.
And so strongly did Joachim's mother feel this, and so earnestly did she wish her son to understand
that a power which seems bestowed for worldly ends, may be turned to spiritual advantage also,
that when his birthday came round she presented to him among other gifts, a little book, called
"The Imitation of Jesus Christ." It was the work of an old fellow called Thomas à Kempis, and
though more practical books of piety have since been written, the idea contained in the title
suggests a great lesson, and held up before Joachim's eyes, Him whom one of our own divines
has since called "The Great Exemplar."

This part of our little hero's 'Lesson of Life,' we can all take to
ourselves, and go and do likewise. And so I hope his story may be
profitable, though we have not all of us a large Genie-gift of Imitation
as he had. With him the excess of this power took a very natural turn,
for though he possessed through its aid, considerable facilities for
music and the study of languages also, the course of events led him
irresistibly to what is usually called "the fine arts." And if the
old dream of the royal chariot and the twelve jet black horses was
never realized to him, a higher happiness by far was his, when some
years after, he and his Mother stood in the council house of his native
town; she looking up with affectionate pride while he showed her a
portrait of the good young King which had a few hours before been
hung up upon its walls. It was the work of Joachim himself.

DARKNESS
AND LIGHT.

The darkness and the light to Thee are both alike.

Far
away to the west, on the borders of the Sea, there lived a lady and
gentleman in a beautiful old house built something like a castle.
They had several children, nice little boys and girls, who were far
fonder of their Sea Castle, as they called it, than of a very pleasant
house which they had in a great town at some distance off. Still they
used to go and be very merry in the Town House in the winter time
when the hail and snow fell, and the winds blew so cold that nobody
could bear to walk out by the wild sea shore.

But in summer weather
the case was quite altered. Indeed, as soon as ever the sun began
to get a little power, and to warm the panes of glass in the nursery
windows of the Town House, there was a hue and cry among all the children
to be off to their Sea Castle home, and many a time had Papa and Mamma
to send them angrily out of the room, because they would do nothing
but beg to "set off directly." They were always "sure that the weather
was getting quite hot," and "it must be summer, for they heard the
sparrows chirping every morning the first thing," and they "thought
they had seen a swallow," and "the windows got so warm with the sunshine,
Nurse declared they were enough to burn one's fingers:" and so the
poor little things teazed themselves and everybody else, every year,
in their hurry to get back to their western home. But I dare say you
have heard the old proverb, "One swallow does not make a summer;"
and so it was proved very often to our friends. For the Spring season
is so changeable, there are often some soft mild days, and then a
cruel frost comes again, and perhaps snow as well; and people who
have boasted about fine weather and put off their winter clothes,
look very foolish.

Still Time passes on; and when May was half over,
the Town House used to echo with shouts of noisy delight, and boxes
were banged down in the passages, and there was a great calling out
for cords, and much scolding about broken keys and padlocks, and the
poor Carpenter who came to mend the trunks and find new keys to old
locks, was at his wits' end and his patience' end too.

But at last
the time came when all this bustle was succeeded by silence in the
Town House, for carriages had rolled away with the happy party, and
nobody was left behind but two or three women servants to clean out
the deserted rooms.

And now then, my little readers, who are, I hope,
wondering what is coming next, you must fancy to yourselves the old
Sea Castle Home. It had two large turrets; and winding staircases
led from the passages and kitchens underneath the sitting rooms, up
to the top of the turrets, and so out upon the leads of the house,
from which there was the most beautiful view of the Ocean you ever
saw; and, as the top of the house was battlemented, like the top of
your church tower, people could walk about quite safely and comfortably,
without any fear of falling over.  Yet it was once the reddest blood in England,--
Nelson's blood!

The hospital stands close adjacent to the town of Greenwich, which will always retain a kind
of festal aspect in my memory, in consequence of my having first become acquainted with it
on Easter Monday.  Till a few years ago, the first three days of Easter were a carnival season
in this old town, during which the idle and disreputable part of London poured itself into
the streets like an inundation of the Thames, as unclean as that turbid mixture of the offscourings
of the vast city, and overflowing with its grimy pollution whatever rural innocence, if any,
might be found in the suburban neighborhood.  This festivity was called Greenwich Fair, the
final one of which, in an immemorial succession, it was my fortune to behold.

If I had bethought myself of going through the fair with a note-book and pencil, jotting down
all the prominent objects, I doubt not that the result might have been a sketch of English
life quite as characteristic and worthy of historical preservation as an account of the Roman
Carnival.  Having neglected to do so, I remember little more than a confusion of unwashed and
shabbily dressed people, intermixed with some smarter figures, but, on the whole, presenting
a mobbish appearance such as we never see in our own country.  It taught me to understand why
Shakespeare, in speaking of a crowd, so often alludes to its attribute of evil odor.  The common
people of England, I am afraid, have no daily familiarity with even so necessary a thing as
a wash-bowl, not to mention a bathing-tub.  And furthermore, it is one mighty difference between
them and us, that every man and woman on our side of the water has a working-day suit and a
holiday suit, and is occasionally as fresh as a rose, whereas, in the good old country, the
griminess of his labor or squalid habits clings forever to the individual, and gets to be a
part of his personal substance.  These are broad facts, involving great corollaries and dependencies.
There are really, if you stop to think about it, few sadder spectacles in the world than a
ragged coat, or a soiled and shabby gown, at a festival.

This unfragrant crowd was exceedingly dense, being welded together, as it were, in the street
through which we strove to make our way.  On either side were oyster-stands, stalls of oranges
(a very prevalent fruit in England, where they give the withered ones a guise of freshness
by boiling them), and booths covered with old sail-cloth, in which the commodity that most
attracted the eye was gilt gingerbread.  It was so completely enveloped in Dutch gilding that
I did not at first recognize an old acquaintance, but wondered what those golden crowns and
images could be.  There were likewise drums and other toys for small children, and a variety
of showy and worthless articles for children of a larger growth; though it perplexed me to
imagine who, in such a mob, could have the innocent taste to desire playthings, or the money
to pay for them. Not that I have a right to license the mob, on my own knowledge, of being
any less innocent than a set of cleaner and better dressed people might have been; for, though
one of them stole my pocket-handkerchief, I could not but consider it fair game, under the
circumstances, and was grateful to the thief for sparing me my purse.  They were quiet, civil,
and remarkably good-humored, making due allowance for the national gruffness; there was no
riot, no tumultuous swaying to and fro of the mass, such as I have often noted in an American
crowd, no noise of voices, except frequent bursts of laughter, hoarse or shrill, and a widely
diffused, inarticulate murmur, resembling nothing so much as the rumbling of the tide among
the arches of London Bridge.  What immensely perplexed me was a sharp, angry sort of rattle,
in all quarters, far off and close at hand, and sometimes right at my own back, where it sounded
as if the stout fabric of my English surtout had been ruthlessly rent in twain; and everybody's
clothes, all over the fair, were evidently being torn asunder in the same way.  By and by,
I discovered that this strange noise was produced by a little instrument called "The Fun of
the Fair,"--a sort of rattle, consisting of a wooden wheel, the cogs of which turn against
a thin slip of wood, and so produce a rasping sound when drawn smartly against a person's back.
The ladies draw their rattles against the backs of their male friends (and everybody passes
for a friend at Greenwich Fair), and the young men return the compliment on the broad British
backs of the ladies; and all are bound by immemorial custom to take it in good part and be
merry at the joke.  As it was one of my prescribed official duties to give an account of such
mechanical contrivances as might be unknown in my own country, I have thought it right to be
thus particular in describing the Fun of the Fair.

But this was far from being the sole amusement.  There were theatrical booths, in front of
which were pictorial representations of the scenes to be enacted within; and anon a drummer
emerged from one of them, thumping on a terribly lax drum, and followed by the entire dramatis
personae, who ranged themselves on a wooden platform in front of the theatre.  They were dressed
in character, but wofully shabby, with very dingy and wrinkled white tights, threadbare cotton-velvets,
crumpled silks, and crushed muslin, and all the gloss and glory gone out of their aspect and
attire, seen thus in the broad daylight and after a long series of performances.  They sang
a song together, and withdrew into the theatre, whither the public were invited to follow them
at the inconsiderable cost of a penny a ticket.  Before another booth stood a pair of brawny
fighting-men, displaying their muscle, and soliciting patronage for an exhibition of the noble
British art of pugilism.  There were pictures of giants, monsters, and outlandish beasts, most
prodigious, to be sure, and worthy of all admiration, unless the artist had gone incomparably
beyond his subject.  Jugglers proclaimed aloud the miracles which they were prepared to work;
and posture-makers dislocated every joint of their bodies and tied their limbs into inextricable
knots, wherever they could find space to spread a little square of carpet on the ground.  In
the midst of the confusion, while everybody was treading on his neighbor's toes, some little
boys were very solicitous to brush your boots.  These lads, I believe, are a product of modern
society,--at least, no older than the time of Gay, who celebrates their origin in his "Trivia";
but in most other respects the scene reminded me of Bunyan's description of Vanity Fair,--nor
is it at all improbable that the Pilgrim may have been a merry-maker here, in his wild youth.

It seemed very singular--though, of course, I immediately classified it as an English characteristic--to
see a great many portable weighing-machines, the owners of which cried out, continually and
amain, "Come, know your weight!  Come, come, know your weight to-day! Come, know your weight!"
and a multitude of people, mostly large in the girth, were moved by this vociferation to sit
down in the machines.  I know not whether they valued themselves on their beef, and estimated
their standing as members of society at so much a pound; but I shall set it down as a national
peculiarity, and a symbol of the prevalence of the earthly over the spiritual element, that
Englishmen are wonderfully bent on knowing how solid and physically ponderous they are.

On the whole, having an appetite for the brown bread and the tripe and sausages of life, as
well as for its nicer cates and dainties, I enjoyed the scene, and was amused at the sight
of a gruff old Greenwich pensioner, who, forgetful of the sailor-frolics of his young days,
stood looking with grim disapproval at all these vanities.  Thus we squeezed our way through
the mob-jammed town, and emerged into the Park, where, likewise, we met a great many merry-makers,
but with freer space for their gambols than in the streets.  We soon found ourselves the targets
for a cannonade with oranges (most of them in a decayed condition), which went humming past
our ears from the vantage-ground of neighboring hillocks, sometimes hitting our sacred persons
with an inelastic thump. This was one of the privileged freedoms of the time, and was nowise
to be resented, except by returning the salute.  Many persons were running races, hand in hand,
down the declivities, especially that steepest one on the summit of which stands the world-central
Observatory, and (as in the race of life) the partners were usually male and female, and often
caught a tumble together before reaching the bottom of the hill. Hereabouts we were pestered
and haunted by two young girls, the eldest not more than thirteen, teasing us to buy matches;
and finding no market for their commodity, the taller one suddenly turned a somerset before
our faces, and rolled heels over head from top to bottom of the hill on which we stood.  Then,
scrambling up the acclivity, the topsy-turvy trollop offered us her matches again, as demurely
as if she had never flung aside her equilibrium; so that, dreading a repetition of the feat,
we gave her sixpence and an admonition, and enjoined her never to do so any more.

The most curious amusement that we witnessed here--or anywhere else, indeed--was an ancient
and hereditary pastime called "Kissing in the Ring."  I shall describe the sport exactly as
I saw it, although an English friend assures me that there are certain ceremonies with a handkerchief,
which make it much more decorous and graceful.  A handkerchief, indeed!  There was no such
thing in the crowd, except it were the one which they had just filched out of my pocket.  It
is one of the simplest kinds of games, needing little or no practice to make the player altogether
perfect; and the manner of it is this.  A ring is formed (in the present case, it was of large
circumference and thickly gemmed around with faces, mostly on the broad grin), into the centre
of which steps an adventurous youth, and, looking round the circle, selects whatever maiden
may most delight his eye.  He presents his hand (which she is bound to accept), leads her into
the centre, salutes her on the lips, and retires, taking his stand in the expectant circle.
The girl, in her turn, throws a favorable regard on some fortunate young man, offers her hand
to lead him forth, makes him happy with a maidenly kiss, and withdraws to hide her blushes,
if any there be, among the simpering faces in the ring; while the favored swain loses no time
in transferring her salute to the prettiest and plumpest among the many mouths that are primming
themselves in anticipation.  And thus the thing goes on, till all the festive throng are inwreathed
and intertwined into an endless and inextricable chain of kisses; though, indeed, it smote
me with compassion to reflect that some forlorn pair of lips might be left out, and never know
the triumph of a salute, after throwing aside so many delicate reserves for the sake of winning
it.  If the young men had any chivalry, there was a fair chance to display it by kissing the
homeliest damsel in the circle.

To be frank, however, at the first glance, and to my American eye, they looked all homely alike,
and the chivalry that I suggest is more than I could have been capable of, at any period of
my life.  They seemed to be country-lasses, of sturdy and wholesome aspect, with coarse-grained,
cabbage-rosy cheeks, and, I am willing to suppose, a stout texture of moral principle, such
as would bear a good deal of rough usage without suffering much detriment.  But how unlike
the trim little damsels of my native land!  I desire above all things to be courteous; but,
since the plain truth must be told, the soil and climate of England produce feminine beauty
as rarely as they do delicate fruit, and though admirable specimens of both are to be met with,
they are the hot-house ameliorations of refined society, and apt, moreover, to relapse into
the coarseness of the original stock.  The men are manlike, but the women are not beautiful,
though the female Bull be well enough adapted to the male. To return to the lasses of Greenwich
Fair, their charms were few, and their behavior, perhaps, not altogether commendable; and yet
it was impossible not to feel a degree of faith in their innocent intentions, with such a half-bashful
zest and entire simplicity did they keep up their part of the game.  It put the spectator in
good-humor to look at them, because there was still something of the old Arcadian life, the
secure freedom of the antique age, in their way of surrendering their lips to strangers, as
if there were no evil or impurity in the world.  As for the young men, they were chiefly specimens
of the vulgar sediment of London life, often shabbily genteel, rowdyish, pale, wearing the
unbrushed coat, unshifted linen, and unwashed faces of yesterday, as well as the haggardness
of last night's jollity in a gin-shop.  Gathering their character from these tokens, I wondered
whether there were any reasonable prospect of their fair partners returning to their rustic
homes with as much innocence (whatever were its amount or quality) as they brought, to Greenwich
Fair, in spite of the perilous familiarity established by Kissing in the Ring.

The manifold disorders resulting from the fair, at which a vast city was brought into intimate
relations with a comparatively rural district, have at length led to its suppression; this
was the very last celebration of it, and brought to a close the broad-mouthed merriment of
many hundred years.  Thus my poor sketch, faint as its colors are, may acquire some little
value in the reader's eyes from the consideration that no observer of the coming time will
ever have an opportunity to give a better.  I should find it difficult to believe, however,
that the queer pastime just described, or any moral mischief to which that and other customs
might pave the way, can have led to the overthrow of Greenwich Fair; for it has often seemed
to me that Englishmen of station and respectability, unless of a peculiarly philanthropic turn,
have neither any faith in the feminine purity of the lower orders of their countrywomen, nor
the slightest value for it, allowing its possible existence.  The distinction of ranks is so
marked, that the English cottage damsel holds a position somewhat analogous to that of the
negro girl in our Southern States. Hence cones inevitable detriment to the moral condition
of those men themselves, who forget that the humblest woman has a right and a duty to hold
herself in the same sanctity as the highest.  The subject cannot well be discussed in these
pages; but I offer it as a serious conviction, from what I have been able to observe, that
the England of to-day is the unscrupulous old England of Tom Jones and Joseph Andrews, Humphrey
Clinker and Roderick Random; and in our refined era, just the same as at that more free-spoken
epoch, this singular people has a certain contempt for any fine-strained purity, any special
squeamishness, as they consider it, on the part of an ingenuous youth.  They appear to look
upon it as a suspicious phenomenon in the masculine character.

Nevertheless, I by no means take upon me to affirm that English morality, as regards the phase
here alluded to, is really at a lower point than our own.  Assuredly, I hope so, because, making
a higher pretension, or, at all events, more carefully hiding whatever may be amiss, we are
either better than they, or necessarily a great deal worse.  It impressed me that their open
avowal and recognition of immoralities served to throw the disease to the surface, where it
might be more effectually dealt with, and leave a sacred interior not utterly profaned, instead
of turning its poison back among the inner vitalities of the character, at the imminent risk
of corrupting them all.  Be that as it may, these Englishmen are certainly a franker and simpler
people than ourselves, from peer to peasant; but if we can take it as compensatory on our part
(which I leave to be considered) that they owe those noble and manly qualities to a coarser
grain in their nature, and that, with a finer one in ours, we shall ultimately acquire a marble
polish of which they are unsusceptible, I believe that this may be the truth.

UP THE THAMES.

The upper portion of Greenwich (where my last article left me loitering) is a cheerful, comely,
old-fashioned town, the peculiarities of which, if there be any, have passed out of my remembrance.
As you descend towards the Thames, the streets get meaner, and the shabby and sunken houses,
elbowing one another for frontage, bear the sign-boards of beer-shops and eating-rooms, with
especial promises of whitebait and other delicacies in the fishing line.  You observe, also,
a frequent announcement of "The Gardens" in the rear; although, estimating the capacity of
the premises by their external compass, the entire sylvan charm and shadowy seclusion of such
blissful resorts must be limited within a small back-yard.  These places of cheap sustenance
and recreation depend for support upon the innumerable pleasure-parties who come from London
Bridge by steamer, at a fare of a few pence, and who get as enjoyable a meal for a shilling
a head as the Ship Hotel would afford a gentleman for a guinea.

The steamers, which are constantly smoking their pipes up and down the Thames, offer much the
most agreeable mode of getting to London.  At least, it might be exceedingly agreeable, except
for the myriad floating particles of soot from the stove-pipe, and the heavy heat of midsummer
sunshine on the unsheltered deck, or the chill, misty air draught of a cloudy day, and the
spiteful little showers of rain that may spatter down upon you at any moment, whatever the
promise of the sky; besides which there is some slight inconvenience from the inexhaustible
throng of passengers, who scarcely allow you standing-room, nor so much as a breath of unappropriated
air, and never a chance to sit down.  If these difficulties, added to the possibility of getting
your pocket picked, weigh little with you, the panorama along the shores of the memorable river,
and the incidents and shows of passing life upon its bosom, render the trip far preferable
to the brief yet tiresome shoot along the railway track.  On one such voyage, a regatta of
wherries raced past us, and at once involved every soul on board our steamer in the tremendous
excitement of the struggle.  The spectacle was but a moment within our view, and presented
nothing more than a few light skiffs, in each of which sat a single rower, bare-armed, and
with little apparel, save a shirt and drawers, pale, anxious, with every muscle on the stretch,
and plying his oars in such fashion that the boat skimmed along with the aerial celerity of
a swallow.  I wondered at myself for so immediately catching an interest in the affair, which
seemed to contain no very exalted rivalship of manhood; but, whatever the kind of battle or
the prize of victory, it stirs one's sympathy immensely, and is even awful, to behold the rare
sight of a man thoroughly in earnest, doing his best, putting forth all there is in him, and
staking his very soul (as these rowers appeared willing to do) on the issue of the contest.
It was the seventy-fourth annual regatta of the Free Watermen of Greenwich, and announced itself
as under the patronage of the Lord Mayor and other distinguished individuals, at whose expense,
I suppose, a prize-boat was offered to the conqueror, and some small amounts of money to the
inferior competitors.

The aspect of London along the Thanes, below Bridge, as it is called, is by no means so impressive
as it ought to be, considering what peculiar advantages are offered for the display of grand
and stately architecture by the passage of a river through the midst of a great city.  It seems,
indeed, as if the heart of London had been cleft open for the mere purpose of showing how rotten
and drearily mean it had become.  The shore is lined with the shabbiest, blackest, and ugliest
buildings that can be imagined, decayed warehouses with blind windows, and wharves that look
ruinous; insomuch that, had I known nothing more of the world's metropolis, I might have fancied
that it had already experienced the downfall which I have heard commercial and financial prophets
predict for it, within the century.  And the muddy tide of the Thames, reflecting nothing,
and hiding a million of unclean secrets within its breast,--a sort of guilty conscience, as
it were, unwholesome with the rivulets of sin that constantly flow into it,--is just the dismal
stream to glide by such a city.  The surface, to be sure, displays no lack of activity, being
fretted by the passage of a hundred steamers and covered with a good deal of shipping, but
mostly of a clumsier build than I had been accustomed to see in the Mersey: a fact which I
complacently attributed to the smaller number of American clippers in the Thames, and the less
prevalent influence of American example in refining away the broad-bottomed capacity of the
old Dutch or English models.

About midway between Greenwich and London Bridge, at a rude landing-place on the left bank
of the river, the steamer rings its bell and makes a momentary pause in front of a large circular
structure, where it may be worth our while to scramble ashore.  It indicates the locality of
one of those prodigious practical blunders that would supply John Bull with a topic of inexhaustible
ridicule, if his cousin Jonathan had committed them, but of which he himself perpetrates ten
to our one in the mere wantonness of wealth that lacks better employment.  The circular building
covers the entrance to the Thames Tunnel, and is surmounted by a dome of glass, so as to throw
daylight down into the great depth at which the passage of the river commences.  Descending
a wearisome succession of staircases, we at last find ourselves, still in the broad noon, standing
before a closed door, on opening which we behold the vista of an arched corridor that extends
into everlasting midnight.  In these days, when glass has been applied to so many new purposes,
it is a pity that the architect had not thought of arching portions of his abortive tunnel
with immense blocks of the lucid substance, over which the dusky Thames would have flowed like
a cloud, making the sub-fluvial avenue only a little gloomier than a street of upper London.
At present, it is illuminated at regular intervals by jets of gas, not very brilliantly, yet
with lustre enough to show the damp plaster of the ceiling and walls, and the massive stone
pavement, the crevices of which are oozy with moisture, not from the incumbent river, but from
hidden springs in the earth's deeper heart. There are two parallel corridors, with a wall between,
for the separate accommodation of the double throng of foot-passengers, equestrians, and vehicles
of all kinds, which was expected to roll and reverberate continually through the Tunnel.  Only
one of them has ever been opened, and its echoes are but feebly awakened by infrequent footfalls.

Yet there seem to be people who spend their lives here, and who probably blink like owls, when,
once or twice a year, perhaps, they happen to climb into the sunshine.  All along the corridor,
which I believe to be a mile in extent, we see stalls or shops in little alcoves, kept principally
by women; they were of a ripe age, I was glad to observe, and certainly robbed England of none
of its very moderate supply of feminine loveliness by their deeper than tomb-like interment.
As you approach (and they are so accustomed to the dusky gaslight that they read all your characteristics
afar off), they assail you with hungry entreaties to buy some of their merchandise, holding
forth views of the Tunnel put up in cases of Derbyshire spar, with a magnifying-glass at one
end to make the vista more effective.  They offer you, besides, cheap jewelry, sunny topazes
and resplendent emeralds for sixpence, and diamonds as big as the Kohi-i-noor at a not much
heavier cost, together with a multifarious trumpery which has died out of the upper world to
reappear in this Tartarean bazaar.  That you may fancy yourself still in the realms of the
living, they urge you to partake of cakes, candy, ginger-beer, and such small refreshment,
more suitable, however, for the shadowy appetite of ghosts than for the sturdy stomachs of
Englishmen.  The most capacious of the shops contains a dioramic exhibition of cities and scenes
in the daylight world, with a dreary glimmer of gas among them all; so that they serve well
enough to represent the dim, unsatisfactory remembrances that dead people might be supposed
to retain from their past lives, mixing them up with the ghastliness of their unsubstantial
state.  I dwell the more upon these trifles, and do my best to give them a mockery of importance,
because, if these are nothing, then all this elaborate contrivance and mighty piece of work
has been wrought in vain.  The Englishman has burrowed under the bed of his great river, and
set ships of two or three thousand tons a-rolling over his head, only to provide new sites
for a few old women to sell cakes and ginger-beer!

Yet the conception was a grand one; and though it has proved an absolute failure, swallowing
an immensity of toil and money, with annual returns hardly sufficient to keep the pavement
free from the ooze of subterranean springs, yet it needs, I presume, only an expenditure three
or four (or, for aught I know, twenty) times as large, to make the enterprise brilliantly successful.
The descent is so great from the bank of the river to its surface, and the Tunnel dips so profoundly
under the river's bed, that the approaches on either side must commence a long way off, in
order to render the entrance accessible to horsemen or vehicles; so that the larger part of
the cost of the whole affair should have been expended on its margins.  It has turned out a
sublime piece of folly; and when the New-Zealander of distant ages shall have moralized sufficiently
among the ruins of London Bridge, he will bethink himself that somewhere thereabout was the
marvellous Tunnel, the very existence of which will seem to him as incredible as that of the
hanging gardens of Babylon.  But the Thames will long ago have broken through the massive arch,
and choked up the corridors with mud and sand and with the large stones of the structure itself,
intermixed with skeletons of drowned people, the rusty ironwork of sunken vessels, and the
great many such precious and curious things as a river always contrives to hide in its bosom;
the entrance will have been obliterated, and its very site forgotten beyond the memory of twenty
generations of men, and the whole neighborhood be held a dangerous spot on account of the malaria;
insomuch that the traveller will make but a brief and careless inquisition for the traces of
the old wonder, and will stake his credit before the public, in some Pacific Monthly of that
day, that the story of it is but a myth, though enriched with a spiritual profundity which
he will proceed to unfold.

Yet it is impossible (for a Yankee, at least) to see so much magnificent ingenuity thrown away,
without trying to endow the unfortunate result with some kind of use, fulness, though perhaps
widely different from the purpose of its original conception.  In former ages, the mile-long
corridors, with their numerous alcoves, might have been utilized as a series of dungeons, the
fittest of all possible receptacles for prisoners of state.  Dethroned monarchs and fallen
statesmen would not have needed to remonstrate against a domicile so spacious, so deeply secluded
from the world's scorn, and so admirably in accordance with their thenceforward sunless fortunes.
An alcove here might have suited Sir Walter Raleigh better than that darksome hiding-place
communicating with the great chamber in the Tower, pacing from end to end of which he meditated
upon his "History of the World."  His track would here have been straight and narrow, indeed,
and would therefore have lacked somewhat of the freedom that his intellect demanded; and yet
the length to which his footsteps might have travelled forth and retraced themselves would
partly have harmonized his physical movement with the grand curves and planetary returns of
his thought, through cycles of majestic periods. Having it in his mind to compose the world's
history, methinks he could have asked no better retirement than such a cloister as this, insulated
from all the seductions of mankind and womankind, deep beneath their mysteries and motives,
down into the heart of things, full of personal reminiscences in order to the comprehensive
measurement and verification of historic records, seeing into the secrets of human nature,--secrets
that daylight never yet revealed to mortal,--but detecting their whole scope and purport with
the infallible eyes of unbroken solitude and night.  And then the shades of the old mighty
men might have risen from their still profounder abodes and joined him in the dim corridor,
treading beside him with an antique stateliness of mien, telling him in melancholy tones, grand,
but always melancholy, of the greater ideas and purposes which their most renowned performances
so imperfectly carried out, that, magnificent successes in the view of all posterity, they
were but failures to those who planned them.  As Raleigh was a navigator, Noah would have explained
to him the peculiarities of construction that made the ark so seaworthy; as Raleigh was a statesman,
Moses would have discussed with him the principles of laws and government; as Raleigh was a
soldier, Caesar and Hannibal would have held debate in his presence, with this martial student
for their umpire; as Raleigh was a poet, David, or whatever most illustrious bard he might
call up, would have touched his harp, and made manifest all the true significance of the past
by means of song and the subtle intelligences of music.

Meanwhile, I had forgotten that Sir Walter Raleigh's century knew nothing of gaslight, and
that it would require a prodigious and wasteful expenditure of tallow-candles to illuminate
the Tunnel sufficiently to discern even a ghost.  On this account, however, it would be all
the more suitable place of confinement for a metaphysician, to keep him from bewildering mankind
with his shadowy speculations; and, being shut off from external converse, the dark corridor
would help him to make rich discoveries in those cavernous regions and mysterious by-paths
of the intellect, which he had so long accustomed himself to explore.  But how would every
successive age rejoice in so secure a habitation for its reformers, and especially for each
best and wisest man that happened to be then alive!  He seeks to burn up our whole system of
society, under pretence of purifying it from its abuses!  Away with him into the Tunnel, and
let him begin by setting the Thames on fire, if he is able!

If not precisely these, yet akin to these were some of the fantasies that haunted me as I passed
under the river: for the place is suggestive of such idle and irresponsible stuff by its own
abortive character, its lack of whereabout on upper earth, or any solid foundation of realities.
Could I have looked forward a few years, I might have regretted that American enterprise had
not provided a similar tunnel, under the Hudson or the Potomac, for the convenience of our
National Government in times hardly yet gone by.  It would be delightful to clap up all the
enemies of our peace and Union in the dark together, and there let them abide, listening to
the monotonous roll of the river above their heads, or perhaps in a state of miraculously suspended
animation, until,--be it after months, years, or centuries,--when the turmoil shall be all
over, the Wrong washed away in blood (since that must needs be the cleansing fluid), and the
Right firmly rooted in the soil which that blood will have enriched, they might crawl forth
again and catch a single glimpse at their redeemed country, and feel it to be a better land
than they deserve, and die!

I was not sorry when the daylight reached me after a much briefer abode in the nether regions
than, I fear, would await the troublesome personages just hinted at.  Emerging on the Surrey
side of the Thames, I found myself in Rotherhithe, a neighborhood not unfamiliar to the readers
of old books of maritime adventure.  There being a ferry hard by the mouth of the Tunnel, I
recrossed the river in the primitive fashion of an open boat, which the conflict of wind and
tide, together with the swash and swell of the passing steamers, tossed high and low rather
tumultuously.  This inquietude of our frail skiff (which, indeed, bobbed up and down like a
cork) so much alarmed an old lady, the only other passenger, that the boatmen essayed to comfort
her.  "Never fear, mother!" grumbled one of them, "we'll make the river as smooth as we can
for you.  We'll get a plane, and plane down the waves!"  The joke may not read very brilliantly;
but I make bold to record it as the only specimen that reached my ears of the old, rough water-wit
for which the Thames used to be so celebrated.  Passing directly along the line of the sunken
Tunnel, we landed in Wapping, which I should have presupposed to be the most tarry and pitchy
spot on earth, swarming with old salts, and full of warm, bustling, coarse, homely, and cheerful
life.  Nevertheless, it turned out to be a cold and torpid neighborhood, mean, shabby, and
unpicturesque, both as to its buildings and inhabitants: the latter comprising (so far as was
visible to me) not a single unmistakable sailor, though plenty of land-sharks, who get a half-dishonest
livelihood by business connected with the sea.  Ale and spirit vaults (as petty drinking-establishments
are styled in England, pretending to contain vast cellars full of liquor within the compass
of ten feet square above ground) were particularly abundant, together with apples, oranges,
and oysters, the stalls of fishmongers and butchers, and slop-shops, where blue jackets and
duck trousers swung and capered before the doors. Everything was on the poorest scale, and
the place bore an aspect of unredeemable decay.  From this remote point of London, I strolled
leisurely towards the heart of the city; while the streets, at first but thinly occupied by
man or vehicle, got more and more thronged with foot-passengers, carts, drays, cabs, and the
all-pervading and all-accommodating omnibus.  But I lack courage, and feel that I should lack
perseverance, as the gentlest reader would lack patience, to undertake a descriptive stroll
through London streets; more especially as there would be a volume ready for the printer before
we could reach a midway resting-place at Charing Cross.  It will be the easier course to step
aboard another passing steamer, and continue our trip up the Thames.

The next notable group of objects is an assemblage of ancient walls, battlements, and turrets,
out of the midst of which rises prominently one great square tower, of a grayish line, bordered
with white stone, and having a small turret at each corner of the roof.  This central structure
is the White Tower, and the whole circuit of ramparts and enclosed edifices constitutes what
is known in English history, and still more widely and impressively in English poetry, as the
Tower.  A crowd of rivercraft are generally moored in front of it; but, if we look sharply
at the right moment under the base of the rampart, we may catch a glimpse of an arched water-entrance,
half submerged, past which the Thames glides as indifferently as if it were the mouth of a
city-kennel.  Nevertheless, it is the Traitor's Gate, a dreary kind of triumphal passageway
(now supposed to be shut up and barred forever), through which a multitude of noble and illustrious
personages have entered the Tower and found it a brief resting-place on their way to heaven.
Passing it many times, I never observed that anybody glanced at this shadowy and ominous trap-door,
save myself.  It is well that America exists, if it were only that her vagrant children may
be impressed and affected by the historical monuments of England in a degree of which the native
inhabitants are evidently incapable.  These matters are too familiar, too real, and too hopelessly
built in amongst and mixed up with the common objects and affairs of life, to be easily susceptible
of imaginative coloring in their minds; and even their poets and romancers feel it a toil,
and almost a delusion, to extract poetic material out of what seems embodied poetry itself
to an American.  An Englishman cares nothing about the Tower, which to us is a haunted castle
in dreamland.  That honest and excellent gentleman, the late Mr. G. P. R. James (whose mechanical
ability, one might have supposed, would nourish itself by devouring every old stone of such
a structure), once assured me that he had never in his life set eyes upon the Tower, though
for years an historic novelist in London.

Not to spend a whole summer's day upon the voyage, we will suppose ourselves to have reached
London Bridge, and thence to have taken another steamer for a farther passage up the river.
But here the memorable objects succeed each other so rapidly that I can spare but a single
sentence even for the great Dome, through I deem it more picturesque, in that dusky atmosphere,
than St. Peter's in its clear blue sky.  I must mention, however (since everything connected
with royalty is especially interesting to my dear countrymen), that I once saw a large and
beautiful barge, splendidly gilded and ornamented, and overspread with a rich covering, lying
at the pier nearest to St. Paul's Cathedral; it had the royal banner of Great Britain displayed,
besides being decorated with a number of other flags; and many footmen (who are universally
the grandest and gaudiest objects to be seen in England at this day, and these were regal ones,
in a bright scarlet livery bedizened with gold-lace, and white silk stockings) were in attendance.
I know not what festive or ceremonial occasion may have drawn out this pageant; after all,
it might have been merely a city-spectacle, appertaining to the Lord Mayor; but the sight had
its value in bringing vividly before me the grand old times when the sovereign and nobles were
accustomed to use the Thames as the high street of the metropolis, and join in pompous processions
upon it; whereas, the desuetude of such customs, nowadays, has caused the whole show of river-life
to consist in a multitude of smoke-begrimed steamers. An analogous change has taken place in
the streets, where cabs and the omnibus have crowded out a rich variety of vehicles; and thus
life gets more monotonous in hue from age to age, and appears to seize every opportunity to
strip off a bit of its gold-lace among the wealthier classes, and to make itself decent in
the lower ones.

Yonder is Whitefriars, the old rowdy Alsatia, now wearing as decorous a face as any other portion
of London; and, adjoining it, the avenues and brick squares of the Temple, with that historic
garden, close upon the river-side, and still rich in shrubbery and flowers, where the partisans
of York and Lancaster plucked the fatal roses, and scattered their pale and bloody petals over
so many English battle-fields.  Hard by, we see tine long white front or rear of Somerset House,
and, farther on, rise the two new Houses of Parliament, with a huge unfinished tower already
hiding its imperfect summit in the smoky canopy,--the whole vast and cumbrous edifice a specimen
of the best that modern architecture can effect, elaborately imitating the masterpieces of
those simple ages when men "builded better than they knew."  Close by it, we have a glimpse
of the roof and upper towers of the holy Abbey; while that gray, ancestral pile on the opposite
side of the river is Lambeth Palace, a venerable group of halls and turrets, chiefly built
of brick, but with at least one large tower of stone.  In our course, we have passed beneath
half a dozen bridges, and, emerging out of the black heart of London, shall soon reach a cleanly
suburb, where old Father Thames, if I remember, begins to put on an aspect of unpolluted innocence.
And now we look back upon the mass of innumerable roofs, out of which rise steeples, towers,
columns, and the great crowning Dome,--look back, in short, upon that mystery of the world's
proudest city, amid which a man so longs and loves to be; not, perhaps, because it contains
much that is positively admirable and enjoyable, but because, at all events, the world has
nothing better.  The cream of external life is there; and whatever merely intellectual or material
good we fail to find perfect in London, we may as well content ourselves to seek that unattainable
thing no farther on this earth.

The steamer terminates its trip at Chelsea, an old town endowed with a prodigious number of
pothouses, and some famous gardens, called the Cremorne, for public amusement.  The most noticeable
thing, however, is Chelsea Hospital, which, like that of Greenwich, was founded, I believe,
by Charles II. (whose bronze statue, in the guise of an old Roman, stands in the centre of
the quadrangle,) and appropriated as a home for aged and infirm soldiers of the British army.
The edifices are of three stories with windows in the high roofs, and are built of dark, sombre
brick, with stone edgings and facings.  The effect is by no means that of grandeur (which is
somewhat disagreeably an attribute of Greenwich Hospital), but a quiet and venerable neatness.
At each extremity of the street-front there is a spacious and hospitably open gateway, lounging
about which I saw some gray veterans in long scarlet coats of an antique fashion, and the cocked
hats of a century ago, or occasionally a modern foraging-cap. Almost all of them moved with
a rheumatic gait, two or three stumped on wooden legs, and here and there an arm was missing.
Inquiring of one of these fragmentary heroes whether a stranger could be admitted to see the
establishment, he replied most cordially, "O yes, sir,--anywhere!  Walk in and go where you
please,--up stairs, or anywhere!"  So I entered, and, passing along the inner side of the quadrangle,
came to the door of the chapel, which forms a part of the contiguity of edifices next the street. (For
the Mirror.)

An old Subscriber has sent us the following questions on the improvement
of the metropolis, which we insert as a castle-building jeu d'esprit
rather than as a serious matter.

They will, however, serve for the committee of taste to crack after dinner, and give a zest for
their magna bona.

Ought not the new palace to have been built in the richest Gothic style, so as to have deviated
in appearance from every other edifice in the metropolis; and to have been erected on the north
bank of the Serpentine?--And, if the dome of the present erection is not to be removed, cannot
it be ornamented?--Or could not the pediment, fronting the park, be raised another story, so
as to hide it (the dome) from that side?--Indeed, would not the palace be much improved by such
an alteration? I think if it be left as it is, when the wings are raised to the height of the body
of the palace, (though they are a wonderful improvement upon those first erected) the whole
will have a very flat appearance.--Are not the statues of Neptune, &c., much too small, and the
other ornaments, consisting of representations of warlike implements, &c., much too heavy to
look well?

Is not the Borough a very improper place for the king's, or any other, college?--Is it not
the very mart of trade, and consequently ever noisy and in confusion?--And
what a magnificent improvement would its erection near Westminster
Abbey be to that ancient and very sumptuous pile.

Could it not be erected from Tothill Street, and extend towards Storey's Gate?--And should it not be
built in the Gothic style to correspond with the abbey? The seat
of learning and wisdom is in that neighbourhood (Westminster School,
Houses of Parliament, Courts of Justice, &c.); therefore it is the
place best adapted for the erection of a college.  But, in truth, the whole system of
a people crowing over its military triumphs had far better he dispensed with, both on account
of the ill-blood that it helps to keep fermenting among the nations, and because it operates
as an accumulative inducement to future generations to aim at a kind of glory, the gain of
which has generally proved more ruinous than its loss.  I heartily wish that every trophy of
victory might crumble away, and that every reminiscence or tradition of a hero, from the beginning
of the world to this day, could pass out of all men's memories at once and forever.  I might
feel very differently, to be sure, if we Northerners had anything especially valuable to lose
by the fading of those illuminated names.

I gave the pensioner (but I am afraid there may have been a little affectation in it) a magnificent
guerdon of all the silver I had in my pocket, to requite him for having unintentionally stirred
up my patriotic susceptibilities.  He was a meek-looking, kindly old man, with a humble freedom
and affability of manner that made it pleasant to converse with him.  Old soldiers, I know
not why, seem to be more accostable than old sailors.  One is apt to hear a growl beneath the
smoothest courtesy of the latter.  The mild veteran, with his peaceful voice, and gentle reverend
aspect, told me that he had fought at a cannon all through the Battle of Waterloo, and escaped
unhurt; he had now been in the hospital four or five years, and was married, but necessarily
underwent a separation from his wife, who lived outside of the gates.  To my inquiry whether
his fellow-pensioners were comfortable and happy, he answered, with great alacrity, "O yes,
sir!" qualifying his evidence, after a moment's consideration, by saying in an undertone, "There
are some people, your Honor knows, who could not be comfortable anywhere."  I did know it,
and fear that the system of Chelsea Hospital allows too little of that wholesome care and regulation
of their own occupations and interests which might assuage the sting of life to those naturally
uncomfortable individuals by giving them something external to think about.  But my old friend
here was happy in the hospital, and by this time, very likely, is happy in heaven, in spite
of the bloodshed that he may have caused by touching off a cannon at Waterloo.

Crossing Battersea Bridge, in the neighborhood of Chelsea, I remember seeing a distant gleam
of the Crystal Palace, glimmering afar in the afternoon sunshine like an imaginary structure,--an
air-castle by chance descended upon earth, and resting there one instant before it vanished,
as we sometimes see a soap-bubble touch unharmed on the carpet,--a thing of only momentary
visibility and no substance, destined to be overburdened and crushed down by the first cloud-shadow
that might fall upon that spot.  Even as I looked, it disappeared.  Shall I attempt a picture
of this exhalation of modern ingenuity, or what else shall I try to paint?  Everything in London
and its vicinity has been depicted innumerable times, but never once translated into intelligible
images; it is an "old, old story," never yet told, nor to be told.  While writing these reminiscences,
I am continually impressed with the futility of the effort to give any creative truth to ink
sketch, so that it might produce such pictures in the reader's mind as would cause the original
scenes to appear familiar when afterwards beheld.  Nor have other writers often been more successful
in representing definite objects prophetically to my own mind.  In truth, I believe that the
chief delight and advantage of this kind of literature is not for any real information that
it supplies to untravelled people, but for reviving the recollections and reawakening the emotions
of persons already acquainted with the scenes described. Thus I found an exquisite pleasure,
the other day, in reading Mr. Tuckerman's "Month in England," fine example of the way in which
a refined and cultivated American looks at the Old Country, the things that he naturally seeks
there, and the modes of feeling and reflection which they excite.  Correct outlines avail little
or nothing, though truth of coloring may be somewhat more efficacious.  Impressions, however,
states of mind produced by interesting and remarkable objects, these, if truthfully and vividly
recorded, may work a genuine effect, and, though lint the result, of what we see, go further
towards representing the actual scene than any direct effort to paint it.  Give the emotions
that cluster about it, and, without being able to analyze the spell by which it is summoned
up, you get something like a simulacre of the object in the midst of them.  From some of the
above reflections I draw the comfortable inference, that, the longer and better known a thing
may be, so much the more eligible is it as the subject of a descriptive sketch.

On a Sunday afternoon, I passed through a side-entrance in the time-blackened wall of a place
of worship, and found myself among a congregation assembled in one of the transepts and the
immediately contiguous portion of the nave.  It was a vast old edifice, spacious enough, within
the extent covered by its pillared roof and overspread by its stone pavement, to accommodate
the whole of church-going London, and with a far wider and loftier concave than any human power
of lungs could fill with audible prayer.  Oaken benches were arranged in the transept, on one
of which I seated myself, and joined, as well as I knew how, in the sacred business that was
going forward.  But when it came to the sermon, the voice of the preacher was puny, and so
were his thoughts, and both seemed impertinent at such a time and place, where he and all of
us were bodily included within a sublime act of religion, which could be seen above and around
us and felt beneath our feet.  The structure itself was the worship of the devout men of long
ago, miraculously preserved in stone without losing an atom of its fragrance and fervor; it
was a kind of anthem-strain that they had sung and poured out of the organ in centuries gone
by; and being so grand and sweet, the Divine benevolence had willed it to be prolonged for
the behoof of auditors unborn.  I therefore came to the conclusion, that, in my individual
case, it would be better and more reverent to let my eyes wander about the edifice than to
fasten them and my thoughts on the evidently uninspired mortal who was venturing--and felt
it no venture at all--to speak here above his breath.

The interior of Westminster Abbey (for the reader recognized it, no doubt, the moment we entered)
is built of rich brown stone; and the whole of it--the lofty roof, the tall, clustered pillars,
and the pointed arches--appears to be in consummate repair.  At all points where decay has
laid its finger, the structure is clamped with iron or otherwise carefully protected; and being
thus watched over,--whether as a place of ancient sanctity, a noble specimen of Gothic art,
or an object of national interest and pride,--it may reasonably be expected to survive for
as many ages as have passed over it already.  It was sweet to feel its venerable quietude,
its long-enduring peace, and yet to observe how kindly and even cheerfully it received the
sunshine of to-day, which fell from the great windows into the fretted aisles and arches that
laid aside somewhat of their aged gloom to welcome it.  Sunshine always seems friendly to old
abbeys, churches, and castles, kissing them, as it were, with a more affectionate, though still
reverential familiarity, than it accords to edifices of later date.  A square of golden light
lay on the sombre pavement of the nave, afar off, falling through the grand western entrance,
the folding leaves of which were wide open, and afforded glimpses of people passing to and
fro in the outer world, while we sat dimly enveloped in the solemnity of antique devotion.
In the south transept, separated from us by the full breadth of the minster, there were painted
glass windows of which the uppermost appeared to be a great orb of many-colored radiance, being,
indeed, a cluster of saints and angels whose glorified bodies formed the rays of an aureole
emanating from a cross in the midst.  These windows are modern, but combine softness with wonderful
brilliancy of effect.  Through the pillars and arches, I saw that the walls in that distant
region of the edifice were almost wholly incrusted with marble, now grown yellow with time,
no blank, unlettered slabs, but memorials of such men as their respective generations deemed
wisest and bravest.  Some of them were commemorated merely by inscriptions on mural tablets,
others by sculptured bas-reliefs, others (once famous, but now forgotten generals or admirals,
these) by ponderous tombs that aspired towards the roof of the aisle, or partly curtained the
immense arch of a window.  These mountains of marble were peopled with the sisterhood of Allegory,
winged trumpeters, and classic figures in full-bottomed wigs; but it was strange to observe
how the old Abbey melted all such absurdities into the breadth of its own grandeur, even magnifying
itself by what would elsewhere have been ridiculous.  Methinks it is the test of Gothic sublimity
to overpower the ridiculous without deigning to hide it; and these grotesque monuments of the
last century answer a similar purpose with the grinning faces which, the old architects scattered
among their most solemn conceptions.

From these distant wanderings (it was my first visit to Westminster Abbey, and I would gladly
have taken it all in at a glance) my eyes came back and began to investigate what was immediately
about me in the transept.  Close at my elbow was the pedestal of Canning's statue.  Next beyond
it was a massive tomb, on the spacious tablet of which reposed the full-length figures of a
marble lord and lady, whom an inscription announced to be the Duke and Duchess of Newcastle,--the
historic Duke of Charles I.'s time, and the fantastic Duchess, traditionally remembered by
her poems and plays.  She was of a family, as the record on her tomb proudly informed us, of
which all the brothers had been valiant and all the sisters virtuous.  A recent statue of Sir
John Malcolm, the new marble as white as snow, held the next place; and near by was a mural
monument and bust of Sir Peter Warren.  The round visage of this old British admiral has a
certain interest for a New-Englander, because it was by no merit of his own (though he took
care to assume it as such), but by the valor and warlike enterprise of our colonial forefathers,
especially the stout men of Massachusetts, that he won rank and renown, and a tomb in Westminster
Abbey.  Lord Mansfield, a huge mass of marble done into the guise of a judicial gown and wig,
with a stern face in the midst of the latter, sat on the other side of the transept; and on
the pedestal beside him was a figure of Justice, holding forth, instead of the customary grocer's
scales, an actual pair of brass steelyards.  It is an ancient and classic instrument, undoubtedly;
but I had supposed that Portia (when Shylock's pound of flesh was to be weighed) was the only
judge that ever really called for it in a court of justice.  Pitt and Fox were in the same
distinguished company; and John Kemble, in Roman costume, stood not far off, but strangely
shorn of the dignity that is said to have enveloped him like a mantle in his lifetime.  Perhaps
the evanescent majesty of the stage is incompatible with the long endurance of marble and the
solemn reality of the tomb; though, on the other hand, almost every illustrious personage here
represented has been invested with more or less of stage-trickery by his sculptor.  In truth,
the artist (unless there be a divine efficacy in his touch, making evident a heretofore hidden
dignity in the actual form) feels it--an imperious law to remove his subject as far from the
aspect of ordinary life as may be possible without sacrificing every trace of resemblance.
The absurd effect of the contrary course is very remarkable in the statue of Mr. Wilberforce,
whose actual self, save for the lack of color, I seemed to behold, seated just across the aisle.

This excellent man appears to have sunk into himself in a sitting posture, with a thin leg
crossed over his knee, a book in one hand, and a finger of the other under his chin, I believe,
or applied to the side of his nose, or to some equally familiar purpose; while his exceedingly
homely and wrinkled face, held a little on one side, twinkles at you with the shrewdest complacency,
as if he were looking right into your eyes, and twigged something there which you had half
a mind to conceal from him.  He keeps this look so pertinaciously that you feel it to be insufferably
impertinent, and bethink yourself what common ground there may be between yourself and a stone
image, enabling you to resent it.  I have no doubt that the statue is as like Mr. Wilberforce
as one pea to another, and you might fancy, that, at some ordinary moment, when he least expected
it, and before he had time to smooth away his knowing complication of wrinkles, he had seen
the Gorgon's head, and whitened into marble,--not only his personal self, but his coat and
small-clothes, down to a button and the minutest crease of the cloth.  The ludicrous result
marks the impropriety of bestowing the age-long duration of marble upon small, characteristic
individualities, such as might come within the province of waxen imagery.  The sculptor should
give permanence to the figure of a great man in his mood of broad and grand composure, which
would obliterate all mean peculiarities; for, if the original were unaccustomed to such a mood,
or if his features were incapable of assuming the guise, it seems questionable whether he could
really have been entitled to a marble immortality.  In point of fact, however, the English
face and form are seldom statuesque, however illustrious the individual.

It ill becomes me, perhaps, to have lapsed into this mood of half-jocose criticism in describing
my first visit to Westminster Abbey, a spot which I had dreamed about more reverentially, from
my childhood upward, than any other in the world, and which I then beheld, and now look back
upon, with profound gratitude to the men who built it, and a kindly interest, I may add, in
the humblest personage that has contributed his little all to its impressiveness, by depositing
his dust or his memory there.  But it is a characteristic of this grand edifice that it permits
you to smile as freely under the roof of its central nave as if you stood beneath the yet grander
canopy of heaven.  Break into laughter, if you feel inclined, provided the vergers do not hear
it echoing among the arches.  In an ordinary church you would keep your countenance for fear
of disturbing the sanctities or proprieties of the place; but you need leave no honest and
decorous portion of your human nature outside of these benign and truly hospitable walls. 
Their mild awfulness will take care of itself. Thus it does no harm to the general impression,
when you come to be sensible that many of the monuments are ridiculous, and commemorate a mob
of people who are mostly forgotten in their graves, and few of whom ever deserved any better
boon from posterity.  You acknowledge the force of Sir Godfrey Kneller's objection to being
buried in Westminster Abbey, because "they do bury fools there!"  Nevertheless, these grotesque
carvings of marble, that break out in dingy-white blotches on the old freestone of the interior
walls, have come there by as natural a process as might cause mosses and ivy to cluster about
the external edifice; for they are the historical and biographical record of each successive
age, written with its own hand, and all the truer for the inevitable mistakes, and none the
less solemn for the occasional absurdity.  Though you entered the Abbey expecting to see the
tombs only of the illustrious, you are content at last to read many names, both in literature
and history, that have now lost the reverence of mankind, if indeed they ever really possessed it.

Let these men rest in peace.  Even if you miss a name or two that you hoped to find there,
they may well be spared.  It matters little a few more or less, or whether Westminster Abbey
contains or lacks any one man's grave, so long as the Centuries, each with the crowd of personages
that it deemed memorable, have chosen it as their place of honored sepulture, and laid themselves
down under its pavement.  The inscriptions and devices on the walls are rich with evidences
of the fluctuating tastes, fashions, manners, opinions, prejudices, follies, wisdoms of the
past, and thus they combine into a more truthful memorial of their dead times than any individual
epitaph-maker ever meant to write.

When the services were over, many of the audience seemed inclined to linger in the nave or
wander away among the mysterious aisles; for there is nothing in this world so fascinating
as a Gothic minster, which always invites you deeper and deeper into its heart both by vast
revelations and shadowy concealments.  Through the open-work screen that divides the nave from
the chancel and choir, we could discern the gleam of a marvellous window, but were debarred
from entrance into that more sacred precinct of the Abbey by the vergers.  These vigilant officials
(doing their duty all the more strenuously because no fees could be exacted from Sunday visitors)
flourished their staves, and drove us towards the grand entrance like a flock of sheep.  Lingering
through one of the aisles, I happened to look down, and found my foot upon a stone inscribed
with this familiar exclamation, "O rare Ben Jonson!" and remembered the story of stout old
Ben's burial in that spot, standing upright,--not, I presume, on account of any unseemly reluctance
on his part to lie down in the dust, like other men, but because standing-room was all that
could reasonably be demanded for a poet among the slumberous notabilities of his age.  It made
me weary to think of it!--such a prodigious length of time to keep one's feet!--apart from
the honor of the thing, it would certainly have been better for Ben to stretch himself at ease
in some country churchyard.  To this day, however, I fancy that there is a contemptuous alloy
mixed up with the admiration which the higher classes of English society profess for their
literary men.

Another day--in truth, many other days--I sought out Poets' Corner, and found a sign-board
and pointed finger, directing the visitor to it, on the corner house of a little lane leading
towards the rear of the Abbey. The entrance is at the southeastern end of the south transept,
and it is used, on ordinary occasions, as the only free mode of access to the building.  It
is no spacious arch, but a small, lowly door, passing through which, and pushing aside an inner
screen that partly keeps out an exceedingly chill wind, you find yourself in a dim nook of
the Abbey, with the busts of poets gazing at you from the otherwise bare stone-work of the
walls.  Great poets, too; for Ben Jenson is right behind the door, and Spenser's tablet is
next, and Butler's on the same side of the transept, and Milton's (whose bust you know at once
by its resemblance to one of his portraits, though older, more wrinkled, and sadder than that)
is close by, and a profile-medallion of Gray beneath it.  A window high aloft sheds down a
dusky daylight on these and many other sculptured marbles, now as yellow as old parchment,
that cover the three walls of the nook up to an elevation of about twenty feet above the pavement.
It seemed to me that I had always been familiar with the spot.  Enjoying a humble intimacy--and
how much of my life had else been a dreary solitude!--with many of its inhabitants, I could
not feel myself a stranger there.  It was delightful to be among them.  There was a genial
awe, mingled with a sense of kind and friendly presences about me; and I was glad, moreover,
at finding so many of them there together, in fit companionship, mutually recognized and duly
honored, all reconciled now, whatever distant generations, whatever personal hostility or other
miserable impediment, had divided them far asunder while they lived. I have never felt a similar
interest in any other tombstones, nor have I ever been deeply moved by the imaginary presence
of other famous dead people.  A poet's ghost is the only one that survives for his fellow-mortals,
after his bones are in the dust,--and be not ghostly, but cherishing many hearts with his own
warmth in the chillest atmosphere of life.  What other fame is worth aspiring for?  Or, let
me speak it more boldly, what other long-enduring fame can exist?  We neither remember nor
care anything for the past, except as the poet has made it intelligibly noble and sublime to
our comprehension.  The shades of the mighty have no substance; they flit ineffectually about
the darkened stage where they performed their momentary parts, save when the poet has thrown
his own creative soul into them, and imparted a more vivid life than ever they were able to
manifest to mankind while they dwelt in the body.  And therefore--though he cunningly disguises
himself in their armor, their robes of state, or kingly purple--it is not the statesman, the
warrior, or the monarch that survives, but the despised poet, whom they may have fed with their
crumbs, and to whom they owe all that they now are or have,--a name!

In the foregoing paragraph I seem to have been betrayed into a flight above or beyond the customary
level that best agrees with me; but it represents fairly enough the emotions with which I passed
from Poets' Corner into the chapels, which contain the sepulchres of kings and great people.
They are magnificent even now, and must have been inconceivably so when the marble slabs and
pillars wore their new polish, and the statues retained the brilliant colors with which they
were originally painted, and the shrines their rich gilding, of which the sunlight still shows
a glimmer or a streak, though the sunbeam itself looks tarnished with antique dust.  Yet this
recondite portion of the Abbey presents few memorials of personages whom we care to remember.
The shrine of Edward the Confessor has a certain interest, because it was so long held in religious
reverence, and because the very dust that settled upon it was formerly worth gold.  The helmet
and war-saddle of Henry V., worn at Agincourt, and now suspended above his tomb, are memorable
objects, but more for Shakespeare's sake than the victor's own.  Rank has been the general
passport to admission here.  Noble and regal dust is as cheap as dirt under the pavement. 
I am glad to recollect, indeed (and it is too characteristic of the right English spirit not
to be mentioned), one or two gigantic statues of great mechanicians, who contributed largely
to the material welfare of England, sitting familiarly in their marble chairs among forgotten
kings and queens.  Otherwise, the quaintness of the earlier monuments, and the antique beauty
of some of them, are what chiefly gives them value.  Nevertheless, Addison is buried among
the men of rank; not on the plea of his literary fame, however, but because he was connected
with nobility by marriage, and had been a Secretary of State.  His gravestone is inscribed
with a resounding verse from Tickell's lines to his memory, the only lines by which Tickell
himself is now remembered, and which (as I discovered a little while ago) he mainly filched
from an obscure versifier of somewhat earlier date.

Returning to Poets' Corner, I looked again at the walls, and wondered how the requisite hospitality
can be shown to poets of our own and the succeeding ages.  There is hardly a foot of space
left, although room has lately been found for a bust of Southey and a full-length statue of
Campbell.  At best, only a little portion of the Abbey is dedicated to poets, literary men,
musical composers, and others of the gentle artist breed, and even into that small nook of
sanctity men of other pursuits have thought it decent to intrude themselves.  Methinks the
tuneful throng, being at home here, should recollect how they were treated in their lifetime,
and turn the cold shoulder, looking askance at nobles and official personages, however worthy
of honorable intercourse elsewhere. Yet it shows aptly and truly enough what portion of the
world's regard and honor has heretofore been awarded to literary eminence in comparison with
other modes of greatness,--this dimly lighted corner (nor even that quietly to themselves)
in the vast minster, the walls of which are sheathed and hidden under marble that has been
wasted upon the illustrious obscure.  Nevertheless, it may not be worth while to quarrel with
the world on this account; for, to confess the very truth, their own little nook contains more
than one poet whose memory is kept alive by his monument, instead of imbuing the senseless
stone with a spiritual immortality,--men of whom you do not ask, "Where is he?" but, "Why is
he here?"  I estimate that all the literary people who really make an essential part of one's
inner life, including the period since English literature first existed, might have ample elbow-room
to sit down and quaff their draughts of Castaly round Chaucer's broad, horizontal tombstone.
These divinest poets consecrate the spot, and throw a reflected glory over the humblest of
their companions.  And as for the latter, it is to be hoped that they may have long outgrown
the characteristic jealousies and morbid sensibilities of their craft, and have found out the
little value (probably not amounting to sixpence in immortal currency) of the posthumous renown
which they once aspired to win.  It would be a poor compliment to a dead poet to fancy him
leaning out of the sky and snuffing up the impure breath of earthly praise.

Yet we cannot easily rid ourselves of the notion that those who have bequeathed us the inheritance
of an undying song would fain be conscious of its endless reverberations in the hearts of mankind,
and would delight, among sublimer enjoyments, to see their names emblazoned in such a treasure-place
of great memories as Westminster Abbey.  There are some men, at all events,--true and tender
poets, moreover, and fully deserving of the honor,--whose spirits, I feel certain, would linger
a little while about Poets' Corner for the sake of witnessing their own apotheosis among their
kindred.  They have had a strong natural yearning, not so much for applause as sympathy, which
the cold fortune of their lifetime did but scantily supply; so that this unsatisfied appetite
may make itself felt upon sensibilities at once so delicate and retentive, even a step or two
beyond the grave.  Leigh Hunt, for example, would be pleased, even now, if he could learn that
his bust had been reposited in the midst of the old poets whom he admired and loved; though
there is hardly a man among the authors of to-day and yesterday whom the judgment of Englishmen
would be less likely to place there.  He deserves it, however, if not for his verse (the value
of which I do not estimate, never having been able to read it), yet for his delightful prose,
his unmeasured poetry, the inscrutable happiness of his touch, working soft miracles by a life-process
like the growth of grass and flowers.  As with all such gentle writers, his page sometimes
betrayed a vestige of affectation, but, the next moment, a rich, natural luxuriance overgrew
and buried it out of sight.  I knew him a little, and (since, Heaven be praised, few English
celebrities whom I chanced to meet have enfranchised my pen by their decease, and as I assume
no liberties with living men) I will conclude this rambling article by sketching my first interview
with Leigh Hunt.

He was then at Hammersmith, occupying a very plain and shabby little house, in a contiguous
range of others like it, with no prospect but that of an ugly village street, and certainly
nothing to gratify his craving for a tasteful environment, inside or out.  A slatternly maid-servant
opened the door for us, and he himself stood in the entry, a beautiful and venerable old man,
buttoned to the chin in a black dress-coat, tall and slender, with a countenance quietly alive
all over, and the gentlest and most naturally courteous manner.  He ushered us into his little
study, or parlor, or both,--a very forlorn room, with poor paper-hangings and carpet, few books,
no pictures that I remember, and an awful lack of upholstery.  I touch distinctly upon these
external blemishes and this nudity of adornment, not that they would be worth mentioning in
a sketch of other remarkable persons, but because Leigh Hunt was born with such a faculty of
enjoying all beautiful things that it seemed as if Fortune, did him as much wrong in not supplying
them as in withholding a sufficiency of vital breath from ordinary men.  All kinds of mild
magnificence, tempered by his taste, would have become him well; but he had not the grim dignity
that assumes nakedness as the better robe.

I have said that he was a beautiful old man.  In truth, I never saw a finer countenance, either
as to the mould of features or the expression, nor any that showed the play of feeling so perfectly
without the slightest theatrical emphasis.  It was like a child's face in this respect. The little
black thing remained as dumb as the grave, for this species is the most malicious and obstinate
of all the underground folk.

The farmer now got angry, and said--

"Do but be quiet, my child. I should be a fool to put myself into a passion with such a little
brat. Never fear, I shall soon make you tame enough."

So saying, he ran home with him, and clapped him into a black sooty iron pot, and put the iron
lid upon it, and laid on the top of the lid a great heavy stone. Then he set the pot in a dark, cold
room, and as he was going out, said to him--

"Stay there, now, and freeze till you are black!

I'll engage that at last you will answer me civilly."

Twice a week the farmer went regularly into the room and asked his little black captive if he
would answer him now, but the little one still obstinately persisted in his silence. The farmer
had, without success, pursued this course for six weeks, at the end of which time his prisoner
at last gave up. One day, as the farmer was opening the room door, of his own accord he asked him
to come and take him out of his dirty, gloomy dungeon, promising that he would now cheerfully
do all that was wanted of him.

The farmer first ordered him to tell him his history. The black one replied--

"My dear friend, you know it just as well as I do, or else you never would have had me here. You see
I happened by chance to come too near the cross, a thing we little people may not do, and then
I was held fast, and obliged instantly to let my body become visible. In order that people might
not recognise me, I turned myself into an insect. But you found me out. When we get fastened
to holy or consecrated things we can never get away from them unless a man takes us off. That, however,
does not happen without plague and annoyance to us; though, indeed, to say the truth, the staying
fastened there is not over pleasant. So I struggled against you too, for we have a natural
aversion to let ourselves be taken in a man's hand."

"Ho, ho! is that the tune with you?" cried the farmer. "You have a natural aversion have you?
Believe me, my sooty friend, I have just the same for you, and so you shall be away without
a moment's delay, and we will lose no time in making our bargain with each other. But you must
first make me some present."

"What you will you have only to ask," said the little one, "silver and gold, and precious stones,
and costly furniture--all shall be thine in less than an instant."

"Silver and gold, and precious stones, and all such glittering fine things, will I none," said
the farmer. "They have turned the heart and broken the neck of many a one before now, and few
are they whose lives they make happy. I know that you are handy smiths, and have many a strange
thing with you that other smiths know nothing about. So, come now, swear to me that you will make
me an iron plough, such that the smallest foal may be able to draw it without being tired, and then
run off with you as fast as your legs will carry you." So the black swore, and then the farmer
cried out--

"Now, in the name of God. There you are at liberty," and the little one vanished like lightning.

Next
morning, before the sun was up, there stood in the farmer's yard
a new iron plough, and he yoked his dog, Water, to it; and though
it was of the size of an ordinary plough, Water drew it with ease
through the heaviest clayland, and it tore up prodigious furrows.

The farmer used this plough for many years, and the smallest foal or the leanest little horse
could draw it through the ground, to the amazement of every one who beheld it, without turning
a single hair.

This plough made a rich man of the farmer, for it cost him no horse-flesh, and he led a cheerful and
contented life by means of it.

Hereby we may see that moderation holds out the longest, and that it is not good to covet too much.

HOW
A LAD STOLE THE GIANT'S TREASURE.

Once upon a time there lived a peasant who had three sons. The two elder ones used to go with
him to the field and to the forest, and helped him in his work, but the youngest remained at home
with his mother, to help her in the house. His brothers despised him for doing this, and whenever
they had a chance they used him badly.

At length the father and mother died, and the sons divided the property among them. As might
have been looked for, the elder brothers took all that was of any value for themselves, leaving
nothing to the youngest but an old cracked kneading-trough, which
neither of them thought worth the having.

"The old trough," said one of the brothers, "will do very well for our young brother, for he
is always baking and scrubbing."

The boy thought this, as was only natural, a poor thing to inherit, but he could do nothing,
and he now recognised that it would be no use his remaining at home, so he wished his brothers
good-bye, and went off to seek his fortune. On coming to the side of a lake he made his trough
water-tight with oakum, and converted it into a little boat. Then he found two sticks, and using
these as oars rowed away.

When he had crossed the water, he saw a large palace, and entering it, he asked to speak with the
king. The king questioned him respecting his family and the purpose of his visit.

"I," said the boy, "am the son of a poor peasant, and all I have in the world is an old kneading-trough.
I have come here to seek work."

The king laughed when he heard this.

"Indeed," said he, "you have not inherited much, but fortune works many a change."

He took the lad to be one of his servants, and he became a favourite for his courage and honesty.

Now
the king who owned this palace had an only daughter, who was so beautiful and so clever that
she was talked of all through the kingdom, and many came from the east and from the west to ask
her hand in marriage. The princess, however, rejected them all, saying that none should have
her for his wife unless he brought her for a wedding-present four valuable things belonging to
a giant who lived on the other side of the lake. These four treasures were a gold sword, three gold
hens, a gold lantern, and a gold harp.

Many king's sons and many good warriors tried to win these treasures,
but none of them came back, for the giant caught them all and eat
them.

The king was very sorrowful, for he feared that at this rate his daughter would never get a husband, and
so he would not have a son-in-law to whom to leave his kingdom.

The boy when he heard of this thought that it might be well worth his while to try to win the
king's beautiful daughter. So he went to the king one day, and told him what he meant to do. When
the king heard him, he got angry, and said--

"Do you think that you, who are only a servant, can do what great warriors have failed in?"

The boy, however, was not to be dissuaded, and begged him so to let him go that at last the king grew
calmer and gave him his permission. "But," said he, "you will lose your life, and I shall be
sorry to miss you."

With that they parted.

The boy went down to the shore of the lake, and, having found his trough, he looked it over
very closely. Then he got into it and rowed across the lake, and coming to the giant's dwelling
he hid himself, and stayed the night there.

Very early in the morning, before it was light, the giant went to his barn, and began to thrash, making
such a noise that the mountains all around echoed again. When the boy heard this he collected
some stones and put them in his pouch. Then he climbed up on to the roof of the barn and made a little
hole so that he could look in. Now the giant had by his side his golden sword, which had the strange
property that it clanked whenever the giant was angry. While the giant was busy thrashing
at full speed, the boy threw a little stone which hit the sword, and caused it to clank.

"Why do you clank?" said the giant. "I am not angry."

He went on thrashing, but the next moment the sword clanked again. Once more the giant pursued
his work, and the sword clanked a third time. Then the giant got so angry that he undid the belt,
and threw the sword out of the barn door.

"Lie there," said he, "till I have done my thrashing."

The lad waited no longer, but slipping down from the roof seized on the sword, ran to his boat, and
rowed across the water. On reaching the other side he hid his treasure, and was full of glee at the success
of his adventure.

The next day he filled his pouch with corn, put a bundle of bast-twine in his boat, and once
more set off to the giant's dwelling. He lay hiding for a time, and then he saw the giant's three
golden hens walking about on the shore, and spreading their feathers, which sparkled beautifully
in the bright sunshine. He was soon near them, and began to softly lead them on, scattering corn
for them out of his pouch. While they were picking the boy gradually led them to the water,
till at last he got them into his little boat. Then he jumped in himself, secured the fowl
with his twine, pushed out from the shore, and rowed as quickly as he could to the other side
of the water.

The third day he put some lumps of salt into his pouch, and again
rowed across the lake.

As night came on he noticed how the smoke rose from the giant's dwelling, and concluded that
the giant's wife was busy getting ready his food. He crept up on to the roof, and, looking down
through the hole by which the smoke escaped, saw a large caldron boiling on the fire. Then he took
the lumps of salt out of his pouch, and threw them one by one into the pot. Having done this, he
crept down from the roof, and waited to see what would follow.

Soon after the giant's wife took the caldron off the fire, poured out the porridge into a bowl, and
put it on the table. The giant was hungry, and he fell to at once, but scarcely had he tasted
the porridge when he found it too salt. He got very angry, and started from his seat. The old woman
made what excuse she could, and said that the porridge must be good; but the giant declared
he would eat no more of the stuff, and told her to taste it for herself. She did so, and pulled
a terrible face, for she had never in her life tasted such abominable stuff.

There was nothing for it but she must make some new porridge. So she seized a can, took the
gold lantern down from the wall, and went as fast as she could to the well to draw some water.
She put the lantern down by the side of the well, and was stooping down to get the water, when
the boy ran to her, and, laying hold of her by the feet, threw her head over heels into the well.
He seized hold of the golden lantern, ran away as fast as he could to his boat, and rowed across
the water in safety.

The giant sat for a long time wondering why his wife was away so long. At last he went to look
for her, but nothing could he see of her. Then he heard a splashing in the well, and finding she was
in the water, he, with a lot of work, got her out.

"Where is my gold lantern?" was the first thing he asked, as the old woman came round a little.

"I
don't know," answered she. "Somebody came, caught me by the feet, and threw me into the well."

The
giant was very angry at this.

"Three of my treasures," said he, "have gone, and I have now only my golden harp left. But, whoever
the thief may be, he shall not have that; I will keep that safe under twelve locks."

While these things occurred at the giant's dwelling, the boy sat on the other side of the water,
rejoicing that he had got on so well.

The most difficult task, however, had yet to be done, and for a long
time he thought over how he could get the golden harp.

At length he determined to row over to the giant's place and see if fortune would favour him.

No
sooner said than done. He rowed over and went to a hiding-place. The giant had, however, been
on the watch, and had seen him. So he rushed forward in a terrible rage and seized the boy, saying--

"So
I have caught you at last, you young rascal. You it was who stole my sword, my three gold hens,
and my gold lantern."

The boy was terribly afraid, for he thought his last hour was come.

"Spare my life, father," said he humbly, "and I will never come here again."

"No," replied the giant, "I will do the same with you as with the others. No one slips alive
out of my hands."

He then shut the boy up in a sty, and fed him with nuts and sweet milk, so as to get him nice
and fat preparatory to killing and eating him.

The lad was a prisoner, but he ate and drank and made himself as easy as he could. After some
time the giant wanted to find out if he were fat enough to be killed. So he went to the sty, made
a little hole in the wall, and told the boy to put his finger through it. The lad knew what
he wanted; so instead of putting out his finger he poked out a little peeled alder twig. The giant
cut the twig, and the red sap ran out. Then he thought the boy must be yet very lean since his
flesh was so hard, so he caused a greater supply of milk and nuts to be given to him.

Some time after, the giant again visited the sty, and ordered the boy to put his finger through
the hole in the wall. The lad now poked out a cabbage-stalk, and the giant, having cut it
with his knife, concluded that the lad must be fat enough, his flesh seemed so soft.

The next morning the giant said to his wife--

"The boy seems to be fat enough now, mother; take him then to-day, and bake him in the oven, while
I go and ask our kinsfolk to the feast."

The old woman promised to do what her husband told her. So, having heated the oven, she dragged
out the boy to bake him.

"Sit on the shovel," said she.

The boy did so, but when the old woman raised the shovel the boy always fell off. So they went
on many times. At last the giantess got angry, and scolded the boy for being so awkward; the lad
excused himself, saying that he did not know the way to sit on the shovel.

"Look at me," said the woman, "I will show you."

So she sat herself down on the shovel, bending her back and drawing
up her knees. No sooner was she seated than the boy, seizing hold
of the handle, pushed her into the oven and slammed the door to. Then
he took the woman's fur cloak, stuffed it out with straw, and laid
it on the bed. Seizing the giant's bunch of keys, he opened the twelve
locks, snatched up the golden harp, and ran down to his boat, which
he had hidden among the flags on the shore.

The giant soon afterwards
came home.

"Where can my wife be?" said he. "No doubt she has lain
down to sleep a bit. Ah! I thought so."

The old woman, however, slept
a long while, and the giant could not wake her, though he was now
expecting his friends to arrive.

"Wake up, mother," cried he, but
no one replied. He called again, but there was no response. He got
angry, and, going to the bed, he gave the fur cloak a good shake.
Then he found that it was not his wife, but only a bundle of straw
put in her clothes. At this the giant grew alarmed, and he ran off
to look after his golden harp. He found his keys gone, the twelve
locks undone, and the harp missing. He went to the oven and opened
the door to see how the meat for the feast was going on. Behold! there
sat his wife, baked, and grinning at him.

Then the giant was almost
mad with grief and rage, and he rushed out to seek the lad who had
done him all this mischief. He came down to the edge of the water
and found him sitting in his boat, playing on the harp. The music
came over the water, and the gold strings shone wonderfully in the
sunshine. The giant jumped into the water after the boy; but finding
that it was too deep, he laid himself down, and began to drink the
water in order to make the lake shallower. He drank with all his might,
and by this means set up a current which drew the boat nearer and
nearer to the shore. Just when he was going to lay hold of it he burst,
for he had drunk too much; and there was an end of him.

The giant
lay dead on the shore, and the boy moved away across the lake, full
of joy and happiness. When he came to land, he combed his golden hair,
put on fine clothes, fastened the giant's gold sword by his side,
and, taking the gold harp in one hand and the gold lantern in the
other, he led the gold fowl after him, and went to the king, who was
sitting in the great hall of the palace surrounded by his courtiers.
When the king saw the boy he was heartily glad. The lad went to the
king's beautiful daughter, saluted her courteously, and laid the giant's
treasures before her. Then there was great joy in the palace, that
the princess had after all got the giant's treasures and so bold and
handsome a bridegroom. The wedding was celebrated soon after with
very much splendour and rejoicing; and when the king died the lad
succeeded him, ruling over all the land both long and happily.

I
know no more respecting them.

TALES OF CATS.

The house of Katholm
(Cat-isle) near Grenaac, in Jutland, got its name from the following
circumstance.

There was a man in Jutland who had made a good deal
of money by improper means. When he died he left his property equally
among his three sons. The youngest, when he got his share, thought
to himself--

"What comes with sin goes with sorrow," and he resolved
to submit his money to the water-ordeal, thinking that the ill-got
money would sink to the bottom, and what was honestly acquired swim
on the top. He accordingly cast all his money into the water, and
only one solitary farthing swam. With this he bought a cat, and he
went to sea and visited foreign parts. At length he chanced to come
to a place where the people were sadly plagued by an enormous number
of rats and mice, and as his cat had had kittens by this time, he
acquired great wealth by selling them. So he came home to Jutland,
and built himself a house, which he called Katholm.

There was one
time a poor sailor out of Ribe, who came to a foreign island whose
inhabitants were grievously plagued with mice. By good luck he had
a cat of his own on board, and the people of the island gave him so
much gold for it that he went home as fast as he could to fetch more
cats, and by this traffic he in a short time grew so rich that he
had no need of any more. Some time after, when he was on his deathbed,
he bequeathed a large sum of money for the building of Ribe Cathedral,
and a proof of this is still to be seen in a carving over the east
door of the church, representing a cat and four mice. The door is
called Cat-head Door (Kathoved Dor).

THE MAGICIAN'S DAUGHTER

Just
on the Finland frontiers there is situated a high mountain, which,
on the Swedish side, is covered with beautiful copsewood, and on the
other with dark pine-trees, so closely ranked together, and so luxuriant
in shade, that one might almost say the smallest bird could not find
its way through the thickets. Below the copsewood there stands a chapel
with the image of St. George, as guardian of the land and as a defence
against dragons, if there be such, and other monsters of paganism,
while, on the other side, on the borders of the dark firwood, are
certain cottages inhabited by wicked sorcerers, who have, moreover,
a cave cut so deep into the mountain that it joins with the bottomless
abyss, whence come all the demons that assist them. The Swedish Christians
who dwelt in the neighbourhood of this mountain thought it would be
necessary, besides the chapel and statue of St. George, to choose
some living protector, and therefore selected an ancient warrior,
highly renowned for his prowess in the battle-field, who had, in his
old age, become a monk. When this man went to take up his abode upon
the mountains, his only son (for he had formerly lived as a married
man in the world) would on no account leave him, but lived there also,
assisting his father in his duties as watcher, and in the exercises
of prayer and penitence, fully equalling the example that was now
afforded him as he had formerly done his example as a soldier.

The
life led by those two valiant champions is said to have been most
admirable and pious.

Once on a time it happened that the young hero
went out to cut wood in the forest. He bore a sharp axe on his shoulders,
and was besides girded with a great sword; for as the woods were not
only full of wild beasts, but also haunted by wicked men, the pious
hermits took the precaution of always going armed. While the good
youth was forcing his way through the thickest of the copsewood, and
already beheld over it the pointed tops of the fir-trees (for he was
close on the Finland frontier), there rushed out against him a great
white wolf, so that he had only just time enough to leap to one side,
and not being able immediately to draw his sword, he flung his axe
at his assailant.  Nothing, as I remember,
smote me with more grief and pity (all the more poignant because perplexingly entangled with
an inclination to smile) than to hear a gaunt and ragged mother priding herself on the pretty
ways of her ragged and skinny infant, just as a young matron might, when she invites her lady
friends to admire her plump, white-robed darling in the nursery.  Indeed, no womanly characteristic
seemed to have altogether perished out of these poor souls.  It was the very same creature
whose tender torments make the rapture of our young days, whom we love, cherish, and protect,
and rely upon in life and death, and whom we delight to see beautify her beauty with rich robes
and set it off with jewels, though now fantastically masquerading in a garb of tatters, wholly
unfit for her to handle.  I recognized her, over and over again, in the groups round a doorstep
or in the descent of a cellar, chatting with prodigious earnestness about intangible trifles,
laughing for a little jest, sympathizing at almost the same instant with one neighbor's sunshine
and another's shadow, wise, simple, sly, and patient, yet easily perturbed, and breaking into
small feminine ebullitions of spite, wrath, and jealousy, tornadoes of a moment, such as vary
the social atmosphere of her silken-skirted sisters, though smothered into propriety by dint
of a well-bred habit.  Not that there was an absolute deficiency of good-breeding, even here.
It often surprised me to witness a courtesy and deference among these ragged folks, which,
having seen it, I did not thoroughly believe in, wondering whence it should have come.  I am
persuaded, however, that there were laws of intercourse which they never violated,--a code
of the cellar, the garret, the common staircase, the doorstep, and the pavement, which perhaps
had as deep a foundation in natural fitness as the code of the drawing-room.

Yet again I doubt whether I may not have been uttering folly in the last two sentences, when
I reflect how rude and rough these specimens of feminine character generally were.  They had
a readiness with their hands that reminded me of Molly Seagrim and other heroines in Fielding's
novels.  For example, I have seen a woman meet a man in the street, and, for no reason perceptible
to me, suddenly clutch him by the hair and cuff his ears,--an infliction which he bore with
exemplary patience, only snatching the very earliest opportunity to take to his heels.  Where
a sharp tongue will not serve the purpose, they trust to the sharpness of their finger-nails,
or incarnate a whole vocabulary of vituperative words in a resounding slap, or the downright
blow of a doubled fist.  All English people, I imagine, are influenced in a far greater degree
than ourselves by this simple and honest tendency, in cases of disagreement, to batter one
another's persons; and whoever has seen a crowd of English ladies (for instance, at the door
of the Sistine Chapel, in Holy Week) will be satisfied that their belligerent propensities
are kept in abeyance only by a merciless rigor on the part of society.  It requires a vast
deal of refinement to spiritualize their large physical endowments. Such being the case with
the delicate ornaments of the drawing-room, it is the less to be wondered at that women who
live mostly in the open air, amid the coarsest kind of companionship and occupation, should
carry on the intercourse of life with a freedom unknown to any class of American females, though
still, I am resolved to think, compatible with a generous breadth of natural propriety.  It
shocked me, at first, to see them (of all ages, even elderly, as well as infants that could
just toddle across the street alone) going about in the mud and mire, or through the dusky
snow and slosh of a severe week in winter, with petticoats high uplifted above bare, red feet
and legs; but I was comforted by observing that both shoes and stockings generally reappeared
with better weather, having been thriftily kept out of the damp for the convenience of dry
feet within doors.  Their hardihood was wonderful, and their strength greater than could have
been expected from such spare diet as they probably lived upon.  I have seen them carrying
on their heads great burdens under which they walked as freely as if they were fashionable
bonnets; or sometimes the burden was huge enough almost to cover the whole person, looked at
from behind,--as in Tuscan villages you may see the girls coming in from the country with great
bundles of green twigs upon their backs, so that they resemble locomotive masses of verdure
and fragrance.  But these poor English women seemed to be laden with rubbish, incongruous and
indescribable, such as bones and rags, the sweepings of the house and of the street, a merchandise
gathered up from what poverty itself had thrown away, a heap of filthy stuff analogous to Christian's
bundle of sin.

Sometimes, though very seldom, I detected a certain gracefulness among the younger women that
was altogether new to my observation.  It was a charm proper to the lowest class.  One girl
I particularly remember, in a garb none of the cleanest and nowise smart, and herself exceedingly
coarse in all respects, but yet endowed with a sort of witchery, a native charm, a robe of
simple beauty and suitable behavior that she was born in and had never been tempted to throw
off, because she had really nothing else to put on.  Eve herself could not have been more natural.
Nothing was affected, nothing imitated; no proper grace was vulgarized by an effort to assume
the manners or adornments of another sphere.  This kind of beauty, arrayed in a fitness of
its own, is probably vanishing out of the world, and will certainly never be found in America,
where all the girls, whether daughters of the upper-tendon, the mediocrity, the cottage, or
the kennel, aim at one standard of dress and deportment, seldom accomplishing a perfectly triumphant
hit or an utterly absurd failure.  Those words, "genteel" and "ladylike," are terrible ones
and do us infinite mischief, but it is because (at least, I hope so) we are in a transition
state, and shall emerge into a higher mode of simplicity than has ever been known to past ages.

In such disastrous circumstances as I have been attempting to describe, it was beautiful to
observe what a mysterious efficacy still asserted itself in character.  A woman, evidently
poor as the poorest of her neighbors, would be knitting or sewing on the doorstep, just as
fifty other women were; but round about her skirts (though wofully patched) you would be sensible
of a certain sphere of decency, which, it seemed to me, could not have been kept more impregnable
in the cosiest little sitting-room, where the tea-kettle on the hob was humming its good old
song of domestic peace.  Maidenhood had a similar power.  The evil habit that grows upon us
in this harsh world makes me faithless to my own better perceptions; and yet I have seen girls
in these wretched streets, on whose virgin purity, judging merely from their impression on
my instincts as they passed by, I should have deemed it safe, at the moment, to stake my life.
The next moment, however, as the surrounding flood of moral uncleanness surged over their footsteps,
I would not have staked a spike of thistle-down on the same wager.  Yet the miracle was within
the scope of Providence, which is equally wise and equally beneficent (even to those poor girls,
though I acknowledge the fact without the remotest comprehension of the mode of it), whether
they were pure or what we fellow-sinners call vile.  Unless your faith be deep-rooted and of
most vigorous growth, it is the safer way not to turn aside into this region so suggestive
of miserable doubt.  It was a place "with dreadful faces thronged," wrinkled and grim with
vice and wretchedness; and, thinking over the line of Milton here quoted, I come to the conclusion
that those ugly lineaments which startled Adam and Eve, as they looked backward to the closed
gate of Paradise, were no fiends from the pit, but the more terrible foreshadowings of what
so many of their descendants were to be. God help them, and us likewise, their brethren and
sisters!  Let me add, that, forlorn, ragged, careworn, hopeless, dirty, haggard, hungry, as
they were, the most pitiful thing of all was to see the sort of patience with which they accepted
their lot, as if they had been born into the world for that and nothing else.  Even the little
children had this characteristic in as perfect development as their grandmothers.

The children, in truth, were the ill-omened blossoms from which another harvest of precisely
such dark fruitage as I saw ripened around me was to be produced.  Of course you would imagine
these to be lumps of crude iniquity, tiny vessels as full as they could hold of naughtiness;
nor can I say a great deal to the contrary.  Small proof of parental discipline could I discern,
save when a mother (drunken, I sincerely hope) snatched her own imp out of a group of pale,
half-naked, humor-eaten abortions that were playing and squabbling together in the mud, turned
up its tatters, brought down her heavy hand on its poor little tenderest part, and let it go
again with a shake.  If the child knew what the punishment was for, it was wiser than I pretend
to be.  It yelled, and went back to its playmates in the mud.  Yet let me bear testimony to
what was beautiful, and more touching than anything that I ever witnessed in the intercourse
of happier children.  I allude to the superintendence which some of these small people (too
small, one would think, to be sent into the street alone, had there been any other nursery
for them) exercised over still smaller ones.  Whence they derived such a sense of duty, unless
immediately from God, I cannot tell; but it was wonderful to observe the expression of responsibility
in their deportment, the anxious fidelity with which they discharged their unfit office, the
tender patience with which they linked their less pliable impulses to the wayward footsteps
of an infant, and let it guide them whithersoever it liked.  In the hollow-cheeked, large-eyed
girl of ten, whom I saw giving a cheerless oversight to her baby-brother, I did not so much
marvel at it.  She had merely come a little earlier than usual to the perception of what was
to be her business in life.  But I admired the sickly-looking little boy, who did violence
to his boyish nature by making himself the servant of his little sister,--she too small to
walk, and he too small to take her in his arms,--and therefore working a kind of miracle to
transport her from one dirt-heap to another.  Beholding such works of love and duty, I took
heart again, and deemed it not so impossible, after all, for these neglected children to find
a path through the squalor and evil of their circumstances up to the gate of heaven.  Perhaps
there was this latent good in all of them, though generally they looked brutish, and dull even
in their sports; there was little mirth among them, nor even a fully awakened spirit of blackguardism.
Yet sometimes, again, I saw, with surprise and a sense as if I had been asleep and dreaming,
the bright, intelligent, merry face of a child whose dark eyes gleamed with vivacious expression
through the dirt that incrusted its skin, like sunshine struggling through a very dusty window-pane.

In these streets the belted and blue-coated policeman appears seldom in comparison with the
frequency of his occurrence in more reputable thoroughfares.  I used to think that the inhabitants
would have ample time to murder one another, or any stranger, like myself, who might violate
the filthy sanctities of the place; before the law could bring up its lumbering assistance.
Nevertheless, there is a supervision; nor does the watchfulness of authority permit the populace
to be tempted to any outbreak.  Once, in a time of dearth I noticed a ballad-singer going through
the street hoarsely chanting some discordant strain in a provincial dialect, of which I could
only make out that it addressed the sensibilities of the auditors on the score of starvation;
but by his side stalked the policeman, offering no interference, but watchful to hear what
this rough minstrel said or sang, and silence him, if his effusion threatened to prove too
soul-stirring.  In my judgment, however, there is little or no danger of that kind: they starve
patiently, sicken patiently, die patiently, not through resignation, but a diseased flaccidity
of hope.  If ever they should do mischief to those above them, it will probably be by the communication
of some destructive pestilence; for, so the medical men affirm, they suffer all the ordinary
diseases with a degree of virulence elsewhere unknown, and keep among themselves traditionary
plagues that have long ceased to afflict more fortunate societies.  Charity herself gathers
her robe about her to avoid their contact.  It would be a dire revenge, indeed, if they were
to prove their claims to be reckoned of one blood and nature with the noblest and wealthiest
by compelling them to inhale death through the diffusion of their own poverty-poisoned atmosphere.

A true Englishman is a kind man at heart, but has an unconquerable dislike to poverty and beggary.
Beggars have heretofore been so strange to an American that he is apt to become their prey,
being recognized through his national peculiarities, and beset by them in the streets. The
English smile at him, and say that there are ample public arrangements for every pauper's possible
need, that street-charity promotes idleness and vice, and that yonder personification of misery
on the pavement will lay up a good day's profit, besides supping more luxuriously than the
dupe who gives him a shilling.  By and by the stranger adopts their theory and begins to practise
upon it, much to his own temporary freedom from annoyance, but not entirely without moral detriment
or sometimes a too late contrition.  Years afterwards, it may be, his memory is still haunted
by some vindictive wretch whose cheeks were pale and hunger-pinched, whose rags fluttered in
the east-wind, whose right arm was paralyzed and his left leg shrivelled into a mere nerveless
stick, but whom he passed by remorselessly because an Englishman chose to say that the fellow's
misery looked too perfect, was too artistically got up, to be genuine.  Even allowing this
to be true (as, a hundred chances to one, it was), it would still have been a clear case of
economy to buy him off with a little loose silver, so that his lamentable figure should not
limp at the heels of your conscience all over the world.  To own the truth, I provided myself
with several such imaginary persecutors in England, and recruited their number with at least
one sickly-looking wretch whose acquaintance I first made at Assisi, in Italy, and, taking
a dislike to something sinister in his aspect, permitted him to beg early and late, and all
day long, without getting a single baiocco.  At my latest glimpse of him, the villain avenged
himself, not by a volley of horrible curses, as any other Italian beggar would, but by taking
an expression so grief-stricken, want-wrung, hopeless, and withal resigned, that I could paint
his lifelike portrait at this moment.  Were I to go over the same ground again, I would listen
to no man's theories, but buy the little luxury of beneficence at a cheap rate, instead of
doing myself a moral mischief by exuding a stony incrustation over whatever natural sensibility
I might possess.

On the other hand, there were some mendicants whose utmost efforts I even now felicitate myself
on having withstood.  Such was a phenomenon abridged of his lower half, who beset me for two
or three years together, and, in spite of his deficiency of locomotive members, had some supernatural
method of transporting himself (simultaneously, I believe) to all quarters of the city.  He
wore a sailor's jacket (possibly, because skirts would have been a superfluity to his figure),
and had a remarkably broad-shouldered and muscular frame, surmounted by a large, fresh-colored
face, which was full of power and intelligence.  His dress and linen were the perfection of
neatness.  Once a day, at least, wherever I went, I suddenly became aware of this trunk of
a man on the path before me, resting on his base, and looking as if he had just sprouted out
of the pavement, and would sink into it again and reappear at some other spot the instant you
left him behind.  The expression of his eye was perfectly respectful, but terribly fixed, holding
your own as by fascination, never once winking, never wavering from its point-blank gaze right
into your face, till you were completely beyond the range of his battery of one immense rifled
cannon.  This was his mode of soliciting alms; and he reminded me of the old beggar who appealed
so touchingly to the charitable sympathies of Gil Blas, taking aim at him from the roadside
with a long-barrelled musket.  The intentness and directness of his silent appeal, his close
and unrelenting attack upon your individuality, respectful as it seemed, was the very flower
of insolence; or, if you give it a possibly truer interpretation, it was the tyrannical effort
of a man endowed with great natural force of character to constrain your reluctant will to
his purpose.  Apparently, he had staked his salvation upon the ultimate success of a daily
struggle between himself and me, the triumph of which would compel me to become a tributary
to the hat that lay on the pavement beside him.  Man or fiend, however, there was a stubbornness
in his intended victim which this massive fragment of a mighty personality had not altogether
reckoned upon, and by its aid I was enabled to pass him at my customary pace hundreds of times
over, quietly meeting his terribly respectful eye, and allowing him the fair chance which I
felt to be his due, to subjugate me, if he really had the strength for it.  He never succeeded,
but, on the other hand, never gave up the contest; and should I ever walk those streets again,
I am certain that the truncated tyrant will sprout up through the pavement and look me fixedly
in the eye, and perhaps get the victory.

I should think all the more highly of myself, if I had shown equal heroism in resisting another
class of beggarly depredators, who assailed me on my weaker side and won an easy spoil.  Such
was the sanctimonious clergyman, with his white cravat, who visited me with a subscription-paper,
which he himself had drawn up, in a case of heart-rending distress;--the respectable and ruined
tradesman, going from door to door, shy and silent in his own person, but accompanied by a
sympathizing friend, who bore testimony to his integrity, and stated the unavoidable misfortunes
that had crushed him down;--or the delicate and prettily dressed lady, who had been bred in
affluence, but was suddenly thrown upon the perilous charities of the world by the death of
an indulgent, but secretly insolvent father, or the commercial catastrophe and simultaneous
suicide of the best of husbands; or the gifted, but unsuccessful author, appealing to my fraternal
sympathies, generously rejoicing in some small prosperities which he was kind enough to term
my own triumphs in the field of letters, and claiming to have largely contributed to them by
his unbought notices in the public journals. England is full of such people, and a hundred
other varieties of peripatetic tricksters, higher than these, and lower, who act their parts
tolerably well, but seldom with an absolutely illusive effect.  I knew at once, raw Yankee
as I was, that they were humbugs, almost without an exception,--rats that nibble at the honest
bread and cheese of the community, and grow fat by their petty pilferings, yet often gave them
what they asked, and privately owned myself a simpleton.  There is a decorum which restrains
you (unless you happen to be a police-constable) from breaking through a crust of plausible
respectability, even when you are certain that there is a knave beneath it.

After making myself as familiar as I decently could with the poor streets, I became curious
to see what kind of a home was provided for the inhabitants at the public expense, fearing
that it must needs be a most comfortless one, or else their choice (if choice it were) of so
miserable a life outside was truly difficult to account for.  Accordingly, I visited a great
almshouse, and was glad to observe how unexceptionably all the parts of the establishment were
carried on, and what an orderly life, full-fed, sufficiently reposeful, and undisturbed by
the arbitrary exercise of authority, seemed to be led there.  Possibly, indeed, it was that
very orderliness, and the cruel necessity of being neat and clean, and even the comfort resulting
from these and other Christian-like restraints and regulations, that constituted the principal
grievance on the part of the poor, shiftless inmates, accustomed to a lifelong luxury of dirt
and harum-scarumness.  The wild life of the streets has perhaps as unforgetable a charm, to
those who have once thoroughly imbibed it, as the life of the forest or the prairie.  But I
conceive rather that there must be insuperable difficulties, for the majority of the poor,
in the way of getting admittance to the almshouse, than that a merely aesthetic preference
for the street would incline the pauper-class to fare scantily and precariously, and expose
their raggedness to the rain and snow, when such a hospitable door stood wide open for their
entrance.  It might be that the roughest and darkest side of the matter was not shown me, there
being persons of eminent station and of both sexes in the party which I accompanied; and, of
course, a properly trained public functionary would have deemed it a monstrous rudeness, as
well as a great shame, to exhibit anything to people of rank that might too painfully shock
their sensibilities.

The women's ward was the portion of the establishment which we especially examined.  It could
not be questioned that they were treated with kindness as well as care.  No doubt, as has been
already suggested, some of them felt the irksomeness of submission to general rules of orderly
behavior, after being accustomed to that perfect freedom from the minor proprieties, at least,
which is one of the compensations of absolutely hopeless poverty, or of any circumstances that
set us fairly below the decencies of life.  I asked the governor of the house whether he met
with any difficulty in keeping peace and order among his inmates; and he informed me that his
troubles among the women were incomparably greater than with the men.  They were freakish,
and apt to be quarrelsome, inclined to plague and pester one another in ways that it was impossible
to lay hold of, and to thwart his own authority by the like intangible methods.  He said this
with the utmost good-nature, and quite won my regard by so placidly resigning himself to the
inevitable necessity of letting the women throw dust into his eyes.  They certainly looked
peaceable and sisterly enough, as I saw them, though still it might be faintly perceptible
that some of them were consciously playing their parts before the governor and his distinguished
visitors.

This governor seemed to me a man thoroughly fit for his position.  An American, in an office
of similar responsibility, would doubtless be a much superior person, better educated, possessing
a far wider range of thought, more naturally acute, with a quicker tact of external observation
and a readier faculty of dealing with difficult cases.  The women would not succeed in throwing
half so much dust into his eyes. Moreover, his black coat, and thin, sallow visage, would make
him look like a scholar, and his manners would indefinitely approximate to those of a gentleman.
But I cannot help questioning, whether, on the whole, these higher endowments would produce
decidedly better results.  The Englishman was thoroughly plebeian both in aspect and behavior,
a bluff, ruddy-faced, hearty, kindly, yeoman-like personage, with no refinement whatever, nor
any superfluous sensibility, but gifted with a native wholesomeness of character which must
have been a very beneficial element in the atmosphere of the almshouse.  He spoke to his pauper
family in loud, good-humored, cheerful tones, and treated them with a healthy freedom that
probably caused the forlorn wretches to feel as if they were free and healthy likewise.  If
he had understood them a little better, he would not have treated them half so wisely.  We
are apt to make sickly people more morbid, and unfortunate people more miserable, by endeavoring
to adapt our deportment to their especial and individual needs.  They eagerly accept our well-meant
efforts; but it is like returning their own sick breath back upon themselves, to be breathed
over and over again, intensifying the inward mischief at every repetition.  The sympathy that
would really do them good is of a kind that recognizes their sound and healthy parts, and ignores
the part affected by disease, which will thrive under the eye of a too close observer like
a poisonous weed in the sunshine.  My good friend the governor had no tendencies in the latter
direction, and abundance of them in the former, and was consequently as wholesome and invigorating
as the west-wind with a little spice of the north in it, brightening the dreary visages that
encountered us as if he had carried a sunbeam in his hand.  He expressed himself by his whole
being and personality, and by works more than words, and had the not unusual English merit
of knowing what to do much better than how to talk about it.

The women, I imagine, must have felt one imperfection in their state, however comfortable otherwise.
They were forbidden, or, at all events, lacked the means, to follow out their natural instinct
of adorning themselves; all were dressed in one homely uniform of blue-checked gowns, with
such caps upon their heads as English servants wear.  Generally, too, they had one dowdy English
aspect, and a vulgar type of features so nearly alike that they seemed literally to constitute
a sisterhood.  We have few of these absolutely unilluminated faces among our native American
population, individuals of whom must be singularly unfortunate, if, mixing as we do, no drop
of gentle blood has contributed to refine the turbid element, no gleam of hereditary intelligence
has lighted up the stolid eyes, which their forefathers brought, from the Old Country. Even
in this English almshouse, however, there was at least one person who claimed to be intimately
connected with rank and wealth.  The governor, after suggesting that this person would probably
be gratified by our visit, ushered us into a small parlor, which was furnished a little more
like a room in a private dwelling than others that we entered, and had a row of religious books
and fashionable novels on the mantel-piece.  An old lady sat at a bright coal-fire, reading
a romance, and rose to receive us with a certain pomp of manner and elaborate display of ceremonious
courtesy, which, in spite of myself, made me inwardly question the genuineness of her aristocratic
pretensions.  But, at any rate, she looked like a respectable old soul, and was evidently gladdened
to the very core of her frost-bitten heart by the awful punctiliousness with which she responded
to her gracious and hospitable, though unfamiliar welcome.  After a little polite conversation,
we retired; and the governor, with a lowered voice and an air of deference, told us that she
had been a lady of quality, and had ridden in her own equipage, not many years before, and
now lived in continual expectation that some of her rich relatives would drive up in their
carriages to take her away.  Meanwhile, he added, she was treated with great respect by her
fellow-paupers.  I could not help thinking, from a few criticisable peculiarities in her talk
and manner, that there might have been a mistake on the governor's part, and perhaps a venial
exaggeration on the old lady's, concerning her former position in society; but what struck
me was the forcible instance of that most prevalent of English vanities, the pretension to
aristocratic connection, on one side, and the submission and reverence with which it was accepted
by the governor and his household, on the other.  Among ourselves, I think, when wealth and
eminent position have taken their departure, they seldom leave a pallid ghost behind them,--or,
if it sometimes stalks abroad, few recognize it.

We went into several other rooms, at the doors of which, pausing on the outside, we could hear
the volubility, and sometimes the wrangling, of the female inhabitants within, but invariably
found silence and peace, when we stepped over the threshold.  The women were grouped together
in their sitting-rooms, sometimes three or four, sometimes a larger number, classified by their
spontaneous affinities, I suppose, and all busied, so far as I can remember, with the one occupation
of knitting coarse yarn stockings.  Hardly any of them, I am sorry to say, had a brisk or cheerful
air, though it often stirred them up to a momentary vivacity to be accosted by the governor,
and they seemed to like being noticed, however slightly, by the visitors.  The happiest person
whom I saw there (and, running hastily through my experiences, I hardly recollect to have seen
a happier one in my life, if you take a careless flow of spirits as happiness) was an old woman
that lay in bed among ten or twelve heavy-looking females, who plied their knitting-work round
about her. She laughed, when we entered, and immediately began to talk to us, in a thin, little,
spirited quaver, claiming to be more than a century old; and the governor (in whatever way
he happened to be cognizant of the fact) confirmed her age to be a hundred and four.  Her jauntiness
and cackling merriment were really wonderful.  It was as if she had got through with all her
actual business in life two or three generations ago, and now, freed from every responsibility
for herself or others, had only to keep up a mirthful state of mind till the short time, or
long time (and, happy as she was, she appeared not to care whether it were long or short),
before Death, who had misplaced her name in his list, might remember to take her away.  She
had gone quite round the circle of human existence, and come back to the play-ground again.
And so she had grown to be a kind of miraculous old pet, the plaything of people seventy or
eighty years younger than herself, who talked and laughed with her as if she were a child,
finding great delight in her wayward and strangely playful responses, into some of which she
cunningly conveyed a gibe that caused their ears to tingle a little.  She had done getting
out of bed in this world, and lay there to be waited upon like a queen or a baby.

In the same room sat a pauper who had once been an actress of considerable repute, but was
compelled to give up her profession by a softening of the brain.  The disease seemed to have
stolen the continuity out of her life, and disturbed an healthy relationship between the thoughts
within her and the world without.  On our first entrance, she looked cheerfully at us, and
showed herself ready to engage in conversation; but suddenly, while we were talking with the
century-old crone, the poor actress began to weep, contorting her face with extravagant stage-grimaces,
and wringing her hands for some inscrutable sorrow.  It might have been a reminiscence of actual
calamity in her past life, or, quite as probably, it was but a dramatic woe, beneath which
she had staggered and shrieked and wrung her hands with hundreds of repetitions in the sight
of crowded theatres, and been as often comforted by thunders of applause.  But my idea of the
mystery was, that she had a sense of wrong in seeing the aged woman (whose empty vivacity was
like the rattling of dry peas in a bladder) chosen as the central object of interest to the
visitors, while she herself, who had agitated thousands of hearts with a breath, sat starving
for the admiration that was her natural food.  I appeal to the whole society of artists of
the Beautiful and the Imaginative,--poets, romancers, painters, sculptors, actors,-- whether
or no this is a grief that may be felt even amid the torpor of a dissolving brain!

We looked into a good many sleeping-chambers, where were rows of beds, mostly calculated for
two occupants, and provided with sheets and pillow-cases that resembled sackcloth.  It appeared
to me that the sense of beauty was insufficiently regarded in all the arrangements of the almshouse;
a little cheap luxury for the eye, at least, might do the poor folks a substantial good.  But,
at all events, there was the beauty of perfect neatness and orderliness, which, being heretofore
known to few of them, was perhaps as much as they could well digest in the remnant of their
lives.  We were invited into the laundry, where a great washing and drying were in process,
the whole atmosphere being hot and vaporous with the steam of wet garments and bedclothes.
This atmosphere was the pauper-life of the past week or fortnight resolved into a gaseous state,
and breathing it, however fastidiously, we were forced to inhale the strange element into our
inmost being.  Had the Queen been there, I know not how she could have escaped the necessity.
What an intimate brotherhood is this in which we dwell, do what we may to put an artificial
remoteness between the high creature and the low one!  A poor man's breath, borne on the vehicle
of tobacco-smoke, floats into a palace-window and reaches the nostrils of a monarch.  It is
but an example, obvious to the sense, of the innumerable and secret channels by which, at every
moment of our lives, the flow and reflux of a common humanity pervade us all.  How superficial
are the niceties of such as pretend to keep aloof!  Let the whole world be cleansed, or not
a man or woman of us all can be clean.

By and by we came to the ward where the children were kept, on entering which, we saw, in the
first place, several unlovely and unwholesome little people lazily playing together in a court-yard.
And here a singular incommodity befell one member of our party.  Among the children was a wretched,
pale, half-torpid little thing (about six years old, perhaps,--but I know not whether a girl
or a boy), with a humor in its eyes and face, which the governor said was the scurvy, and which
appeared to bedim its powers of vision, so that it toddled about gropingly, as if in quest
of it did not precisely know what.  This child--this sickly, wretched, humor-eaten infant,
the offspring of unspeakable sin and sorrow, whom it must have required several generations
of guilty progenitors to render so pitiable an object as we beheld it--immediately took an
unaccountable fancy to the gentleman just hinted at.  It prowled about him like a pet kitten,
rubbing against his legs, following everywhere at his heels, pulling at his coat-tails, and,
at last, exerting all the speed that its poor limbs were capable of, got directly before him
and held forth its arms, mutely insisting on being taken up. It said not a word, being perhaps
under-witted and incapable of prattle. But it smiled up in his face,--a sort of woful gleam
was that smile, through the sickly blotches that covered its features,--and found means to
express such a perfect confidence that it was going to be fondled and made much of, that there
was no possibility in a human heart of balking its expectation.  It was as if God had promised
the poor child this favor on behalf of that individual, and he was bound to fulfil the contract,
or else no longer call himself a man among men.  Nevertheless, it could be no easy thing for
him to do, he being a person burdened with more than an Englishman's customary reserve, shy
of actual contact with human beings, afflicted with a peculiar distaste for whatever was ugly,
and, furthermore, accustomed to that habit of observation from an insulated stand-point which
is said (but, I hope, erroneously) to have the tendency of putting ice into the blood.

So I watched the struggle in his mind with a good deal of interest, and am seriously of opinion
that he did an heroic act, and effected more than he dreamed of towards his final salvation,
when he took up the loathsome child and caressed it as tenderly as if he had been its father.
To be sure, we all smiled at him, at the time, but doubtless would have acted pretty much the
same in a similar stress of circumstances.  The child, at any rate, appeared to be satisfied
with his behavior; for when he had held it a considerable time, and set it down, it still favored
him with its company, keeping fast hold of his forefinger till we reached the confines of the
place.  And on our return through the court-yard, after visiting another part of the establishment,
here again was this same little Wretchedness waiting for its victim, with a smile of joyful,
and yet dull recognition about its scabby mouth and in its rheumy eyes.  No doubt, the child's
mission in reference to our friend was to remind him that he was responsible, in his degree,
for all the sufferings and misdemeanors of the world in which he lived, and was not entitled
to look upon a particle of its dark calamity as if it were none of his concern: the offspring
of a brother's iniquity being his own blood-relation, and the guilt, likewise, a burden on
him, unless he expiated it by better deeds.

All the children in this ward seemed to be invalids, and, going up stairs, we found more of
them in the same or a worse condition than the little creature just described, with their mothers
(or more probably other women, for the infants were mostly foundlings) in attendance as nurses.
The matron of the ward, a middle-aged woman, remarkably kind and motherly in aspect, was walking
to and fro across the chamber--on that weary journey in which careful mothers and nurses travel
so continually and so far, and gain never a step of progress--with an unquiet baby in her arms.
She assured us that she enjoyed her occupation, being exceedingly fond of children; and, in
fact, the absence of timidity in all the little people was a sufficient proof that they could
have had no experience of harsh treatment, though, on the other hand, none of them appeared
to be attracted to one individual more than another.  In this point they differed widely from
the poor child below stairs.  They seemed to recognize a universal motherhood in womankind,
and cared not which individual might be the mother of the moment.  I found their tameness as
shocking as did Alexander Selkirk that of the brute subjects of his else solitary kingdom.
It was a sort of tame familiarity, a perfect indifference to the approach of strangers, such
as I never noticed in other children.  I accounted for it partly by their nerveless, unstrung
state of body, incapable of the quick thrills of delight and fear which play upon the lively
harp-strings of a healthy child's nature, and partly by their woful lack of acquaintance with
a private home, and their being therefore destitute of the sweet home-bred shyness, which is
like the sanctity of heaven about a mother-petted child.  Their condition was like that of
chickens hatched in an oven, and growing up without the especial guardianship of a matron hen:
both the chicken and the child, methinks, must needs want something that is essential to their
respective characters.

In this chamber (which was spacious, containing a large number of beds) there was a clear fire
burning on the hearth, as in all the other occupied rooms; and directly in front of the blaze
sat a woman holding a baby, which, beyond all reach of comparison, was the most horrible object
that ever afflicted my sight.  Days afterwards--nay, even now, when I bring it up vividly before
my mind's eye--it seemed to lie upon the floor of my heart, polluting my moral being with the
sense of something grievously amiss in the entire conditions of humanity.  The holiest man
could not be otherwise than full of wickedness, the chastest virgin seemed impure, in a world
where such a babe was possible.  The governor whispered me, apart, that, like nearly all the
rest of them, it was the child of unhealthy parents.  Ah, yes!  There was the mischief.  This
spectral infant, a hideous mockery of the visible link which Love creates between man and woman,
was born of disease and sin.  Diseased Sin was its father, and Sinful Disease its mother, and
their offspring lay in the woman's arms like a nursing Pestilence, which, could it live and
grow up, would make the world a more accursed abode than ever heretofore.  Thank Heaven, it
could not live!  This baby, if we must give it that sweet name, seemed to be three or four
months old, but, being such an unthrifty changeling, might have been considerably older.  It
was all covered with blotches, and preternaturally dark and discolored; it was withered away,
quite shrunken and fleshless; it breathed only amid pantings and gaspings, and moaned painfully
at every gasp.  The only comfort in reference to it was the evident impossibility of its surviving
to draw many more of those miserable, moaning breaths; and it would have been infinitely less
heart-depressing to see it die, right before my eyes, than to depart and carry it alive in
my remembrance, still suffering the incalculable torture of its little life.  I can by no means
express how horrible this infant was, neither ought I to attempt it.  And yet I must add one
final touch.  Young as the poor little creature was, its pain and misery had endowed it with
a premature intelligence, insomuch that its eyes seemed to stare at the bystanders out of their
sunken sockets knowingly and appealingly, as if summoning us one and all to witness the deadly
wrong of its existence.  At least, I so interpreted its look, when it positively met and responded
to my own awe-stricken gaze, and therefore I lay the case, as far as I am able, before mankind,
on whom God has imposed the necessity to suffer in soul and body till this dark and dreadful
wrong be righted.

Thence we went to the school-rooms, which were underneath the chapel. The pupils, like the
children whom we had just seen, were, in large proportion, foundlings.  Almost without exception,
they looked sickly, with marks of eruptive trouble in their doltish faces, and a general tendency
to diseases of the eye.  Moreover, the poor little wretches appeared to be uneasy within their
skins, and screwed themselves about on the benches in a disagreeably suggestive way, as if
they had inherited the evil habits of their parents as an innermost garment of the same texture
and material as the shirt of Nessus, and must wear it with unspeakable discomfort as long as
they lived.  I saw only a single child that looked healthy; and on my pointing him out, the
governor informed me that this little boy, the sole exception to the miserable aspect of his
school-fellows, was not a foundling, nor properly a work-house child, being born of respectable
parentage, and his father one of the officers of the institution.  As for the remainder,--the
hundred pale abortions to be counted against one rosy-cheeked boy,--what shall we say or do?
Depressed by the sight of so much misery, and uninventive of remedies for the evils that force
themselves on my perception, I can do little more than recur to the idea already hinted at
in the early part of this article, regarding the speedy necessity of a new deluge.  So far
as these children are concerned, at any rate, it would be a blessing to the human race, which
they will contribute to enervate and corrupt,--a greater blessing to themselves, who inherit
no patrimony but disease and vice, and in whose souls, if there be a spark of God's life, this
seems the only possible mode of keeping it aglow,--if every one of them could be drowned to-night,
by their best friends, instead of being put tenderly to bed.  This heroic method of treating
human maladies, moral and material, is certainly beyond the scope of man's discretionary rights,
and probably will not be adopted by Divine Providence until the opportunity of milder reformation
shall have been offered us again and again, through a series of future ages.

It may be fair to acknowledge that the humane and excellent governor, as well as other persons
better acquainted with the subject than myself, took a less gloomy view of it, though still
so dark a one as to involve scanty consolation.  They remarked that individuals of the male
sex, picked up in the streets and nurtured in the workhouse, sometimes succeed tolerably well
in life, because they are taught trades before being turned into the world, and, by dint of
immaculate behavior and good luck, are not, unlikely to get employment and earn a livelihood.
The case is different with the girls.  They can only go to service, and are invariably rejected
by families of respectability on account of their origin, and for the better reason of their
unfitness to fill satisfactorily even the meanest situations in a well-ordered English household.
Their resource is to take service with people only a step or two above the poorest class, with
whom they fare scantily, endure harsh treatment, lead shifting and precarious lives, and finally
drop into the slough of evil, through which, in their best estate, they do but pick their slimy
way on stepping-stones.

From the schools we went to the bake-house, and the brew-house (for such cruelty is not harbored
in the heart of a true Englishman as to deny a pauper his daily allowance of beer), and through
the kitchens, where we beheld an immense pot over the fire, surging and walloping with some
kind of a savory stew that filled it up to its brim.  We also visited a tailor's shop, and
a shoemaker's shop, in both of which a number of mien, and pale, diminutive apprentices, were
at work, diligently enough, though seemingly with small heart in the business.  Finally, the
governor ushered us into a shed, inside of which was piled up an immense quantity of new coffins.
They were of the plainest description, made of pine boards, probably of American growth, not
very nicely smoothed by the plane, neither painted nor stained with black, but provided with
a loop of rope at either end for the convenience of lifting the rude box and its inmate into
the cart that shall carry them to the burial-ground.  There, in holes ten feet deep, the paupers
are buried one above another, mingling their relics indistinguishably.  In another world may
they resume their individuality, and find it a happier one than here!

As we departed, a character came under our notice which I have met with in all almshouses,
whether of the city or village, or in England or America.  It was the familiar simpleton, who
shuffled across the court-yard, clattering his wooden-soled shoes, to greet us with a howl
or a laugh, I hardly know which, holding out his hand for a penny, and chuckling grossly when
it was given him.  All under-witted persons, so far as my experience goes, have this craving
for copper coin, and appear to estimate its value by a miraculous instinct, which is one of
the earliest gleams of human intelligence while the nobler faculties are yet in abeyance. 
There may come a time, even in this world, when we shall all understand that our tendency to
the individual appropriation of gold and broad acres, fine houses, and such good and beautiful
things as are equally enjoyable by a multitude, is but a trait of imperfectly developed intelligence,
like the simpleton's cupidity of a penny.  When that day dawns,--and probably not till then,--I
imagine that there will be no more poor streets nor need of almshouses.

I was once present at the wedding of some poor English people, and was deeply impressed by
the spectacle, though by no means with such proud and delightful emotions as seem to have affected
all England on the recent occasion of the marriage of its Prince.  It was in the Cathedral
at Manchester, a particularly black and grim old structure, into which I had stepped to examine
some ancient and curious wood-carvings within the choir.  The woman in attendance greeted me
with a smile (which always glimmers forth on the feminine visage, I know not why, when a wedding
is in question), and asked me to take a seat in the nave till some poor parties were married,
it being the Easter holidays, and a good time for them to marry, because no fees would be demanded
by the clergyman.  I sat down accordingly, and soon the parson and his clerk appeared at the
altar, and a considerable crowd of people made their entrance at a side-door, and ranged themselves
in a long, huddled line across the chancel.  They were my acquaintances of the poor streets,
or persons in a precisely similar condition of life, and were now come to their marriage-ceremony
in just such garbs as I had always seen them wear: the men in their loafers' coats, out at
elbows, or their laborers' jackets, defaced with grimy toil; the women drawing their shabby
shawls tighter about their shoulders, to hide the raggedness beneath; all of them unbrushed,
unshaven, unwashed, uncombed, and wrinkled with penury and care; nothing virgin-like in the
brides, nor hopeful or energetic in the bridegrooms;--they were, in short, the mere rags and
tatters of the human race, whom some east-wind of evil omen, howling along the streets, had
chanced to sweep together into an unfragrant heap.  Each and all of them, conscious of his
or her individual misery, had blundered into the strange miscalculation of supposing that they
could lessen the sum of it by multiplying it into the misery of another person.  All the couples
(and it was difficult, in such a confused crowd, to compute exactly their number) stood up
at once, and had execution done upon them in the lump, the clergyman addressing only small
parts of the service to each individual pair, but so managing the larger portion as to include
the whole company without the trouble of repetition.  By this compendious contrivance, one
would apprehend, he came dangerously near making every man and woman the husband or wife of
every other; nor, perhaps, would he have perpetrated much additional mischief by the mistake;
but, after receiving a benediction in common, they assorted themselves in their own fashion,
as they only knew how, and departed to the garrets, or the cellars, or the unsheltered street-corners,
where their honeymoon and subsequent lives were to be spent.  The parson smiled decorously,
the clerk and the sexton grinned broadly, the female attendant tittered almost aloud, and even
the married parties seemed to see something exceedingly funny in the affair; but for my part,
though generally apt enough to be tickled by a joke, I laid it away in my memory as one of
the saddest sights I ever looked upon.

Not very long afterwards, I happened to be passing the same venerable Cathedral, and heard
a clang of joyful bells, and beheld a bridal party coming down the steps towards a carriage
and four horses, with a portly coachman and two postilions, that waited at the gate.  One parson
and one service had amalgamated the wretchedness of a score of paupers; a Bishop and three
or four clergymen had combined their spiritual might to forge the golden links of this other
marriage-bond.  The bridegroom's mien had a sort of careless and kindly English pride; the
bride floated along in her white drapery, a creature, so nice and delicate that it was a luxury
to see her, and a pity that her silk slippers should touch anything so grimy as the old stones
of the churchyard avenue.  The crowd of ragged people, who always cluster to witness what they
may of an aristocratic wedding, broke into audible admiration of the bride's beauty and the
bridegroom's manliness, and uttered prayers and ejaculations (possibly paid for in alms) for
the happiness of both.  If the most favorable of earthly conditions could make them happy,
they had every prospect of it. They were going to live on their abundance in one of those stately
and delightful English homes, such as no other people ever created or inherited, a hall set
far and safe within its own private grounds, and surrounded with venerable trees, shaven lawns,
rich shrubbery, and trimmest pathways, the whole so artfully contrived and tended that summer
rendered it a paradise, and even winter would hardly disrobe it of its beauty; and all this
fair property seemed more exclusively and inalienably their own, because of its descent through
many forefathers, each of whom had added an improvement or a charm, and thus transmitted it
with a stronger stamp of rightful possession to his heir.  And is it possible, after all, that
there may be a flaw in the title-deeds?  Is, or is not, the system wrong that gives one married
pair so immense a superfluity of luxurious home, and shuts out a million others from any home
whatever?  One day or another, safe as they deem themselves, and safe as the hereditary temper
of the people really tends to make them, the gentlemen of England will be compelled to face
this question.

CIVIC BANQUETS.

It has often perplexed one to imagine how an Englishman will be able to reconcile himself to
any future state of existence from which the earthly institution of dinner shall be excluded.
Even if he fail to take his appetite along with him (which it seems to me hardly possible to
believe, since this endowment is so essential to his composition), the immortal day must still
admit an interim of two or three hours during which he will be conscious of a slight distaste,
at all events, if not an absolute repugnance, to merely spiritual nutriment.  The idea of dinner
has so imbedded itself among his highest and deepest characteristics, so illuminated itself
with intellect and softened itself with the kindest emotions of his heart, so linked itself
with Church and State, and grown so majestic with long hereditary customs and ceremonies, that,
by taking it utterly away, Death, instead of putting the final touch to his perfection, would
leave him infinitely less complete than we have already known him.  He could not be roundly
happy.  Paradise, among all its enjoyments, would lack one daily felicity which his sombre
little island possessed.  Perhaps it is not irreverent to conjecture that a provision may have
been made, in this particular, for the Englishman's exceptional necessities.  It strikes me
that Milton was of the opinion here suggested, and may have intended to throw out a delightful
and consolatory hope for his countrymen, when he represents the genial archangel as playing
his part with such excellent appetite at Adam's dinner-table, and confining himself to fruit
and vegetables only because, in those early days of her housekeeping, Eve had no more acceptable
viands to set before him.  Milton, indeed, had a true English taste for the pleasures of the
table, though refined by the lofty and poetic discipline to which he had subjected himself.
It is delicately implied in the refection in Paradise, and more substantially, though still
elegantly, betrayed in the sonnet proposing to "Laurence, of virtuous father virtuous son,"
a series of nice little dinners in midwinter and it blazes fully out in that untasted banquet
which, elaborate as it was, Satan tossed up in a trice from the kitchen-ranges of Tartarus.

Among this people, indeed, so wise in their generation, dinner has a kind of sanctity quite
independent of the dishes that may be set upon the table; so that, if it be only a mutton-chop,
they treat it with due reverence, and are rewarded with a degree of enjoyment which such reckless
devourers as ourselves do not often find in our richest abundance.  It is good to see how staunch
they are after fifty or sixty years of heroic eating, still relying upon their digestive powers
and indulging a vigorous appetite; whereas an American has generally lost the one and learned
to distrust the other long before reaching the earliest decline of life; and thenceforward
he makes little account of his dinner, and dines at his peril, if at all.  I know not whether
my countrymen will allow me to tell them, though I think it scarcely too much to affirm, that
on this side of the water, people never dine.  At any rate, abundantly as Nature has provided
us with most of the material requisites, the highest possible dinner has never yet been eaten
in America.  It is the consummate flower of civilization and refinement; and our inability
to produce it, or to appreciate its admirable beauty, if a happy inspiration should bring it
into bloom, marks fatally the limit of culture which we have attained.

It is not to be supposed, however, that the mob of cultivated Englishmen know how to dine in
this elevated sense.  The unpolishable ruggedness of the national character is still an impediment
to them, even in that particular line where they are best qualified to excel.  Though often
present at good men's feasts, I remember only a single dinner, which, while lamentably conscious
that many of its higher excellences were thrown away upon me, I yet could feel to be a perfect
work of art.  It could not, without unpardonable coarseness, be styled a matter of animal enjoyment,
because, out of the very perfection of that lower bliss, there had arisen a dream-like development
of spiritual happiness.  As in the masterpieces of painting and poetry, there was a something
intangible, a final deliciousness that only fluttered about your comprehension, vanishing whenever
you tried to detain it, and compelling you to recognize it by faith rather than sense.  It
seemed as if a diviner set of senses were requisite, and had been partly supplied, for the
special fruition of this banquet, and that the guests around the table (only eight in number)
were becoming so educated, polished, and softened, by the delicate influences of what they
ate and drunk, as to be now a little more than mortal for the nonce.  And there was that gentle,
delicious sadness, too, which we find in the very summit of our most exquisite enjoyments,
and feel it a charm beyond all the gayety through which it keeps breathing its undertone. 
In the present case, it was worth a heavier sigh, to reflect that such a festal achievement,--the
production of so much art, skill, fancy, invention, and perfect taste,--the growth of all the
ages, which appeared to have been ripening for this hour, since man first began to eat and
to moisten his food with wine,--must lavish its happiness upon so brief a moment, when other
beautiful things can be made a joy forever.  Yet a dinner like this is no better than we can
get, any day, at the rejuvenescent Cornhill Coffee-House, unless the whole man, with soul,
intellect, and stomach, is ready to appreciate it, and unless, moreover, there is such a harmony
in all the circumstances and accompaniments, and especially such a pitch of well-according
minds, that nothing shall jar rudely against the guest's thoroughly awakened sensibilities.
The world, and especially our part of it, being the rough, ill-assorted, and tumultuous place
we find it, a beefsteak is about as good as any other dinner.

The foregoing reminiscence, however, has drawn me aside from the main object of my sketch,
in which I purposed to give a slight idea of those public, or partially public banquets, the
custom of which so thoroughly prevails among the English people, that nothing is ever decided
upon, in matters of peace and war, until they have chewed upon it in the shape of roast-beef,
and talked it fully over in their cups.  Nor are these festivities merely occasional, but of
stated recurrence in all considerable municipalities and associated bodies.  The most ancient
times appear to have been as familiar with them as the Englishmen of to-day.  In many of the
old English towns, you find some stately Gothic hall or chamber in which the Mayor and other
authorities of the place have long held their sessions; and always, in convenient contiguity,
there is a dusky kitchen, with an immense fireplace where an ox might be roasting at his ease,
though the less gigantic scale of modern cookery may now have permitted the cobwebs to gather
in its chimney.  St. Mary's Hall, in Coventry, is so good a specimen of an ancient banqueting-room,
that perhaps I may profitably devote a page or two to the description of it.

In a narrow street, opposite to St. Michael's Church, one of the three famous spires of Coventry,
you behold a mediaeval edifice, in the basement of which is such a venerable and now deserted
kitchen as I have above alluded to, and, on the same level, a cellar, with low stone pillars
and intersecting arches, like the crypt of a cathedral.  Passing up a well-worn staircase,
the oaken balustrade of which is as black as ebony, you enter the fine old hall, some sixty
feet in length, and broad and lofty in proportion.  It is lighted by six windows of modern
stained glass, on one side, and by the immense and magnificent arch of another window at the
farther end of the room, its rich and ancient panes constituting a genuine historical piece,
in which are represented some of the kingly personages of old times, with their heraldic blazonries.
Notwithstanding the colored light thus thrown into the hall, and though it was noonday when
I last saw it, the panelling of black-oak, and some faded tapestry that hung round the walls,
together with the cloudy vault of the roof above, made a gloom, which the richness only illuminated
into more appreciable effect.  The tapestry is wrought with figures in the dress of Henry VI.'s
time (which is the date of the hall), and is regarded by antiquaries as authentic evidence
both for the costume of that epoch, and, I believe, for the actual portraiture of men known
in history.  They are as colorless as ghosts, however, and vanish drearily into the old stitch-work
of their substance when you try to make them out.  Coats-of-arms were formerly emblazoned all
round the hall, but have been almost rubbed out by people hanging their overcoats against them
or by women with dishclouts and scrubbing-brushes, obliterating hereditary glories in their
blind hostility to dust and spiders' webs.  Full-length portraits of several English kings,
Charles II. being the earliest, hang on the walls; and on the dais, or elevated part of the
floor, stands an antique chair of state, which several royal characters are traditionally said
to have occupied while feasting here with their loyal subjects of Coventry.  It is roomy enough
for a person of kingly bulk, or even two such, but angular and uncomfortable, reminding me
of the oaken settles which used to be seen in old-fashioned New England kitchens.

Overhead, supported by a self-sustaining power, without the aid of a single pillar, is the
original ceiling of oak, precisely similar in shape to the roof of a barn, with all the beams
and rafters plainly to be seen. At the remote height of sixty feet, you hardly discern that
they are carved with figures of angels and doubtless many other devices, of which the admirable
Gothic art is wasted in the duskiness that has so long been brooding there.  Over the entrance
of the hall, opposite the great arched window, the party-colored radiance of which glimmers
faintly through the interval, is a gallery for minstrels; and a row of ancient suits of armor
is suspended from its balustrade.  It impresses me, too (for, having gone so far, I would fain
leave nothing untouched upon), that I remember, somewhere about these venerable precincts,
a picture of the Countess Godiva on horseback, in which the artist has been so niggardly of
that illustrious lady's hair, that, if she had no ampler garniture, there was certainly much
need for the good people of Coventry to shut their eyes. After all my pains, I fear that I
have made but a poor hand at the description, as regards a transference of the scene from my
own mind to the reader's.  It gave me a most vivid idea of antiquity that had been very little
tampered with; insomuch that, if a group of steel-clad knights had come clanking through the
doorway, and a bearded and beruffed old figure had handed in a stately dame, rustling in gorgeous
robes of a long-forgotten fashion, unveiling a face of beauty somewhat tarnished in the mouldy
tomb, yet stepping majestically to the trill of harp and viol from the minstrels' gallery,
while the rusty armor responded with a hollow ringing sound beneath,--why, I should have felt
that these shadows, once so familiar with the spot, had a better right in St. Mary's Hall than
I, a stranger from a far country which has no Past.  But the moral of the foregoing description
is to show how tenaciously this love of pompous dinners, this reverence for dinner as a sacred
institution, has caught hold of the English character; since, from the earliest recognizable
period, we find them building their civic banqueting-halls as magnificently as their palaces
or cathedrals.

I know not whether the hall just described is now used for festive purposes, but others of
similar antiquity and splendor still are.  For example, there is Barber-Surgeons' Hall, in
London, a very fine old room, adorned with admirably carved wood-work on the ceiling and walls.
It is also enriched with Holbein's masterpiece, representing a grave assemblage of barbers
and surgeons, all portraits (with such extensive beards that methinks one half of the company
might have been profitably occupied in trimming the other), kneeling before King Henry VIII.
Sir Robert Peel is said to have offered a thousand pounds for the liberty of cutting out one
of the heads from this picture, he conditioning to have a perfect facsimile painted in.  The
room has many other pictures of distinguished members of the company in long-past times, and
of some of the monarchs and statesmen of England, all darkened with age, but darkened into
such ripe magnificence as only age could bestow.  It is not my design to inflict any more specimens
of ancient hall-painting on the reader; but it may be worth while to touch upon other modes
of stateliness that still survive in these time-honored civic feasts, where there appears to
be a singular assumption of dignity and solemn pomp by respectable citizens who would never
dream of claiming any privilege of rank outside of their own sphere.  Thus, I saw two caps
of state for the warden and junior warden of the company, caps of silver (real coronets or
crowns, indeed, for these city-grandees) wrought in open-work and lined with crimson velvet.
In a strong-closet, opening from the hall, there was a great deal of rich plate to furnish
forth the banquet-table, comprising hundreds of forks and spoons, a vast silver punch-bowl,
the gift of some jolly king or other, and, besides a multitude of less noticeable vessels,
two loving-cups, very elaborately wrought in silver gilt, one presented by Henry VIII., the
other by Charles II.  These cups, including the covers and pedestals, are very large and weighty,
although the bowl-part would hardly contain more than half a pint of wine, which, when the
custom was first established, each guest was probably expected to drink off at a draught. 
In passing them from hand to hand adown a long table of compotators, there is a peculiar ceremony
which I may hereafter have occasion to describe.  Meanwhile, if I might assume such a liberty,
I should be glad to invite the reader to the official dinner-table of his Worship, the Mayor,
at a large English seaport where I spent several years.

The Mayor's dinner-parties occur as often as once a fortnight, and, inviting his guests by
fifty or sixty at a time, his Worship probably assembles at his board most of the eminent citizens
and distinguished personages of the town and neighborhood more than once during his year's
incumbency, and very much, no doubt, to the promotion of good feeling among individuals of
opposite parties and diverse pursuits in life. This opinion is opposed by M. Raspail, who states,
that all the indications supposed to belong to true blood, may be obtained from, linen rags, dipped,
not into blood, but into a mixture of white of egg and infusion of madder, and that, therefore,
the indications are injurious rather than useful.

Cedars of Lebanon.

Mr. Wolff, the missionary, counted on Mount Lebanus, thirteen large and ancient cedars, besides the
numerous small ones, in the whole 387 trees. The largest of these trees was about 15 feet high,
not one-third of the height of hundreds of English cedars; for instance, those at Whitton, Pain's
Hill, Caenwood, and Juniper Hall, near Dorking.

Leeches.

In the Medical Repository, a case is quoted, where some leeches, which had been employed first on
a syphylitic patient and afterwards on an infant, communicated the disease to the latter.

Stinging Flies.

There is a fly which exteriorly much resembles the house-fly, and which is often very troublesome about
this time; this is called the stinging fly, one of the greatest plagues to cattle, as well as
to persons wearing thin stockings.

Mont Blanc.

The height of Mont Blanc and of the Lake of Geneva has lately been carefully ascertained by M.
Roger, an officer of engineers in the service of the Swiss Confederation. The summit of the
mountain appears to be 4,435 metres, or 14,542 English feet above the Lake of Geneva, and
the surface of the Lake 367 metres, or 1,233 English feet above the sea. The mountain is,
therefore, 15,775 feet above the level of the sea.

Bird Catching.

The golden-crested wren may be taken by striking the bough upon which it is sitting, sharply,
with a stone or stick. The timid bird immediately drops to the ground, and generally dead. As
their skins are tender, those who want them for stuffing will find this preferable to using the
gun.--Mag. Nat. Hist.

Shower of Herrings in Ross-shire.

In April last, as Major Forbes, of Fodderty, in Strathpfeffer, was
traversing a field on his farm, he found a considerable portion of
the ground covered with herring fry, of from three to four inches
in length. The fish were fresh and entire, and had no appearance of
being dropped by birds--a medium by which they must have been bruised
and mutilated. The only rational conjecture that can be formed of
the circumstance is, that the fish were transported thither in a water-spout--a
phenomenon that has before occurred in the same county. The Firth
of Dengwall lies at a distance of three miles from the place in question;
but no obstruction occurs between the field and the sea, the whole
is a level strath or plain, and water spouts have been known to travel
even farther than this.--Inverness Courier.

Spanish Asses.

The Duke
of Buckingham has, at his seat at Avington, a team of Spanish asses,
resembling the zebra in appearance, which are extremely tractable,
and take more freely to the collar than any of our native species.

Drawing
Instrument.

An ingenious invention of this description was recently
exhibited at the Royal Institution. A pencil and a small bead are
so connected together by means of a thread passing over pullies, that
if a person, looking through an eye-piece, will hold the pencil upon
a sheet of paper, and then, watching the bead, will move his hand,
so that the bead shall trace the lines of any object that is selected
or looked at, he will find that, whilst he has been doing this, he
has also made a drawing of the subject upon the paper; for the pencil
and the bead describe exactly the same lines, though upon different
planes. Thus, a drawing is made, without even looking at the paper,
but solely at the object.

White Cats.  Comparing him with an American, I really thought
that our national paleness and lean habit of flesh gave us greatly the advantage in an aesthetic
point of view.  It seemed to me, moreover, that the English tailor had not done so much as
he might and ought for these heavy figures, but had gone on wilfully exaggerating their uncouthness
by the roominess of their garments; he had evidently no idea of accuracy of fit, and smartness
was entirely out of his line.  But, to be quite open with the reader, I afterwards learned
to think that this aforesaid tailor has a deeper art than his brethren among ourselves, knowing
how to dress his customers with such individual propriety that they look as if they were born
in their clothes, the fit being to the character rather than the form.  If you make an Englishman
smart (unless he be a very exceptional one, of whom I have seen a few), you make him a monster;
his best aspect is that of ponderous respectability.

To make an end of these first impressions, I fancied that not merely the Suffolk bar, but the
bar of any inland county in New England, might show a set of thin-visaged men, looking wretchedly
worn, sallow, deeply wrinkled across the forehead, and grimly furrowed about the mouth, with
whom these heavy-checked English lawyers, slow-paced and fat-witted as they must needs be,
would stand very little chance in a professional contest.  How that matter might turn out,
I am unqualified to decide. But I state these results of my earliest glimpses at Englishmen,
not for what they are worth, but because I ultimately gave them up as worth little or nothing.
In course of time, I came to the conclusion that Englishmen of all ages are a rather good-looking
people, dress in admirable taste from their own point of view, and, under a surface never silken
to the touch, have a refinement of manners too thorough and genuine to be thought of as a separate
endowment,--that is to say, if the individual himself be a man of station, and has had gentlemen
for his father and grandfather.  The sturdy Anglo-Saxon nature does not refine itself short
of the third generation.  The tradesmen, too, and all other classes, have their own proprieties.
The only value of my criticisms, therefore, lay in their exemplifying the proneness of a traveller
to measure one people by the distinctive characteristics of another,--as English writers invariably
measure us, and take upon themselves to be disgusted accordingly, instead of trying to find
out some principle of beauty with which we may be in conformity.

In due time we were summoned to the table, and went thither in no solemn procession, but with
a good deal of jostling, thrusting behind, and scrambling for places when we reached our destination.
The legal gentlemen, I suspect, were responsible for this indecorous zeal, which I never afterwards
remarked in a similar party.  The dining-hall was of noble size, and, like the other rooms
of the suite, was gorgeously painted and gilded and brilliantly illuminated.  There was a splendid
table-service, and a noble array of footmen, some of them in plain clothes, and others wearing
the town-livery, richly decorated with gold-lace, and themselves excellent specimens of the
blooming young manhood of Britain.  When we were fairly seated, it was certainly an agreeable
spectacle to look up and down the long vista of earnest faces, and behold them so resolute,
so conscious that there was an important business in hand, and so determined to be equal to
the occasion.  Indeed, Englishman or not, I hardly know what can be prettier than a snow-white
table-cloth, a huge heap of flowers as a central decoration, bright silver, rich china, crystal
glasses, decanters of Sherry at due intervals, a French roll and an artistically folded napkin
at each plate, all that airy portion of a banquet, in short, that comes before the first mouthful,
the whole illuminated by a blaze of artificial light, without which a dinner of made-dishes
looks spectral, and the simplest viands are the best.  Printed bills-of-fare were distributed,
representing an abundant feast, no part of which appeared on the table until called for in
separate plates.  I have entirely forgotten what it was, but deem it no great matter, inasmuch
as there is a pervading commonplace and identicalness in the composition of extensive dinners,
on account of the impossibility of supplying a hundred guests with anything particularly delicate
or rare.  It was suggested to me that certain juicy old gentlemen had a private understanding
what to call for, and that it would be good policy in a stranger to follow in their footsteps
through the feast.  I did not care to do so, however, because, like Sancho Panza's dip out
of Camacho's caldron, any sort of pot-luck at such a table would be sure to suit my purpose;
so I chose a dish or two on my own judgment, and, getting through my labors betimes, had great
pleasure in seeing the Englishmen toil onward to the end.

They drank rather copiously, too, though wisely; for I observed that they seldom took Hock,
and let the Champagne bubble slowly away out of the goblet, solacing themselves with Sherry,
but tasting it warily before bestowing their final confidence.  Their taste in wines, however,
did not seem so exquisite, and certainly was not so various, as that to which many Americans
pretend.  This foppery of an intimate acquaintance with rare vintages does not suit a sensible
Englishman, as he is very much in earnest about his wines, and adopts one or two as his lifelong
friends, seldom exchanging them for any Delilahs of a moment, and reaping the reward of his
constancy in an unimpaired stomach, and only so much gout as he deems wholesome and desirable.
Knowing well the measure of his powers, he is not apt to fill his glass too often.  Society,
indeed, would hardly tolerate habitual imprudences of that kind, though, in my opinion, the
Englishmen now upon the stage could carry off their three bottles, at need, with as steady
a gait as any of their forefathers.  It is not so very long since the three-bottle heroes sank
finally under the table.  It may be (at least, I should be glad if it were true) that there
was an occult sympathy between our temperance reform, now somewhat in abeyance, and the almost
simultaneous disappearance of hard-drinking among the respectable classes in England. "The forme of
adjuring and citing the spirits aforesaid to appeare.--When you will have any spirit, you
must knowe his name and office; you must also fast and be cleane from all pollution three
or foure days before; so will the spirit be more obedient unto you. Then make a circle, and call
up the spirit with great intention, rehearse in your owne name, and your companion's, (for
one must alwaies be with you,) this prayer following; and so no spirit
shall annoy you, and your purpose shall take effect.  "Mr. Clerk," said Sir John, as if
it were the most indifferent fact in the world, "I was drunk last night.  There are my five
shillings."

During the dinner, I had a good deal of pleasant conversation with the gentlemen on either
side of me.  One of them, a lawyer, expatiated with great unction on the social standing of
the judges.  Representing the dignity and authority of the Crown, they take precedence, during
assize-time, of the highest military men in the kingdom, of the Lord-Lieutenant of the county,
of the Archbishops, of the royal Dukes, and even of the Prince of Wales.  For the nonce, they
are the greatest men in England.  With a glow of professional complacency that amounted to
enthusiasm, my friend assured me, that, in case of a royal dinner, a judge, if actually holding
an assize, would be expected to offer his arm and take the Queen herself to the table.  Happening
to be in company with some of these elevated personages, on subsequent occasions, it appeared
to me that the judges are fully conscious of their paramount claims to respect, and take rather
more pains to impress them on their ceremonial inferiors than men of high hereditary rank are
apt to do.  Bishops, if it be not irreverent to say so, are sometimes marked by a similar characteristic.
Dignified position is so sweet to an Englishman, that he needs to be born in it, and to feel
it thoroughly incorporated with his nature from its original germ, in order to keep him from
flaunting it obtrusively in the faces of innocent bystanders.

My companion on the other side was a thick-set, middle-aged man, uncouth in manners, and ugly
where none were handsome, with a dark, roughly hewn visage, that looked grim in repose, and
secured to hold within itself the machinery of a very terrific frown.  He ate with resolute
appetite, and let slip few opportunities of imbibing whatever liquids happened to be passing
by.  I was meditating in what way this grisly featured table-fellow might most safely be accosted,
when he turned to me with a surly sort of kindness, and invited me to take a glass of wine.
We then began a conversation that abounded, on his part, with sturdy sense, and, somehow or
other, brought me closer to him than I had yet stood to an Englishman.  I should hardly have
taken him to be an educated man, certainly not a scholar of accurate training; and yet he seemed
to have all the resources of education and trained intellectual power at command. My fresh
Americanism, and watchful observation of English characteristics, appeared either to interest
or amuse him, or perhaps both.  Under the mollifying influences of abundance of meat and drink,
he grew very gracious (not that I ought to use such a phrase to describe his evidently genuine
good-will), and by and by expressed a wish for further acquaintance, asking me to call at his
rooms in London and inquire for Sergeant Wilkins,--throwing out the name forcibly, as if he
had no occasion to be ashamed of it.  I remembered Dean Swift's retort to Sergeant Bettesworth
on a similar announcement,--"Of what regiment, pray, sir?"--and fancied that the same question
might not have been quite amiss, if applied to the rugged individual at my side.  But I heard
of him subsequently as one of the prominent men at the English bar, a rough customer, and a
terribly strong champion in criminal cases; and it caused me more regret than might have been
expected, on so slight an acquaintanceship, when, not long afterwards, I saw his death announced
in the newspapers.  Not rich in attractive qualities, he possessed, I think, the most attractive
one of all,--thorough manhood.

After the cloth was removed, a goodly group of decanters were set before the Mayor, who sent
them forth on their outward voyage, full freighted with Port, Sherry, Madeira, and Claret,
of which excellent liquors, methought, the latter found least acceptance among the guests.
When every man had filled his glass, his Worship stood up and proposed a toast.  It was, of
course, "Our gracious Sovereign," or words to that effect; and immediately a band of musicians,
whose preliminary footings and thrummings I had already heard behind me, struck up "God save
the Queen," and the whole company rose with one impulse to assist in singing that famous national
anthem.  It was the first time in my life that I had ever seen a body of men, or even a single
man, under the active influence of the sentiment of Loyalty; for, though we call ourselves
loyal to our country and institutions, and prove it by our readiness to shed blood and sacrifice
life in their behalf, still the principle is as cold and hard, in an American bosom, as the
steel spring that puts in motion a powerful machinery.  In the Englishman's system, a force
similar to that of our steel spring is generated by the warm throbbings of human hearts.  He
clothes our bare abstraction in flesh and blood,--at present, in the flesh and blood of a woman,--and
manages to combine love, awe, and intellectual reverence, all in one emotion, and to embody
his mother, his wife, his children, the whole idea of kindred, in a single person, and make
her the representative of his country and its laws.  We Americans smile superior, as I did
at the Mayor's table; and yet, I fancy, we lose some very agreeable titillations of the heart
in consequence of our proud prerogative of caring no more about our President than for a man
of straw, or a stuffed scarecrow straddling in a cornfield. 

The poor tree was marked for felling! Ambrosia was almost affected to tears, once more. The scene
was so beautiful, and the allusion so touching, and there seemed to her such a charm over
her God-daughter Hermione; she was herself so glad, too, to feel sure that success had crowned her
gift, that, altogether, her Fairy heart grew quite soft. "You may do as you like about observing
Hermione further," cried she. "But, for my part, I am now satisfied. She is enjoying life
to the uttermost; all its beauties of sight and sound; its outward loveliness; its inward mysteries.
She will never marry but from love, and one whose heart can sympathise with hers. Ah, Ianthe, what
more has life to give? You will say, she is not beautiful; perhaps not for a marble statue; but
the grace of poetical feeling is in her every look and action. Ah, she will walk by the side
of manhood, turning even the hard realities of life into beauty by that living well-spring
of sweet thoughts and fancies that I see beaming from her eyes. Look at her now, Ianthe, and confess
that surely that countenance breathes more beauty than chiselled features can give."

[2] Coleridge's "Dejection: an Ode."

And, turning through the little handgate at the extremity of the wood, she pursued the train
of thought with heightened colour in her cheeks--

"I may not hope from outward forms to win The passion and the life, whose fountains are within."

And
thus Hermione reached her home, her countenance lighted up by the pleasure of success, and the
sweet and healthy musings of her solitary walk.

She entered the library of a beautiful country house by the low window that opened on to the lawn,
and found her mother reading.

"I cannot tell you how lovely the day is, Mamma, every thing is so fresh, and the shadows and lights
are so good! I have immortalized our poor old friend the oak, before they cut him down," added she,
smiling, as she placed the drawing in her mother's hands. "I wish the forest belonged to some
one who had not this cruel taste for turning knotted oak trees into fancy work-tables. It is
as bad as what Charles Lamb said of the firs, 'which look so romantic alive, and die into
desks.'--Die into desks!" repeated Hermione musingly, as she seated
herself on the sofa, and took up a book that was before her on the
table; mechanically removing her bonnet from her head, and laying
it down by her side as she spoke.

And here for some time there was
a silence, during which Hermione's mother ceased reading, and, lifting
up her eyes, looked at her daughter with mingled love, admiration,
and interest.  The stronger and heavier his thoughts,
the better, provided there be an element of commonplace running through them; and any rough,
yet never vulgar force of expression, such as would knock an opponent down, if it hit him,
only it must not be too personal, is altogether to their taste; but a studied neatness of language,
or other such superficial graces, they cannot abide.  They do not often permit a man to make
himself a fine orator of malice aforethought, that is, unless he be a nobleman (as, for example,
Lord Stanley, of the Derby family), who, as an hereditary legislator and necessarily a public
speaker, is bound to remedy a poor natural delivery in the best way he can.  On the whole,
I partly agree with them, and, if I cared for any oratory whatever, should be as likely to
applaud theirs as our own.  When an English speaker sits down, you feel that you have been
listening to a real man, and not to an actor; his sentiments have a wholesome earth-smell in
them, though, very likely, this apparent naturalness is as much an art as what we expend in
rounding a sentence or elaborating a peroration.

It is one good effect of this inartificial style, that nobody in England seems to feel any
shyness about shovelling the untrimmed and untrimmable ideas out of his mind for the benefit
of an audience.  At least, nobody did on the occasion now in hand, except a poor little Major
of Artillery, who responded for the Army in a thin, quavering voice, with a terribly hesitating
trickle of fragmentary ideas, and, I question not, would rather have been bayoneted in front
of his batteries than to have said a word.  Not his own mouth, but the cannon's, was this poor
Major's proper organ of utterance.

While I was thus amiably occupied in criticising my fellow-guests, the Mayor had got up to
propose another toast; and listening rather inattentively to the first sentence or two, I soon
became sensible of a drift in his Worship's remarks that made me glance apprehensively towards
Sergeant Wilkins.  "Yes," grumbled that gruff personage, shoving a decanter of Port towards
me, "it is your turn next"; and seeing in my face, I suppose, the consternation of a wholly
unpractised orator, he kindly added, "It is nothing.  A mere acknowledgment will answer the
purpose.  The less you say, the better they will like it."  That being the case, I suggested
that perhaps they would like it best if I said nothing at all.  But the Sergeant shook his
head.  Now, on first receiving the Mayor's invitation to dinner, it had occurred to me that
I might possibly be brought into my present predicament; but I had dismissed the idea from
my mind as too disagreeable to be entertained, and, moreover, as so alien from my disposition
and character that Fate surely could not keep such a misfortune in store for me.  If nothing
else prevented, an earthquake or the crack of doom would certainly interfere before I need
rise to speak.  Yet here was the Mayor getting on inexorably,--and, indeed, I heartily wished
that he might get on and on forever, and of his wordy wanderings find no end.

If the gentle reader, my kindest friend and closest confidant, deigns to desire it, I can impart
to him my own experience as a public speaker quite as indifferently as if it concerned another
person.  Indeed, it does concern another, or a mere spectral phenomenon, for it was not I,
in my proper and natural self, that sat there at table or subsequently rose to speak.  At the
moment, then, if the choice had been offered me whether the Mayor should let off a speech at
my head or a pistol, I should unhesitatingly have taken the latter alternative.  I had really
nothing to say, not an idea in my head, nor, which was a great deal worse, any flowing words
or embroidered sentences in which to dress out that empty Nothing, and give it a cunning aspect
of intelligence, such as might last the poor vacuity the little time it had to live.  But time
pressed; the Mayor brought his remarks, affectionately eulogistic of the United States and
highly complimentary to their distinguished representative at that table, to a close, amid
a vast deal of cheering; and the band struck up "Hail Columbia," I believe, though it might
have been "Old Hundred," or "God save the Queen" over again, for anything that I should have
known or cared.  When the music ceased, there was an intensely disagreeable instant, during
which I seemed to rend away and fling off the habit of a lifetime, and rose, still void of
ideas, but with preternatural composure, to make a speech.  The guests rattled on the table,
and cried, "Hear!" most vociferously, as if now, at length, in this foolish and idly garrulous
world, had come the long-expected moment when one golden word was to be spoken; and in that
imminent crisis, I caught a glimpse of a little bit of an effusion of international sentiment,
which it might, and must, and should do to utter.

Well; it was nothing, as the Sergeant had said.  What surprised me most, was the sound of my
own voice, which I had never before heard at a declamatory pitch, and which impressed me as
belonging to some other person, who, and not myself, would be responsible for the speech: a
prodigious consolation and encouragement under the circumstances!  I went on without the slightest
embarrassment, and sat down amid great applause, wholly undeserved by anything that I had spoken,
but well won from Englishmen, methought, by the new development of pluck that alone had enabled
me to speak at all.  "It was handsomely done!" quoth Sergeant Wilkins; and I felt like a recruit
who had been for the first time under fire.

I would gladly have ended my oratorical career then and there forever, but was often placed
in a similar or worse position, and compelled to meet it as I best might; for this was one
of the necessities of an office which I had voluntarily taken on my shoulders, and beneath
which I might be crushed by no moral delinquency on my own part, but could not shirk without
cowardice and shame.  My subsequent fortune was various.  Once, though I felt it to be a kind
of imposture, I got a speech by heart, and doubtless it might have been a very pretty one,
only I forgot every syllable at the moment of need, and had to improvise another as well as
I could.  I found it a better method to prearrange a few points in my mind, and trust to the
spur of the occasion, and the kind aid of Providence, for enabling me to bring them to bear.
The presence of any considerable proportion of personal friends generally dumbfounded me. 
I would rather have talked with an enemy in the gate.  Invariably, too, I was much embarrassed
by a small audience, and succeeded better with a large one,-- the sympathy of a multitude possessing
a buoyant effect, which lifts the speaker a little way out of his individuality and tosses
him towards a perhaps better range of sentiment than his private one.  Again, if I rose carelessly
and confidently, with an expectation of going through the business entirely at my ease, I often
found that I had little or nothing to say; whereas, if I came to the charge in perfect despair,
and at a crisis when failure would have been horrible, it once or twice happened that the frightful
emergency concentrated my poor faculties, and enabled me to give definite and vigorous expression
to sentiments which an instant before looked as vague and far off as the clouds in the atmosphere.
On the whole, poor as my own success may have been, I apprehend that any intelligent man with
a tongue possesses the chief requisite of oratorical power, and may develop many of the others,
if he deems it worth while to bestow a great amount of labor and pains on an object which the
most accomplished orators, I suspect, have not found altogether satisfactory to their highest
impulses.  At any rate, it must be a remarkably true man who can keep his own elevated conception
of truth when the lower feeling of a multitude is assailing his natural sympathies, and who
can speak out frankly the best that there is in him, when by adulterating it a little, or a
good deal, he knows that he may make it ten times as acceptable to the audience.

This slight article on the civic banquets of England would be too wretchedly imperfect, without
an attempted description of a Lord Mayor's dinner at the Mansion House in London.  I should
have preferred the annual feast at Guildhall, but never had the good fortune to witness it.
Once, however, I was honored with an invitation to one of the regular dinners, and gladly accepted
it,--taking the precaution, nevertheless, though it hardly seemed necessary, to inform the
City-King, through a mutual friend, that I was no fit representative of American eloquence,
and must humbly make it a condition that I should not be expected to open my mouth, except
for the reception of his Lordship's bountiful hospitality.  The reply was gracious and acquiescent;
so that I presented myself in the great entrance-hall of the Mansion House, at half past six
o'clock, in a state of most enjoyable freedom from the pusillanimous apprehensions that often
tormented me at such times.  The Mansion House was built in Queen Anne's days, in the very
heart of old London, and is a palace worthy of its inhabitant, were he really as great a man
as his traditionary state and pomp would seem to indicate.  Times are changed, however, since
the days of Whittington, or even of Hogarth's Industrious Apprentice, to whom the highest imaginable
reward of lifelong integrity was a seat in the Lord Mayor's chair.  People nowadays say that
the real dignity and importance have perished out of the office, as they do, sooner or later,
out of all earthly institutions, leaving only a painted and gilded shell like that of an Easter
egg, and that it is only second-rate and third-rate men who now condescend to be ambitious
of the Mayoralty.  I felt a little grieved at this; for the original emigrants of New England
had strong sympathies with the people of London, who were mostly Puritans in religion and Parliamentarians
in politics, in the early days of our country; so that the Lord Mayor was a potentate of huge
dimensions in the estimation of our forefathers, and held to be hardly second to the prime
minister of the throne.  The true great men of the city now appear to have aims beyond city
greatness, connecting themselves with national politics, and seeking to be identified with
the aristocracy of the country.

In the entrance-hall I was received by a body of footmen dressed in a livery of blue coats
and buff breeches, in which they looked wonderfully like American Revolutionary generals, only
bedizened with far more lace and embroidery than those simple and grand old heroes ever dreamed
of wearing.  There were likewise two very imposing figures, whom I should have taken to be
military men of rank, being arrayed in scarlet coats and large silver epaulets; but they turned
out to be officers of the Lord Mayor's household, and were now employed in assigning to the
guests the places which they were respectively to occupy at the dinner-table.  Our names (for
I had included myself in a little group of friends) were announced; and ascending the staircase,
we met his Lordship in the doorway of the first reception-room, where, also, we had the advantage
of a presentation to the Lady Mayoress.  As this distinguished couple retired into private
life at the termination of their year of office, it is inadmissible to make any remarks, critical
or laudatory, on the manners and bearing of two personages suddenly emerging from a position
of respectable mediocrity into one of pre-eminent dignity within their own sphere.  Such individuals
almost always seem to grow nearly or quite to the full size of their office.  If it were desirable
to write an essay on the latent aptitude of ordinary people for grandeur, we have an exemplification
in our own country, and on a scale incomparably greater than that of the Mayoralty, though
invested with nothing like the outward magnificence that gilds and embroiders the latter. Our
interest in this may, I suppose, be called healthy, inasmuch as it would be decidedly unhealthy to
become indifferent to the activities of the German anti-aircraft
gunners.

It would be far-fetched to say that any airman ever looks forward zestfully to the business of being
shot at with one hundred and fives; and seventy-fives, if they are well placed, are unpleasant enough.
After one hundred hours of it, we have learned to assume that attitude of contemptuous toleration
which is the manner common to all pilotes de chasse. We know that the chances of a direct hit
are almost negligible, and that we have all the blue dome of the heavens in which to maneuver.

Furthermore,
we have learned many little tricks by means of which we can keep the gunners guessing. By way of
illustration, we are patrolling, let us say, at thirty-five hundred metres, crossing and recrossing
the lines, following the patrol leader, who has his motor throttled down so that we may keep well in
formation. The guns may be silent for the moment, but we know well enough what the gunners are
doing. We know exactly where some of the batteries are, and the approximate location of all of
them along the sector; and we know, from earlier experience, when we come within range of each individual
battery. Presently one of them begins firing in bursts of four shells. If their first estimate
of our range has been an accurate one, if they place them uncomfortably close, so that we can hear, all
too well, above the roar of our motors, the rending Gr-r-rOW, Gr-r-rOW, of the shells as they
explode, we sail calmly--to all outward appearances--on, maneuvering very little. The gunners,
seeing that we are not disturbed, will alter their ranges, four times
out of five, which is exactly what we want them to do.

The next bursts will be hundreds of metres below or above us, whereupon we show signs of great
uneasiness, and the gunners, thinking they have our altitude, begin to fire like demons.
  Be that as it might, while straying hither
and thither through those crowded apartments, I saw much reason for modifying certain heterodox
opinions which I had imbibed, in my Transatlantic newness and rawness, as regarded the delicate
character and frequent occurrence of English beauty.  To state the entire truth (being, at
this period, some years old in English life), my taste, I fear, had long since begun to be
deteriorated by acquaintance with other models of feminine loveliness than it was my happiness
to know in America.  I often found, or seemed to find, if I may dare to confess it, in the
persons of such of my dear countrywomen as I now occasionally met, a certain meagreness, (Heaven
forbid that I should call it scrawniness!) a deficiency of physical development, a scantiness,
so to speak, in the pattern of their material make, a paleness of complexion, a thinness of
voice,--all of which characteristics, nevertheless, only made me resolve so much the more sturdily
to uphold these fair creatures as angels, because I was sometimes driven to a half-acknowledgment,
that the English ladies, looked at from a lower point of view, were perhaps a little finer
animals than they.  The advantages of the latter, if any they could really be said to have,
were all comprised in a few additional lumps of clay on their shoulders and other parts of
their figures.  It would be a pitiful bargain to give up the ethereal charm of American beauty
in exchange for half a hundred-weight of human clay!

At a given signal we all found our way into an immense room, called the Egyptian Hall, I know
not why, except that the architecture was classic, and as different as possible from the ponderous
style of Memphis and the Pyramids.  A powerful band played inspiringly as we entered, and a
brilliant profusion of light shone down on two long tables, extending the whole length of the
hall, and a cross-table between them, occupying nearly its entire breadth.  Glass gleamed and
silver glistened on an acre or two of snowy damask, over which were set out all the accompaniments
of a stately feast.  We found our places without much difficulty, and the Lord Mayor's chaplain
implored a blessing on the food,--a ceremony which the English never omit, at a great dinner
or a small one, yet consider, I fear, not so much a religious rite as a sort of preliminary
relish before the soup.

The soup, of course, on this occasion, was turtle, of which, in accordance with immemorial
custom, each guest was allowed two platefuls, in spite of the otherwise immitigable law of
table-decorum.  Indeed, judging from the proceedings of the gentlemen near me, I surmised that
there was no practical limit, except the appetite of the guests and the capacity of the soup-tureens.
Not being fond of this civic dainty, I partook of it but once, and then only in accordance
with the wise maxim, always to taste a fruit, a wine, or a celebrated dish, at its indigenous
site; and the very fountain-head of turtle-soup, I suppose, is in the Lord Mayor's dinner-pot.
It is one of those orthodox customs which people follow for half a century without knowing
why, to drink a sip of rum-punch, in a very small tumbler, after the soup.  It was excellently
well-brewed, and it seemed to me almost worth while to sup the soup for the sake of sipping
the punch.  The rest of the dinner was catalogued in a bill-of-fare printed on delicate white
paper within an arabesque border of green and gold.  It looked very good, not only in the English
and French names of the numerous dishes, but also in the positive reality of the dishes themselves,
which were all set on the table to be carved and distributed by the guests.  This ancient and
honest method is attended with a good deal of trouble, and a lavish effusion of gravy, yet
by no means bestowed or dispensed in vain, because you have thereby the absolute assurance
of a banquet actually before your eyes, instead of a shadowy promise in the bill-of-fare, and
such meagre fulfilment as a single guest can contrive to get upon his individual plate.  I
wonder that Englishmen, who are fond of looking at prize-oxen in the shape of butcher's-meat,
do not generally better estimate the aesthetic gormandism of devouring the whole dinner with
their eyesight, before proceeding to nibble the comparatively few morsels which, after all,
the most heroic appetite and widest stomachic capacity of mere mortals can enable even an alderman
really to eat.  There fell to my lot three delectable things enough, which I take pains to
remember, that the reader may not go away wholly unsatisfied from the Barmecide feast to which
I have bidden him,-- a red mullet, a plate of mushrooms, exquisitely stewed, and part of a
ptarmigan, a bird of the same family as the grouse, but feeding high up towards the summit
of the Scotch mountains, whence it gets a wild delicacy of flavor very superior to that of
the artificially nurtured English game-fowl.  All the other dainties have vanished from my
memory as completely as those of Prospero's banquet after Ariel had clapped his wings over
it.  The band played at intervals inspiriting us to new efforts, as did likewise the sparkling
wines which the footmen supplied from an inexhaustible cellar, and which the guests quaffed
with little apparent reference to the disagreeable fact that there comes a to-morrow morning
after every feast.  As long as that shall be the case, a prudent man can never have full enjoyment
of his dinner.

Nearly opposite to me, on the other side of the table, sat a young lady in white, whom I am
sorely tempted to describe, but dare not, because not only the supereminence of her beauty,
but its peculiar character, would cause the sketch to be recognized, however rudely it might
be drawn.  I hardly thought that there existed such a woman outside of a picture-frame, or
the covers of a romance: not that I had ever met with her resemblance even there, but, being
so distinct and singular an apparition; she seemed likelier to find her sisterhood in poetry
and picture than in real life.  Let us turn away from her, lest a touch too apt should compel
her stately and cold and soft and womanly grace to gleam out upon my page with a strange repulsion
and unattainableness in the very spell that made her beautiful.  At her side, and familiarly
attentive to her, sat a gentleman of whom I remember only a hard outline of the nose and forehead,
and such a monstrous portent of a beard that you could discover no symptom of a mouth, except,
when he opened it to speak, or to put in a morsel of food.  Then, indeed, you suddenly became
aware of a cave hidden behind the impervious and darksome shrubbery. There could be no doubt
who this gentleman and lady were.  Any child would have recognized them at a glance.  It was
Bluebeard and a new wife (the loveliest of the series, but with already a mysterious gloom
overshadowing her fair young brow) travelling in their honeymoon, and dining, among other distinguished
strangers, at the Lord Mayor's table.

After an hour or two of valiant achievement with knife and fork came the dessert; and at the
point of the festival where finger-glasses are usually introduced, a large silver basin was
carried round to the guests, containing rose-water, into which we dipped the ends of our napkins
and were conscious of a delightful fragrance, instead of that heavy and weary odor, the hateful
ghost of a defunct dinner.  This seems to be an ancient custom of the city, not confined to
the Lord Mayor's table, but never met with westward of Temple Bar.

During all the feast, in accordance with another ancient custom, the origin or purport of which
I do not remember to have heard, there stood a man in armor, with a helmet on his head, behind
his Lordship's chair. When the after-dinner wine was placed on the table, still another official
personage appeared behind the chair, and proceeded to make a solemn and sonorous proclamation
(in which he enumerated the principal guests, comprising three or four noblemen, several baronets,
and plenty of generals, members of Parliament, aldermen, and other names of the illustrious,
one of which sounded strangely familiar to my ears), ending in some such style as this: "and
other gentlemen and ladies, here present, the Lord Mayor drinks to you all in a loving-cup,"--giving
a sort, of sentimental twang to the two words,--"and sends it round among you!"  And forthwith
the loving-cup--several of them, indeed, on each side of the tables--came slowly down with
all the antique ceremony.

The fashion of it is thus.  The Lord Mayor, standing up and taking the covered cup in both
hands, presents it to the guest at his elbow, who likewise rises, and removes the cover for
his Lordship to drink, which being successfully accomplished, the guest replaces the cover
and receives the cup into his own hands.  He then presents it to his next neighbor, that the
cover may be again removed for himself to take a draught, after which the third person goes
through a similar manoeuvre with a fourth, and he with a fifth, until the whole company find
themselves inextricably intertwisted and entangled in one complicated chain of love.  When
the cup came to my hands, I examined it critically, both inside and out, and perceived it to
be an antique and richly ornamented silver goblet, capable of holding about a quart of wine.
Considering how much trouble we all expended in getting the cup to our lips, the guests appeared
to content themselves with wonderfully moderate potations.  In truth, nearly or quite the original
quart of wine being still in the goblet, it seemed doubtful whether any of the company had
more than barely touched the silver rim before passing it to their neighbors,--a degree of
abstinence that might be accounted for by a fastidious repugnance to so many compotators in
one cup, or possibly by a disapprobation of the liquor.  Being curious to know all about these
important matters, with a view of recommending to my countrymen whatever they might usefully
adopt, I drank an honest sip from the loving-cup, and had no occasion for another,--ascertaining
it to be Claret of a poor original quality, largely mingled with water, and spiced and sweetened.
It was good enough, however, for a merely spectral or ceremonial drink, and could never have
been intended for any better purpose.

The toasts now began in the customary order, attended with speeches neither more nor less witty
and ingenious than the specimens of table-eloquence which had heretofore delighted me.  As
preparatory to each new display, the herald, or whatever he was, behind the chair of state,
gave awful notice that the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor was about to propose a toast.  His
Lordship being happily delivered thereof, together with some accompanying remarks, the band
played an appropriate tune, and the herald again issued proclamation to the effect that such
or such a nobleman, or gentleman, general, dignified clergyman, or what not, was going to respond
to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor's toast; then, if I mistake not, there was another prodigious
flourish of trumpets and twanging of stringed instruments; and finally the doomed individual,
waiting all this while to be decapitated, got up and proceeded to make a fool of himself. This
was what she most thought about. So she had tried to correct the child herself, but not with the success
she had desired. "How little she knows the heart," thought Theodore, "his evil propensities would have been
an additional claim upon my kindness!"

I will pass over all that Theodore said to the boy himself. No father could have been more earnest,
more solemn in his warnings, or more kind in his expostulations. Reuben, by this time, could understand
all he said, and shame and repentance burnt in his face during a painful interview. It is right
to remind you, dear children, of the many excuses that were to be made for him. He had been
brought up, till seven years old, in total ignorance of God, and without ever having heard one
duty commanded or one sin forbidden. The woman lied daily and hourly in his sight, and made
him do the same; and she took all she could lay hold of in any way, and beat him if he did not
follow her example; and although Theodore's instructions had opened a new world on the child's
mind, the evil HABITS were not so soon got rid of. So there the mischief was; and now the great
difficulty Theodore felt, was to know what to do for the best. And, after much consideration,
he decided to send him to school, as the likeliest means of eradicating the bad habits the boy
had acquired. I say habits, rather than dispositions, for there was indeed nothing mean or
sneaking about his character. On the contrary, he was both courageous and generous in the turn of his
mind, and, after his health improved, his manners partook of the same freedom and candour.

To school therefore poor Reuben went; and Theodore was almost astonished himself at the blank which
his absence created.

But having desired that continued reports should be sent to him of his conduct, he meanwhile
began seriously to think what was to become of him hereafter. At last it occurred to him that
he might employ him in some way or other about his property; and with a view to this, Theodore
himself began to take more interest in his estate than he had had the energy to bestow before,
and made himself more intimately acquainted with the wants and modes
of life of those under his control.  One of them was a lady, whose honored name my readers would recognize as a household
word, if I dared write it; another, a gentleman, likewise well known to them, whose fine taste,
kind heart, and genial cultivation are qualities seldom mixed in such happy proportion as in
him.  The third was the man to whom I owed most in England, the warm benignity of whose nature
was never weary of doing me good, who led me to many scenes of life, in town, camp, and country,
which I never could have found out for myself, who knew precisely the kind of help a stranger
needs, and gave it as freely as if he had not had a thousand more important things to live
for.  Thus I never felt safer or cosier at anybody's fireside, even my own, than at the dinner-table
of the Lord Mayor.

Out of this serene sky came a thunderbolt.  His Lordship got up and proceeded to make some
very eulogistic remarks upon "the literary and commercial"--I question whether those two adjectives
were ever before married by a copulative conjunction, and they certainly would not live together
in illicit intercourse, of their own accord--"the literary and commercial attainments of an
eminent gentleman there present," and then went on to speak of the relations of blood and interest
between Great Britain and the aforesaid eminent gentleman's native country.  Those bonds were
more intimate than had ever before existed between two great nations, throughout all history,
and his Lordship felt assured that that whole honorable company would join him in the expression
of a fervent wish that they might be held inviolably sacred, on both sides of the Atlantic,
now and forever.  Then came the same wearisome old toast, dry and hard to chew upon as a musty
sea-biscuit, which had been the text of nearly all the oratory of my public career.  The herald
sonorously announced that Mr. So-and-so would now respond to his Right Honorable Lordship's
toast and speech, the trumpets sounded the customary flourish for the onset, there was a thunderous
rumble of anticipatory applause, and finally a deep silence sank upon the festive hall.

All this was a horrid piece of treachery on the Lord Mayor's part, after beguiling me within
his lines on a pledge of safe-conduct; and it seemed very strange that he could not let an
unobtrusive individual eat his dinner in peace, drink a small sample of the Mansion House wine,
and go away grateful at heart for the old English hospitality.  If his Lordship had sent me
an infusion of ratsbane in the loving-cup, I should have taken it much more kindly at his hands.
But I suppose the secret of the matter to have been somewhat as follows.

All England, just then, was in one of those singular fits of panic excitement (not fear, though
as sensitive and tremulous as that emotion), which, in consequence of the homogeneous character
of the people, their intense patriotism, and their dependence for their ideas in public affairs
on other sources than their own examination and individual thought, are more sudden, pervasive,
and unreasoning than any similar mood of our own public. Because there are not many people in the story,
and because their characters are so well-described, the reader is drawn into the family, and
follows their concerns with interest. It makes a good audiobook of
about eleven hours duration.  For example,
the grand rising of the North, at the commencement of this war, bore the aspect of impulse
and passion only because it was so universal, and necessarily done in a moment, just as the
quiet and simultaneous getting-up of a thousand people out of their chairs would cause a tumult
that might be mistaken for a storm.  We were cool then, and have been cool ever since, and
shall remain cool to the end, which we shall take coolly, whatever it may be.  There is nothing
which the English find it so difficult to understand in us as this characteristic.  They imagine
us, in our collective capacity, a kind of wild beast, whose normal condition is savage fury,
and are always looking for the moment when we shall break through the slender barriers of international
law and comity, and compel the reasonable part of the world, with themselves at the head, to
combine for the purpose of putting us into a stronger cage.  At times this apprehension becomes
so powerful (and when one man feels it, a million do), that it resembles the passage of the
wind over a broad field of grain, where you see the whole crop bending and swaying beneath
one impulse, and each separate stalk tossing with the selfsame disturbance as its myriad companions.
At such periods all Englishmen talk with a terrible identity of sentiment and expression. You
have the whole country in each man; and not one of them all, if you put him strictly to the
question, can give a reasonable ground for his alarm.  There are but two nations in the world--our
own country and France--that can put England into this singular state.  It is the united sensitiveness
of a people extremely well-to-do, careful of their country's honor, most anxious for the preservation
of the cumbrous and moss-grown prosperity which they have been so long in consolidating, and
incompetent (owing to the national half-sightedness, and their habit of trusting to a few leading
minds for their public opinion) to judge when that prosperity is really threatened. 

Even attachés carried them sometimes. The very lowest a man with an attaché-case could be was
a First-Class Civil Servant; and one was justified in imagining confidential papers inside, or, at any
rate, home-work of the first importance. But nowadays there are too many of them for that. The
attaché-case has been degraded; it is universal. This might be because there is practically
no male person alive just now who has not been an adjutant at one time or another, and pinched at
least one attaché-case from the orderly-room. But most of the cases in the Tube are carried by
females, so that theory is no good.

Well, then, I imagined sandwiches
or knitting or powder-puffs or tea; but those also are rotten hypotheses.

If I remember it correctly, it was a mere diplomatic squabble, in which the British ministers,
with the politic generosity which they are in the habit of showing towards their official subordinates,
had tried to browbeat us for the purpose of sustaining an ambassador in an indefensible proceeding;
and the American Government (for God had not denied us an administration of statesmen then)
had retaliated with stanch courage and exquisite skill, putting inevitably a cruel mortification
upon their opponents, but indulging them with no pretence whatever for active resentment.

Now the Lord Mayor, like any other Englishman, probably fancied that War was on the western
gale, and was glad to lay hold of even so insignificant an American as myself, who might be
made to harp on the rusty old strings of national sympathies, identity of blood and interest,
and community of language and literature, and whisper peace where there was no peace, in however
weak an utterance.  And possibly his Lordship thought, in his wisdom, that the good feeling
which was sure to be expressed by a company of well-bred Englishmen, at his august and far-famed
dinner-table, might have an appreciable influence on the grand result.  Thus, when the Lord
Mayor invited me to his feast, it was a piece of strategy. Voltaire's last moments were distorted
by his enemies after the approved fashion; and notwithstanding the most unqualified denial on the
part of Dr. Burard and others, who were present at his death, there are many who believe these
falsehoods at this moment.  On the
whole, I forgive his Lordship.  He meant well by all parties,--himself, who would share the
glory, and me, who ought to have desired nothing better than such an heroic opportunity,--his
own country, which would continue to get cotton and breadstuffs, and mine, which would get
everything that men work with and wear.

As soon as the Lord Mayor began to speak, I rapped upon my mind, and it gave forth a hollow
sound, being absolutely empty of appropriate ideas. I never thought of listening to the speech,
because I knew it all beforehand in twenty repetitions from other lips, and was aware that
it would not offer a single suggestive point.  In this dilemma, I turned to one of my three
friends, a gentleman whom I knew to possess an enviable flow of silver speech, and obtested
him, by whatever he deemed holiest, to give me at least an available thought or two to start
with, and, once afloat, I would trust to my guardian-angel for enabling me to flounder ashore
again.  He advised me to begin with some remarks complimentary to the Lord Mayor, and expressive
of the hereditary reverence in which his office was held,--at least, my friend thought that
there would be no harm in giving his Lordship this little sugar-plum, whether quite the fact
or no,--was held by the descendants of the Puritan forefathers. At this the little man grinned
and shook his head, but said not a word in reply, only begging and praying the more to get loose.
The farmer thought he must now entreat him if he would coax any information
out of him. But it was all to no purpose.

Seizing this handful of straw with a death-grip, and bidding my three friends bury me honorably,
I got upon my legs to save both countries, or perish in the attempt.  The tables roared and
thundered at me, and suddenly were silent again.  But, as I have never happened to stand in
a position of greater dignity and peril, I deem it a stratagem of sage policy here to close
these Sketches, leaving myself still erect in so heroic an attitude.

THE END

