Whilst, therefore, grace of manner, politeness of behaviour, elegance of demeanour, and all
the arts that contribute to make life pleasant and beautiful, are worthy of cultivation, it
must not be at the expense of the more solid and enduring qualities of honesty, sincerity,
and truthfulness. The fountain of beauty must be in the heart; more than in the eye, and if
art do not tend to produce beautiful life and noble practice, it will be of comparatively little
avail. Politeness of manner is not worth much, unless accompanied by polite action. Grace may
be but skin-deep--very pleasant and attractive, and yet very heartless. Art is a source of
innocent enjoyment, and an important aid to higher culture; but unless it leads to higher culture,
it will probably be merely sensuous. And when art is merely sensuous, it is enfeebling and
demoralizing rather than strengthening or elevating. Honest courage is of greater worth than
any amount of grace; purity is better than elegance; and cleanliness of body, mind, and heart,
than any amount of fine art.

In fine, while the cultivation of the graces is not to be neglected, it should ever be held
in mind that there is something far higher and nobler to be aimed at--greater than pleasure,
greater than art, greater than wealth, greater than power, greater than intellect, greater
than genius--and that is, purity and excellence of character. Without a solid sterling basis
of individual goodness, all the grace, elegance, and art in the world would fail to save or
to elevate a people.

CHAPTER X--COMPANIONSHIP OF BOOKS.

     "Not only in the common speech of men, but in all art too--
     which is or should be the concentrated and conserved essence
     of what men can speak and show--Biography is almost the one
     thing needful" --CARLYLE.

     "I read all biographies with intense interest. Even a man
     without a heart, like Cavendish, I think about, and read
     about, and dream about, and picture to myself in all
     possible ways, till he grows into a living being beside me,
     and I put my feet into his shoes, and become for the time
     Cavendish, and think as he thought, and do as he did."
     --GEORGE WILSON.

          "My thoughts are with the dead; with them
            I live in long-past years;
          Their virtues love, their faults condemn;
            Partake their hopes and fears;
          And from their lessons seek and find
            Instruction with a humble mind."--SOUTHEY.

A man may usually be known by the books he reads, as well as by the company he keeps; for there
is a companionship of books as well as of men; and one should always live in the best company,
whether it be of books or of men.

A good book may be among the best of friends. It is the same to-day that it always was, and
it will never change. It is the most patient and cheerful of companions. It does not turn its
back upon us in times of adversity or distress. It always receives us with the same kindness;
amusing and instructing us in youth, and comforting and consoling us in age.

Men often discover their affinity to each other by the mutual love they have for a book--just
as two persons sometimes discover a friend by the admiration which both entertain for a third.
There is an old proverb, "Love me, love my dog." But there is more wisdom in this: "Love me,
love my book." The book is a truer and higher bond of union. Men can think, feel, and sympathise
with each other through their favourite author. They live in him together, and he in them. [192]

Books introduce us into the best society; they bring us into the presence of the greatest minds
that have ever lived. We hear what they said and did; we see them as if they were really alive;
we are participators in their thoughts; we sympathise with them, enjoy with them, grieve with
them; their experience becomes ours, and we feel as if we were in a measure actors with them
in the scenes which they describe.

The great and good do not die, even in this world. Embalmed in books their spirits walk abroad.
The book is a living voice. It is an intellect to which one still listens. Hence we ever remain
under the influence of the great men of old:

         "The dead but sceptred sovrans, who still rule
          Our spirits from their urns."

The imperial intellects of the world are as much alive now as they were ages ago. Homer still
lives; and though his personal history is hidden in the mists of antiquity, his poems are as
fresh to-day as if they had been newly written. Plato still teaches his transcendent philosophy;
Horace, Virgil, and Dante still sing as when they lived; Shakspeare is not dead: his body was
buried in 1616, but his mind is as much alive in England now, and his thought as far-reaching,
as in the time of the Tudors.

The humblest and poorest may enter the society of these great spirits without being thought
intrusive. All who can read have got the ENTREE. Would you laugh?--Cervantes or Rabelais will
laugh with you. Do you grieve?--there is Thomas a Kempis or Jeremy Taylor to grieve with and
console you. Always it is to books, and the spirits of great men embalmed in them, that we
turn, for entertainment, for instruction and solace--in joy and in sorrow, as in prosperity
and in adversity.

Man himself is, of all things in the world, the most interesting to man. Whatever relates to
human life--its experiences, its joys, its sufferings, and its achievements--has usually attractions
for him beyond all else. Each man is more or less interested in all other men as his fellow-creatures--as
members of the great family of humankind; and the larger a man's culture, the wider is the
range of his sympathies in all that affects the welfare of his race.

Men's interest in each other as individuals manifests itself in a thousand ways--in the portraits
which they paint, in the busts which they carve, in the narratives which they relate of each
other. "Man," says Emerson, "can paint, or make, or think, nothing but Man." Most of all is
this interest shown in the fascination which personal history possesses for him. "Man s sociality
of nature," says Carlyle, "evinces itself, in spite of all that can be said, with abundance
of evidence, by this one fact, were there no other: the unspeakable delight he takes in Biography."

Great, indeed, is the human interest felt in biography! What are all the novels that find such
multitudes of readers, but so many fictitious biographies? What are the dramas that people
crowd to see, but so much acted biography? Strange that the highest genius should be employed
on the fictitious biography, and so much commonplace ability on the real!

Yet the authentic picture of any human being's life and experience ought to possess an interest
greatly beyond that which is fictitious, inasmuch as it has the charm of reality. Every person
may learn something from the recorded life of another; and even comparatively trivial deeds
and sayings may be invested with interest, as being the outcome of the lives of such beings
as we ourselves are.

The records of the lives of good men are especially useful. They influence our hearts, inspire
us with hope, and set before us great examples. And when men have done their duty through life
in a great spirit, their influence will never wholly pass away. "The good life," says George
Herbert, "is never out of season."

Goethe has said that there is no man so commonplace that a wise man may not learn something
from him. Sir Walter Scott could not travel in a coach without gleaning some information or
discovering some new trait of character in his companions. [193] Dr. Johnson once observed
that there was not a person in the streets but he should like to know his biography--his experiences
of life, his trials, his difficulties, his successes, and his failures. How much more truly
might this be said of the men who have made their mark in the world's history, and have created
for us that great inheritance of civilization of which we are the possessors! Whatever relates
to such men--to their habits, their manners, their modes of living, their personal history,
their conversation, their maxims, their virtues, or their greatness--is always full of interest,
of instruction, of encouragement, and of example.

The great lesson of Biography is to show what man can be and do at his best. A noble life put
fairly on record acts like an inspiration to others. It exhibits what life is capable of being
made. It refreshes our spirit, encourages our hopes, gives us new strength and courage and
faith--faith in others as well as in ourselves. It stimulates our aspirations, rouses us to
action, and incites us to become co-partners with them in their work. To live with such men
in their biographies, and to be inspired by their example, is to live with the best of men,
and to mix in the best of company. [194]

It would, indeed, be difficult to overestimate the influence which the lives of the great and
good have exercised upon the elevation of human character. "The best biography," says Isaac
Disraeli, "is a reunion with human existence in its most excellent state." Indeed, it is impossible
for one to read the lives of good men, much less inspired men, without being unconsciously
lighted and lifted up in them, and growing insensibly nearer to what they thought and did.
And even the lives of humbler persons, of men of faithful and honest spirit, who have done
their duty in life well, are not without an elevating influence upon the character of those
who come after them.

Among the great writers of the past, probably the two that have been most influential in forming
the characters of great men of action and great men of thought, have been Plutarch and Montaigne--the
one by presenting heroic models for imitation, the other by probing questions of constant recurrence
in which the human mind in all ages has taken the deepest interest. And the works of both are
for the most part cast in a biographic form, their most striking illustrations consisting in
the exhibitions of character and experience which they contain.

Plutarch's 'Lives,' though written nearly eighteen hundred years ago, like Homer's 'Iliad,'
still holds its ground as the greatest work of its kind. It was the favourite book of Montaigne;
and to Englishmen it possesses the special interest of having been Shakspeare's principal authority
in his great classical dramas. Montaigne pronounced Plutarch to be "the greatest master in
that kind of writing"--the biographic; and he declared that he "could no sooner cast an eye
upon him but he purloined either a leg or a wing."

Alfieri was first drawn with passion to literature by reading Plutarch. "I read," said he,
"the lives of Timoleon, Caesar, Brutus, Pelopidas, more than six times, with cries, with tears,
and with such transports, that I was almost furious.... Every time that I met with one of the
grand traits of these great men, I was seized with such vehement agitation as to be unable
to sit still." Plutarch was also a favourite with persons of such various minds as Schiller
and Benjamin Franklin, Napoleon and Madame Roland. The latter was so fascinated by the book
that she carried it to church with her in the guise of a missal, and read it surreptitiously
during the service.

It has also been the nurture of heroic souls such as Henry IV. of France, Turenne, and the
Napiers. It was one of Sir William Napier's favourite books when a boy. His mind was early
imbued by it with a passionate admiration for the great heroes of antiquity; and its influence
had, doubtless, much to do with the formation of his character, as well as the direction of
his career in life. It is related of him, that in his last illness, when feeble and exhausted,
his mind wandered back to Plutarch's heroes; and he descanted for hours to his son-in-law on
the mighty deeds of Alexander, Hannibal, and Caesar. Indeed, if it were possible to poll the
great body of readers in all ages whose minds have been influenced and directed by books, it
is probable that--excepting always the Bible--the immense majority of votes would be cast in
favour of Plutarch.

And how is it that Plutarch has succeeded in exciting an interest which continues to attract
and rivet the attention of readers of all ages and classes to this day? In the first place,
because the subject of his work is great men, who occupied a prominent place in the world's
history, and because he had an eye to see and a pen to describe the more prominent events and
circumstances in their lives. And not only so, but he possessed the power of portraying the
individual character of his heroes; for it is the principle of individuality which gives the
charm and interest to all biography. The most engaging side of great men is not so much what
they do as what they are, and does not depend upon their power of intellect but on their personal
attractiveness. Thus, there are men whose lives are far more eloquent than their speeches,
and whose personal character is far greater than their deeds.

It is also to be observed, that while the best and most carefully-drawn of Plutarch's portraits
are of life-size, many of them are little more than busts. They are well-proportioned but compact,
and within such reasonable compass that the best of them--such as the lives of Caesar and Alexander--may
be read in half an hour. Reduced to this measure, they are, however, greatly more imposing
than a lifeless Colossus, or an exaggerated giant. They are not overlaid by disquisition and
description, but the characters naturally unfold themselves. Montaigne, indeed, complained
of Plutarch's brevity. "No doubt," he added, "but his reputation is the better for it, though
in the meantime we are the worse. Plutarch would rather we should applaud his judgment than
commend his knowledge, and had rather leave us with an appetite to read more than glutted with
what we have already read. He knew very well that a man may say too much even on the best subjects....
Such as have lean and spare bodies stuff themselves out with clothes; so they who are defective
in matter, endeavour to make amends with words." [195]

Plutarch possessed the art of delineating the more delicate features of mind and minute peculiarities
of conduct, as well as the foibles and defects of his heroes, all of which is necessary to
faithful and accurate portraiture. "To see him," says Montaigne, "pick out a light action in
a man's life, or a word, that does not seem to be of any importance, is itself a whole discourse."
He even condescends to inform us of such homely particulars as that Alexander carried his head
affectedly on one side; that Alcibiades was a dandy, and had a lisp, which became him, giving
a grace and persuasive turn to his discourse; that Cato had red hair and gray eyes, and was
a usurer and a screw, selling off his old slaves when they became unfit for hard work; that
Caesar was bald and fond of gay dress; and that Cicero [19like Lord Brougham] had involuntary
twitchings of his nose.

