At the present day, when books are so easily obtained, there is no need of the excuse of inability
to procure them. Circulating libraries are easy of access,--though caution should be used in
selecting from them,--and each Sabbath school has a library open for all. There has been much
said, and much written about books of fiction, whether they may be read with safety by the
young. Fiction as such need not be condemned, though works of fiction should be sparingly read.
But if read at all, let them be selected by persons of experience. There is much in the current
fiction of the day that is pernicious and unfit for publication.

But if we set aside the light reading, there are standard works enough to furnish reading for
one generation. The better newspapers of the day should be carefully read. The newspapers of
this week are the history of the world for this week. In each particular branch of literature
there are books without number, not only worthy of perusal, but deserving of careful study.
In history we have Rollin, Hume, Smollet, Prescott, Macaulay, and Robertson. Philosophy, theology,
and science, each in its turn, brings names as illustrious.

But there is one book above all others. Never complain for want of reading while we have such
historians as Moses, poets before whom Shakspeare dwindles into insignificance, philosophers
of a higher and holier school, and truths that exceed the most astonishing fictions. Where
has Scott a heroine that can compare with Ruth? Grand as are the beauties of the Bible, life-giving
as is its wisdom, and imperishable as are its truths, it is too frequently left unread.

As a general thing, too much is read; more than can be well retained. One page well read is
more beneficial than a whole volume merely glanced over. Never read the second line until the
first is fully understood. Make the author's sentiments your own. In reading history it is
highly important you should have a clear idea of the locality where the events occurred. I
have found by experience that the best method deeply to impress what I have read, is to have
at hand writing materials, and after each reading write out as fully as possible whatever new
idea has been presented. But in all that you read, keep in view the great object of your reading,--Self
Improvement.

A SABBATH SCHOOL EXCURSION.

The morning breaks. A hundred voices rise, In shouts of gladness echoing to the skies. The
happy time draws near, the day is fair, To festive scenes and rural joys repair. Bright expectation
gleams from every face, And lighter footsteps bend with eager pace; Children and parents, pastor,
people, all With one accord obey the welcome call; And hand in hand, along the path they wind,
As heart responds to heart a greeting kind, To hold in verdant temples high and broad, Commune
with Nature and with Nature's God. Far from the city's worn and narrow streets, To sunny slopes
embowered by Nature's sweets, How blest the change; to breathe the scented air, Steals for
the moment every sense of care, Its healing powers to all new life impart, Expand the mind
and elevate the heart. But now arrived at the appointed place,-- A rural spot adorned with
every grace, Which Nature from her bounties could bestow, To make the world a paradise below,--
Our party pause a moment to reflect; Then towards a path their several steps direct, Which
leads the way to some sequestered seat, Secured by foliage from the noonday heat; Or to the
various sports their tastes incline, Where art and nature, toil and skill combine To give to
all a welcome warm and kind, That every weary heart sweet rest may find. Here a few friends
in social cheer are met, Discoursing topics which such scenes beget; And there a crowd, intent
on sports more gay, In lively measure tread the hours away. Some roam in groups through fields
and meadows green, And laden with the fragrant spoils are seen, Bedecked with crowns from Flora's
own fair hand, A radiant company from Fairy-land. Apart from this another group behold, A burden
sweet their little arms unfold-- Lilies, fit emblem, when by childhood twined, Of purity and
innocence combined. But hark! what sound is pealing through the air? A summons from their sports
to join in prayer; Come one and all, your voices mingle here, To bless His presence who is
ever near. From east and west they come, from south and north, From every path and thicket
issuing forth, Till all together seated once again, The songs of worship and of praise begin.
Up to the throne of Heaven their prayers ascend, Together rich and poor their voices blend;
While with their songs unite the feathered choir, With gratitude each spirit to inspire, Till
hill and valley echo all around, And "God's first temples" with His praise resound. And look!
for now again the scene is changed; A group before that rustic altar ranged, With bended knee
the throne of grace implore, On infant heads its showers of love to pour; That infant tongues
may lisp the praise of God, To guide their feet in paths by Jesus trod. Sure, angels hallow
scenes like this below, And holy spirits at that altar bow, Like winged messengers from Heaven,
to bear These offerings, and ever guard them there, That every bud of promise reared below,
May bloom in Heaven, and to perfection grow. But fast in scenes like this the day is spent;
Again toward home their weary steps are bent. Weary with pleasure, they reluctant go, Once
more the toils and cares of earth to know: But purified, and strengthened for the strife Of
labor, and the busy scenes of life; While the remembrance of those happy hours Shall deck the
barren path of toil with flowers; And praying each that as the years roll on, Laden with pleasures
soon forever gone, Each year shall bring but added virtues forth, And leave behind the impress
of their worth; Till every heart to innocence be tuned, Nor sinful pleasures ever dare intrude,
To mar the image God has made and blest, With means of pleasure, happiness and rest; That all
may find, in holy joys and pure, Relief from care, for every sorrow cure; And live to be in
holy pleasures blest, Till earthly toil is changed for heavenly rest.

CHRIST AND DUTY.

It is profitable for us to meditate on such a character as Christ's, if by dwelling upon it
we become even in one respect like him. The more we know of him, the more we shall love him;
for his character is love. We should imitate the example of Mary, who was first at the door
of the sepulchre where Jesus was laid. She had great love for him, and her faith in him was
as strong as her love. She was not a stranger to the miracles which he performed while here
on earth. She had seen him, and she knew that in him perfection dwelt. So we should try to
be first in doing any act of kindness or benevolence, not in a spirit of unholy emulation,
but from a love of doing good. By cultivating this spirit we shall be happy in life, and prepared
for death. We shall be far happier than those who seek worldly honors; and more than all, we
shall leave a name behind us more precious than fame or wealth can bestow. When I was young
as are many of you to whom I am now speaking, I had not the privilege of worshipping God as
we now do. I was taught that a greater part of the human family will be destroyed, and will
have no part in the heavenly kingdom. But thanks be to God that he has now opened the eyes
of many to see him a Father to the fatherless, and a sure help in time of need. When such thoughts
take possession of the heart, we view him in his true character.

In order to serve him as we ought, we should commence in youth. Christ said, "they that seek
me early shall find me." The whole life is short, if happily spent in his service. We have
every encouragement to trust wholly in his kind care and keeping, for his watchful eye is ever
over us. If you seek Christ in youth, nothing will be lost, but much will be gained. When I
look back upon the early days of my life, I regard them as lost to the true service of Christ.
It was impressed upon my young mind, that God was filled with anger and wrath; and still I
was told that I must love him with my whole heart. I am sorry to say it, but I fear I had no
true love for him at that time. If the path in which I have walked has been desolate and dreary,
I do not desire that others should walk in it. If God is seen in his true loveliness, the young,
as well as the old, will love his holy name.

In this regard, I think much good can be done in the Sabbath school, and many profitable and
lasting impressions may be made upon the young mind. I cannot think we meet together every
Sabbath in vain. The blessing of God will surely rest upon us, and we shall be profited by
our assemblings. We must not be forgetful of God, for he is not forgetful of us. When we lie
down on our pillow at night, we ought not to close our eyes to sleep without thanking him for
his kind care of us through the day; and in the morning we should thank him for his watchful
care through the night.

In time of sorrow and trouble we at once fly to him. This is right; but still it is our duty
and privilege to call on him in time of prosperity as well as in time of adversity, never forgetting
to seek his divine blessing. Without this we cannot enjoy life, or be prepared for death. And
when the days on earth are all passed, and we are called to lay ourselves on the bed of death,
if we can but look back upon a life well spent, it will smooth the pillow of pain, and make
even death itself sweet.

Salvation is the right direction of all one's powers and activities.

Hope is the sunshine of the soul.