[83] It is to be regretted that we have left us so little relating to the Rev. Thomas James
and his knowledge of the Indians of Montauk. The few depositions and letters he left show that
his knowledge of Indian traditions and customs must have been quite extensive. In September,
1660, he informed the Commissioners of the United Colonies, then in session at New Haven, that
he was "willing to apply himself, to instruct the Indians" of Long Island, "in the knowledge
of the true God." An allowance of £10 was therefore made for him "towards the hiering of an
Interpreter and other Charges." In 1662 he was paid £20 "for Instructing the Indians on Long
Island," and the same allowance was continued for the two following years. In a letter from
Governor Lovelace to Mr. James (Colonial History of New York, vol. xiv. pp. 610-11), we find:
"I very much approve of yor composure of a Catechisme.... That wch I shall desire from you
at p'sent is the Catachisme with some few select chapters & Lauditory Psalms fairly transcribed
in the Indian Language wch I will send over to England & have quantityes of them printed &
if you thinke it necessary I conceive a small book such as shal only seme to the instructing
ye Indians to read may likewise be compiled & sent with them," etc. The Catechism referred
to above was probably never printed (Pilling's Algonquian Bibliography, p. 569). ENCHIRIDION
LEONIS PAPÆ.

MACNAB'S THEORY OF THE UNIVERSE. 1818. 1849), and in Hampson's Medii
Ævi Kalendarium (vol i). We have no doubt some of our correspondents
will furnish A.B. with a list of Eugene Aram's published writings.

[84] The numerous valleys and hilly slopes of the "North Neck," to the northeast of Fort Pond,
are dotted in many places by Indian graves. The pedestrian will meet with them in the most
isolated spots; but generally near swamps and ponds in proximity to wigwam or cabin sites.
The two principal are located at "Burial Place Point," on the eastern shore of Great Pond,
and on the top of Fort Hill. The outlines of the Fort still visible (which was yet standing
in 1662) now inclose forty graves, each marked by cobblestones laid thickly along the tops.
The tramping of cattle has obliterated all traces of mounds, and the stones are generally on
a level with the surface. On the outside, in close proximity to the others, are ten more, while
on the slope of the hill to the northwest--the hill not being so abrupt in its descent at this
point--are eighty-six more graves; making a total of one hundred and thirty-six buried on this
hill. All are marked in the same manner, the last being covered by a thick growth of blackberry
vines and bayberry bushes, and would not be noticed by the careless observer. One of the graves,
inside the outlines of the Fort, has an irregular fragment of granite for a headstone; on it
is carved very rudely 1817/BR. This is evidence that the graves on this hill were all subsequent
to the erection of the Fort, and are not very ancient. Those at "Burial Place Point" look much
older, and some of the graves there are simply depressions not marked by any stones. In the
"Indian Field," to the northwest of Great Pond, are many more.

[85] I would suggest placing this at the top of Fort Hill, and thus preserving the hill and
graves forever as a memorial.

       *       *       *       *       *