Here we dined and were merry.  At dinner comes my Lord Carlingford from London, going to Portsmouth:
tells us that the Duchess of York is brought to bed of a girl,--[Mary, afterwards Queen of
England.]--at which I find nobody pleased; and that Prince Rupert and the Duke of Buckingham
are sworn of the Privy Councell.  He himself made a dish with eggs of the butter of the Sparagus,
which is very fine meat, which I will practise hereafter.  To horse again after dinner, and
got to Gilford, where after supper I to bed, having this day been offended by Sir W. Pen's
foolish talk, and I offending him with my answers.  Among others he in discourse complaining
of want of confidence, did ask me to lend him a grain or two, which I told him I thought he
was better stored with than myself, before Sir George. So that I see I must keep a greater
distance than I have done, and I hope I may do it because of the interest which I am making
with Sir George.  To bed all alone, and my Will in the truckle bed.

     [According to the original Statutes of Corpus Christi Coll. Oxon,
     a Scholar slept in a truckle bed below each Fellow.  Called also
     "a trindle bed."  Compare Hall's description of an obsequious tutor:

                              "He lieth in a truckle bed
                    While his young master lieth o'er his head."

                                                  Satires, ii.  6, 5.

     The bed was drawn in the daytime under the high bed of the tutor.
     See Wordsworth's "University Life in the Eighteenth Century."--M. B.]

2nd.  Early to coach again and to Kingston, where we baited a little, and presently to coach
again and got early to London, and I found all well at home, and Mr. Hunt and his wife had
dined with my wife to-day, and been very kind to my wife in my absence.  After I had washed
myself, it having been the hottest day that has been this year, I took them all by coach to
Mrs. Hunt's, and I to Dr. Clerke's lady, and gave her her letter and token.  She is a very
fine woman, and what with her person and the number of fine ladies that were with her, I was
much out of countenance, and could hardly carry myself like a man among them; but however,
I staid till my courage was up again, and talked to them, and viewed her house, which is most
pleasant, and so drank and good-night.  And so to my Lord's lodgings, where by chance I spied
my Lady's coach, and found her and my Lady Wright there, and so I spoke to them, and they being
gone went to Mr. Hunt's for my wife, and so home and to bed.

3rd.  Sir W. Pen and I by coach to St. James's, and there to the Duke's Chamber, who had been
a-hunting this morning and is come back again. Thence to Westminster, where I met Mr. Moore,
and hear that Mr. Watkins' is suddenly dead since my going.  To dinner to my Lady Sandwich,
and Sir Thomas Crew's children coming thither, I took them and all my Ladys to the Tower and
showed them the lions

     [The Tower Menagerie was not abolished until the reign of
     William IV.]

and all that was to be shown, and so took them to my house, and there made much of them, and
so saw them back to my Lady's.  Sir Thomas Crew's children being as pretty and the best behaved
that ever I saw of their age.  Thence, at the goldsmith's, took my picture in little,--[Miniature
by Savill]--which is now done, home with me, and pleases me exceedingly and my wife.  So to
supper and to bed, it being exceeding hot.

4th (Lord's day).  Lay long talking with my wife, then Mr. Holliard came to me and let me blood,
about sixteen ounces, I being exceedingly full of blood and very good.  I begun to be sick;
but lying upon my back I was presently well again, and did give him 5s. for his pains, and
so we parted, and I, to my chamber to write down my journall from the beginning of my late
journey to this house.  Dined well, and after dinner, my arm tied up with a black ribbon, I
walked with my wife to my brother Tom's; our boy waiting on us with his sword, which this day
he begins to wear, to outdo Sir W. Pen's boy, who this day, and Six W. Batten's too, begin
to wear new livery; but I do take mine to be the neatest of them all.  I led my wife to Mrs.
Turner's pew, and the church being full, it being to hear a Doctor who is to preach a probacon
sermon, I went out to the Temple and there walked, and so when church was done went to Mrs.
Turner's, and after a stay there, my wife and I walked to Grays Inn, to observe fashions of
the ladies, because of my wife's making some clothes. Thence homewards, and called in at Antony
Joyce's, where we found his wife brought home sick from church, and was in a convulsion fit.
So home and to Sir W. Pen's and there supped, and so to prayers at home and to bed.

5th.  My arme not being well, I staid within all the morning, and dined alone at home, my wife
being gone out to buy some things for herself, and a gown for me to dress myself in.  And so
all the afternoon looking over my papers, and at night walked upon the leads, and so to bed.

6th.  This morning I got my seat set up on the leads, which pleases me well.  So to the office,
and thence to the Change, but could not meet with my uncle Wight.  So home to dinner and then
out again to several places to pay money and to understand my debts, and so home and walked
with my wife on the leads, and so to supper and to bed.  I find it a hard matter to settle
to business after so much leisure and pleasure.  So at noon to my Lord Crew's and there dined,
and after dinner Sir Thos. Crew and I talked together, and among other instances of the simple
light discourse that sometimes is in the Parliament House, he told me how in the late business
of Chymny money, when all occupiers were to pay, it was questioned whether women were under
that name to pay, and somebody rose and said that they were not occupiers, but occupied.  And
so after the play done, she and The. Turner and Mrs. Lucin and I, in her coach to the Park;
and there found them out, and spoke to them; and observed many fine ladies, and staid till
all were gone almost.  And so to Mrs. Turner's, and there supped, and so walked home, and by
and by comes my wife home, brought by my Lady Carteret to the gate, and so to bed.

8th.  At the office all the morning doing business alone, and then to the Wardrobe, where my,
Lady going out with the children to dinner I staid not, but returned home, and was overtaken
in St. Paul's Churchyard by Sir G. Carteret in his coach, and so he carried me to the Exchange,
where I staid awhile.  So to the office, and was there late doing business, and so with my
head full of business I to bed.

9th.  Up and to my office, and so to dinner at home, and then to several places to pay my debts,
and then to Westminster to Dr. Castle, who discoursed with me about Privy Seal business, which
I do not much mind, it being little worth, but by Watkins's--[clerk of the Privy Seal]--late
sudden death we are like to lose money.  Thence to Mr. de Cretz, and there saw some good pieces
that he hath copyed of the King's pieces, some of Raphael and Michael Angelo; and I have borrowed
an Elizabeth of his copying to hang up in my house, and sent it home by Will.  Thence with
Mr. Salisbury, who I met there, into Covent Garden to an alehouse, to see a picture that hangs
there, which is offered for 20s., and I offered fourteen--but it is worth much more money--but
did not buy it, I having no mind to break my oath.  Thence to see an Italian puppet play that
is within the rayles there, which is very pretty, the best that ever I saw, and great resort
of gallants.  So to the Temple and by water home, and so walk upon the leads, and in the dark
there played upon my flageolette, it being a fine still evening, and so to supper and to bed.
This day I paid Godfrey's debt of 40 and odd pounds.  The Duke of York went last night to Portsmouth;
so that I believe the Queen is near.

10th.  By myself at the office all the morning drawing up instructions for Portsmouth yard
in those things wherein we at our late being there did think fit to reform, and got them signed
this morning to send away to-night, the Duke being now there.  So home, and after being trimmed,
to bed.

11th (Lord's day).  To our church in the morning, where, our Minister being out of town, a
dull, flat Presbiter preached.  Dined at home, and my wife's brother with us, we having a good
dish of stewed beef of Jane's own dressing, which was well done, and a piece of sturgeon of
a barrel sent me by Captain Cocke.  So to Mr. Marriott's, and there we rested ourselves and
drank. And so to barge again, and there we had good victuals and wine, and were very merry;
and got home about eight at night very well.  So my wife and I took leave of my Ladies, and
home by a hackney-coach, the easiest that ever I met with, and so to bed.

14th.  All the morning at Westminster and elsewhere about business, and dined at the Wardrobe;
and after dinner, sat talking an hour or two alone with my Lady.  She is afeard that my Lady
Castlemaine will keep still with the King, and I am afeard she will not, for I love her well.
Thence to my brother's, and finding him in a lie about the lining of my new morning gown, saying
that it was the same with the outside, I was very angry with him and parted so.  So home after
an hour stay at Paul's Churchyard, and there came Mr. Morelock of Chatham, and brought me a
stately cake, and I perceive he has done the same to the rest, of which I was glad; so to bed.

15th.  To Westminster; and at the Privy Seal I saw Mr. Coventry's seal for his being Commissioner
with us, at which I know not yet whether to be glad or otherwise.  So doing several things
by the way, I walked home, and after dinner to the office all the afternoon.  At night, all
the bells of the town rung, and bonfires made for the joy of the Queen's arrival, who came
and landed at Portsmouth last night.

16th.  Up early, Mr. Hater and I to the office, and there I made an end of my book of contracts
which I have been making an abstract of.  Dined at home, and spent most of the day at the office.
At night to supper and bed.

17th.  Upon a letter this morning from Mr. Moore, I went to my cozen Turner's chamber, and
there put him drawing a replication to Tom Trice's answer speedily.  So to Whitehall and there
met Mr. Moore, and I walked long in Westminster Hall, and thence with him to the Wardrobe to
dinner, where dined Mrs. Sanderson, the mother of the maids, and after dinner my Lady and she
and I on foot to Pater Noster Row to buy a petticoat against the Queen's coming for my Lady,
of plain satin, and other things; and being come back again, we there met Mr. Nathaniel Crew

     [Nathaniel Crew, born 1633, fifth son of John, first Lord Crew; he
     himself became third Lord Crew in 1697.  Sub-Rector of Lincoln
     College, Oxford, 1659.  Took orders in 1664, and was Rector of
     Lincoln College in 1668; Dean of Chichester, 1669; Bishop of Oxford,
     1671; Bishop of Durham, 1674; sworn of the Privy Council in 1676.
     He was very subservient to James II., and at the Revolution was
     excepted from the general pardon of May, 1690, but he was allowed to
     keep possession of the bishopric of Durham.]

at the Wardrobe with a young gentleman, a friend and fellow student of his, and of a good family,
Mr. Knightly, and known to the Crews, of whom my Lady privately told me she hath some thoughts
of a match for my Lady Jemimah.  I like the person very well, and he hath L2000 per annum.
Thence to the office, and there we sat, and thence after writing letters to all my friends
with my Lord at Portsmouth, I walked to my brother Tom's to see a velvet cloak, which I buy
of Mr. Moore.  It will cost me L8 10s.; he bought it for L6 10s., but it is worth my money.
So home and find all things made clean against to-morrow, which pleases me well.  So to bed.

18th (Whitsunday).  Hence with Sir G. Carteret to his lodging to dinner with his Lady and one
Mr. Brevin, a French Divine, we were very merry, and good discourse, and I had much talk with
my Lady.  I got a coach and so home, sending the boat away without me. At home I found my wife
discontented at my being abroad, but I pleased her. She was in her new suit of black sarcenet
and yellow petticoat very pretty.  So to bed.

19th.  Long in bed, sometimes scolding with my wife, and then pleased again, and at last up,
and put on my riding cloth suit, and a camelott coat new, which pleases me well enough.  To
the Temple about my replication, and so to my brother Tom's, and there hear that my father
will be in town this week.  So home, the shops being but some shut and some open.

     [To ears accustomed to the official words of speeches from the
     throne at the present day, the familiar tone of the following
     extracts from Charles's speech to the Commons, on the 1st of March;
     will be amusing: "I will conclude with putting you in mind of the
     season of the year, and the convenience of your being in the
     country, in many respects, for the good and welfare of it; for you
     will find much tares have been sowed there in your absence.  The
     arrival of my wife, who I expect some time this month, and the
     necessity of my own being out of town to meet her, and to stay some
     time before she comes hither, makes it very necessary that the
     Parliament be adjourned before Easter, to meet again in the winter .
     .  .  .  .  Such a bill passed
     the Commons on the 24th June.  Home, and Mr. Hunt dined with me, and were merry.  After
dinner Sir W. Pen and his daughter, and I and my wife by coach to the
Theatre, and there in a box saw "The Little Thief" well done.  Thence to
Moorefields, and walked and eat some cheesecake and gammon of bacon, but
when I was come home I was sick, forced to vomit it up again.  So my wife
walking and singing upon the leads till very late, it being pleasant and
moonshine, and so to bed.

10th.  Sir W. Pen and I did a little business at the office, and so home again.  Then comes
Dean Fuller after we had dined, but I got something for him, and very merry we were for an
hour or two, and I am most pleased with his company and goodness.  At last parted, and my wife
and I by coach to the Opera, and there saw the 2nd part of "The Siege of Rhodes," but it is
not so well done as when Roxalana was there, who, it is said, is now owned by my Lord of Oxford.

     [For note on Mrs. Davenport, who was deceived by a pretended
     marriage with the Earl of Oxford, see ante.  Lord Oxford's first
     wife died in 1659.  He married, in 1672, his second wife, Diana
     Kirke, of whom nothing more need be said than that she bore an
     inappropriate Christian name.]

Thence to Tower-wharf, and there took boat, and we all walked to Halfeway House, and there
eat and drank, and were pleasant, and so finally home again in the evening, end so good night,
this being a very pleasant life that we now lead, and have long done; the Lord be blessed,
and make us thankful.  But, though I am much against too much spending, yet I do think it best
to enjoy some degree of pleasure now that we have health, money, and opportunity, rather than
to leave pleasures to old age or poverty, when we cannot have them so properly.

21st. So to Wilkinson's, she and I and Sarah to dinner, where I had a good quarter of lamb
and a salat. But we went to the Theatre to "The French Dancing Master," and there with much
pleasure gazed upon her (Lady Castlemaine); but it troubles us to see her look dejectedly and
slighted by people already.  The play pleased us very well; but Lacy's part, the Dancing Master,
the best in the world. Thence to my brother Tom's, in expectation to have met my father to-night
come out of the country, but he is not yet come, but here we found my uncle Fenner and his
old wife, whom I had not seen since the wedding dinner, nor care to see her.  They being gone,
my wife and I went and saw Mrs. Turner, whom we found not well, and her two boys Charles and
Will come out of the country, grown very plain boys after three years being under their father's
care in Yorkshire.  Thence to Tom's again, and there supped well, my she cozen Scott being
there and my father being not come, we walked home and to bed.

22d.  The play hath little in it but Lacy's part of a country fellow, which he did to admiration.
So home, and supped with Sir W. Pen, where Sir W. Batten and Captn. Cocke came to us, to whom
I have lately been a great stranger. This night we had each of us a letter from Captain Teddiman
from the Streights, of a peace made upon good terms, by Sir J. Lawson, with the Argier men,
which is most excellent news?  He hath also sent each of us some anchovies, olives, and muscatt;
but I know not yet what that is, and am ashamed to ask.  After supper home, and to bed, resolving
to make up this week in seeing plays and pleasure, and so fall to business next week again
for a great while.

23rd.  At the office good part of the morning, and then about noon with my wife on foot to
the Wardrobe.  He very merry, and hath left the King and Queen at Portsmouth, and is come up
to stay here till next Wednesday, and then to meet the King and Queen at Hampton Court.  There
coming much company after dinner to my Lord, my wife and I slunk away to the Opera, where we
saw "Witt in a Constable," the first time that it is acted; but so silly a play I never saw
I think in my life.  After it was done, my wife and I to the puppet play in Covent Garden,
which I saw the other day, and indeed it is very pleasant.  Here among the fidlers I first
saw a dulcimere

     [The dulcimer (or psaltery) consisted of a flat box, acting as a
     resonating chamber, over which strings of wire were stretched: These
     were struck by little hammers.]

played on with sticks knocking of the strings, and is very pretty.  So by water home, and supped
with Sir William Pen very merry, and so to bed.

24th.  To the Wardrobe, and there again spoke with my Lord, and saw W. Howe, who is grown a
very pretty and is a sober fellow.  That the Juego de Toros is a simple sport, yet the greatest
in Spain.  After a morning draft at the Star in Cheapside, I took him to the Exchange, thence
home, but my wife having dined, I took him to Fish Street, and there we had a couple of lobsters,
and dined upon them, and much discourse.  And so I to the office, and that being done, Sir
W. Pen and I to Deptford by water to Captain Rooth's to see him, he being very sick, and by
land home, calling at Halfway house, where we eat and drank. So home and to bed.

25th (Lord's day).  To trimming myself, which I have this week done every morning, with a pumice
stone,--[Shaving with pumice stone.]--which I learnt of Mr. Marsh, when I was last at Portsmouth;
and I find it very easy, speedy, and cleanly, and shall continue the practice of it.  Dined
at home, and Mr. Creed with me.  This day I had the first dish of pease I have had this year.
After discourse he and I abroad, and walked up and down, and looked into many churches, among
others Mr. Baxter's at Blackfryers.  Then to the Wardrobe, where I found my Lord takes physic,
so I did not see him, but with Captn. Ferrers in Mr. George Montagu's coach to Charing Cross;
and there at the Triumph tavern he showed me some Portugall ladys, which are come to town before
the Queen.  They are not handsome, and their farthingales a strange dress.

     [Farthingales had gone out of fashion in England during the reign of
     Charles I., and therefore their use by the Portuguese ladies
     astonished the English.  So to the Wardrobe back on foot and supped with my Lady, and so
home, and after a walk upon the leads with my wife, to prayers and bed.
The King's guards and some City companies do walk up and down the town
these five or six days; which makes me think, and they do say, there are
some plots in laying.  God keep us.

26th.  Up by four o'clock in the morning, and fell to the preparing of some accounts for my
Lord of Sandwich.  By and by, by appointment comes Mr. Moore, and, by what appears to us at
present, we found that my Lord is above L7,000 in debt, and that he hath money coming into
him that will clear all, and so we think him clear, but very little money in his purse. So
to my Lord's, and after he was ready, we spent an hour with him, giving him an account thereof;
and he having some L6,000 in his hands, remaining of the King's, he is resolved to make use
of that, and get off of it as well as he can, which I like well of, for else I fear he will
scarce get beforehand again a great while.  I seated myself close by Mr. Prin, who, in discourse
with me, fell upon what records he hath of the lust and wicked lives of the nuns heretofore
in England, and showed me out of his pocket one wherein thirty nuns for their lust were ejected
of their house, being not fit to live there, and by the Pope's command to be put, however,
into other nunnerys.  I could not stay to end dinner with them, but rose, and privately went
out, and by water to my brother's, and thence to take my wife to the Redd Bull, where we saw
"Doctor Faustus," but so wretchedly and poorly done, that we were sick of it, and the worse
because by a former resolution it is to be the last play we are to see till Michaelmas.  Thence
homewards by coach, through Moorefields, where we stood awhile, and saw the wrestling. At home,
got my lute upon the leads, and there played, and so to bed.

27th.  To my Lord this morning, and thence to my brother's, where I found my father, poor man,
come, which I was glad to see.  I staid with him till noon, and then he went to my cozen Scott's
to dinner, who had invited him. He tells me his alterations of the house and garden at Brampton,
which please me well.  I could not go with him, and so we parted at Ludgate, and I home to
dinner, and to the office all the afternoon, and musique in my chamber alone at night, and
so to bed.

28th.  Up early to put things in order in my chamber, and then to my Lord's, with whom I spoke
about several things, and so up and down in several places about business with Mr. Creed, among
others to Mr. Wotton's the shoemaker, and there drank our morning draft, and then home about
noon, and by and by comes my father by appointment to dine with me, which we did very merrily,
I desiring to make him as merry as I can, while the poor man is in town.  After dinner comes
my uncle Wight and sat awhile and talked with us, and thence we three to the Mum House at Leadenhall,
and there sat awhile.  Then I left them, and to the Wardrobe, where I found my Lord gone to
Hampton Court.  Here I staid all the afternoon till late with Creed and Captain Ferrers, thinking
whether we should go to-morrow together to Hampton Court, but Ferrers his wife coming in by
and by to the house with the young ladies (with whom she had been abroad), she was unwilling
to go, whereupon I was willing to put off our going, and so home, but still my mind was hankering
after our going to-morrow.  So to bed.

29th.  At home all the morning.  At noon to the Wardrobe, and dined with my Lady, and after
dinner staid long talking with her; then homeward, and in Lumbard Street was called out of
a window by Alderman Backwell, where I went, and saluted his lady, a very pretty woman.  Here
was Mr. Creed, and it seems they have been under some disorder in fear of a fire at the next
door, and had been removing their goods, but the fire was over before I came.  Thence home,
and with my wife and the two maids, and the boy, took boat and to Foxhall,

     [Foxhall, Faukeshall, or Vauxhall, a manor in Surrey, properly
     Fulke's.  Hall, and so called from Fulke de Breaute, the notorious
     mercenary follower of King John.  The manor house was afterwards
     known as Copped or Copt Hall.  Sir Samuel Morland obtained a lease
     of the place, and King Charles made him Master of Mechanics, and
     here "he (Morland), anno 1667, built a fine room," says Aubrey, "the
     inside all of looking-glass and fountains, very pleasant to behold."
     Balthazar Monconys, who visited England early in the reign of
     Charles II., describes the 'Jardins Printemps' at Lambeth as having
     lawns and gravel walks, dividing squares of twenty or thirty yards
     enclosed with hedges of gooseberry trees, within which were planted
     roses.]

where I had not been a great while.  To the Old Spring Garden, and there walked long, and the
wenches gathered pinks.  Here we staid, and seeing that we could not have anything to eat,
but very dear, and with long stay, we went forth again without any notice taken of us, and
so we might have done if we had had anything.  Thence to the New one, where I never was before,
which much exceeds the other; and here we also walked, and the boy crept through the hedge
and gathered abundance of roses, and, after a long walk, passed out of doors as we did in the
other place, and here we had cakes and powdered beef--[salt beef]--and ale, and so home again
by water with much pleasure.  So to bed.

30th.  This morning I made up my accounts, and find myself 'de claro' worth about L530, and
no more, so little have I increased it since my last reckoning; but I confess I have laid out
much money in clothes. Upon a suddaine motion I took my wife, and Sarah and Will by water,
with some victuals with us, as low as Gravesend, intending to have gone into the Hope to the
Royal James, to have seen the ship and Mr. Shepley, but meeting Mr. Shepley in a hoy, bringing
up my Lord's things, she and I went on board, and sailed up with them as far as half-way tree,
very glad to see Mr. Shepley.  Here we saw a little Turk and a negroe, which are intended for
pages to the two young ladies.  Many birds and other pretty noveltys there was, but I was afeard
of being louzy, and so took boat again, and got to London before them, all the way, coming
and going, reading in the "Wallflower" with great pleasure.  So home, and thence to the Wardrobe,
where Mr. Shepley was come with the things.  Here I staid talking with my Lady, who is preparing
to go to-morrow to Hampton Court. So home, and at ten o'clock at night Mr. Shepley came to
sup with me.  So we had a dish of mackerell and pease, and so he bid us good night, going to
lie on board the hoy, and I to bed.

31st.  Lay long in bed, and so up to make up my Journall for these two or three days past.
Then came Anthony Joyce, who duns me for money for the tallow which he served in lately by
my desire, which vexes me, but I must get it him the next by my promise.  By and by to White
Hall, hearing that Sir G. Carteret was come to town, but I could not find him, and so back
to Tom's, and thence I took my father to my house, and there he dined with me, discoursing
of our businesses with uncle Thomas and T. Trice. After dinner he departed and I to the office
where we met, and that being done I walked to my Brother's and the Wardrobe and other places
about business, and so home, and had Sarah to comb my head clean, which I found so foul with
powdering and other troubles, that I am resolved to try how I can keep my head dry without
powder; and I did also in a suddaine fit cut off all my beard, which I had been a great while
bringing up, only that I may with my pumice-stone do my whole face, as I now do my chin, and
to save time, which I find a very easy way and gentile.  So she also washed my feet in a bath
of herbs, and so to bed.  This month ends with very fair weather for a great while together.
My health pretty well, but only wind do now and then torment me .  .  .  extremely.  My father
is lately come to town to see us, and though it has cost and will cost more money, yet I am
pleased with the alteraeons on my house at Brampton.  My Lord Sandwich is lately come with
the Queen from sea, very well and in good repute.  Upon an audit of my estate I find myself
worth about L530 'de claro'.  God keep us all.  I have by a late oath obliged myself from wine
and plays, of which I find good effect.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                   JUNE
                                   1662

June 1st (Lord's day).  At church in the morning.  A stranger made a very good sermon.  Dined
at home, and Mr. Spong came to see me; so he and I sat down a little to sing some French psalms,
and then comes Mr. Shepley and Mr. Moore, and so we to dinner, and after dinner to church again,
where a Presbyter made a sad and long sermon, which vexed me, and so home, and so to walk on
the leads, and supper and to prayers and bed.

2nd.  Up early about business and then to the Wardrobe with Mr. Moore, and spoke to my Lord
about the exchange of the crusados

     [Cruzado, a Portuguese coin of 480 reis.  It is named from a cross
     which it bears on one side, the arms of Portugal being on the other.
     It varied in value at different periods from 2s. 3d. to 4s.]

into sterling money, and other matters.  So to my father at Tom's, and after some talk with
him away home, and by and by comes my father to dinner with me, and then by coach, setting
him down in Cheapside, my wife and I to Mrs. Clarke's at Westminster, the first visit that
ever we both made her yet.  We found her in a dishabille, intending to go to Hampton Court
to-morrow.  We had much pretty discourse, and a very fine lady she is.  Thence by water to
Salisbury Court, and Mrs. Turner not being at home, home by coach, and so after walking on
the leads and supper to bed. This day my wife put on her slasht wastecoate, which is very pretty.

3rd.  Up by four o'clock and to my business in my chamber, to even accounts with my Lord and
myself, and very fain I would become master of L1000, but I have not above L530 toward it yet.
At the office all the morning, and Mr. Coventry brought his patent and took his place with
us this morning.  Upon our making a contract, I went, as I use to do, to draw the heads thereof,
but Sir W. Pen most basely told me that the Comptroller is to do it, and so begun to employ
Mr. Turner about it, at which I was much vexed, and begun to dispute; and what with the letter
of the Duke's orders, and Mr. Barlow's letter, and the practice of our predecessors, which
Sir G. Carteret knew best when he was Comptroller, it was ruled for me.  What Sir J. Minnes
will do when he comes I know not, but Sir W. Pen did it like a base raskall, and so I shall
remember him while I live. After office done, I went down to the Towre Wharf, where Mr. Creed
and Shepley was ready with three chests of the crusados, being about L6000, ready to bring
to shore to my house, which they did, and put it in my further cellar, and Mr. Shepley took
the key.  I to my father and Dr. Williams and Tom Trice, by appointment, in the Old Bayly,
to Short's, the alehouse, but could come to no terms with T. Trice.  Thence to the Wardrobe,
where I found my Lady come from Hampton Court, where the Queen hath used her very civilly;
and my Lady tells me is a most pretty woman, at which I am glad.  Home and to the office, where
about 8 at night comes Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Batten, and so we did some business, and
then home and to bed, my mind troubled about Sir W. Pen, his playing the rogue with me to-day,
as also about the charge of money that is in my house, which I had forgot; but I made the maids
to rise and light a candle, and set it in the dining-room, to scare away thieves, and so to sleep.

4th.  Up early, and Mr. Moore comes to me and tells me that Mr. Barnwell is dead, which troubles
me something, and the more for that I believe we shall lose Mr. Shepley's company.  I was glad
of this discovery, because I would not have the King's workmen discouraged (as Sir W. Batten
do most basely do) from representing the faults of merchants' goods, where there is any.  After
eating some fish that we had bought upon the water at Falconer's, we went to Woolwich, and
there viewed our frames of our houses, and so home, and I to my Lord's, who I find resolved
to buy Brampton Manor of Sir Peter Ball,

     [Sir Peter Ball was the Queen's Attorney-General, and Evelyn
     mentions, in his Diary (January 11th, 1661-62), having received from
     him the draft of an act against the nuisance of the smoke of
     London.]

at which I am glad.  Thence to White Hall, and showed Sir G. Carteret the cheat, and so to
the Wardrobe, and there staid and supped with my Lady. My Lord eating nothing, but writes letters
to-night to several places, he being to go out of town to-morrow.  So late home and to bed.

5th.  To the Wardrobe, and there my Lord did enquire my opinion of Mr. Moore, which I did give
to the best advantage I could, and by that means shall get him joined with Mr. Townsend in
the Wardrobe business.  He did also give me all Mr. Shepley's and Mr. Moore's accounts to view,
which I am glad of, as being his great trust in me, and I would willingly keep up a good interest
with him.  So took leave of him (he being to go this day) and to the office, where they were
just sat down, and I showed them yesterday's discovery, and have got Sir R. Ford to be my enemy
by it; but I care not, for it is my duty, and so did get his bill stopped for the present.
To dinner, and found Dr. Thos. Pepys at my house; but I was called from dinner by a note from
Mr. Moore to Alderman Backwell's, to see some thousands of my Lord's crusados weighed, and
we find that 3,000 come to about L530 or 40 generally.  Home again and found my father there;
we talked a good while and so parted.  We met at the office in the afternoon to finish Mr.
Gauden's accounts, but did not do them quite.  In the evening with Mr. Moore to Backwell's
with another 1,200 crusados and saw them weighed, and so home and to bed.

6th.  At my office all alone all the morning, and the smith being with me about other things,
did open a chest that hath stood ever since I came to the office, in my office, and there we
found a modell of a fine ship, which I long to know whether it be the King's or Mr. Turner's.
At noon to the Wardrobe by appointment to meet my father, who did come and was well treated
by my Lady, who tells me she has some thoughts to send her two little boys to our house at
Brampton, but I have got leave for them to go along with me and my wife to Hampton Court to-morrow
or Sunday. Thence to my brother Tom's, where we found a letter from Pall that my mother is
dangerously ill in fear of death, which troubles my father and me much, but I hope it is otherwise,
the letter being four days old since it was writ.  Home and at my office, and with Mr. Hater
set things in order till evening, and so home and to bed by daylight.  This day at my father's
desire I lent my brother Tom L20, to be repaid out of the proceeds of Sturtlow when we can
sell it.  I sent the money all in new money by my boy from Alderman Backwell's.

7th.  My mind in great trouble whether I should go as I intended to Hampton Court to-morrow
or no.  At last resolved the contrary, because of the charge thereof, and I am afraid now to
bring in any accounts for journeys, and so will others I suppose be, because of Mr. Coventry's
prying into them.  Thence sent for to Sir G. Carteret's, and there talked with him a good while.
At my office all the afternoon, and at night hear that my father is gone into the country,
but whether to Richmond as he intended, and thence to meet us at Hampton Court on Monday, I
know not, or to Brampton.  At which I am much troubled.  In the evening home and to bed.

8th (Lord's day).  Lay till church-time in bed, and so up and to church, and there I found
Mr. Mills come home out of the country again, and preached but a lazy sermon.  Home and dined
with my wife, and so to church again with her.  Thence walked to my Lady's, and there supped
with her, and merry, among other things, with the parrott which my Lord hath brought from the
sea, which speaks very well, and cries Pall so pleasantly, that made my Lord give it my Lady
Paulina; but my Lady, her mother, do not like it.  Home, and observe my man Will to walk with
his cloak flung over his shoulder, like a Ruffian, which, whether it was that he might not
be seen to walk along with the footboy, I know not, but I was vexed at it; and coming home,
and after prayers, I did ask him where he learned that immodest garb, and he answered me that
it was not immodest, or some such slight answer, at which I did give him two boxes on the ears,
which I never did before, and so was after a little troubled at it.

9th.  Early up and at the office with Mr. Hater, making my alphabet of contracts, upon the
dispatch of which I am now very intent, for that I am resolved much to enquire into the price
of commodities.  Dined at home, and after dinner to Greatorex's, and with him and another stranger
to the Tavern, but I drank no wine.  He recommended Bond, of our end of the town, to teach
me to measure timber, and some other things that I would learn, in order to my office.  Thence
back again to the office, and there T. Hater and I did make an end of my alphabet, which did
much please me. So home to supper and to bed.

10th.  Dined at home, Mr. Hunt with us; to the office again in the afternoon, but not meeting,
as was intended, I went to my brother's and bookseller's, and other places about business,
and paid off all for books to this day, and do not intend to buy any more of any kind a good
while, though I had a great mind to have bought the King's works, as they are new printed in
folio, and present it to my Lord; but I think it will be best to save the money.  So home and
to bed.

     [There is a beautiful copy of "The Workes of King Charles the
     Martyr, and Collections of Declarations, Treaties, &c."  (2 vols.
     folio, 1662), in the Pepysian Library, with a very interesting note
     in the first volume by Pepys (dated October 7th, 1700), to the
     effect that he had collated it with a copy in Lambeth Library,
     presented by Dr. Zachary Cradock, Provost of Eton.  "This book being
     seized on board an English ship was delivered, by order of the
     Inquisition of Lisbon, to some of the English Priests to be perused
     and corrected according to the Rules of the 'Index Expurgatorius.'
     Thus corrected it was given to Barnaby Crafford, English merchant
     there, and by him it was given to me, the English preacher resident
     there A.D. 1670, and by me as I then received it to the Library at
     Lambeth to be there preserved.  Nov. 2, 1678.  'Ita testor', Zach.
     Cradock.--From which (through the favour of the most Reverend Father
     in God and my most honoured Friend his Grace the present Archbishop
     of Canterbury) I have this 7th of October, 1700, had an opportunity
     given me there (assisted by my clerk, Thomas Henderson), leisurely to
     overlook, and with my uttermost attention to note the said
     Expurgations through each part of this my own Book."  Whole
     sentences in the book are struck through, as well as such words as
     Martyr, Defender of the Faith, More than Conqueror, &c.]

11th.  At the office all the morning, Sir W. Batten, Sir W. Pen, and I about the Victualler's
accounts.  Then home to dinner and to the office again all the afternoon, Mr. Hater and I writing
over my Alphabet fair, in which I took great pleasure to rule the lines and to have the capitall
words wrote with red ink.  So home and to supper.  This evening Savill the Paynter came and
did varnish over my wife's picture and mine, and I paid him for my little picture L3, and so
am clear with him.  So after supper to bed.  This day I had a letter from my father that he
is got down well, and found my mother pretty well again.  So that I am vexed with all my heart
at Pall for writing to him so much concerning my mother's illness (which I believe was not
so great), so that he should be forced to hasten down on the sudden back into the country without
taking leave, or having any pleasure here.

12th.  This morning I tried on my riding cloth suit with close knees, the first that ever I
had; and I think they will be very convenient, if not too hot to wear any other open knees
after them.  At the office all the morning, where we had a full Board, viz., Sir G. Carteret,
Sir John Mennes, Sir W. Batten, Mr. Coventry, Sir W. Pen, Mr. Pett, and myself.  It ended in
anger, and I believe will come to be a question before the King and Council.  I did what I
could to keep myself unconcerned in it, having some things of my own to do before I would appear
high in anything.  Thence to dinner, by Mr. Gauden's invitation, to the Dolphin, where a good
dinner; but what is to myself a great wonder; that with ease I past the whole dinner without
drinking a drop of wine. After dinner to the office, my head full of business, and so home,
and it being the longest day in the year,--[That is, by the old style. The new style was not
introduced until 1752]--I made all my people go to bed by daylight.  But after I was a-bed
and asleep, a note came from my brother Tom to tell me that my cozen Anne Pepys, of Worcestershire,
her husband is dead, and she married again, and her second husband in town, and intends to
come and see me to-morrow.

13th.  Thence to several places about business, among others to my brother's, and there Tom
Beneere the barber trimmed me. Thence to my Lady's, and there dined with her, Mr. Laxton, Gibbons,
and Goldgroove with us, and after dinner some musique, and so home to my business, and in the
evening my wife and I, and Sarah and the boy, a most pleasant walk to Halfway house, and so
home and to bed.

14th.  Up by four o'clock in the morning and upon business at my office.

     [Sir Harry Vane the younger was born 1612.  One asked him why he did not pray for the King.  So home and to bed.

15th (Lord's day).  To church in the morning and home to dinner, where come my brother Tom
and Mr. Fisher, my cozen, Nan Pepys's second husband, who, I perceive, is a very good-humoured
man, an old cavalier.  I made as much of him as I could, and were merry, and am glad she hath
light of so good a man.  They gone, to church again; but my wife not being dressed as I would
have her, I was angry, and she, when she was out of doors in her way to church, returned home
again vexed.  But I to church, Mr. Mills, an ordinary sermon.  So home, and found my wife and
Sarah gone to a neighbour church, at which I was not much displeased.  By and by she comes
again, and, after a word or two, good friends.  And then her brother came to see her, and he
being gone she told me that she believed he was married and had a wife worth L500 to him, and
did inquire how he might dispose the money to the best advantage, but I forbore to advise her
till she could certainly tell me how things are with him, being loth to meddle too soon with
him.  So to walk upon the leads, and to supper, and to bed.

16th.  Up before four o'clock, and after some business took Will forth, and he and I walked
over the Tower Hill, but the gate not being open we walked through St. Catharine's and Ratcliffe
(I think it is) by the waterside above a mile before we could get a boat, and so over the water
in a scull (which I have not done a great while), and walked finally to Deptford, where I saw
in what forwardness the work is for Sir W. Batten's house and mine, and it is almost ready.
I also, with Mr. Davis, did view my cozen Joyce's tallow, and compared it with the Irish tallow
we bought lately, and found ours much more white, but as soft as it; now what is the fault,
or whether it be or no a fault, I know not.  So walked home again as far as over against the
Towre, and so over and home, where I found Sir W. Pen and Sir John Minnes discoursing about
Sir John Minnes's house and his coming to live with us, and I think he intends to have Mr.
Turner's house and he to come to his lodgings, which I shall be very glad of.  We three did
go to Mr. Turner's to view his house, which I think was to the end that Sir John Minnes might
see it.  Then by water with my wife to the Wardrobe, and dined there; and in the afternoon
with all the children by water to Greenwich, where I showed them the King's yacht, the house,
and the park, all very pleasant; and so to the tavern, and had the musique of the house, and
so merrily home again.  Will and I walked home from the Wardrobe, having left my wife at the
Tower Wharf coming by, whom I found gone to bed not very well . . . .  So to bed.

17th.  Up, and Mr. Mayland comes to me and borrowed 30s. of me to be paid again out of the
money coming to him in the James and Charles for his late voyage.  So to the office, where
all the morning.  So home to dinner, my wife not being well, but however dined with me.  So
to the office, and at Sir W. Batten's, where we all met by chance and talked, and they drank
wine; but I forebore all their healths.  Sir John Minnes, I perceive, is most excellent company.
So home and to bed betimes by daylight.

18th.  Up early; and after reading a little in Cicero, I made me ready and to my office, where
all the morning very busy.  At noon Mr. Creed came to me about business, and he and I walked
as far as Lincoln's Inn Fields together.  Thence to Somerset House to Sir J. Winter's chamber
by appointment, and met Mr. Pett, where he and I read over his last contract with the King
for the Forest of Dean, whereof I took notes because of this new one that he is now in making.
Thence to the Temple, and there spoke with my cozen Roger, who gives me little hopes in the
business between my Uncle Tom and us. So Mr. Pett (who staid at his son's chamber) and I by
coach to the old Exchange, and there parted, and I home and at the office till night.  My windows
at my office are made clean to-day and a casement in my closet. So home, and after some merry
discourse in the kitchen with my wife and maids as I now-a-days often do, I being well pleased
with both my maids, to bed.

19th.  Up by five o'clock, and while my man Will was getting himself ready to come up to me
I took and played upon my lute a little.  So to dress myself, and to my office to prepare things
against we meet this morning. We sat long to-day, and had a great private business before us
about contracting with Sir W. Rider, Mr. Cutler, and Captain Cocke, for 500 ton of hemp, which
we went through, and I am to draw up the conditions.  Home to dinner, where I found Mr. Moore,
and he and I cast up our accounts together and evened them, and then with the last chest of
crusados to Alderman Backwell's, by the same token his lady going to take coach stood in the
shop, and having a gilded glassfull of perfumed comfits given her by Don Duarte de Silva, the
Portugall merchant, that is come over with the Queen, I did offer at a taste, and so she poured
some out into my hand, and, though good, yet pleased me the better coming from a pretty lady.
So home and at the office preparing papers and things, and indeed my head has not been so full
of business a great while, and with so much pleasure, for I begin to see the pleasure it gives.
God give me health.  So to bed.

20th. At my office till Mr. Moore took me out and at my house looked over our papers again,
and upon our evening accounts did give full discharges one to the other, and in his and many
other accounts I perceive I shall be better able to give a true balance of my estate to myself
within a day or two than I have been this twelve months.  Then he and I to Alderman Backwell's
and did the like there, and I gave one receipt for all the money I have received thence upon
the receipt of my Lord's crusados.  Then to Pope's Head Ally, and there bought me a pair of
tweezers, cost me 14s., the first thing like a bawble I have bought a good while, but I do
it with some trouble of mind, though my conscience tells me that I do it with an apprehension
of service in my office to have a book to write memorandums in, and a pair of compasses in
it; but I confess myself the willinger to do it because I perceive by my accounts that I shall
be better by L30 than I expected to be.  But by tomorrow night I intend to see to the bottom
of all my accounts.  Then home to dinner, where Mr. Moore met me.  Then he went away, and I
to the office and dispatch much business.  So in the evening, my wife and I and Jane over the
water to the Halfway-house, a pretty, pleasant walk, but the wind high.  So home again and to bed.

21st. Up about four o'clock, and settled some private business of my own, then made me ready
and to the office to prepare things for our meeting to-day.  Thence to the office, where Sir
W. Rider, Capt. Cocke, and Mr. Cutler came by appointment to meet me to confer about the contract
between us and them for 500 tons of hemp.  That being done, I did other business and so went
home, and there found Mr. Creed, who staid talking with my wife and me an hour or two, and
I put on my riding cloth suit, only for him to see how it is, and I think it will do very well.
He being gone, and I hearing from my wife and the maids' complaints made of the boy, I called
him up, and with my whip did whip him till I was not able to stir, and yet I could not make
him confess any of the lies that they tax him with.  At last, not willing to let him go away
a conqueror, I took him in task again, and pulled off his frock to his shirt, and whipped him
till he did confess that he did drink the whey, which he had denied, and pulled a pink, and
above all did lay the candlestick upon the ground in his chamber, which he had denied this
quarter of a year.  I confess it is one of the greatest wonders that ever I met with that such
a little boy as he could possibly be able to suffer half so much as he did to maintain a lie.
I think I must be forced to put him away.  So to bed, with my arm very weary.

22nd (Lord's day).  This day I first put on my slasht doublet, which I like very well.  Mr.
Shepley came to me in the morning, telling me that he and my Lord came to town from Hinchinbroke
last night.  He and I spend an hour in looking over his account, and then walked to the Wardrobe,
all the way discoursing of my Lord's business.  He tells me to my great wonder that Mr. Barnwell
is dead L500 in debt to my Lord.  By and by my Lord came from church, and I dined, with some
others, with him, he very merry, and after dinner took me aside and talked of state and other
matters.  By and by to my brother Tom's and took him out with me homewards (calling at the
Wardrobe to talk a little with Mr. Moore), and so to my house, where I paid him all I owed
him, and did make the L20 I lately lent him up to L40, for which he shall give bond to Mr.
Shepley, for it is his money.  So my wife and I to walk in the garden, where all our talk was
against Sir W. Pen, against whom I have lately had cause to be much prejudiced.  By and by
he and his daughter came out to walk, so we took no notice of them a great while, at last in
going home spoke a word or two, and so good night, and to bed.

23rd.  Up early, this morning, and my people are taking down the hangings and things in my
house because of the great dust that is already made by the pulling down of Sir W. Batten's
house, and will be by my own when I come to it.  To my office, and there hard at work all the
morning.  At noon to the Exchange to meet Dr. Williams, who sent me this morning notice of
his going into the country tomorrow, but could not find him, but meeting with Frank Moore,
my Lord Lambeth's man formerly, we, and two or three friends of his did go to a tavern, and
there they drank, but I nothing but small beer.  In the next room one was playing very finely
of the dulcimer, which well played I like well, but one of our own company, a talking fellow,
did in discourse say much of this Act against Seamen,

     [In 1662 was passed "An Act for providing of carriage by land and by
     water for the use of His Majesty's Navy and Ordinance" (13-14 Gar.
     II., cap.  From
on board he took me to his yard, where vast and many places of deals,
sparrs, and bulks, &c., the difference between which I never knew before,
and indeed am very proud of this evening's work.  He had me into his
house, which is most pretty and neat and well furnished.  After a glass,
not of wine, for I would not be tempted to drink any, but a glass of mum,
I well home by water, but it being late was forced to land at the Custom
House, and so home and to bed, and after I was a-bed, letters came from
the Duke for the fitting out of four ships forthwith from Portsmouth (I
know not yet for what) so I was forced to make Will get them wrote, and
signed them in bed and sent them away by express.  And so to sleep.

24th (Midsummer day).  Up early and to my office, putting things in order against we sit. 
There came to me my cozen Harry Alcocke, whom I much respect, to desire (by a letter from my
father to me, where he had been some days) my help for him to some place.  I proposed the sea
to him, and I think he will take it, and I hope do well.  Sat all the morning, and I bless
God I find that by my diligence of late and still, I do get ground in the office every day.
At noon to the Change, where I begin to be known also, and so home to dinner, and then to the
office all the afternoon dispatching business.  At night home, and Mr. Spong came to me, and
so he and I sat singing upon the leads till almost ten at night and so he went away (a pretty,
harmless, and ingenious man), and I to bed, in a very great content of mind, which I hope by
my care still in my business will continue to me.

25th.  Up by four o'clock, and put my accounts with my Lord into a very good order, and so
to my office, where having put many things in order I went to the Wardrobe, but found my Lord
gone to Hampton Court.  After discourse with Mr. Shepley we parted, and I into Thames Street,
beyond the Bridge, and there enquired among the shops the price of tarre and oyle, and do find
great content in it, and hope to save the King money by this practice.  So home to dinner,
and then to the Change, and so home again, and at the office preparing business against to-morrow
all the afternoon. At night walked with my wife upon the leads, and so to supper and to bed.
My wife having lately a great pain in her ear, for which this night she begins to take physique,
and I have got cold and so have a great deal of my old pain.

26th.  Up and took physique, but such as to go abroad with, only to loosen me, for I am bound.
So to the office, and there all the morning sitting till noon, and then took Commissioner Pett
home to dinner with me, where my stomach was turned when my sturgeon came to table, upon which
I saw very many little worms creeping, which I suppose was through the staleness of the pickle.
He being gone, comes Mr. Nicholson, my old fellow-student at Magdalene, and we played three
or four things upon the violin and basse, and so parted, and I to my office till night, and
there came Mr. Shepley and Creed in order to settling some accounts of my Lord to-night, and
so to bed.

27th.  Up early, not quite rid of my pain.  I took more physique, and so
made myself ready to go forth. By which he will oblige that party, and
prevent, as much as may be, their envy; but he says that certainly things
will go to rack if ever the old captains should be wholly out, and the new
ones only command.  Then we fell to talk of Sir J. Minnes, of whom my Lord
hath a very slight opinion, and that at first he did come to my Lord very
displeased and sullen, and had studied and turned over all his books to
see whether it had ever been that two flags should ride together in the
main-top, but could not find it, nay, he did call his captains on board to
consult them.  So when he came by my Lord's side, he took down his flag,
and all the day did not hoist it again, but next day my Lord did tell him
that it was not so fit to ride without a flag, and therefore told him that
he should wear it in the fore-top, for it seems my Lord saw his
instructions, which were that he should not wear his flag in the maintop
in the presence of the Duke or my Lord. But that after that my Lord did
caress him, and he do believe him as much his friend as his interest will
let him.  I told my Lord of the late passage between Swan and me, and he
told me another lately between Dr. Dell and himself when he was in the
country.  He was son of Lord
     Chief Justice Richard Pepys.]

he told me he would most readily do what I would command him, and then told me we must needs
eat a dish of meat together before he went, and so invited me and my wife on Sunday next. 
To all which I did give a cold consent, for my heart cannot love or have a good opinion of
him since his last playing the knave with me, but he took no notice of our difference at all,
nor I to him, and so parted, and I by water to Deptford, where I found Sir W. Batten alone
paying off the yard three quarters pay.  Thence to dinner, where too great a one was prepared,
at which I was very much troubled, and wished I had not been there.  After dinner comes Sir
J. Minnes and some captains with him, who had been at a Councill of Warr to-day, who tell us
they have acquitted Captain Hall, who was accused of cowardice in letting of old Winter, the
Argier pyrate, go away from him with a prize or two; and also Captain Diamond of the murder
laid to him of a man that he had struck, but he lived many months after, till being drunk,
he fell into the hold, and there broke his jaw and died, but they say there are such bawdy
articles against him as never were heard of .  .  .  .  To the pay again, where I left them,
and walked to Redriffe, and so home, and there came Mr. Creed and Shepley to me, and staid
till night about my Lord's accounts, our proceeding to set them in order, and so parted and
I to bed.  Mr. Holliard had been with my wife to-day, and cured her of her pain in her ear
by taking out a most prodigious quantity of hard wax that had hardened itself in the bottom
of the ear, of which I am very glad.

28th.  Up to my Lord's and my own accounts, and so to the office, where all the forenoon sitting,
and at noon by appointment to the Mitre, where Mr. Shepley gave me and Mr. Creed, and I had
my uncle Wight with us, a dish of fish.  Thence to the office again, and there all the afternoon
till night, and so home, and after talking with my wife to bed.  This day a genteel woman came
to me, claiming kindred of me, as she had once done before, and borrowed 10s. of me, promising
to repay it at night, but I hear nothing of her.  I shall trust her no more.  My mind is now
in a wonderful condition of quiet and content, more than ever in all my life, since my minding
the business of my office, which I have done most constantly; and I find it to be the very
effect of my late oaths against wine and plays, which, if God please, I will keep constant
in, for now my business is a delight to me, and brings me great credit, and my purse encreases too.

29th (Lord's day).  Up by four o'clock, and to the settling of my own accounts, and I do find
upon my monthly ballance, which I have undertaken to keep from month to month, that I am worth
L650, the greatest sum that ever I was yet master of.  I pray God give me a thankfull, spirit,
and care to improve and encrease it.  To church with my wife, who this day put on her green
petticoat of flowred satin, with fine white and gimp lace of her own putting on, which is very
pretty.  Home with Sir W. Pen to dinner by appointment, and to church again in the afternoon,
and then home, Mr. Shepley coming to me about my Lord's accounts, and in the evening parted,
and we to supper again to Sir W. Pen.  Whatever the matter is, he do much fawn upon me, and
I perceive would not fall out with me, and his daughter mighty officious to my wife, but I
shall never be deceived again by him, but do hate him and his traitorous tricks with all my
heart.  It was an invitation in order to his taking leave of us to-day, he being to go for
Ireland in a few days.  So home and prayers, and to bed.

30th.  Up betimes, and to my office, where I found Griffen's girl making it clean, but, God
forgive me! what a mind I had to her, but did not meddle with her.  She being gone, I fell
upon boring holes for me to see from my closet into the great office, without going forth,
wherein I please myself much.  So settled to business, and at noon with my wife to the Wardrobe,
and there dined, and staid talking all the afternoon with my Lord, and about four o'clock took
coach with my wife and Lady, and went toward my house, calling at my Lady Carteret's, who was
within by chance (she keeping altogether at Deptford for a month or two), and so we sat with
her a little.  Among other things told my Lady how my Lady Fanshaw is fallen out with her only
for speaking in behalf of the French, which my Lady wonders at, they having been formerly like
sisters, but we see there is no true lasting friendship in the world.  She staid a little at
my house, and then walked through the garden, and took water, and went first on board the King's
pleasure boat, which pleased her much. Then to Greenwich Park; and with much ado she was able
to walk up to the top of the hill, and so down again, and took boat, and so through bridge
to Blackfryers, and home, she being much pleased with the ramble in every particular of it.
So we supped with her, and then walked home, and to bed.

                              OBSERVATIONS.

This I take to be as bad a juncture as ever I observed.  Myself all in dirt about building
of my house and Sir W. Batten's a story higher.  Into a good way, fallen on minding my business
and saving money, which God encrease; and I do take great delight in it, and see the benefit
of it.  In a longing mind of going to see Brampton, but cannot get three days time, do what
I can.  In very good health, my wife and myself.

