"Then people will be damned," said Mr. Kennedy, rising from his chair. "And they will be damned."

"A woman doesn't like to be told so."

"I never told her so. I never said anything of the kind. I never spoke a hard word to her in
my life. If her head did but ache, I hung over her with the tenderest solicitude. I refused
her nothing. When I found that she was impatient I chose the shortest sermon for our Sunday
evening's worship, to the great discomfort of my mother." Phineas wondered whether this assertion
as to the discomfort of old Mrs. Kennedy could possibly be true. Could it be that any human
being really preferred a long sermon to a short one,--except the being who preached it or read
it aloud? "There was nothing that I did not do for her. I suppose you really do know why she
went away, Mr. Finn?"

"I know nothing more than I have said."

"I did think once that she was--"

"There was nothing more than I have said," asserted Phineas sternly, fearing that the poor
insane man was about to make some suggestion that would be terribly painful. "She felt that
she did not make you happy."

"I did not want her to make me happy. I do not expect to be made happy. I wanted her to do
her duty. You were in love with her once, Mr. Finn?"

"Yes, I was. I was in love with Lady Laura Standish."

"Ah! Yes. There was no harm in that, of course; only when any thing of that kind happens, people
had better keep out of each other's way afterwards. Not that I was ever jealous, you know."

"I should hope not."

"But I don't see why you should go all the way to Dresden to pay her a visit. What good can
that do? I think you had much better stay where you are, Mr. Finn; I do indeed. It isn't a
decent thing for a young unmarried man to go half across Europe to see a lady who is separated
from her husband, and who was once in love with him;--I mean he was once in love with her.
It's a very wicked thing, Mr. Finn, and I have to beg that you will not do it."

Phineas felt that he had been grossly taken in. He had been asked to come to Loughlinter in
order that he might take a message from the husband to the wife, and now the husband made use
of his compliance to forbid the visit on some grotesque score of jealousy. He knew that the
man was mad, and that therefore he ought not to be angry; but the man was not too mad to require
a rational answer, and had some method in his madness. "Lady Laura Kennedy is living with her
father," said Phineas.

"Pshaw;--dotard!"

"Lady Laura Kennedy is living with her father," repeated Phineas; "and I am going to the house
of the Earl of Brentford."

"Who was it wrote and asked you?"

"The letter was from Lady Laura."

"Yes;--from my wife. What right had my wife to write to you when she will not even answer my
appeals? She is my wife;--my wife! In the presence of God she and I have been made one, and
even man's ordinances have not dared to separate us. Mr. Finn, as the husband of Lady Laura
Kennedy, I desire that you abstain from seeking her presence." As he said this he rose from
his chair, and took the poker in his hand. The chair in which he was sitting was placed upon
the rug, and it might be that the fire required his attention. As he stood bending down, with
the poker in his right hand, with his eye still fixed on his guest's face, his purpose was
doubtful. The motion might be a threat, or simply have a useful domestic tendency. But Phineas,
believing that the man was mad, rose from his seat and stood upon his guard. The point of the
poker had undoubtedly been raised; but as Phineas stretched himself to his height, it fell
gradually towards the fire, and at last was buried very gently among the coals. But he was
never convinced that Mr. Kennedy had carried out the purpose with which he rose from his chair.
"After what has passed, you will no doubt abandon your purpose," said Mr. Kennedy.

"I shall certainly go to Dresden," said Phineas. "If you have a message to send, I will take it."

"Then you will be accursed among adulterers," said the laird of Loughlinter. "By such a one
I will send no message. From the first moment that I saw you I knew you for a child of Apollyon.
But the sin was my own. Why did I ask to my house an idolater, one who pretends to believe
that a crumb of bread is my God, a Papist, untrue alike to his country and to his Saviour?
When she desired it of me I knew that I was wrong to yield. Yes;--it is you who have done it
all, you, you, you;--and if she be a castaway, the weight of her soul will be doubly heavy
on your own."

To get out of the room, and then at the earliest possible hour of the morning out of the house,
were now the objects to be attained. That his presence had had a peculiarly evil influence
on Mr. Kennedy, Phineas could not doubt; as assuredly the unfortunate man would not have been
left with mastery over his own actions had his usual condition been such as that which he now
displayed. He had been told that "poor Kennedy" was mad,--as we are often told of the madness
of our friends when they cease for awhile to run in the common grooves of life. But the madman
had now gone a long way out of the grooves;--so far, that he seemed to Phineas to be decidedly
dangerous. "I think I had better wish you good night," he said.

"Look here, Mr. Finn."

"Well?"

"I hope you won't go and make more mischief."

"I shall not do that, certainly."

"You won't tell her what I have said?"

"I shall tell her nothing to make her think that your opinion of her is less high than it ought
to be."

"Good night."

"Good night," said Phineas again; and then he left the room. It was as yet but nine o'clock,
and he had no alternative but to go to bed. He found his way back into the hall, and from thence
up to his own chamber. But there was no fire there, and the night was cold. He went to the
window, and raised it for a moment, that he might hear the well-remembered sound of the Fall
of Linter. Though the night was dark and wintry, a dismal damp November night, he would have
crept out of the house and made his way up to the top of the brae, for the sake of auld lang
syne, had he not feared that the inhospitable mansion would be permanently closed against him
on his return. He rang the bell once or twice, and after a while the old serving man came to
him. Could he have a cup of tea? The man shook his head, and feared that no boiling water could
be procured at that late hour of the night. Could he have his breakfast the next morning at
seven, and a conveyance to Callender at half-past seven? When the old man again shook his head,
seeming to be dazed at the enormity of the demand, Phineas insisted that his request should
be conveyed to the master of the house. As to the breakfast, he said he did not care about
it, but the conveyance he must have. He did, in fact, obtain both, and left the house early
on the following morning without again seeing Mr. Kennedy, and without having spoken a single
word to Mr. Kennedy's mother. And so great was his hurry to get away from the place which had
been so disagreeable to him, and which he thought might possibly become more so, that he did
not even run across the sward that divided the gravel sweep from the foot of the waterfall.

CHAPTER XI

The Truant Wife

Phineas on his return to London wrote a line to Lady Chiltern in accordance with a promise
which had been exacted from him. She was anxious to learn something as to the real condition
of her husband's brother-in-law, and, when she heard that Phineas was going to Loughlinter,
had begged that he would tell her the truth. "He has become eccentric, gloomy, and very strange,"
said Phineas. "I do not believe that he is really mad, but his condition is such that I think
no friend should recommend Lady Laura to return to him. He seems to have devoted himself to
a gloomy religion,--and to the saving of money. I had but one interview with him, and that
was essentially disagreeable." Having remained two days in London, and having participated,
as far as those two days would allow him, in the general horror occasioned by the wickedness
and success of Mr. Daubeny, he started for Dresden.

He found Lord Brentford living in a spacious house, with a huge garden round it, close upon
the northern confines of the town. Dresden, taken altogether, is a clean cheerful city, and
strikes the stranger on his first entrance as a place in which men are gregarious, busy, full
of merriment, and pre-eminently social. Such is the happy appearance of but few towns either
in the old or the new world, and is hardly more common in Germany than elsewhere. Leipsic is
decidedly busy, but does not look to be social. Vienna is sufficiently gregarious, but its
streets are melancholy. Munich is social, but lacks the hum of business. Frankfort is both
practical and picturesque, but it is dirty, and apparently averse to mirth. Dresden has much
to recommend it, and had Lord Brentford with his daughter come abroad in quest of comfortable
easy social life, his choice would have been well made. But, as it was, any of the towns above
named would have suited him as well as Dresden, for he saw no society, and cared nothing for
the outward things of the world around him. He found Dresden to be very cold in the winter
and very hot in the summer, and he liked neither heat nor cold; but he had made up his mind
that all places, and indeed all things, are nearly equally disagreeable, and therefore he remained
at Dresden, grumbling almost daily as to the climate and manners of the people.

Phineas, when he arrived at the hall door, almost doubted whether he had not been as wrong
in visiting Lord Brentford as he had in going to Loughlinter. His friendship with the old Earl
had been very fitful, and there had been quarrels quite as pronounced as the friendship. He
had often been happy in the Earl's house, but the happiness had not sprung from any love for
the man himself. How would it be with him if he found the Earl hardly more civil to him than
the Earl's son-in-law had been? In former days the Earl had been a man quite capable of making
himself disagreeable, and probably had not yet lost the power of doing so. Of all our capabilities
this is the one which clings longest to us. He was thinking of all this when he found himself
at the door of the Earl's house. He had travelled all night, and was very cold. At Leipsic
there had been a nominal twenty minutes for refreshment, which the circumstances of the station
had reduced to five. This had occurred very early in the morning, and had sufficed only to
give him a bowl of coffee. It was now nearly ten, and breakfast had become a serious consideration
with him. He almost doubted whether it would not have been better for him to have gone to an
hotel in the first instance.

He soon found himself in the hall amidst a cluster of servants, among whom he recognised the
face of a man from Saulsby. He had, however, little time allowed him for looking about. He
was hardly in the house before Lady Laura Kennedy was in his arms. She had run forward, and
before he could look into her face, she had put up her cheek to his lips and had taken both
his hands. "Oh, my friend," she said; "oh, my friend! How good you are to come to me! How good
you are to come!" And then she led him into a large room, in which a table had been prepared
for breakfast, close to an English-looking open fire. "How cold you must be, and how hungry!
Shall I have breakfast for you at once, or will you dress first? You are to be quite at home,
you know; exactly as though we were brother and sister. You are not to stand on any ceremonies."
And again she took him by the hand. He had hardly looked her yet in the face, and he could
not do so now because he knew that she was crying. "Then I will show you to your room," she
said, when he had decided for a tub of water before breakfast. "Yes, I will,--my own self.
And I'd fetch the water for you, only I know it is there already. How long will you be? Half
an hour? Very well. And you would like tea best, wouldn't you?"

"Certainly, I should like tea best."

"I will make it for you. Papa never comes down till near two, and we shall have all the morning
for talking. Oh, Phineas, it is such a pleasure to hear your voice again. You have been at
Loughlinter?"

"Yes, I have been there."

"How very good of you; but I won't ask a question now. You must put up with a stove here, as
we have not open fires in the bed-rooms. I hope you will be comfortable. Don't be more than
half an hour, as I shall be impatient."

Though he was thus instigated to haste he stood a few minutes with his back to the warm stove
that he might be enabled to think of it all. It was two years since he had seen this woman,
and when they had parted there had been more between them of the remembrances of old friendship
than of present affection. During the last few weeks of their intimacy she had made a point
of telling him that she intended to separate herself from her husband; but she had done so
as though it were a duty, and an arranged part of her own defence of her own conduct. And in
the latter incidents of her London life,--that life with which he had been conversant,--she
had generally been opposed to him, or, at any rate, had chosen to be divided from him. She
had said severe things to him,--telling him that he was cold, heartless, and uninterested,
never trying even to please him with that sort of praise which had once been so common with
her in her intercourse with him, and which all men love to hear from the mouths of women. She
had then been cold to him, though she would make wretched allusions to the time when he, at
any rate, had not been cold to her. She had reproached him, and had at the same time turned
away from him. She had repudiated him, first as a lover, then as a friend; and he had hitherto
never been able to gauge the depth of the affection for him which had underlaid all her conduct.
As he stood there thinking of it all, he began to understand it.

How natural had been her conduct on his arrival, and how like that of a genuine, true-hearted,
honest woman! All her first thoughts had been for his little personal wants,--that he should
be warmed, and fed, and made outwardly comfortable. Let sorrow be ever so deep, and love ever
so true, a man will be cold who travels by winter, and hungry who has travelled by night. And
a woman, who is a true, genuine woman, always takes delight in ministering to the natural wants
of her friend. To see a man eat and drink, and wear his slippers, and sit at ease in his chair,
is delightful to the feminine heart that loves. When I heard the other day that a girl had
herself visited the room prepared for a man in her mother's house, then I knew that she loved
him, though I had never before believed it. Phineas, as he stood there, was aware that this
woman loved him dearly. She had embraced him, and given her face to him to kiss. She had clasped
his hands, and clung to him, and had shown him plainly that in the midst of all her sorrow
she could be made happy by his coming. But he was a man far too generous to take all this as
meaning aught that it did not mean,--too generous, and intrinsically too manly. In his character
there was much of weakness, much of vacillation, perhaps some deficiency of strength and purpose;
but there was no touch of vanity. Women had loved him, and had told him so; and he had been
made happy, and also wretched, by their love. But he had never taken pride, personally, to
himself because they had loved him. It had been the accident of his life. Now he remembered
chiefly that this woman had called herself his sister, and he was grateful.

Then he thought of her personal appearance. As yet he had hardly looked at her, but he felt
that she had become old and worn, angular and hard-visaged. All this had no effect upon his
feelings towards her, but filled him with ineffable regret. When he had first known her she
had been a woman with a noble presence--not soft and feminine as had been Violet Effingham,
but handsome and lustrous, with a healthy youth. In regard to age he and she were of the same
standing. That he knew well. She had passed her thirty-second birthday, but that was all. He
felt himself to be still a young man, but he could not think of her as of a young woman.

When he went down she had been listening for his footsteps, and met him at the door of the
room. "Now sit down," she said, "and be comfortable--if you can, with German surroundings.
They are almost always late, and never give one any time. Everybody says so. The station at
Leipsic is dreadful, I know. Good coffee is very well, but what is the use of good coffee if
you have no time to drink it? You must eat our omelette. If there is one thing we can do better
than you it is to make an omelette. Yes,--that is genuine German sausage. There is always some
placed upon the table, but the Germans who come here never touch it themselves. You will have
a cutlet, won't you? I breakfasted an hour ago, and more. I would not wait because then I thought
I could talk to you better, and wait upon you. I did not think that anything would ever please
me so much again as your coming has done. Oh, how much we shall have to say! Do you remember
when we last parted;--when you were going back to Ireland?"

"I remember it well."

"Ah me; as I look back upon it all, how strange it seems. I dare say you don't remember the
first day I met you, at Mr. Mildmay's,--when I asked you to come to Portman Square because
Barrington had said that you were clever?"

"I remember well going to Portman Square."

"That was the beginning of it all. Oh dear, oh dear; when I think of it I find it so hard to
see where I have been right, and where I have been wrong. If I had not been very wrong all
this evil could not have come upon me."

"Misfortune has not always been deserved."

"I am sure it has been so with me. You can smoke here if you like." This Phineas persistently
refused to do. "You may if you please. Papa never comes in here, and I don't mind it. You'll
settle down in a day or two, and understand the extent of your liberties. Tell me first about
Violet. She is happy?"

"Quite happy, I think."

"I knew he would be good to her. But does she like the kind of life?"

"Oh, yes."

"She has a baby, and therefore of course she is happy. She says he is the finest fellow in
the world."

"I dare say he is. They all seem to be contented with him, but they don't talk much about him."

"No; they wouldn't. Had you a child you would have talked about him, Phineas. I should have
loved my baby better than all the world, but I should have been silent about him. With Violet
of course her husband is the first object. It would certainly be so from her nature. And so
Oswald is quite tame?"

"I don't know that he is very tame out hunting."

"But to her?"

"I should think always. She, you know, is very clever."

"So clever!"

"And would be sure to steer clear of all offence," said Phineas, enthusiastically.

"While I could never for an hour avoid it. Did they say anything about the journey to Flanders?"

"Chiltern did, frequently. He made me strip my shoulder to show him the place where he hit me."

"How like Oswald!"

"And he told me that he would have given one of his eyes to kill me, only Colepepper wouldn't
let him go on. He half quarrelled with his second, but the man told him that I had not fired
at him, and the thing must drop. 'It's better as it is, you know,' he said. And I agreed with him."

"And how did Violet receive you?"

"Like an angel,--as she is."

"Well, yes. I'll grant she is an angel now. I was angry with her once, you know. You men find
so many angels in your travels. You have been honester than some. You have generally been off
with the old angel before you were on with the new,--as far at least as I knew."

"Is that meant for rebuke, Lady Laura?"

"No, my friend; no. That is all over. I said to myself when you told me that you would come,
that I would not utter one ill-natured word. And I told myself more than that!"

"What more?"

"That you had never deserved it,--at least from me. But surely you were the most simple of men."

"I dare say."

"Men when they are true are simple. They are often false as hell, and then they are crafty
as Lucifer. But the man who is true judges others by himself,--almost without reflection. A
woman can be true as steel and cunning at the same time. How cunning was Violet, and yet she
never deceived one of her lovers, even by a look. Did she?"

"She never deceived me,--if you mean that. She never cared a straw about me, and told me so
to my face very plainly."

"She did care,--many straws. But I think she always loved Oswald. She refused him again and
again, because she thought it wrong to run a great risk, but I knew she would never marry any
one else. How little Lady Baldock understood her. Fancy your meeting Lady Baldock at Oswald's
house!"

"Fancy Augusta Boreham turning nun!"

"How exquisitely grotesque it must have been when she made her complaint to you."

"I pitied her with all my heart."

"Of course you did,--because you are so soft. And now, Phineas, we will put it off no longer.
Tell me all that you have to tell me about him."

CHAPTER XII

Königstein

Phineas Finn and Lady Laura Kennedy sat together discussing the affairs of the past till the
servant told them that "My Lord" was in the next room, and ready to receive Mr. Finn. "You
will find him much altered," said Lady Laura, "even more than I am."

"I do not find you altered at all."

"Yes, you do,--in appearance. I am a middle-aged woman, and conscious that I may use my privileges
as such. But he has become quite an old man,--not in health so much as in manner. But he will
be very glad to see you." So saying she led him into a room, in which he found the Earl seated
near the fireplace, and wrapped in furs. He got up to receive his guest, and Phineas saw at
once that during the two years of his exile from England Lord Brentford had passed from manhood
to senility. He almost tottered as he came forward, and he wrapped his coat around him with
that air of studious self-preservation which belongs only to the infirm.

"It is very good of you to come and see me, Mr. Finn," he said.

"Don't call him Mr. Finn, Papa. I call him Phineas."

"Well, yes; that's all right, I dare say. It's a terrible long journey from London, isn't it,
Mr. Finn?"

"Too long to be pleasant, my lord."

"Pleasant! Oh, dear. There's no pleasantness about it. And so they've got an autumn session,
have they? That's always a very stupid thing to do, unless they want money."

"But there is a money bill which must be passed. That's Mr. Daubeny's excuse."

"Ah, if they've a money bill of course it's all right. So you're in Parliament again?"

"I'm sorry to say I'm not." Then Lady Laura explained to her father, probably for the third
or fourth time, exactly what was their guest's position. "Oh, a scrutiny. We didn't use to
have any scrutinies at Loughton, did we? Ah, me; well, everything seems to be going to the
dogs. I'm told they're attacking the Church now." Lady Laura glanced at Phineas; but neither
of them said a word. "I don't quite understand it; but they tell me that the Tories are going
to disestablish the Church. I'm very glad I'm out of it all. Things have come to such a pass
that I don't see how a gentleman is to hold office now-a-days. Have you seen Chiltern lately?"

After a while, when Phineas had told the Earl all that there was to tell of his son and his
grandson, and all of politics and of Parliament, Lady Laura suddenly interrupted them. "You
knew, Papa, that he was to see Mr. Kennedy. He has been to Loughlinter, and has seen him."

"Oh, indeed!"

"He is quite assured that I could not with wisdom return to live with my husband."

"It is a very grave decision to make," said the Earl.

"But he has no doubt about it," continued Lady Laura.

"Not a shadow of doubt," said Phineas. "I will not say that Mr. Kennedy is mad; but the condition
of his mind is such in regard to Lady Laura that I do not think she could live with him in
safety. He is crazed about religion."

"Dear, dear, dear," exclaimed the Earl.

"The gloom of his house is insupportable. And he does not pretend that he desires her to return
that he and she may be happy together."

"What for then?"

"That we might be unhappy together," said Lady Laura.

"He repudiates all belief in happiness. He wishes her to return to him chiefly because it is
right that a man and wife should live together."

"So it is," said the Earl.

"But not to the utter wretchedness of both of them," said Lady Laura. "He says," and she pointed
to Phineas, "that were I there he would renew his accusation against me. He has not told me
all. Perhaps he cannot tell me all. But I certainly will not return to Loughlinter."

"Very well, my dear."

"It is not very well, Papa; but, nevertheless, I will not return to Loughlinter. What I suffered
there neither of you can understand."

That afternoon Phineas went out alone to the galleries, but the next day she accompanied him,
and showed him whatever of glory the town had to offer in its winter dress. They stood together
before great masters, and together examined small gems. And then from day to day they were
always in each other's company. He had promised to stay a month, and during that time he was
petted and comforted to his heart's content. Lady Laura would have taken him into the Saxon
Switzerland, in spite of the inclemency of the weather and her father's rebukes, had he not
declared vehemently that he was happier remaining in the town. But she did succeed in carrying
him off to the fortress of Königstein; and there as they wandered along the fortress constructed
on that wonderful rock there occurred between them a conversation which he never forgot, and
which it would not have been easy to forget. His own prospects had of course been frequently
discussed. He had told her everything, down to the exact amount of money which he had to support
him till he should again be enabled to earn an income, and had received assurances from her
that everything would be just as it should be after a lapse of a few months. The Liberals would,
as a matter of course, come in, and equally as a matter of course, Phineas would be in office.
She spoke of this with such certainty that she almost convinced him. Having tempted him away
from the safety of permanent income, the party could not do less than provide for him. If he
could only secure a seat he would be safe; and it seemed that Tankerville would be a certain
seat. This certainty he would not admit; but, nevertheless, he was comforted by his friend.
When you have done the rashest thing in the world it is very pleasant to be told that no man
of spirit could have acted otherwise. It was a matter of course that he should return to public
life,--so said Lady Laura;--and doubly a matter of course when he found himself a widower without
a child. "Whether it be a bad life or a good life," said Lady Laura, "you and I understand
equally well that no other life is worth having after it. We are like the actors, who cannot
bear to be away from the gaslights when once they have lived amidst their glare." As she said
this they were leaning together over one of the parapets of the great fortress, and the sadness
of the words struck him as they bore upon herself. She also had lived amidst the gaslights,
and now she was self-banished into absolute obscurity. "You could not have been content with
your life in Dublin," she said.

"Are you content with your life in Dresden?"

"Certainly not. We all like exercise; but the man who has had his leg cut off can't walk. Some
can walk with safety; others only with a certain peril; and others cannot at all. You are in
the second position, but I am in the last."

"I do not see why you should not return."

"And if I did what would come of it? In place of the seclusion of Dresden, there would be the
seclusion of Portman Square or of Saulsby. Who would care to have me at their houses, or to
come to mine? You know what a hazardous, chancy, short-lived thing is the fashion of a woman.
With wealth, and wit, and social charm, and impudence, she may preserve it for some years,
but when she has once lost it she can never recover it. I am as much lost to the people who
did know me in London as though I had been buried for a century. A man makes himself really
useful, but a woman can never do that."

"All those general rules mean nothing," said Phineas. "I should try it."

"No, Phineas. I know better than that. It would only be disappointment. I hardly think that
after all you ever did understand when it was that I broke down utterly and marred my fortunes
for ever."

"I know the day that did it."

"When I accepted him?"

"Of course it was. I know that, and so do you. There need be no secret between us."

"There need be no secret between us certainly,--and on my part there shall be none. On my part
there has been none."

"Nor on mine."

"There has been nothing for you to tell,--since you blurted out your short story of love that
day over the waterfall, when I tried so hard to stop you."

"How was I to be stopped then?"

"No; you were too simple. You came there with but one idea, and you could not change it on
the spur of the moment. When I told you that I was engaged you could not swallow back the words
that were not yet spoken. Ah, how well I remember it. But you are wrong, Phineas. It was not
my engagement or my marriage that has made the world a blank for me." A feeling came upon him
which half-choked him, so that he could ask her no further question. "You know that, Phineas."

"It was your marriage," he said, gruffly.

"It was, and has been, and still will be my strong, unalterable, unquenchable love for you.
How could I behave to that other man with even seeming tenderness when my mind was always thinking
of you, when my heart was always fixed upon you? But you have been so simple, so little given
to vanity,"--she leaned upon his arm as she spoke,--"so pure and so manly, that you have not
believed this, even when I told you. Has it not been so?"

"I do not wish to believe it now."

