NINE SHORT ESSAYS

By Charles Dudley Warner

CONTENTS:

A NIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF THE TUILERIES TRUTHFULNESS THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS LITERATURE AND
THE STAGE THE LIFE-SAVING AND LIFE PROLONGING ART "H.H." IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA SIMPLICITY
THE ENGLISH VOLUNTEERS DURING THE LATE INVASION NATHAN HALE

A NIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF THE TUILERIES

It was in the time of the Second Empire. To be exact, it was the night of the 18th of June,
1868; I remember the date, because, contrary to the astronomical theory of short nights at
this season, this was the longest night I ever saw. It was the loveliest time of the year in
Paris, when one was tempted to lounge all day in the gardens and to give to sleep none of the
balmy nights in this gay capital, where the night was illuminated like the day, and some new
pleasure or delight always led along the sparkling hours. Any day the Garden of the Tuileries
was a microcosm repaying study. There idle Paris sunned itself; through it the promenaders
flowed from the Rue de Rivoli gate by the palace to the entrance on the Place de la Concorde,
out to the Champs-Elysees and back again; here in the north grove gathered thousands to hear
the regimental band in the afternoon; children chased butterflies about the flower-beds and
amid the tubs of orange-trees; travelers, guide-book in hand, stood resolutely and incredulously
before the groups of statuary, wondering what that Infant was doing with, the snakes and why
the recumbent figure of the Nile should have so many children climbing over him; or watched
the long facade of the palace hour after hour, in the hope of catching at some window the flutter
of a royal robe; and swarthy, turbaned Zouaves, erect, lithe, insouciant, with the firm, springy
step of the tiger, lounged along the allees.

Napoleon was at home--a fact attested by a reversal of the hospitable rule of democracy, no
visitors being admitted to the palace when he was at home. The private garden, close to the
imperial residence, was also closed to the public, who in vain looked across the sunken fence
to the parterres, fountains, and statues, in the hope that the mysterious man would come out
there and publicly enjoy himself. But he never came, though I have no doubt that he looked
out of the windows upon the beautiful garden and his happy Parisians, upon the groves of horse-chestnuts,
the needle-like fountain beyond, the Column of Luxor, up the famous and shining vista terminated
by the Arch of the Star, and reflected with Christian complacency upon the greatness of a monarch
who was the lord of such splendors and the goodness of a ruler who opened them all to his children.
Especially when the western sunshine streamed down over it all, turning even the dust of the
atmosphere into gold and emblazoning the windows of the Tuileries with a sort of historic glory,
his heart must have swelled within him in throbs of imperial exaltation. It is the fashion
nowadays not to consider him a great man, but no one pretends to measure his goodness.

The public garden of the Tuileries was closed at dusk, no one being permitted to remain in
it after dark. I suppose it was not safe to trust the Parisians in the covert of its shades
after nightfall, and no one could tell what foreign fanatics and assassins might do if they
were permitted to pass the night so near the imperial residence. At any rate, everybody was
drummed out before the twilight fairly began, and at the most fascinating hour for dreaming
in the ancient garden. After sundown the great door of the Pavilion de l'Horloge swung open
and there issued from it a drum-corps, which marched across the private garden and down the
broad allee of the public garden, drumming as if the judgment-day were at hand, straight to
the great gate of the Place de la Concorde, and returning by a side allee, beating up every
covert and filling all the air with clamor until it disappeared, still thumping, into the court
of the palace; and all the square seemed to ache with the sound. Never was there such pounding
since Thackeray's old Pierre, who, "just to keep up his drumming, one day drummed down the
Bastile":

     At midnight I beat the tattoo,
     And woke up the Pikemen of Paris
     To follow the bold Barbaroux.

On the waves of this drumming the people poured out from every gate of the garden, until the
last loiterer passed and the gendarmes closed the portals for the night. Before the lamps were
lighted along the Rue de Rivoli and in the great square of the Revolution, the garden was left
to the silence of its statues and its thousand memories. I often used to wonder, as I looked
through the iron railing at nightfall, what might go on there and whether historic shades might
not flit about in the ghostly walks.

Late in the afternoon of the 18th of June, after a long walk through the galleries of the Louvre,
and excessively weary, I sat down to rest on a secluded bench in the southern grove of the
garden; hidden from view by the tree-trunks. Where I sat I could see the old men and children
in that sunny flower-garden, La Petite Provence, and I could see the great fountain-basin facing
the Porte du Pont-Tournant. I must have heard the evening drumming, which was the signal for
me to quit the garden; for I suppose even the dead in Paris hear that and are sensitive to
the throb of the glory-calling drum. But if I did hear it,--it was only like an echo of the
past, and I did not heed it any more than Napoleon in his tomb at the Invalides heeds, through
the drawn curtain, the chanting of the daily mass. Overcome with fatigue, I must have slept
soundly.

When I awoke it was dark under the trees. I started up and went into the broad promenade. The
garden was deserted; I could hear the plash of the fountains, but no other sound therein. Lights
were gleaming from the windows of the Tuileries, lights blazed along the Rue de Rivoli, dotted
the great Square, and glowed for miles up the Champs Elysees. There were the steady roar of
wheels and the tramping of feet without, but within was the stillness of death.

What should I do? I am not naturally nervous, but to be caught lurking in the Tuileries Garden
in the night would involve me in the gravest peril. The simple way would have been to have
gone to the gate nearest the Pavillon de Marsan, and said to the policeman on duty there that
I had inadvertently fallen asleep, that I was usually a wide-awake citizen of the land that
Lafayette went to save, that I wanted my dinner, and would like to get out. I walked down near
enough to the gate to see the policeman, but my courage failed. Before I could stammer out
half that explanation to him in his trifling language (which foreigners are mockingly told
is the best in the world for conversation), he would either have slipped his hateful rapier
through my body, or have raised an alarm and called out the guards of the palace to hunt me
down like a rabbit.

A man in the Tuileries Garden at night! an assassin! a conspirator! one of the Carbonari, perhaps
a dozen of them--who knows?--Orsini bombs, gunpowder, Greek-fire, Polish refugees, murder,
emeutes, REVOLUTION!

No, I'm not going to speak to that person in the cocked hat and dress-coat under these circumstances.
Conversation with him out of the best phrase-books would be uninteresting. Diplomatic row between
the two countries would be the least dreaded result of it. A suspected conspirator against
the life of Napoleon, without a chance for explanation, I saw myself clubbed, gagged, bound,
searched (my minute notes of the Tuileries confiscated), and trundled off to the Conciergerie,
and hung up to the ceiling in an iron cage there, like Ravaillac.

I drew back into the shade and rapidly walked to the western gate. It was closed, of course.
On the gate-piers stand the winged steeds of Marly, never less admired than by me at that moment.
They interested me less than a group of the Corps d'Afrique, who lounged outside, guarding
the entrance from the square, and unsuspicious that any assassin was trying to get out. I could
see the gleam of the lamps on their bayonets and hear their soft tread. Ask them to let me
out? How nimbly they would have scaled the fence and transfixed me! They like to do such things.
No, no--whatever I do, I must keep away from the clutches of these cats of Africa.

And enough there was to do, if I had been in a mind to do it. All the seats to sit in, all
the statuary to inspect, all the flowers to smell. The southern terrace overlooking the Seine
was closed, or I might have amused myself with the toy railway of the Prince Imperial that
ran nearly the whole length of it, with its switches and turnouts and houses; or I might have
passed delightful hours there watching the lights along the river and the blazing illumination
on the amusement halls. But I ascended the familiar northern terrace and wandered amid its
bowers, in company with Hercules, Meleager, and other worthies I knew only by sight, smelling
the orange-blossoms, and trying to fix the site of the old riding-school where the National
Assembly sat in 1789.

It must have been eleven o'clock when I found myself down by the private garden next the palace.
Many of the lights in the offices of the household had been extinguished, but the private apartments
of the Emperor in the wing south of the central pavilion were still illuminated. The Emperor
evidently had not so much desire to go to bed as I had. I knew the windows of his petits appartements--as
what good American did not?--and I wondered if he was just then taking a little supper, if
he had bidden good-night to Eugenie, if he was alone in his room, reflecting upon his grandeur
and thinking what suit he should wear on the morrow in his ride to the Bois. Perhaps he was
dictating an editorial for the official journal; perhaps he was according an interview to the
correspondent of the London Glorifier; perhaps one of the Abbotts was with him. Or was he composing
one of those important love-letters of state to Madame Blank which have since delighted the
lovers of literature? I am not a spy, and I scorn to look into people's windows late at night,
but I was lonesome and hungry, and all that square round about swarmed with imperial guards,
policemen, keen-scented Zouaves, and nobody knows what other suspicious folk. If Napoleon had
known that there was a

        MAN IN THE GARDEN!

I suppose he would have called up his family, waked the drum-corps, sent for the Prefect of
Police, put on the alert the 'sergents de ville,' ordered under arms a regiment of the Imperial
Guards, and made it unpleasant for the Man.

All these thoughts passed through my mind, not with the rapidity of lightning, as is usual
in such cases, but with the slowness of conviction. If I should be discovered, death would
only stare me in the face about a minute. If he waited five minutes, who would believe my story
of going to sleep and not hearing the drums? And if it were true, why didn't I go at once to
the gate, and not lurk round there all night like another Clement? And then I wondered if it
was not the disagreeable habit of some night-patrol or other to beat round the garden before
the Sire went to bed for good, to find just such characters as I was gradually getting to feel
myself to be.

But nobody came. Twelve o'clock, one o'clock sounded from the tower of the church of St. Germain
l'Auxerrois, from whose belfry the signal was given for the beginning of the Massacre of St.
Bartholomew--the same bells that tolled all that dreadful night while the slaughter went on,
while the effeminate Charles IX fired from the windows of the Louvre upon stray fugitives on
the quay--bells the reminiscent sound of which, a legend (which I fear is not true) says, at
length drove Catharine de Medici from the Tuileries.

One o'clock! The lights were going out in the Tuileries, had nearly all gone out. I wondered
if the suspicious and timid and wasteful Emperor would keep the gas burning all night in his
room. The night-roar of Paris still went on, sounding always to foreign ears like the beginning
of a revolution. As I stood there, looking at the window that interested me most, the curtains
were drawn, the window was opened, and a form appeared in a white robe. I had never seen the
Emperor before in a night-gown, but I should have known him among a thousand. The Man of Destiny
had on a white cotton night-cap, with a peaked top and no tassel. It was the most natural thing
in the land; he was taking a last look over his restless Paris before he turned in. What if
he should see me! I respected that last look and withdrew into the shadow. Tired and hungry,
I sat down to reflect upon the pleasures of the gay capital.

One o'clock and a half! I had presence of mind enough to wind my watch; indeed, I was not likely
to forget that, for time hung heavily on my hands. It was a gay capital. Would it never put
out its lights, and cease its uproar, and leave me to my reflections? In less than an hour
the country legions would invade the city, the market-wagons would rumble down the streets,
the vegetable-man and the strawberry-woman, the fishmongers and the greens-venders would begin
their melodious cries, and there would be no repose for a man even in a public garden. It is
secluded enough, with the gates locked, and there is plenty of room to turn over and change
position; but it is a wakeful situation at the best, a haunting sort of place, and I was not
sure it was not haunted.

I had often wondered as I strolled about the place in the daytime or peered through the iron
fence at dusk, if strange things did not go on here at night, with this crowd of effigies of
persons historical and more or less mythological, in this garden peopled with the representatives
of the dead, and no doubt by the shades of kings and queens and courtiers, 'intrigantes' and
panders, priests and soldiers, who live once in this old pile--real shades, which are always
invisible in the sunlight. They have local attachments, I suppose. Can science tell when they
depart forever from the scenes of their objective intrusion into the affairs of this world,
or how long they are permitted to revisit them? Is it true that in certain spiritual states,
say of isolation or intense nervous alertness, we can see them as they can see each other?
There was I--the I catalogued in the police description--present in that garden, yet so earnestly
longing to be somewhere else that would it be wonderful if my 'eidolon' was somewhere else
and could be seen?--though not by a policeman, for policemen have no spiritual vision.

There were no policemen in the garden, that I was certain of; but a little after half-past
one I saw a Man, not a man I had ever seen before, clad in doublet and hose, with a short cloak
and a felt cap with a white plume, come out of the Pavillon de Flore and turn down the quay
towards the house I had seen that afternoon where it stood--of the beautiful Gabrielle d'Estrees.
I might have been mistaken but for the fact that, just at this moment, a window opened in the
wing of the same pavilion, and an effeminate, boyish face, weak and cruel, with a crown on
its head, appeared and looked down into the shadow of the building as if its owner saw what
I had seen. And there was nothing remarkable in this, except that nowadays kings do not wear
crowns at night. It occurred to me that there was a masquerade going on in the Tuileries, though
I heard no music, except the tinkle of, it might be, a harp, or "the lascivious pleasing of
a lute," and I walked along down towards the central pavilion. I was just in time to see two
ladies emerge from it and disappear, whispering together, in the shrubbery; the one old, tall,
and dark, with the Italian complexion, in a black robe, and the other young, petite, extraordinarily
handsome, and clad in light and bridal stuffs, yet both with the same wily look that set me
thinking on poisons, and with a grace and a subtle carriage of deceit that could be common
only to mother and daughter. I didn't choose to walk any farther in the part of the garden
they had chosen for a night promenade, and turned off abruptly.

What?

There, on the bench of the marble hemicycle in the north grove, sat a row of graybeards, old
men in the costume of the first Revolution, a sort of serene and benignant Areopagus. In the
cleared space before them were a crowd of youths and maidens, spectators and participants in
the Floral Games which were about to commence; behind the old men stood attendants who bore
chaplets of flowers, the prizes in the games. The young men wore short red tunics with copper
belts, formerly worn by Roman lads at the ludi, and the girls tunics of white with loosened
girdles, leaving their limbs unrestrained for dancing, leaping, or running; their hair was
confined only by a fillet about the head. The pipers began to play and the dancers to move
in rhythmic measures, with the slow and languid grace of those full of sweet wine and the new
joy of the Spring, according to the habits of the Golden Age, which had come again by decree
in Paris. This was the beginning of the classic sports, but it is not possible for a modern
pen to describe particularly the Floral Games. I remember that the Convention ordered the placing
of these hemicycles in the garden, and they were executed from Robespierre's designs; but I
suppose I am the only person who ever saw the games played that were expected to be played
before them. It was a curious coincidence that the little livid-green man was also there, leaning
against a tree and looking on with a half sneer. It seemed to me an odd classic revival, but
then Paris has spasms of that, at the old Theatre Francais and elsewhere.

