"You can't help. It's--all over," he replied as he started again to where the lantern was gleaming
like a star fallen among the sage.

I tucked the children in a little more snugly, then went over to the coaster.

"Won't you come to bed and rest?" I asked Mrs. O'Shaughnessy.

"No, I'll not. Are me children covered and warm?"

"Yes," I answered.

"What are them fellys pow-wowing about down in the sage?"

"Olaf is dead," I said.

"Who says God is not merciful? Now all the poor felly's troubles are done with. 'Twas him that
caused the stampede, mayhap. God send him peace. I am glad. He will never be hungry nor cold
any more."

"Yes," said the girl; speaking slowly. "I am glad, too. He almost lived in this draw. We saw
him every trip and he did suffer. Dad left a little for him to eat and whatever he could to
wear every trip. The sheep-herders helped him, too. But he suffered. All the home he had was
an old, thrown-away sheep wagon down beyond the last ridge toward the valley. I've seen him
every two weeks for ten years. It's a wonder he has not been killed before."

"I wonder," said Mrs. O'Shaughnessy, "if he has any family. Where will they bury him?"

"He has no people. If they will listen to Dad, they will lay him here on the desert. He would
want it so."

After breakfast Mrs. O'Shaughnessy lay down for a little rest. When the wounded man awoke the
girl gave him a little coffee.

"You're awful good to me," he said. "I'd like to have you around all the time."

The girl smiled gravely. "Ain't you got nobody to take care of you?"

"No. What is your name?"

"Amy Winters. Now you must hush. Talkin' might make you worse."

"I'm not so tur'ble bad off. Where do you live?"

"In the coaster, somewhere on the road between Pinedale and Rock Springs. Dad is a freighter."

"Huh! Do you like to live that way?"

"No; I want a house and a garden awful bad, but Dad can't do nothin' but freight and we've
got Jessie to raise. We ain't got no ma."

"Do women have to change their names when they marry?"

"I don't know. Reckon they do, though. Why?"

"'Cause my name is Tod Winters. I know where there is a dandy little place up on the Gros Ventre
where a cabin would look mighty good to me if there was some one to keep it for me--"

"Oh, say," she interrupted, "that is a awful pretty handkerchief you've got around your neck."

Just then the automobile came up frightening our horses. I heard no more, but the "awful pretty
handkerchief" was missing when the hero left for the hospital. They used some lumber from a
load the freighter had and walled up a grave for Olaf. They had no tools but axes and a shovel
we had along. By noon Olaf was buried. Glenholdt set a slab of sandstone at the head. With
his knife he had dug out these words--"Olaf. The friend of horses."

We camped last night at Ten Trees. To-night we are at Eden Valley. The mystery of Mrs. O'Shaughnessy's
sudden change about the license is explained. She unloaded an elk at the Sanders cabin. "'Twas
two I aimed to bring you, but me own family has increased by twins whilst I've been gone, so
one ilk will have to do you."

So now, dear friend, I am a little nearer you. In one more week I shall be home.

                              Sincerely, thankfully yours,
                                   E. R. S.

XIII

NEARING HOME

                              AT THE WELL IN THE DESERT,
                                   October 21.

DEAR FRIEND,--

We shall reach Green River City to-night. We will rest the teams one day, then start home.
It will take us two days from Green River to reach home, so this is the last letter on the
road. When we made camp here last night we saw some one coming on horseback along the cañon
rim on the opposite side. The form seemed familiar and the horse looked like one I had seen,
but I dared not believe my eyes. Clyde, who was helping to draw water from the eighty-foot
well without a pulley, thought I was bereft as I ran from the camp toward the advancing rider.
But although I thought what I saw must be a mirage, still I knew Mrs. Louderer on Bismarck.

Out of breath from my run, I grasped her fat ankle and panted till I could speak.

"Haf they run you out of camp, you iss so bad?" she asked me by way of greeting. Then, more
kindly, "Your boy iss all right, the mutter also. I am come, though, to find you. It iss time
you are home with the kinder. Haf you any goose-grease left?"

I had, all she had given me.

At camp, joy knew no bounds. Never was one more welcome than our beloved neighbor. Her astonishment
knew no bounds either, when her big blue eyes rested upon Mrs. O'Shaughnessy's "twins."

"Frau O'Shaughnessy," she said severely, "what have you here? You iss robbed an orphan asylum.
How haf you come by these?"

Mrs. O'Shaughnessy is so full of life and good spirits and so delighted to talk about her "childher"
that she gave a very animated recital of how she became a happy mother. In turn Mrs. Louderer
told how she grew more and more alarmed by our long absence, but decided not to alarm the neighbors,
so she had "made a search party out of mineself," and had fared forth to learn our fate.

We had a merry supper; even Haynes became cheerful, and there was no lagging next morning when
we started for home. When people go on elk hunts they are very likely to return in tatters,
so I am going to leave it to your imagination to picture our appearance when we drove up to
the rear of the hotel about sundown. Our friend Mrs. Hutton came running to meet us. I was
ashamed to go into her house, but she leaned up against the house and laughed until tears came.
"What chased you?" she gasped. "You must have been run through some of those barbed wire things
that they are putting up to stop the German army."

Mrs. Hutton is a little lady who bolsters up self-respect and makes light of trying situations,
so she "shooed" us in and I sneaked into my room and waited until Clyde could run down to the
store and purchase me a dress. I feel quite clean and respectable now, sitting up here in my
room writing this to you. I will soon be at home now. Until then good-bye.

                              E. R. S.

XIV

THE MEMORY-BED

                              October 25.

DEAR, DEAR FRIEND,--

Can you guess how happy I am? Be it ever so humble there is no place like home.

