LIFE ON THE MISSISSIPPI

                        BY MARK TWAIN

                           Part 5.

Chapter 21  A Section in My Biography

IN due course I got my license.  I was a pilot now, full fledged. I dropped into casual employments;
no misfortunes resulting, intermittent work gave place to steady and protracted engagements.
Time drifted smoothly and prosperously on, and I supposed--and hoped--that I was going to follow
the river the rest of my days, and die at the wheel when my mission was ended.  But by and
by the war came, commerce was suspended, my occupation was gone.

I had to seek another livelihood.  So I became a silver miner in Nevada; next, a newspaper
reporter; next, a gold miner, in California; next, a reporter in San Francisco; next, a special
correspondent in the Sandwich Islands; next, a roving correspondent in Europe and the East;
next, an instructional torch-bearer on the lecture platform; and, finally, I became a scribbler
of books, and an immovable fixture among the other rocks of New England.

In so few words have I disposed of the twenty-one slow-drifting years that have come and gone
since I last looked from the windows of a pilot- house.

Let us resume, now.

Chapter 22 I Return to My Muttons

AFTER twenty-one years' absence, I felt a very strong desire to see the river again, and the
steamboats, and such of the boys as might be left; so I resolved to go out there. I enlisted
a poet for company, and a stenographer to 'take him down,' and started westward about the middle
of April.

As I proposed to make notes, with a view to printing, I took some thought as to methods of
procedure. I reflected that if I were recognized, on the river, I should not be as free to
go and come, talk, inquire, and spy around, as I should be if unknown; I remembered that it
was the custom of steamboatmen in the old times to load up the confiding stranger with the
most picturesque and admirable lies, and put the sophisticated friend off with dull and ineffectual
facts: so I concluded, that, from a business point of view, it would be an advantage to disguise
our party with fictitious names. The idea was certainly good, but it bred infinite bother;
for although Smith, Jones, and Johnson are easy names to remember when there is no occasion
to remember them, it is next to impossible to recollect them when they are wanted. How do criminals
manage to keep a brand-new ALIAS in mind? This is a great mystery.  I was innocent; and yet
was seldom able to lay my hand on my new name when it was needed; and it seemed to me that
if I had had a crime on my conscience to further confuse me, I could never have kept the name
by me at all.

We left per Pennsylvania Railroad, at 8 A.M. April 18.

'EVENING.  Speaking of dress.  Grace and picturesqueness drop gradually out of it as one travels
away from New York.'

I find that among my notes.  It makes no difference which direction you take, the fact remains
the same. Whether you move north, south, east, or west, no matter: you can get up in the morning
and guess how far you have come, by noting what degree of grace and picturesqueness is by that
time lacking in the costumes of the new passengers,--I do not mean of the women alone, but
of both sexes. It may be that CARRIAGE is at the bottom of this thing; and I think it is; for
there are plenty of ladies and gentlemen in the provincial cities whose garments are all made
by the best tailors and dressmakers of New York; yet this has no perceptible effect upon the
grand fact:  the educated eye never mistakes those people for New-Yorkers. No, there is a godless
grace, and snap, and style about a born and bred New-Yorker which mere clothing cannot effect.

'APRIL 19.  This morning, struck into the region of full goatees-- sometimes accompanied by
a mustache, but only occasionally.'

It was odd to come upon this thick crop of an obsolete and uncomely fashion; it was like running
suddenly across a forgotten acquaintance whom you had supposed dead for a generation. The goatee
extends over a wide extent of country; and is accompanied by an iron-clad belief in Adam and
the biblical history of creation, which has not suffered from the assaults of the scientists.

'AFTERNOON. PERSONAL REMINISCENCES OF EARLY DAYS IN CALIFORNIA, WITH OTHER SKETCHES.

BY

STEPHEN J. FIELD.

TO WHICH IS ADDED THE STORY OF HIS ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATION
BY A FORMER ASSOCIATE ON THE SUPREME BENCH OF THE STATE.

BY

HON.
GEORGE C. GORHAM.

'Heretofore, all along, the station-loafer has been often observed to scratch one shin with
the other foot; here, these remains of activity are wanting. This has an ominous look.'

By and by, we entered the tobacco-chewing region. Fifty years ago, the tobacco-chewing region
covered the Union. It is greatly restricted now.

Next, boots began to appear.  Not in strong force, however. Later--away down the Mississippi--they
became the rule. They disappeared from other sections of the Union with the mud; no doubt they
will disappear from the river villages, also, when proper pavements come in.

We reached St. Louis at ten o'clock at night.  At the counter of the hotel I tendered a hurriedly-invented
fictitious name, with a miserable attempt at careless ease.  The clerk paused, and inspected
me in the compassionate way in which one inspects a respectable person who is found in doubtful
circumstances; then he said--

'It's all right; I know what sort of a room you want. Used to clerk at the St. James, in New York.'

An unpromising beginning for a fraudulent career.  We started to the supper room, and met two
other men whom I had known elsewhere. How odd and unfair it is:  wicked impostors go around
lecturing under my NOM DE GUERRE and nobody suspects them; but when an honest man attempts
an imposture, he is exposed at once.

One thing seemed plain:  we must start down the river the next day, if people who could not
be deceived were going to crop up at this rate: an unpalatable disappointment, for we had hoped
to have a week in St. Louis. The Southern was a good hotel, and we could have had a comfortable
time there.  It is large, and well conducted, and its decorations do not make one cry, as do
those of the vast Palmer House, in Chicago. True, the billiard-tables were of the Old Silurian
Period, and the cues and balls of the Post-Pliocene; but there was refreshment in this, not
discomfort; for there is rest and healing in the contemplation of antiquities.

The most notable absence observable in the billiard-room, was the absence of the river man.
If he was there he had taken in his sign, he was in disguise.  I saw there none of the swell
airs and graces, and ostentatious displays of money, and pompous squanderings of it, which
used to distinguish the steamboat crowd from the dry-land crowd in the bygone days, in the
thronged billiard-rooms of St. Louis. In those times, the principal saloons were always populous
with river men; given fifty players present, thirty or thirty-five were likely to be from the
river.  But I suspected that the ranks were thin now, and the steamboatmen no longer an aristocracy.
Why, in my time they used to call the 'barkeep' Bill, or Joe, or Tom, and slap him on the shoulder;
I watched for that.  But none of these people did it. Manifestly a glory that once was had
dissolved and vanished away in these twenty-one years.

When I went up to my room, I found there the young man called Rogers, crying. Rogers was not
his name; neither was Jones, Brown, Dexter, Ferguson, Bascom, nor Thompson; but he answered
to either of these that a body found handy in an emergency; or to any other name, in fact,
if he perceived that you meant him.  He said--

'What is a person to do here when he wants a drink of water?--drink this slush?'

'Can't you drink it?'

'I could if I had some other water to wash it with.'

Here was a thing which had not changed; a score of years had not affected this water's mulatto
complexion in the least; a score of centuries would succeed no better, perhaps.  It comes out
of the turbulent, bank-caving Missouri, and every tumblerful of it holds nearly an acre of
land in solution.  I got this fact from the bishop of the diocese. If you will let your glass
stand half an hour, you can separate the land from the water as easy as Genesis; and then you
will find them both good:  the one good to eat, the other good to drink. The land is very nourishing,
the water is thoroughly wholesome. The one appeases hunger; the other, thirst.  But the natives
do not take them separately, but together, as nature mixed them. In the following December,
while at Galignani's News Room in Paris, I read in the New York Herald the message of President
Polk, which confirmed previous reports, that gold had been discovered in California, then recently
acquired. It is good for steamboating, and good to drink; but
it is worthless for all other purposes, except baptizing.

Next morning, we drove around town in the rain. The city seemed but little changed.  It WAS
greatly changed, but it did not seem so; because in St. Louis, as in London and Pittsburgh,
you can't persuade a new thing to look new; the coal smoke turns it into an antiquity the moment
you take your hand off it.  The place had just about doubled its size, since I was a resident
of it, and was now become a city of 400,000 inhabitants; still, in the solid business parts,
it looked about as it had looked formerly.  Yet I am sure there is not as much smoke in St.
Louis now as there used to be. The smoke used to bank itself in a dense billowy black canopy
over the town, and hide the sky from view.  This shelter is very much thinner now; still, there
is a sufficiency of smoke there, I think. I heard no complaint.

However, on the outskirts changes were apparent enough; notably in dwelling-house architecture.
The fine new homes are noble and beautiful and modern.  They stand by themselves, too, with
green lawns around them; whereas the dwellings of a former day are packed together in blocks,
and are all of one pattern, with windows all alike, set in an arched frame-work of twisted
stone; a sort of house which was handsome enough when it was rarer.

There was another change--the Forest Park.  This was new to me. It is beautiful and very extensive,
and has the excellent merit of having been made mainly by nature.  There are other parks, and
fine ones, notably Tower Grove and the Botanical Gardens; for St. Louis interested herself
in such improvements at an earlier day than did the most of our cities.

The first time I ever saw St. Louis, I could have bought it for six million dollars, and it
was the mistake of my life that I did not do it. It was bitter now to look abroad over this
domed and steepled metropolis, this solid expanse of bricks and mortar stretching away on every
hand into dim, measure-defying distances, and remember that I had allowed that opportunity
to go by.  Why I should have allowed it to go by seems, of course, foolish and inexplicable
to-day, at a first glance; yet there were reasons at the time to justify this course.

A Scotchman, Hon. Charles Augustus Murray, writing some forty-five or fifty years ago, said--'The
streets are narrow, ill paved and ill lighted.' Those streets are narrow still, of course;
many of them are ill paved yet; but the reproach of ill lighting cannot be repeated, now. The
'Catholic New Church' was the only notable building then, and Mr. Murray was confidently called
upon to admire it, with its 'species of Grecian portico, surmounted by a kind of steeple, much
too diminutive in its proportions, and surmounted by sundry ornaments' which the unimaginative
Scotchman found himself 'quite unable to describe;' and therefore was grateful when a German
tourist helped him out with the exclamation--'By ---, they look exactly like bed-posts!' St.
Louis is well equipped with stately and noble public buildings now, and the little church,
which the people used to be so proud of, lost its importance a long time ago.  Still, this
would not surprise Mr. Murray, if he could come back; for he prophesied the coming greatness
of St. Louis with strong confidence.

The further we drove in our inspection-tour, the more sensibly I realized how the city had
grown since I had seen it last; changes in detail became steadily more apparent and frequent
than at first, too: changes uniformly evidencing progress, energy, prosperity.

But the change of changes was on the 'levee.'  This time, a departure from the rule.  Half
a dozen sound-asleep steamboats where I used to see a solid mile of wide-awake ones! This was
melancholy, this was woeful. The absence of the pervading and jocund steamboatman from the
billiard- saloon was explained. He was absent because he is no more.  His occupation is gone,
his power has passed away, he is absorbed into the common herd, he grinds at the mill, a shorn
Samson and inconspicuous. Half a dozen lifeless steamboats, a mile of empty wharves, a negro
fatigued with whiskey stretched asleep, in a wide and soundless vacancy, where the serried
hosts of commerce used to contend!{footnote [Capt. Marryat, writing forty-five years ago says:
'St. Louis has 20,000 inhabitants. It is difficult to describe the effect which that message produced
upon my mind.

I read and re-read it, and the suggestion of my brother to go to that country recurred to me, and
I felt some regret that I had not followed it

.  The mighty
bridge, stretching along over our heads, had done its share in the slaughter and spoliation.
Remains of former steamboatmen told me, with wan satisfaction, that the bridge doesn't pay.
Still, it can be no sufficient compensation to a corpse, to know that the dynamite that laid
him out was not of as good quality as it had been supposed to be.

The pavements along the river front were bad:  the sidewalks were rather out of repair; there
was a rich abundance of mud. All this was familiar and satisfying; but the ancient armies of
drays, and struggling throngs of men, and mountains of freight, were gone; and Sabbath reigned
in their stead.  The immemorial mile of cheap foul doggeries remained, but business was dull
with them; the multitudes of poison-swilling Irishmen had departed, and in their places were
a few scattering handfuls of ragged negroes, some drinking, some drunk, some nodding, others
asleep. St. Louis is a great and prosperous and advancing city; but the river- edge of it seems
dead past resurrection.

Mississippi steamboating was born about 1812; at the end of thirty years, it had grown to mighty
proportions; and in less than thirty more, it was dead!  A strangely short life for so majestic
a creature. Of course it is not absolutely dead, neither is a crippled octogenarian who could
once jump twenty-two feet on level ground; but as contrasted with what it was in its prime
vigor, Mississippi steamboating may be called dead.

It killed the old-fashioned keel-boating, by reducing the freight-trip to New Orleans to less
than a week. The railroads have killed the steamboat passenger traffic by doing in two or three
days what the steamboats consumed a week in doing; and the towing-fleets have killed the through-freight
traffic by dragging six or seven steamer-loads of stuff down the river at a time, at an expense
so trivial that steamboat competition was out of the question.

Freight and passenger way-traffic remains to the steamers. This is in the hands--along the
two thousand miles of river between St. Paul and New Orleans---of two or three close corporations
well fortified with capital; and by able and thoroughly business-like management and system,
these make a sufficiency of money out of what is left of the once prodigious steamboating industry.
I suppose that St. Louis and New Orleans have not suffered materially by the change, but alas
for the wood-yard man!

He used to fringe the river all the way; his close-ranked merchandise stretched from the one
city to the other, along the banks, and he sold uncountable cords of it every year for cash
on the nail; but all the scattering boats that are left burn coal now, and the seldomest spectacle
on the Mississippi to-day is a wood-pile. Where now is the once wood-yard man?

Chapter 23 Traveling Incognito

MY idea was, to tarry a while in every town between St. Louis and New Orleans.  To do this,
it would be necessary to go from place to place by the short packet lines.  It was an easy
plan to make, and would have been an easy one to follow, twenty years ago--but not now. There
are wide intervals between boats, these days.

I wanted to begin with the interesting old French settlements of St. Genevieve and Kaskaskia,
sixty miles below St. Louis. There was only one boat advertised for that section--a Grand Tower
packet.  Still, one boat was enough; so we went down to look at her.  She was a venerable rack-
heap, and a fraud to boot; for she was playing herself for personal property, whereas the good
honest dirt was so thickly caked all over her that she was righteously taxable as real estate.
There are places in New England where her hurricane deck would be worth a hundred and fifty
dollars an acre. The soil on her forecastle was quite good--the new crop of wheat was already
springing from the cracks in protected places. The companionway was of a dry sandy character,
and would have been well suited for grapes, with a southern exposure and a little subsoiling.
The soil of the boiler deck was thin and rocky, but good enough for grazing purposes. A colored
boy was on watch here--nobody else visible. We gathered from him that this calm craft would
go, as advertised, 'if she got her trip;' if she didn't get it, she would wait for it.

'Has she got any of her trip?'

'Bless you, no, boss.  She ain't unloadened, yit.  She only come in dis mawnin'.'

He was uncertain as to when she might get her trip, but thought it might be to-morrow or maybe
next day.  This would not answer at all; so we had to give up the novelty of sailing down the
river on a farm. However, I don't want to abuse him, poor fellow."

"I don't think you ought."

"I know what that means. You do want to
abuse me. So they've been bullying him about the money he paid to
that man Lopez. How did anybody know anything about it?"  We camped
on the boiler deck, and bought some cheap literature to kill time with.  The vender was a venerable
Irishman with a benevolent face and a tongue that worked easily in the socket, and from him
we learned that he had lived in St. Louis thirty-four years and had never been across the river
during that period. Then he wandered into a very flowing lecture, filled with classic names
and allusions, which was quite wonderful for fluency until the fact became rather apparent
that this was not the first time, nor perhaps the fiftieth, that the speech had been delivered.
He was a good deal of a character, and much better company than the sappy literature he was
selling. A random remark, connecting Irishmen and beer, brought this nugget of information
out of him--

They don't drink it, sir.  They can't drink it, sir. Give an Irishman lager for a month, and
he's a dead man. An Irishman is lined with copper, and the beer corrodes it. But whiskey polishes
the copper and is the saving of him, sir.'

At eight o'clock, promptly, we backed out and crossed the river. As we crept toward the shore,
in the thick darkness, a blinding glory of white electric light burst suddenly from our forecastle,
and lit up the water and the warehouses as with a noon-day glare. Another big change, this--
no more flickering, smoky, pitch-dripping, ineffectual torch-baskets, now:  their day is past.
Next, instead of calling out a score of hands to man the stage, a couple of men and a hatful
of steam lowered it from the derrick where it was suspended, launched it, deposited it in just
the right spot, and the whole thing was over and done with before a mate in the olden time
could have got his profanity-mill adjusted to begin the preparatory services. Why this new
and simple method of handling the stages was not thought of when the first steamboat was built,
is a mystery which helps one to realize what a dull-witted slug the average human being is.

We finally got away at two in the morning, and when I turned out at six, we were rounding to
at a rocky point where there was an old stone warehouse--at any rate, the ruins of it; two
or three decayed dwelling- houses were near by, in the shelter of the leafy hills; but there
were no evidences of human or other animal life to be seen. I wondered if I had forgotten the
river; for I had no recollection whatever of this place; the shape of the river, too, was unfamiliar;
there was nothing in sight, anywhere, that I could remember ever having seen before. I was
surprised, disappointed, and annoyed.

We put ashore a well-dressed lady and gentleman, and two well-dressed, lady-like young girls,
together with sundry Russia-leather bags. A strange place for such folk!  No carriage was waiting.
The party moved off as if they had not expected any, and struck down a winding country road afoot.

But the mystery was explained when we got under way again; for these people were evidently
bound for a large town which lay shut in behind a tow-head (i.e., new island) a couple of miles
below this landing.  I couldn't remember that town; I couldn't place it, couldn't call its
name.  So I lost part of my temper. I suspected that it might be St. Genevieve--and so it proved
to be.  Observe what this eccentric river had been about: it had built up this huge useless
tow-head directly in front of this town, cut off its river communications, fenced it away completely,
and made a 'country' town of it. It is a fine old place, too, and deserved a better fate. It
was settled by the French, and is a relic of a time when one could travel from the mouths of
the Mississippi to Quebec and be on French territory and under French rule all the way.

Presently I ascended to the hurricane deck and cast a longing glance toward the pilot-house.

Chapter 24 My Incognito is Exploded

AFTER a close study of the face of the pilot on watch, I was satisfied that I had never seen
him before; so I went up there.  The pilot inspected me; I re-inspected the pilot.  These customary
preliminaries over, I sat down on the high bench, and he faced about and went on with his work.
Every detail of the pilot-house was familiar to me, with one exception,--a large-mouthed tube
under the breast-board. I puzzled over that thing a considerable time; then gave up and asked
what it was for.

'To hear the engine-bells through.'

It was another good contrivance which ought to have been invented half a century sooner.  So
I was thinking, when the pilot asked--

'Do you know what this rope is for?'

I managed to get around this question, without committing myself.

'Is this the first time you were ever in a pilot-house?'

I crept under that one.

'Where are you from?'

'New England.'

'First time you have ever been West?'

I climbed over this one.

'If you take an interest in such things, I can tell you what all these things are for.'

I said I should like it.

'This,' putting his hand on a backing-bell rope, 'is to sound the fire- alarm; this,' putting
his hand on a go-ahead bell, 'is to call the texas-tender; this one,' indicating the whistle-lever,
'is to call the captain'--and so he went on, touching one object after another, and reeling
off his tranquil spool of lies.

I had never felt so like a passenger before. I thanked him, with emotion, for each new fact,
and wrote it down in my note-book. The pilot warmed to his opportunity, and proceeded to load
me up in the good old- fashioned way. At times I was afraid he was going to rupture his invention;
but it always stood the strain, and he pulled through all right. He drifted, by easy stages,
into revealments of the river's marvelous eccentricities of one sort and another, and backed
them up with some pretty gigantic illustrations. For instance--

'Do you see that little boulder sticking out of the water yonder? well, when I first came on
the river, that was a solid ridge of rock, over sixty feet high and two miles long.  All washed
away but that.' [This with a sigh.]

I had a mighty impulse to destroy him, but it seemed to me that killing, in any ordinary way,
would be too good for him.

Once, when an odd-looking craft, with a vast coal-scuttle slanting aloft on the end of a beam,
was steaming by in the distance, he indifferently drew attention to it, as one might to an
object grown wearisome through familiarity, and observed that it was an 'alligator boat.'

'An alligator boat?  What's it for?'

'To dredge out alligators with.'

'Are they so thick as to be troublesome?'

'Well, not now, because the Government keeps them down. But they used to be.  Not everywhere;
but in favorite places, here and there, where the river is wide and shoal-like Plum Point,
and Stack Island, and so on-- places they call alligator beds.'

'Did they actually impede navigation?'

'Years ago, yes, in very low water; there was hardly a trip, then, that we didn't get aground
on alligators.'

It seemed to me that I should certainly have to get out my tomahawk. However, I restrained
myself and said--

'It must have been dreadful.'

'Yes, it was one of the main difficulties about piloting. It was so hard to tell anything about
the water; the damned things shift around so-- never lie still five minutes at a time. You
can tell a wind-reef, straight off, by the look of it; you can tell a break; you can tell a
sand-reef--that's all easy; but an alligator reef doesn't show up, worth anything. Nine times
in ten you can't tell where the water is; and when you do see where it is, like as not it ain't
there when YOU get there, the devils have swapped around so, meantime. Of course there were
some few pilots that could judge of alligator water nearly as well as they could of any other
kind, but they had to have natural talent for it; it wasn't a thing a body could learn, you
had to be born with it.  Let me see: there was Ben Thornburg, and Beck Jolly, and Squire Bell,
and Horace Bixby, and Major Downing, and John Stevenson, and Billy Gordon, and Jim Brady, and
George Ealer, and Billy Youngblood--all A 1 alligator pilots.  THEY could tell alligator water
as far as another Christian could tell whiskey. Read it?--Ah, COULDN'T they, though!  I only
wish I had as many dollars as they could read alligator water a mile and a half off. Yes, and
it paid them to do it, too.  A good alligator pilot could always get fifteen hundred dollars
a month.  Nights, other people had to lay up for alligators, but those fellows never laid up
for alligators; they never laid up for anything but fog. They could SMELL the best alligator
water it was said; I don't know whether it was so or not, and I think a body's got his hands
full enough if he sticks to just what he knows himself, without going around backing up other
people's say-so's, though there's a plenty that ain't backward about doing it, as long as they
can roust out something wonderful to tell. Which is not the style of Robert Styles, by as much
as three fathom--maybe quarter-LESS.'

[My! Was this Rob Styles?--This mustached and stately figure?-A slim enough cub, in my time.
How he has improved in comeliness in five-and- twenty year and in the noble art of inflating
his facts.] After these musings, I said aloud--

'I should think that dredging out the alligators wouldn't have done much good, because they
could come back again right away.'

'If you had had as much experience of alligators as I have, you wouldn't talk like that.  You
dredge an alligator once and he's CONVINCED. It's the last you hear of HIM.  He wouldn't come
back for pie. If there's one thing that an alligator is more down on than another, it's being
dredged.  Besides, they were not simply shoved out of the way; the most of the scoopful were
scooped aboard; they emptied them into the hold; and when they had got a trip, they took them
to Orleans to the Government works.'

'What for?'

'Why, to make soldier-shoes out of their hides. When by degrees the son-in-law began to feel that
even this would not be operative on his father-in-law's purse,--when under this threat neither
Wharton nor Emily gave way,--and when, with the view of strengthening his threat, he renewed his
inquiries as to Guatemala and found that there might still be an opening for him in that direction,--the
threat took the shape of a true purpose, and he began to think that he would in real earnest try
his fortunes in a new world. The buzzard is the sacred bird of the South, and you can't
touch him; the alligator is the sacred bird of the Government, and you've got to let him alone.'

'Do you ever get aground on the alligators now?'

'Oh, no! it hasn't happened for years.'

'Well, then, why do they still keep the alligator boats in service?'

'Just for police duty--nothing more.  They merely go up and down now and then.  The present
generation of alligators know them as easy as a burglar knows a roundsman; when they see one
coming, they break camp and go for the woods.'

After rounding-out and finishing-up and polishing-off the alligator business, he dropped easily
and comfortably into the historical vein, and told of some tremendous feats of half-a-dozen
old-time steamboats of his acquaintance, dwelling at special length upon a certain extraordinary
performance of his chief favorite among this distinguished fleet--and then adding--

'That boat was the "Cyclone,"--last trip she ever made--she sunk, that very trip--captain was
Tom Ballou, the most immortal liar that ever I struck.  He couldn't ever seem to tell the truth,
in any kind of weather. Why, he would make you fairly shudder.  He WAS the most scandalous
liar! I left him, finally; I couldn't stand it.  The proverb says, "like master, like man;"
and if you stay with that kind of a man, you'll come under suspicion by and by, just as sure
as you live.  He paid first-class wages; but said I, What's wages when your reputation's in
danger?  So I let the wages go, and froze to my reputation.  And I've never regretted it. Reputation's
worth everything, ain't it?  That's the way I look at it. He had more selfish organs than any
seven men in the world--all packed in the stern-sheets of his skull, of course, where they
belonged. They weighed down the back of his head so that it made his nose tilt up in the air.
People thought it was vanity, but it wasn't, it was malice. If you only saw his foot, you'd
take him to be nineteen feet high, but he wasn't; it was because his foot was out of drawing.
He was intended to be nineteen feet high, no doubt, if his foot was made first, but he didn't
get there; he was only five feet ten. That's what he was, and that's what he is.  You take
the lies out of him, and he'll shrink to the size of your hat; you take the malice out of him,
and he'll disappear.  That "Cyclone" was a rattler to go, and the sweetest thing to steer that
ever walked the waters.  Set her amidships, in a big river, and just let her go; it was all
you had to do. She would hold herself on a star all night, if you let her alone. You couldn't
ever feel her rudder.  It wasn't any more labor to steer her than it is to count the Republican
vote in a South Carolina election. One morning, just at daybreak, the last trip she ever made,
they took her rudder aboard to mend it; I didn't know anything about it; I backed her out from
the wood-yard and went a-weaving down the river all serene. When I had gone about twenty-three
miles, and made four horribly crooked crossings--'

'Without any rudder?'

'Yes--old Capt. Tom appeared on the roof and began to find fault with me for running such a
dark night--'

'Such a DARK NIGHT ?--Why, you said--'

'Never mind what I said,--'twas as dark as Egypt now, though pretty soon the moon began to
rise, and--'

'You mean the SUN--because you started out just at break of--look here! Was this BEFORE you
quitted the captain on account of his lying, or--'

'It was before--oh, a long time before.  And as I was saying, he--'

'But was this the trip she sunk, or was--'

'Oh, no!--months afterward.  And so the old man, he--'

'Then she made TWO last trips, because you said--'

He stepped back from the wheel, swabbing away his perspiration, and said--

'Here!' (calling me by name), 'YOU take her and lie a while--you're handier at it than I am.
Trying to play yourself for a stranger and an innocent!--why, I knew you before you had spoken
seven words; and I made up my mind to find out what was your little game. It was to DRAW ME
OUT. Well, I let you, didn't I? Now take the wheel and finish the watch; and next time play
fair, and you won't have to work your passage.'

Thus ended the fictitious-name business.  And not six hours out from St. Louis! but I had gained
a privilege, any way, for I had been itching to get my hands on the wheel, from the beginning.
I seemed to have forgotten the river, but I hadn't forgotten how to steer a steamboat, nor
how to enjoy it, either.

Chapter 25 From Cairo to Hickman

THE scenery, from St. Louis to Cairo--two hundred miles--is varied and beautiful.  The hills
were clothed in the fresh foliage of spring now, and were a gracious and worthy setting for
the broad river flowing between. Our trip began auspiciously, with a perfect day, as to breeze
and sunshine, and our boat threw the miles out behind her with satisfactory despatch.

We found a railway intruding at Chester, Illinois; Chester has also a penitentiary now, and
is otherwise marching on.  At Grand Tower, too, there was a railway; and another at Cape Girardeau.
The former town gets its name from a huge, squat pillar of rock, which stands up out of the
water on the Missouri side of the river--a piece of nature's fanciful handiwork--and is one
of the most picturesque features of the scenery of that region. For nearer or remoter neighbors,
the Tower has the Devil's Bake Oven--so called, perhaps, because it does not powerfully resemble
anybody else's bake oven; and the Devil's Tea Table--this latter a great smooth-surfaced mass
of rock, with diminishing wine-glass stem, perched some fifty or sixty feet above the river,
beside a beflowered and garlanded precipice, and sufficiently like a tea-table to answer for
anybody, Devil or Christian. Away down the river we have the Devil's Elbow and the Devil's
Race-course, and lots of other property of his which I cannot now call to mind.

