From the first moment of this reading and the departure of the bastards, everybody saw that
something was in preparation against them.  What that something was to be, kept every mind
in suspense.  A Bed of justice, too, prepared in secret, ready as soon as announced, indicated
a strong resolution taken against the Parliament, and indicated also so much firmness and measure
in a Prince, usually supposed to be entirely incapable of any, that every one was at sea. 
All, according as they were allied to the Parliament or to the bastards, seemed to wait in
fear what was to be proposed.  Many others appeared deeply wounded because the Regent had not
admitted them behind the scenes, and because they were compelled to share the common surprise.
Never were faces so universally elongated; never was embarrassment more general or more marked.
In these first moments of trouble I fancy few people lent an ear to the letters the Keeper
of the Seals was reading.  When they were finished, M. le Duc d'Orleans said he did not think
it was worth while to take the votes one by one, either upon the contents of these letters
or their registration; but that all would be in favour of commencing the Bed of justice at once.

After a short but marked pause, the Regent developed, in few words, the reasons which had induced
the Council at its last sitting, to abrogate the decree of the Parliament.  He added, that
judging by the conduct of that assembly, it would have been to jeopardise anew the King's authority,
to send for registration this act of abrogation to the Parliament, which would assuredly have
given in public a proof of formal disobedience, in refusing to register; that there being no
other remedy than a Bed of justice, he had thought it best to assemble one, but in secret,
so as not to give time or opportunity to the ill-disposed to prepare for disobedience; that
he believed, with the Keeper of the Seals, the frequency and the manner of the parliamentary
remonstrances were such that the Parliament must be made to keep within the limits of its duty,
which, long since, it seemed to have lost sight of; that the Keeper of the Seals would now
read to the Council the act of abrogation, and the rules that were to be observed in future.
Then, looking at the Keeper of the Seals, "Monsieur," said he, "you will explain this better
than I. Have the goodness to do so before reading the decree."

The Keeper of the Seals then spoke, and paraphrased what his Royal Highness had said more briefly;
he explained in what manner the Parliament had the right to remonstrate, showed the distinction
between its power and that of the Crown; the incompetence of the tribunals in all matters of
state and finance; and the necessity of repressing the remonstrances of Parliament by passing
a code (that was the term used), which was to serve as their inviolable guide.  All this explained
without lengthiness, with grace and clearness, he began to read the decree, as it has since
been printed and circulated everywhere, some trifling alteration excepted.

The reading finished, the Regent, contrary to his custom, showed his opinion by the, praises
he gave to this document: and then, assuming the Regent's tone and air he had never before
put on, and which completed the astonishment of the company, he added, "To-day, gentlemen,
I shall deviate from the usual rule in taking your votes, and I think it will be well to do
so during all this Council."

Then after a slight glance upon both sides of the table, during which you might have heard
a worm crawl, he turned towards M. le Duc and asked him his opinion.  M. le Duc declared for
the decree, alleging several short but strong reasons.  The Prince de Conti spoke in the same
sense.  I spoke after, for the Keeper of the Seals had done so directly his reading was finished.
My opinion was given in more general terms so as not to fall too heavily upon the Parliament,
or to show that I arrogated to myself the right to support his Royal Highness in the same manner
as a prince of the blood.  The Duc de la Force was longer.  All spoke, but the majority said
but little, and some allowed their vexation to be seen, but did not dare to oppose, feeling
that it would be of no use.  Dejection was painted upon their faces; it was evident this affair,
of the Parliament was not what they expected or wished.  Tallard was the only one whose face
did not betray him; but the suffocated monosyllable of the Marechal d'Huxelles tore off the
rest of the mask.  The Duc de Noailles could scarcely contain himself, and spoke more than
he wished, with anguish worthy of Fresnes.  M. le Duc d'Orleans spoke last, and with unusual
force; then made a pause, piercing all the company with his eyes.

At this moment the Marechal de Villeroy, full of his own thoughts, muttered between his teeth,
"But will the Parliament come?" This was gently taken up.  M. le Duc d'Orleans replied that
he did not doubt it; and immediately afterwards, that it would be as well to know when they
set out.  The Keeper of the Seals said he should be informed.  M. le Duc d'Orleans replied
that the door-keepers must be told.  Thereupon up jumps M. de Troyes.

I was seized with such a sudden fear lest he should go and chatter at the door with some one
that I jumped up also, and got the start of him.  As I returned, D'Antin, who had turned round
to lay wait for me, begged me for mercy's sake to tell him what all this meant.  I sped on
saying that I knew nothing.  "Tell that to others!  Ho, ho!" replied he.  When he had resumed
his seat, M. le Duc d'Orleans said something, I don't know what, M. de Troyes still standing,
I also.  In passing La Vrilliere, I asked him to go to the door every time anything was wanted,
for fear of the babbling of M. de Troyes; adding, that distant as I was from the door, going
there looked too peculiar.  La Vrilliere did as I begged him all the rest of the sitting.

As I was returning to my place, D'Antin, still in ambush, begged me in the name of heaven,
his hands joined, to tell him something.  I kept firm, however, saying, "You will see."  The
Duc de Guiche pressed me as resolutely, even saying, it was evident I was in the plot.  I remained
deaf.

These little movements over, M. le Duc d'Orleans, rising a little in his seat, said to the
company, in a tone more firm, and more like that of a master than before, that there was another
matter now to attend to, much more important than the one just heard.  This prelude increased
the general astonishment, and rendered everybody motionless.  After a moment of silence the
Regent said, that the peers had had for some time good grounds of complaint against certain
persons, who by unaccustomed favour, had been allowed to assume rank and dignity to which their
birth did not entitle them; that it was time this irregularity should be stopped short, and
that with this view, an instrument had been drawn up, which the Keeper of the Seals would read
to them.

A profound silence followed this discourse, so unexpected, and which began to explain the absence
of the bastards.  Upon many visages a sombre hue was painted.  As for me I had enough to do
to compose my, own visage, upon which all eyes successively passed; I had put upon it an extra
coat of gravity and of modesty; I steered my eyes with care, and only looked horizontally at
most, not an inch higher.  As soon as the Regent opened his mouth on this business, M. le Duc
cast upon me a triumphant look which almost routed my seriousness, and which warned me to increase
it, and no longer expose myself to meet his glance.  Contained in this manner, attentive in
devouring the aspect of all, alive to everything and to myself, motionless, glued to my chair,
all my body fixed, penetrated with the most acute and most sensible pleasure that joy could
impart, with the most charming anxiety, with an enjoyment, so perseveringly and so immoderately
hoped for, I sweated with agony at the captivity of my transport, and this agony was of a voluptuousness
such as I had never felt before, such as I have never felt since.  How inferior are the pleasures
of the senses to those of the mind! and how true it is that the balance-weight of misfortunes,
is the good fortune that finishes them!

A moment after the Regent had ceased speaking, he told the Keeper of the Seals to read the
declaration.  During the reading, which was more than music to my ears, my attention was again
fixed on the company.  I saw by the alteration of the faces what an immense effect this document,
which embodied the resolutions I have already explained, produced upon some of our friends.
The whole of the reading was listened to with the utmost attention, and the utmost emotion.

When it was finished, M. le Duc d'Orleans said he was very sorry for this necessity, but that
justice must be done to the peers as well as to the princes of the blood: then turning to the
Keeper of the Seals asked him for his opinion.

This latter spoke briefly and well; but was like a dog running over hot ashes.  He declared
for the declaration.  His Royal Highness then called upon M. le Duc for his opinion.  It was
short, but nervous, and polite to the peers.  M. le Prince de Conti the same.  Then the Regent
asked me my opinion.  I made, contrary to my custom, a profound inclination, but without rising,
and said, that having the honour to find myself the eldest of the peers of the Council, I offered
to his Royal Highness my very humble thanks and those of all the peers of France, for the justice
so ardently desired, and touching so closely our dignity and our persons, that he had resolved
to render us; that I begged him to be persuaded of our gratitude, and to count upon our utmost
attachment to his person for an act of equity so longed for, and so complete; that in this
sincere expression of our sentiments consisted all our opinion, because, being pleaders, we
could not be judges also.  I terminated these few words with a profound inclination, without
rising, imitated by the Duc de la Force at the same moment; all the rest of the Council briefly
gave their opinions, approving what the majority of them evidently did not approve at all.

I had tried to modulate my voice, so that it should be just heard and no more, preferring to
be indistinct rather than speak too loudly; and confined all my person to express as much as
possible, gravity, modesty, and simple gratitude.  M. le Duc maliciously made signs to me in
smiling, that I had spoken well.  But I kept my seriousness, and turned round to examine all
the rest.

It would be impossible to describe the aspect of the company.  Nothing was seen but people,
oppressed with surprise that overwhelmed them, meditative, agitated, some irritated, some but
ill at ease, like La Force and Guiche, who freely admitted so to me.

The opinions taken almost as soon as demanded, M. le Duc d'Orleans said, "Gentlemen, it is
finished, then justice is done, and the rights of Messieurs the Peers are in safety.  I have
now an act of grace to propose to you, and I do so with all the more confidence, because I
have taken care to consult the parties interested, who support me; and because, I have drawn
up the document in a manner to wound no one.  What I am going to explain to you, regards the
Comte de Toulouse alone.

"Nobody is ignorant how he has disapproved all that has been done in favour of him and his
brother, and that he has sustained it since the regency only out of respect for the wishes
of the late King.  Everybody knows also his virtue, his merit, his application, his probity,
his disinterestedness.  Nevertheless, I could not avoid including him in the declaration you
have just heard.  Justice furnishes no exception in his favour, and the rights of the Peers
must be assured.  Now that they are no longer attacked, I have thought fitly to render to merit
what from equity I have taken from birth; and to make an exception of M. le Comte de Toulouse,
which (while confirming the rule), will leave him in full possession of all the honours he
enjoys to the exclusion of every other. Those honours are not to pass to his children, should
he marry and have any, or their restitution be considered as a precedent to be made use of
at any future time.

"I have the pleasure to announce that the Princes of the Blood consent to this, and that such
of the Peers to whom I have been able to explain myself, share my sentiments.  I doubt not
that the esteem he has acquired here will render this proposition agreeable to you."  And then
turning to the Keeper of the Seals, "Monsieur, will you read the declaration?"

It was read at once.

I had, during the discourse of his Royal Highness, thrown all my attention into an examination
of the impression it made upon the assembly.  The astonishment it caused was general; it was
such, that to judge of those addressed, it seemed that they understood nothing; and they did
not recover themselves during all the reading.  I inwardly rejoiced at success so pleasingly
demonstrated and did not receive too well the Duc de Guiche, who testified to me his disapprobation.
Villeroy confounded, Villars raging, Effiat rolling his eyes, Estrees beside himself with surprise,
were the most marked.  Tallard, with his head stretched forward, sucked in, so to speak, all
the Regent's words as they were proffered, and those of the declaration, as the Keeper of the
Seals read them.  Noailles, inwardly distracted, could not hide his distraction; Huxelles,
entirely occupied in smoothing himself, forgot to frown.  I divided my attention between the
declaration and these persons.

The document read, M. le Duc d'Orleans praised it in two words, and called upon the Keeper
of the Seals to give his opinion.  He did so briefly, in favour of the Comte de Toulouse. 
M. le Duc the same; M. le Prince de Conti the same.  After him, I testified to his Royal Highness
my joy at seeing him conciliate the justice and the safety of the peers with the unheard-of
favour he had just rendered to the virtue of M. le Comte de Toulouse, who merited it by his
moderation, his truthfulness, his attachment to the State; thus the more he had recognised
the injustice of his elevation to the rank to which he was raised, the more he had rendered
himself worthy of it, and the more it was advantageous to the peers to yield to merit, (when
this exception was confined solely to his person, with formal and legal precautions, so abundantly
supplied by the declaration) and voluntarily contribute thus to an elevation without example,
(so much the more flattering because its only foundation was virtue), so as to incite that
virtue more and more to the service and utility of the state; that I declared therefore with
joy for the declaration, and did not fear to add the very humble thanks of the peers, since
I had the honour to be the oldest present.

As I closed my mouth I cast my eyes in front of some, and plainly saw that my applause did
not please, and, perhaps, my thanks still less.  The others gave their opinion with heavy heart,
as it were, to so terrible a blow, some few muttered I know not what between their teeth, but
the thunderbolt upon the Duc du Maine's cabal was more and more felt, and as reflection succeeded
to the first feeling of surprise, so a bitter and sharp grief manifested itself upon their
faces in so marked a manner, that it was easy to see it had become high time to strike.

All opinions having been expressed, M. le Duc cast a brilliant leer at me, and prepared to
speak; but the Keeper of the Seals, who, from his side of the table did not see this movement,
wishing also to say something, M. le Duc d'Orleans intimated to him that M. le Duc had the
start of him.  Raising himself majestically from his seat, the Regent then said: "Gentlemen,
M. le Duc has a proposition to make to you.  I have found it just and reasonable; I doubt not,
you will find it so too." Then turning towards M. le Duc, he added, "Monsieur, will you explain
it?"

The movement these few words made among the company is inexpressible. 'Twas as though I saw
before me people deprived of all power, and surprised by a new assembly rising up from the
midst of them in an asylum they had breathlessly reached.

"Monsieur," said M. le Duc, addressing himself to the Regent, as usual; "since you have rendered
justice to the Dukes, I think I am justified in asking for it myself.  The deceased King gave
the education of his Majesty to M. le Duc du Maine.  I was a minor then, and according to the
idea of the deceased King, M. du Maine was prince of the blood, capable of succeeding to the
crown.  Now I am of age, and not only M. du Maine is no longer prince of the blood, but he
is reduced to the rank of his peerage.  M. le Marechal de Villeroy is now his senior, and precedes
him everywhere; M. le Marechal can therefore no longer remain governor of the King, under the
superintendence of M. du Maine.  I ask you, then, for M. du Maine's post, that I think my age,
my rank, my attachment to the King and the State, qualify me for.  I hope," he added, turning
towards his left, "that I shall profit by the lessons of M. le Marechal de Villeroy, acquit
myself of my duties with distinction, and merit his friendship."

At this discourse the Marechal de Villeroy almost slipped off his chair. As soon, at least,
as he heard the Words, "Superintendence of the King's education," he rested his forehead upon
his stick, and remained several moments in that posture.  He appeared even to understand nothing
of the rest of the speech.  Villars and D'Effiat bent their backs like people who had received
the last blow.  I could see nobody on my own side except the Duc de Guiche, who approved through
all his prodigious astonishment. Estrees became master of himself the first, shook himself,
brightened up, and looked at the company like a man who returns from the other world.

As soon as M. le Duc had finished, M. le Duc d'Orleans reviewed all the company with his eyes,
and then said, that the request of M. le Duc was just; that he did not think it could be refused;
that M. le Marechal de Villeroy could not be allowed to remain under a person whom he preceded
in rank; that the superintendence of the King's education could not be more worthily filled
than by M. le Duc; and that he was persuaded all would be of one voice in this matter.  Immediately
afterwards, he asked M. le Prince de Conti to give his opinion, who did so in two words; then
he asked the Keeper of the Seals, whose reply was equally brief; then he asked me.

I simply said, looking at M. le Duc, that I was for the change with all my heart.  The rest,
M. de la Force excepted (who said a single word), voted without speaking, simply bowing; the
Marshals and D'Effiat scarcely moved their eyes, and those of Villars glistened with fury.

The opinions taken, the Regent turning towards M. le Duc, said, "Monsieur, I think you would
like to read what you intend to say to the King at the Bed of Justice."

Therefore M. le Duc read it as it has been printed.  Some moments of sad and profound silence
succeeded this reading, during which the Marechal de Villeroy, pale and agitated, muttered
to himself.  At last, like a man who has made up his mind, he turned with bended head, expiring
eyes, and feeble voice, towards the Regent, and said, "I will simply say these two words; here
are all the dispositions of the late king overturned, I cannot see it without grief.  M. du
Maine is very unfortunate."

"Monsieur," replied the Regent, in a loud and animated tone, "M. du Maine is my brother-in-law,
but I prefer an open enemy to a hidden one."

At this great declaration several lowered their heads.  The Marechal de Villeroy nearly swooned;
sighs began to make themselves heard near me, as though by stealth; everybody felt by this
that the scabbard was thrown away.

The Keeper of the Seals, to make a diversion; proposed to read the speech he had prepared to
serve as preface to the decree to be read at the Bed of justice, abrogating the Parliament
decrees; as he was finishing it, some one entered to say he was asked for at the door.

He went out, returning immediately afterwards, not to his place, but to M. le Duc d'Orleans,
whom he took into a window, meditative silence reigning around.  The Regent having returned
back to his place, said to the company, he had received information that the Chief-President
of the Parliament, notwithstanding the reply previously made, had proposed that the Parliament
should not go to the Tuileries, asking, "What it was to do in a place where it would not be
free?" that he had proposed to send a message to the King, stating that "his Parliament would
hear his wishes in their ordinary place of meeting, whenever it should please him to come or
to send."  The Regent added that these propositions had made considerable sensation, and that
the Parliament were at that moment debating upon them.  The Council appeared much astounded
at this news, but M. le Duc d'Orleans said, in a very composed manner, that he did not expect
a refusal; he ordered the Keeper of the Seals, nevertheless, to propose such measures as it
would be best to take, supposing the motion of the Chief-President should be carried.

The Keeper of the Seals declared that he could not believe the Parliament would be guilty of
this disobedience, contrary to all law and usage. He showed at some length that nothing was
so pernicious as to expose the King's authority to a formal opposition, and decided in favour
of the immediate interdiction of the Parliament if it fell into this fault. M. le Duc d'Orleans
added that there was no other course open, and took the opinion of M. le Duc, which was strongly
in his favour.  M. le Prince de Conti the same, mine also, that of M. de la Force and of M.
de Guiche still more so.  The Marechal de Villeroy, in a broken voice, seeking big words, which
would not come in time to him, deplored this extremity, and did all he could to avoid giving
a precise opinion.  Forced at last by the Regent to explain himself, he did not dare to oppose,
but added that he assented with regret, and wished to explain the grievous results of the proposed
measure.  But the Regent, interrupting him, said he need not take the trouble: everything had
been foreseen; that it would be much more grievous to be disobeyed by the Parliament than to
force it into obedience; and immediately after asked the Duc de Noailles his opinion, who replied
that it would be very sad to act thus, but that he was for it.  Villars wished to paraphrase,
but contained himself, and said he hoped the Parliament would obey.  Pressed by the Regent,
he proposed to wait for fresh news before deciding; but, pressed more closely, he declared
for the interdiction, with an air of warmth and vexation, extremely marked.  Nobody after this
dared to hesitate, and the majority voted by an inclination of the head.

A short time afterwards it was announced to M. le Duc d'Orleans that the Parliament had set
out on foot, and had begun to defile through the palace.  This news much cooled the blood of
the company, M. le Duc d'Orleans more than that of any one else.

