Towards the end of the year (1715) the Chevalier de Bouillon, who since the death of the son
of the Comte d'Auvergne had taken the name of the Prince d'Auvergne, proposed to the Regent
that there should be a public ball, masked and unmasked, in the opera three times a week, people
to pay upon entering, and the boxes to be thrown open to those who did not care to dance. 
It was believed that a public ball, guarded as is the opera on days of performance, would prevent
those adventures which happened so often at the little obscure balls scattered throughout Paris;
and indeed close them altogether.  The opera balls were established on a grand scale, and with
all possible effect.  The proposer of the idea had for it six thousand livres pension; and
a machine admirably invented and of easy and instantaneous application, was made to cover the
orchestra, and put the stage and the pit on the same level.  The misfortune was, that the opera
was at the Palais Royal, and that M. le Duc d'Orleans had only one step to take to reach it
after his suppers and show himself there, often in a state but little becoming.  The Duc de
Noailles, who strove to pay court to him, went there from the commencement so drunk that there
was no indecency he did not commit.

CHAPTER LXXXII

Let me speak now of another matter.

A Scotchman, I do not know of what family, a great player and combiner, who had gained much
in various countries he had been in, had come to Paris during the last days of the deceased
King.  His name was Law; but when he became more known, people grew so accustomed to call him
Las, that his name of Law disappeared.  He was spoken of to M. le Duc d'Orleans as a man deep
in banking and commercial matters, in the movements of the precious metals, in monies and finance:
the Regent, from this description, was desirous to see him.  He conversed with Law some time,
and was so pleased with him, that he spoke of him to Desmarets as a man from whom information
was to be drawn.  I recollect that the Prince spoke of him to me at the same time.  Desmarets
sent for Law, and was a long while with him several times; I know nothing of what passed between
them or its results, except that Desmarets was pleased with Law, and formed some esteem for him.

M. le Duc d'Orleans, after that, only saw him from time to time; but after the first rush of
affairs, which followed the death of the King, Law, who had formed some subaltern acquaintances
at the Palais Royal, and an intimacy with the Abbe Dubois, presented himself anew before M.
le Duc d'Orleans, soon after conversed with him in private, and proposed some finance plans
to him.  The Regent made him work with the Duc de Noailles, with Rouille, with Amelot--this
last for commercial matters.  The first two were afraid of an intruder, favoured by the Regent,
in their administration; so that Law was a long time tossed about, but was always backed by
the Duc d'Orleans.  At last, the bank project pleased that Prince so much that he wished to
carry it out.  He spoke in private to the heads of finance, in whom he found great opposition.
He had often spoken to me of it, and I had contented myself with listening to him upon a matter
I never liked, and which, consequently, I never well understood; and the carrying out of which
appeared to me distant.  When he had entirely formed his resolution, he summoned a financial
and commercial assembly, in which Law explained the whole plan of the bank he wished to establish
(this was on the 24th of October, 1715).  He was listened to as long as he liked to talk. 
Some, who saw that the Regent was almost decided, acquiesced; but the majority opposed.

Law was not disheartened.  The majority were spoken to privately in very good French.  Nearly
the same assembly was called, in which, the Regent being present, Law again explained his project.
This time few opposed and feebly.  The Duc de Noailles was obliged to give in.  The bank being
approved of in this manner, it had next to be proposed to the regency council.

M. le Duc d'Orleans took the trouble to speak in private to each member of the council, and
gently to make them understand that he wished the bank to meet with no opposition.  He spoke
his mind to me thoroughly: therefore a reply was necessary.  I said to him that I did not hide
my ignorance or my disgust for all finance matters; that, nevertheless, what he had just explained
to me appeared good in itself, that without any new tax, without expense, and without wronging
or embarrassing anybody, money should double itself at once by means of the notes of this bank,
and become transferable with the greatest facility.  But along with this advantage I found
two inconveniences, the first, how to govern the bank with sufficient foresight and wisdom,
so as not to issue more notes than could be paid whenever presented: the second, that what
is excellent in a republic, or in a monarchy where the finance is entirely popular, as in England,
is of pernicious use in an absolute monarchy, such as France, where the necessities of a war
badly undertaken and ill sustained, the avarice of a first minister, favourite, or mistress,
the luxury, the wild expenses, the prodigality of a King, might soon exhaust a bank, and ruin
all the holders of notes, that is to say, overthrow the realm.  M. le Duc d'Orleans agreed
to this; but at the same time maintained that a King would have so much interest in never meddling
or allowing minister, mistress, or favourite to meddle with the bank, that this capital inconvenience
was never to be feared.  Upon that we for a long time disputed without convincing each other,
so that when, some few days afterwards, he proposed the bank to the regency council, I gave
my opinion as I have just explained it, but with more force and at length: and my conclusion
was to reject the bank, as a bait the most fatal, in an absolute country, while in a free country
it would be a very good and very wise establishment.

Few dared to be of this opinion: the bank passed.  Duc d'Orleans cast upon me some little reproaches,
but gentle, for having spoken at such length.  I based my excuses upon my belief that by duty,
honour, and conscience, I ought to speak according to my persuasion, after having well thought
over the matter, and explained myself sufficiently to make my opinion well understood, and
the reason I had for forming it. Immediately after, the edict was registered without difficulty
at the Parliament.  This assembly sometimes knew how to please the Regent with good grace in
order to turn the cold shoulder to him afterwards with more efficacy.

Some time after, to relate all at once, M. le Duc d'Orleans wished me to see Law in order that
he might explain to me his plans, and asked me to do so as a favour.  I represented to him
my unskilfulness in all finance matters; that Law would in vain speak a language to me of which
I understood nothing, that we should both lose our time very uselessly. I tried to back out
thus, as well as I could.  The Regent several times reverted to the charge, and at last demanded
my submission.  Law came then to my house.  Though there was much of the foreigner in his bearing,
in his expressions, and in his accent, he expressed himself in very good terms, with much clearness
and precision.  He conversed with me a long while upon his bank, which, indeed, was an excellent
thing in itself, but for another country rather than for France, and with a prince less easy
than the Regent.  Law had no other solutions to give me, of my two objections, than those the
Regent himself had given, which did not satisfy me.  But as the affair had passed, and there
was nothing now to do but well direct it, principally upon that did our conversation turn.
I made him feel as much as I could the importance of not showing such facility, that it might
be abused, with a Regent so good, so easy, so open, so surrounded.  I masked as well as I could
what I wished to make him understand thereupon; and I dwelt especially upon the necessity of
being prepared to satisfy instantly all bearers of notes, who should demand payment: for upon
this depended the credit or the overthrow of the bank.  Law, on going out, begged me to permit
him to come sometimes and talk with me; we separated mutually satisfied, at which the Regent
was still more so.

Law came several other times to my house, and showed much desire to grow intimate with me.
I kept to civilities, because finance entered not into my head, and I regarded as lost time
all these conversations.  Some time after, the Regent, who spoke to me tolerably often of Law
with great prepossession, said that he had to ask of me, nay to demand of me, a favour; it
was, to receive a visit from Law regularly every week.  I represented to him the perfect inutility
of these conversations, in which I was incapable of learning anything, and still more so of
enlightening Law upon subjects he possessed, and of which I knew naught.  It was in vain; the
Regent wished it; obedience was necessary.  Law, informed of this by the Regent, came then
to my house.  He admitted to me with good grace, that it was he who had asked the Regent to
ask me, not daring to do so himself.  Many compliments followed on both sides, and we agreed
that he should come to my house every Tuesday morning about ten o'clock, and that my door should
be closed to everybody while he remained.  This first visit was not given to business.  On
the following Tuesday morning he came to keep his appointment, and punctually came until his
discomfiture.  An hour-and-a-half, very often two hours, was the ordinary time for our conversations.
He always took care to inform me of the favour his bank was obtaining in France and foreign
countries, of its products, of his views, of his conduct, of the opposition he met with from
the heads of finance and the magistracy, of his reasons, and especially of his balance sheet,
to convince me that he was more than prepared to face all holders of notes whatever sums they
had to ask for.

I soon knew that if Law had desired these regular visits at my house, it was not because he
expected to make me a skilful financier; but because, like a man of sense--and he had a good
deal--he wished to draw near a servitor of the Regent who had the best post in his confidence,
and who long since had been in a position to speak to him of everything and of everybody with
the greatest freedom and the most complete liberty; to try by this frequent intercourse to
gain my friendship; inform himself by me of the intrinsic qualities of those of whom he only
saw the outside; and by degrees to come to the Council, through me, to represent the annoyances
he experienced, the people with whom he had to do; and lastly, to profit by my dislike to the
Duc de Noailles, who, whilst embracing him every day, was dying of jealousy and vexation, and
raised in his path, under-hand, all the obstacles and embarrassments possible, and would have
liked to stifle him.  The bank being in action and flourishing, I believed it my duty to sustain
it.  I lent myself, therefore, to the instructions Law proposed, and soon we spoke to each
other with a confidence I never have had reason to repent.  I will not enter into the details
of this bank, the other schemes which followed it, or the operations made in consequence. 
This subject of finance would fill several volumes.  I will speak of it only as it affects
the history of the time, or what concerns me in particular.  It is the history of my time I
have wished to write; I should have been too much turned from it had I entered into the immense
details respecting finance.  I might add here what Law was.  I defer it to a time when this
curiosity will be more in place.

Arouet, son of a notary, who was employed by my father and me until his death, was exiled and
sent to Tulle at this time (the early part of 1716), for some verses very satirical and very
impudent.

I should not amuse myself by writing down such a trifle, if this same Arouet, having become
a great poet and academician under the name of Voltaire, had not also become--after many tragical
adventures--a manner of personage in the republic of letters, and even achieved a sort of importance
among certain people.

CHAPTER LXXXIII

I have elsewhere alluded to Alberoni, and shown what filthy baseness he stooped to in order
to curry favour with the infamous Duc de Vendome. I have also shown that he accompanied the
new Queen of Spain from Parma to Madrid, after she had been married, by procuration, to Philip
V.  He arrived at the Court of Spain at a most opportune moment for his fortune. Madame des
Ursins had just been disgraced; there was no one to take her place.  Alberoni saw his opportunity
and was not slow to avail himself of it.  During the journey with the new Queen, he had contrived
to ingratiate himself so completely into her favour, that she was, in a measure, prepared to
see only with his eyes.  The King had grown so accustomed to be shut out from all the world,
and to be ruled by others, that he easily adapted himself to his new chains.  The Queen and
Alberoni, then, in a short time had him as completely under their thumb, as he had before been
under that of Madame des Ursins.

Alberoni, unscrupulous and ambitious, stopped at nothing in order to consolidate his power
and pave the way for his future greatness.  Having become prime minister, he kept the King
as completely inaccessible to the courtiers as to the world; would allow no one to approach
him whose influence he had in any way feared.  He had Philip completely in his own hands by
means of the Queen, and was always on his guard to keep him there.

Ever since the Regent's accession to power an intimacy had gradually been growing up between
the two governments of France and England.  This was mainly owing to the intrigues of the Abbe
Dubois, who had sold himself to the English Court, from which he secretly received an enormous
pension. He was, therefore, devoted heart and soul--if such a despicable personage can be said
to have the one or the other--to the interests of King George, and tried to serve them in every
way.  He had but little difficulty--comparatively speaking--in inducing M. le Duc d'Orleans
to fall into his nets, and to declare himself in favour of an English alliance.  Negotiations
with this end in view were, in fact, set on foot, had been for some time; and about the month
of September of this year (1716), assumed a more smiling face than they had yet displayed.

Both France and England, from different motives, wished to draw Spain into this alliance. 
The Regent, therefore, in order to further this desire, obtained from England a promise that
she would give up Gibraltar to its former owners, the Spaniards.  The King of England consented
to do so, but on one condition: it was, that in order not to expose himself to the cries of
the party opposed to him, this arrangement should be kept profoundly secret until executed.
In order that this secrecy might be secured, he stipulated that the negotiation should not
in any way pass through the hands of Alberoni, or any Spanish minister, but be treated directly
between the Regent and the King of Spain, through a confidential agent chosen by the former.

This confidential agent was to take a letter respecting the treaty to the King of Spain, a
letter full of insignificant trifles, and at the same time a positive order from the King of
England, written and signed by his hand, to the Governor of Gibraltar, commanding him to surrender
the place to the King of Spain the very moment he received this order, and to retire with his
garrison, etc., to Tangiers.  In order to execute this a Spanish general was suddenly to march
to Gibraltar, under pretence of repressing the incursions of its garrison,--summon the Governor
to appear, deliver to him the King of England's order, and enter into possession of the place.
All this was very weakly contrived; but this concerned the King of England, not us.

I must not be proud; and must admit that I knew nothing of all this, save at second-hand. 
If I had, without pretending to be very clever, I must say that I should have mistrusted this
fine scheme.  The King of England could not be ignorant with what care and with what jealousy
the Queen and Alberoni kept the King of Spain locked up, inaccessible to everybody--and that
the certain way to fail, was to try to speak to him without their knowledge, in spite of them,
or unaided by them.  However, my opinion upon this point was not asked, and accordingly was
not given.

Louville was the secret agent whom the Regent determined to send.  He had already been in Spain,
had gained the confidence of the King, and knew him better than any other person who could
have been chosen.  Precisely because of all these reasons, I thought him the most unfit person
to be charged with this commission.  The more intimate he had been with the King of Spain,
the more firm in his confidence, the more would he be feared by the Queen and Alberoni; and
the more would they do to cover his embassy with failure, so as to guard their credit and their
authority. I represented my views on this subject to Louville, who acknowledged there was truth
in them, but contented himself with saying, that he had not in his surprise dared to refuse
the mission offered to him; and that if he succeeded in it, the restitution to Spain of such
an important place as Gibraltar, would doubtless be the means of securing to him large arrears
of pensions due to him from Philip the First: an object of no small importance in his eyes.
Louville, therefore, in due time departed to Madrid, on his strange and secret embassy.

Upon arriving he went straight to the house of the Duc de Saint-Aignan, our ambassador, and
took up his quarters there.  Saint-Aignan who had received not the slightest information of
his arriving, was surprised beyond measure at it.  Alberoni was something more than surprised.
As fortune would have it, Louville when at some distance from Madrid was seen by a courier,
who straightway told Alberoni of the circumstance. As may be imagined, tormented as Alberoni
was by jealousy and suspicion, this caused him infinite alarm.  He was quite aware who Louville
was; the credit he had attained with the King of Spain; the trouble Madame des Ursins and the
deceased Queen had had to get him out of their way; the fear, therefore, that he conceived
on account of this unexpected arrival, was so great that he passed all bounds, in order to
free himself from it.

He instantly despatched a courier to meet Louville with an order prohibiting him to approach
any nearer to Madrid.  The courier missed Louville, but a quarter of an hour after this latter
had alighted at Saint-Aignan's, he received a note from Grimaldo inclosing an order from the
King of Spain, commanding him to leave the city that instant! Louville replied that he was
charged with a confidential letter from the King of France, and with another from M. le Duc
d'Orleans, for the King of Spain; and with a commission for his Catholic Majesty which would
not permit him to leave until he had executed it.  In consequence of this reply, a courier
was at once despatched to the Prince de Cellamare, Spanish ambassador at Paris, ordering him
to ask for the recall of Louville, and to declare that the King of Spain so disliked his person
that he would neither see him, nor allow him to treat with any of the ministers!

Meanwhile the fatigue of the journey followed by such a reception so affected Louville, that
during the night he had an attack of a disease to which he was subject, so that he had a bath
prepared for him, into which he got towards the end of the morning.

Alberoni, not satisfied with what he had already done, came himself to the Duc de Saint-Aignan's,
in order to persuade Louville to depart at once.  Despite the representations made to him,
he insisted upon penetrating to the sick-chamber.  There he saw Louville in his bath. Nothing
could be more civil than the words of Alberoni, but nothing could be more dry, more negative,
or more absolute than their signification. He pitied the other's illness and the fatigue of
his journey; would have wished to have known of this journey beforehand, so as to have prevented
it; and had hoped to be able to overcome the repugnance of the King of Spain to see him, or
at least to obtain permission for him to remain some days in Madrid.  He added that he had
been unable to shake his Majesty in any way, or to avoid obeying the very express order he
had received from him, to see that he (Louville) departed at once.

Louville, however, was in a condition which rendered his departure impossible.  Alberoni admitted
this, but warned him that his stay must only last as long as his illness, and that the attack
once over, he must away.  Louville insisted upon the confidential letters, of which he was
the bearer, and which gave him an official character, instructed as he was to execute an important
commission from the King of France, nephew of the King of Spain, such as his Majesty could
not refuse to hear direct from his mouth, and such as he would regret not having listened to.
The dispute was long and warm, despite the illness of Louville, who could gain nothing.  He
did not fail to remain five or six days with the Duc de Saint-Aignan, and to make him act as
ambassador in order to obtain an audience of the King, although Saint-Aignan was hurt at being
kept ignorant of the object of the other's mission.

Louville did not dare to call upon a soul, for fear of committing himself, and nobody dared
to call upon him.  He hazarded, however, for curiosity, to go and see the King of Spain pass
through a street, and ascertain if, on espying him, he would not be tempted to hear him, in
case his arrival, as was very possible, had been kept a secret.  But Alberoni had anticipated
everything.  Louville saw the King pass, certainly, but found it was impossible to make himself
perceived by his Majesty.  Grimaldo came afterwards to intimate to Louville an absolute order
to depart, and to inform the Duc de Saint-Aignan that the King of Spain was so angry with the
obstinacy of this delay, that he would not say what might happen if the stay of Louville was
protracted; but that he feared the respect due to a representative minister, and above all
an ambassador of France, would be disregarded.

Both Louville and Saint-Aignan clearly saw that all audience was impossible, and that in consequence
a longer stay could only lead to disturbances which might embroil the two crowns; so that,
at the end of seven or eight days, Louville departed, returning as he came.  Alberoni began
then to breathe again after the extreme fear he had had.  He was consoled by this proof of
his power, which showed he need no longer fear that any one could approach the King without
his aid, or that any business could be conducted without him.  Thus Spain lost Gibraltar, and
she has never been able to recover it since.

Such is the utility of prime ministers!

Alberoni spread the report in Spain and in France, that Philip V. had taken a mortal aversion
against Louville, since he had driven him out of the country for his insolence and his scheming;
that he would never see him, and was offended because he had passed the Pyrenees; that Louville
had no proposition to make, or commission to execute; that he had deceived the Regent, in making
him believe that if once he found a pretext for appearing before the King of Spain, knowing
him so well as he did, that prince would be ravished by the memory of his former affection,
would reinstate him in his former credit, and thus France would be able to make Spain do all
she wished.  In a word, Alberoni declared that Louville had only come into the country to try
and obtain some of the pensions he had been promised on quitting the King of Spain, but that
he had not gone the right way to work to be so soon paid.

Nothing short of the effrontery of Alberoni would have been enough for the purpose of spreading
these impostures.  No one had forgotten in Spain what Madame des Ursins had done to get rid
of Louville, how the King of Spain had resisted; that she was not able to succeed without the
aid of France and her intrigues with Madame de Maintenon; and that the King, afflicted to the
utmost, yielding to the orders given by France to Louville, had doubled the pensions which
had for a long time been paid to him, given him a sum of money in addition, and the government
of Courtray, which he lost only by the misfortune of the war that followed the loss of the
battle of Ramillies.  With respect to the commission, to deny it was an extreme piece of impudence,
a man being concerned so well known as Louville, who descends at the house of the ambassador
of France, says he has letters of trust from the King and the Regent, and an important mission
which he can only confide to the King of Spain, the self-same ambassador striving to obtain
an audience for him.  Nothing was so easy as to cover Louville with confusion, if he had spoken
falsely, by making him show his letters; if he had none he would have been struck dumb, and
having no official character, Alberoni would have been free to punish him.  Even if with confidential
letters, he had only a complaint to utter in order to introduce himself and to solicit his
pay, Alberoni would very easily have been able to dishonour him, because he had no commission
after having roundly asserted that he was charged with one of great importance.  But omnipotence
says and does with impunity whatever it pleases.

Louville having returned, it was necessary to send word to the King of England of all he had
done in Spain; and this business came to nothing, except that it set Alberoni against the Regent
for trying to execute a secret commission without his knowledge; and that it set the Regent
against Alberoni for frustrating a project so openly, and for showing the full force of his
power.  Neither of the two ever forgot this matter; and the dislike of Alberoni to the Regent
led, as will be seen, to some strange results.

I will add here, that the treaty of alliance between France and England was signed a short
time after this event.  I did my utmost to prevent it, representing to the Regent that his
best policy was to favour the cause of the Pretender, and thus by keeping the attention of
Great Britain continually fixed upon her domestic concerns, he would effectually prevent her
from influencing the affairs of the continent, and long were the conversations I had with him,
insisting upon this point.  But although, while he was with me, my arguments might appear to
have some weight with him, they were forgotten, clean swept from his mind, directly the Abbe
Dubois, who had begun to obtain a most complete and pernicious influence over him, brought
his persuasiveness to bear.  Dubois' palm had been so well greased by the English that he was
afraid of nothing. He succeeded then in inducing the Regent to sign a treaty with England,
in every way, it may safely be said, advantageous to that power, and in no way advantageous
to France.  Amongst other conditions, the Regent agreed to send the so-called Pretender out
of the realm, and to force him to seek an asylum in Italy.  This was, in fact, executed to
the letter. King James, who for some time had retired to Avignon, crossed the Alps and settled
in Rome, where he lived ever afterwards.  I could not but deplore the adoption of a policy
so contrary to the true interests of France; but the business being done I held my peace, and
let matters take their course.  It was the only course of conduct open to me.

CHAPTER LXXXIV

I have already shown in these memoirs, that the late King had made of the lieutenant of police
a species of secret and confidential minister; a sort of inquisitor, with important powers
that brought him in constant relation with the King.  The Regent, with less authority than
the deceased monarch, and with more reasons than he to be well informed of everything passing,
intrigues included, found occupying this office of lieutenant of police, Argenson, who had
gained his good graces chiefly, I fancy, when the affair of the cordelier was on the carpet,
as shown in its place.  Argenson, who had much intelligence, and who had desired this post
as the entry, the basis, and the road of his fortune, filled it in a very superior manner,
and the Regent made use of him with much liberty. The Parliament, very ready to show the extent
of its authority everywhere, at the least as though in competition with that of the Regent,
suffered impatiently what it called the encroachments of the Court.  It wished to indemnify
itself for the silence it had been compelled to keep thereon under the last reign, and to re-obtain
at the expense of the Regent all it had lost of its authority over the police, of which it
is the head.  The lieutenant of police is answerable to this body--even receives his orders
from it, and its reprimands (in public audiences, standing uncovered at the bar of the Parliament)
from the mouth of the Chief-President, or of him who presides, and who calls him neither Master
nor Monsieur, but nakedly by his name, although the lieutenant of police might have claimed
these titles, being then Councillor of State.

The Parliament wished, then, to humiliate Argenson (whom it hated during the time of the deceased
King); to give a disagreeable lesson to the Regent; to prepare worse treatment still for his
lieutenant of police; to make parade of its power, to terrify thus the public, and arrogate
to itself the right of limiting the authority of the Regent.

Argenson had often during the late reign, and sometimes since, made use of an intelligent and
clever fellow, just suited to him, and named Pomereu, to make discoveries, arrest people, and
occasionally keep them a short time in his own house.  The Parliament believed, and rightly,
that in arresting this man under other pretexts, it would find the thread of many curious and
secret tortuosities, which would aid its design, and that it might plume itself upon protecting
the public safety against the tyranny of secret arrests and private imprisonments.  To carry
out its aim it made use of the Chamber of justice, so as to appear as little as possible in
the matter.  This Chamber hastened on so well the proceedings, for fear of being stopped on
the road, that the first hint people had of them was on learning that Pomereu was, by decree
of this Chamber, in the prisons of the Conciergerie, which are those of the Parliament.  Argenson,
who was informed of this imprisonment immediately it took place, instantly went to the Regent,
who that very moment sent a 'lettre de cachet', ordering Pomereu to be taken from prison by
force if the gaoler made the slightest difficulty in giving him up to the bearers of the 'lettre
de cachet'; but that gentleman did not dare to make any. The execution was so prompt that this
man was not an hour in prison, and they who had sent him there had not time to seize upon a
box of papers which had been transported with him to the Conciergerie, and which was very carefully
carried away with him.  At the same time, everything in any way bearing upon Pomereu, or upon
the things in which he had been employed, was carefully removed and secreted.

The vexation of the Parliament upon seeing its prey, which it had reckoned upon making such
a grand use of, carried off before its eyes, may be imagined.  It left nothing undone in order
to move the public by its complaints, and by its cries against such an attack upon law.  The
Chamber of justice sent a deputation to the Regent, who made, fun of it, by gravely giving
permission to the deputies to re-take their prisoner, but without saying a single word to them
upon his escape from gaol.  He was in Paris, in a place where he feared nobody.  The Chamber
of justice felt the derisiveness of the Regent's permission, and ceased to transact business.
It thought to embarrass the Regent thus, but 'twould have been at its own expense.  This lasted
only a day or two.  The Duc de Noailles spoke to the Chamber; the members felt they could gain
nothing by their strike, and that if they were obstinate they would be dispensed with, and
others found to perform their duties.  They recommenced their labours then, and the Parliament
gained nothing by its attack, but only showed its ill-will, and at the same time its powerlessness.

I have forgotten something which, from its singularity, deserves recollection, and I will relate
it now lest it should escape me again.

One afternoon, as we were about to take our places at the regency council, the Marechal de
Villars drew me aside and asked me if I knew that Marly was going to be destroyed.  I replied,
"No;" indeed, I had not heard speak of it; and I added that I could not believe it.  "You do
not approve of it?" said the Marechal.  I assured him I was far from doing so.  He repeated
that the destruction was resolved on, that he knew it beyond all doubt, and that if I wished
to hinder it, I had not a moment to lose.  I replied that when we took our places I would speak
to M. le Duc d'Orleans.  "Immediately," quickly replied the Marechal; "speak to him this instant,
for the order is perhaps already given."

As all the council were already seated I went behind to M. le Duc d'Orleans, and whispered
in his ear what I had just learnt without naming from whom, and begged him, if my information
was right, to suspend execution of his project until I had spoken to him, adding that I would
join him at the Palais Royal after the council.  He stammered a little, as if sorry at being
discovered, but nevertheless agreed to wait for me: I said so in leaving to the Marechal de
Villars, and went to the Palais Royal, where M. le Duc d'Orleans admitted the truth of the
news I had heard.  I said I would not ask who had given such a pernicious counsel. He tried
to show it was good by pointing to the saving in keeping up that would be obtained; to the
gain that would accrue from the sale of so many water-conduits and materials; to the unpleasant
situation of a place to which the King would not be able to go for several years; and to the
expense the King was put to in keeping up so many other beautiful houses, not one of which
admitted of pulling down.

I replied to him, that these were the reasons of the guardian of a private gentleman that had
been presented to him, the conduct of whom could in no way resemble that of the guardian of
a King of France; that the expenses incurred in keeping up Marly were necessary, and that,
compared with the total of those of the King, they were but as drops in the ocean.  I begged
him to get rid of the idea that the sale of the materials would yield any profit,--all the
receipts would go in gifts and pillage, I said; and also that it was not these petty objects
he ought to regard, but that he should consider how many millions had been buried in this ancient
sewer, to transform it into a fairy palace, unique as to form in all Europe--unique by the
beauty of its fountains, unique also by the reputation that the deceased King had given to
it; and that it was an object of curiosity to strangers of every rank who came to France; that
its destruction would resound throughout Europe with censure; that these mean reasons of petty
economy would not prevent all France from being indignant at seeing so distinguished an ornament
swept away; that although neither he nor I might be very delicate upon what had been the taste
and the favourite work of the late King, the Regent ought to avoid wounding his memory,--which
by such a long reign, so many brilliant years, so many grand reverses so heroically sustained,
and escaped from in so unhoped-for a manner--had left the entire world in veneration of his
person: in fine, that he might reckon all the discontented, all the neutral even, would join
in chorus with the Ancient Court, and cry murder; that the Duc du Maine, Madame de Ventadour,
the Marechal de Villeroy would not hesitate to look upon the destruction of Marly as a crime
against the King,--a crime they would not fail to make the best of for their own purposes during
all the regency, and even after it was at an end.  I clearly saw that M. le Duc d'Orleans had
not in the least reflected upon all this.  He agreed that I was right: promised that Marly
should not be touched, that it should continue to be kept up, and thanked me for preserving
him from this fault.

When I was well assured of him, "Admit," said I, "that the King, in the other world, would
be much astonished if he could know that the Duc de Noailles had made you order the destruction
of Marly, and that it was who hindered it."

"Oh! as to that," he quickly replied, "it is true he could not believe it."  In effect Marly
was preserved and kept up; and it is the Cardinal Fleury, with his collegiate proctor's avarice,
who has stripped it of its river, which was its most superb charm.

I hastened to relate this good resolve to the Marechal de Villars. The Duc de Noailles, who,
for his own private reasons, had wished the destruction of Marly, was furious when he saw his
proposal fail. To indemnify himself in some degree for his vexation, he made the Regent agree,
in the utmost secrecy, for fear of another failure, that all the furniture, linen, etc., should
be sold.  He persuaded M. le Duc d'Orleans that all these things would be spoiled and lost
by the time the King was old enough to use them; that in selling them a large sum would be
gained to relieve expenses; and that in future years the King could furnish Marly as he pleased.
There was an immense quantity of things sold, but owing to favour and pillage they brought
very little; and to replace them afterwards, millions were spent.  I did not know of this sale,
at which anybody bought who wished, and at very low prices, until it had commenced; therefore
I was unable to hinder this very damaging parsimoniousness.

The Regent just about this time was bestowing his favours right and left with a very prodigal
hand; I thought, therefore, I was fully entitled to ask him for one, which, during the previous
reign, had been so rare, so useful, and accordingly so difficult to obtain; I mean the right
of entering the King's room--the 'grandes entrees'--as it was called, and I attained it at once.

