STRONG HEARTS

By George W. Cable

1899

CONTENTS

The Solitary

The Taxidermist

The Entomologist

In magazine form "The Solitary" appeared under the title of "Gregory's Island."

The Solitary

I

"The dream of Pharaoh is one. The seven kine are seven years; and the seven good ears are seven
years: the dream is one.... And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice, it is because
the thing is established."...

In other words: Behind three or four subtitles and changes of time, scene, characters, this
tale of strong hearts is one. And for that the tale is tripled or quadrupled unto you three
or four times (the number will depend); it is because in each of its three or four aspects--or
separate stories, if you insist--it sets forth, in heroic natures and poetic fates, a principle
which seems to me so universal that I think Joseph would say of it also, as he said to the
sovereign of Egypt, "The thing is established of God."

I know no better way to state this principle, being a man, not of letters, but of commerce
(and finance), than to say--what I fear I never should have learned had I not known the men
and women I here tell of--that religion without poetry is as dead a thing as poetry without
religion. In our practical use of them, I mean; their infusion into all our doing and being.
As dry as a mummy, great Joseph would say.

Shall I be more explicit? Taking that great factor of life which men, with countless lights,
shades, narrownesses and breadths of meaning, call Religion, and taking it in the largest sense
we can give it; in like manner taking Poetry in the largest sense possible; this cluster of
tales is one, because from each of its parts, with no argument but the souls and fates they
tell of, it illustrates the indivisible twinship of Poetry and Religion; a oneness of office
and of culmination, which, as they reach their highest plane, merges them into identity. Is
that any clearer? You see I am no scientist or philosopher, and I do not stand at any dizzy
height, even in my regular business of banking and insurance, except now and then when my colleagues
of the clearing-house or board want something drawn up--"Whereas, the inscrutable wisdom of
Providence has taken from among us"--something like that.

I tell the stories as I saw them occur. I tell them for your entertainment; the truth they
taught me you may do what you please with. It was exemplified in some of these men and women
by their failure to incarnate it. Others, through the stained glass of their imperfect humanity,
showed it forth alive and alight in their own souls and bodies. One there was who never dreamed
he was a bright example of anything, in a world which, you shall find him saying, God--or somebody--whoever
is responsible for civilization--had made only too good and complex and big for him. We may
hold that to make life a perfect, triumphant poem we must keep in beautiful, untyrannous subordination
every impulse of mere self- provision, whether earthly or heavenly, while at the same time
we give life its equatorial circumference. I know that he so believed. Yet, under no better
conscious motive than an impulse of pure self-preservation, finding his spiritual breadth and
stature too small for half the practical demands of such large theories, he humbly set to work
to narrow down the circumference of his life to limits within which he might hope to turn some
of its daily issues into good poetry. This is the main reason why I tell of him first, and
why the parts of my story--or the stories--do not fall into chronological order. I break that
order with impunity, and adopt that which I believe to be best in the interest of Poetry and
themselves. Only do not think hard if I get more interested in the story, or stories, than
in the interpretation thereof.

II

The man of whom I am speaking was a tallish, slim young fellow, shaped well enough, though
a trifle limp for a Louisianian in the Mississippi (Confederate) cavalry. Some camp wag had
fastened on him the nickname of "Crackedfiddle." Our acquaintance began more than a year before
Lee's surrender; but Gregory came out of the war without any startling record, and the main
thing I tell of him occurred some years later.

I never saw him under arms or in uniform. I met him first at the house of a planter, where
I was making the most of a flesh-wound, and was, myself, in uniform simply because I hadn't
any other clothes. There were pretty girls in the house, and as his friends and fellow-visitors--except
me-- wore the gilt bars of commissioned rank on their gray collars, and he, as a private, had
done nothing glorious, his appearance was always in civilian's dress. Black he wore, from head
to foot, in the cut fashionable in New Orleans when the war brought fashion to a stand: coat-waist
high, skirt solemnly long; sleeves and trousers small at the hands and feet, and puffed out--phew!
in the middle. The whole scheme was dandyish, dashing, zou-zou; and when he appeared in it,
dark, good-looking, loose, languorous, slow to smile and slower to speak, it was--confusing.

One sunset hour as I sat alone on the planter's veranda immersed in a romance, I noticed, too
late to offer any serviceable warning, this impressive black suit and its ungenerously nicknamed
contents coming in at the gate unprotected. Dogs, in the South, in those times, were not the
caressed and harmless creatures now so common. A Mississippi planter's watch-dogs were kept
for their vigilant and ferocious hostility to the negro of the quarters and to all strangers.
One of these, a powerful, notorious, bloodthirsty brute, long-bodied, deer-legged--you may
possibly know that big breed the planters called the "cur-dog" and prized so highly -darted
out of hiding and silently sprang at the visitor's throat. Gregory swerved, and the brute's
fangs, whirling by his face, closed in the sleeve and rent it from shoulder to elbow. At the
same time another, one of the old "bear-dog" breed, was coming as fast as the light block and
chain he had to drag would allow him. Gregory neither spoke, nor moved to attack or retreat.
At my outcry the dogs slunk away, and he asked me, diffidently, for a thing which was very
precious in those days--pins.

But he was quickly surrounded by pitying eyes and emotional voices, and was coaxed into the
house, where the young ladies took his coat away to mend it. While he waited for it in my room
I spoke of the terror so many brave men had of these fierce home-guards. I knew one such beast
that was sired of a wolf. He heard me with downcast eyes, at first with evident pleasure, but
very soon quite gravely.

"They can afford to fear dogs," he replied, "when they've got no other fear." And when I would
have it that he had shown a stout heart he smiled ruefully.

"I do everything through weakness," he soliloquized, and, taking my book, opened it as if to
dismiss our theme. But I bade him turn to the preface, where heavily scored by the same feminine
hand which had written on the blank leaf opposite, "Richard Thorndyke Smith, from C.O."--we
read something like this:

The seed of heroism is in all of us. Else we should not forever relish, as we do, stories of
peril, temptation, and exploit. "Now, sir--a leetle more round, if you please--there, sir, there. It
is a most entertaining paper, and beats all for news. In fact, it is full of every thing, sir--every,
every thing--accidents--charity sermons--markets--boxing--Bible societies--horse racing--child
murders--the theatres--foreign wars--Bow-street reports--electioneering--and Day and Martin's blacking."

"Are
you a bit of a bruiser, Mr. Tims?"

"Oh, bless your heart, sir, only a leetle--a very leetle.

A turn-up with the gloves, or so, your honour. I'm but a light weight--only a light weight--seven
stone and a half, sir; but a rare bit of stuff, though I say it myself,
sir--Begging your pardon.

I dare say I have put some of the soap into your mouth. Now, sir, now--please let me hold
your nose, sir."

"Scarcely civil, Mr. Toby," said I, "scarcely civil--Phroo! let me
spit out the suds."

"I will be done in a moment, sir--in half a moment. Well, sir, speaking of razors, they should
be always properly tempered with hot water, a leetle dip more or less. You see now how it glides
over, smooth and smack as your hand.--Keep still, sir; I might have given you a nick just
now. You don't choose a leetle of the mustachy left?"

"No, no--off with it all. No matrimonial news stirring in this quarter
just now, Mr. Tims?"

"Nothing extremely particular.--Now, sir, you are fit for the king's
levee, so far as my department is concerned.

But you cannot go out just now, sir--see how it rains--a perfect
water-spout.

Just feel yourself at home, sir, for a leetle, and take a peep around you. That block, sir, has
been very much admired--extremely like the Wenus de Medicine--capital nose--and as for the wig department,
catch me for that, sir.

But of all them there pictures hanging around, yon is the favourite of myself and the connessoors."

"Ay,
Mr. Tims," said I, "that is truly a gem--an old lover kneeling at
the foot of his young sweetheart, and two fellows in buckram taking
a peep at them from among the trees."

"Capital, sir--capital.

I'll tell you a rare good story, sir, connected with that picture and my own history, with your
honour's leave, sir."

"With all my heart, Mr. Tims--you are very obliging."

"Well then, sir, take that chair, and I will get on like a house on
fire; but if you please, don't put me off my clew, sir.--Concerning
that picture and my courtship, the most serious epoch of my life,
there is a leetle bit of a story which I would like to be a beacon
to others; and if your honour is still a bachelor, and not yet stranded
on the shoals of matrimony, it may be Werbum Sapienti, as O'Toole,
the Irish schoolmaster, used to observe, when in the act of applying
the birch to the booby's back.

"Well, sir, having received a grammatical education, and been brought
up as a peruke-maker from my earliest years--besides having seen a
deal of high life, and the world in general, in carrying false curls,
bandeaux, and other artificial head-gear paraphernalia, in bandboxes
to boarding schools, and so on--a desire naturally sprung up within
me, being now in my twenty-first year, and worth a guinea a week of
wages, to look about for what old kind Seignor Fiddle-stringo, the
minuet-master, used to recommend under the title of a cara sposa--open
shop--and act head frizzle in an establishment of my own.

"Very good, sir--In the pursuit of this virtuous purpose, I cast a sheep's eye over the broad
face of society, and at length, from a number of eligible specimens,
I selected three, who, whether considered in the light of natural
beauty, or mental accomplishment, struck me forcibly as suitable coadjutors
for a man--for a man like your humble servant."

"A most royal bow that, Mr. Tims.

Well, proceed, if you please."

"Very good, sir--well, then, to proceed. The first of these was Miss Diana Tonkin, a young lady,
who kept her brother's snuff-shop, at the sign of the African astride the Tobacco Barrel--a
rare beauty, who was on the most intimate talking terms with half a hundred young bloods and beaux,
who looked in during lounging hours, being students of law, physic, and divinity, half-pay
ensigns, and theatrical understrappers, to replenish their boxes with Lundyfoot, whiff a Havannah
cigar, or masticate pigtail.
 What his love lacked in courage
it made up in constancy, however, and morning, noon, and night--sometimes midnight too, I venture
to say--his all too patient heart had bowed mutely down toward its holy city across the burning
sands of his diffidence. When another fellow stepped in and married her, he simply loved on,
in the same innocent, dumb, harmless way as before. He gave himself some droll consolations.
One of these was a pretty, sloop-rigged sail-boat, trim and swift, on which he lavished the
tendernesses he knew he should never bestow upon any living she. He named her Sweetheart; a
general term; but he knew that we all knew it meant the mender of his coat. By and by his visits
fell off and I met him oftenest on the street. Sometimes we stopped for a moment's sidewalk
chat, New Orleans fashion, and I still envied the clear bronze of his fine skin, which the
rest of us had soon lost. But after a while certain changes began to show for the worse, until
one day in the summer of the fifth year he tried to hurry by me. I stopped him, and was thinking
what a handsome fellow he was even yet, with such a quiet, modest fineness about him, when
he began, with a sudden agony of face, "My schooner's sold for debt! You know the reason; I've
seen you read it all over me every time we have met, these twelve months--O don't look at me!"

His slim, refined hands--he gave me both?-were clammy and tremulous. "Yes," he babbled on,
"it's a fixed fact, Smith; the cracked fiddle's a smashed fiddle at last!"

I drew him out of the hot sun and into a secluded archway, he talking straight on with a speed
and pitiful grandiloquence totally unlike him. "I've finished all the easy parts--the first
ecstasies of pure license-- the long down-hill plunge, with all its mad exhilarations--the
wild vanity of venturing and defying--that bigness of the soul's experiences which makes even
its anguish seem finer than the old bitterness of tame propriety--they are all behind me, now?-the
valley of horrors is before! You can't understand it, Smith. O you can't understand----"

O couldn't I! And, anyhow, one does not have to put himself through a whole criminal performance
to apprehend its spiritual experiences. I understood all, and especially what he unwittingly
betrayed even now; that deep thirst for the dramatic element in one's own life, which, when
social conformity fails to supply it, becomes, to an eager soul, sin's cunningest allurement.

I tried to talk to him. "Gregory, that day the dogs jumped on you--you remember?--didn't you
say if ever you should reach this condition your fear might save you?"

He stared at me a moment. "Do you"--a ray of humor lighted his eyes--"do you still believe
in spasms of virtue?"

"Thank heaven, yes!" laughed I.

"Good-by," he said, and was gone.

I heard of him twice afterward that day. About noon some one coming into the office said: "I
just now saw Crackedfiddle buying a great lot of powder and shot and fishing-tackle. Here's
a note. He says first read it and then seal it and send it to his aunt." It read:

"Don't look for me. You can't find me. I'm not going to kill or hurt myself, and I'll report
again in a month."

I delivered it in person on my way uptown, advising his kinswoman to trust him on his own terms
and hope for the best. Privately, of course, I was distressed, and did not become less so when,
on reaching home, Mrs. Smith told me that he had been there and borrowed an arm-load of books,
saying he might return some of them in a month, but would probably keep others for two. So
he did; and one evening, when he brought the last of them back, he told us fully, spiritual
experiences and all, what had occurred to him in the interval.

The sale of the schooner had paid its debt and left him some cash over. Better yet, it had
saved Sweetheart. On the day of his disappearance she was lying at the head of the New Basin,
distant but a few minutes' walk from the spot where we met and talked. When he left me he went
there. At the stores thereabout he bought a new hatchet and axe, an extra water-keg or two,
and a month's provisions. He filled all the kegs, stowed everything aboard, and by the time
the afternoon had half waned was rippling down the New Canal under mule-tow with a strong lake
breeze in his face.

At the lake (Pontchartrain), as the tow-line was cast off, he hoisted sail, and, skimming out
by lighthouse and breakwater, tripped away toward Pointe-aux-Herbes and the eastern skyline
beyond, he and Sweetheart alone, his hand clasping hers--the tiller, that is--hour by hour,
and the small waves tiptoeing to kiss her southern cheek as she leaned the other away from
the saucy north wind. In time the low land, and then the lighthouse, sank and vanished behind
them; on the left the sun went down in the purple black swamps of Manchac; the intervening
waters turned crimson and bronze under the fairer changes of the sky, while in front of them
Fort Pike Light began to glimmer through an opal haze, and by and by to draw near. It passed.
From a large inbound schooner gliding by in the twilight, came in friendly recognition, the
drone of a conch-shell, the last happy salutation Sweetheart was ever to receive. Then the
evening star silvered their wake through the deep Rigolets, and the rising moon met them, her
and her lover, in Lake Borgne, passing the dark pines of Round Island, and hurrying on toward
the white sand-keys of the Gulf.

The night was well advanced as they neared the pine-crested dunes of Cat Island, in whose lee
a more cautious sailor would have dropped anchor till the morning. But to this pair every mile
of these fickle waters, channel and mud-lump, snug lagoon, open sea and hidden bar, each and
all, were known as the woods are known to a hunter, and, as he drew her hand closer to his
side, she turned across the track of the moon and bounded into the wide south. A maze of marsh
islands--huddling along that narrow, half- drowned mainland of cypress swamp and trembling
prairie which follows the Mississippi out to sea--slept, leagues away, below the western waters.
In the east lay but one slender boundary between the voyager and the shoreless deep, and this
was so near that from its farther edge came now and again its admonishing murmur, the surf-thunder
of the open Gulf rolling forever down the prone but unshaken battle-front of the sandy Chandeleurs.

IV

So all night, lest wind or resolve should fail next day, he sailed. How to tell just where
dawn found him I scarcely know.

Somewhere in that blue wilderness, with no other shore in sight, yet not over three miles northeast
of a "pass" between two long tide-covered sand- reefs, a ferment of delta silt--if science
guesses right--had lifted higher than most of the islands behind it in the sunken west one
mere islet in the shape of a broad crescent, with its outward curve to seaward and a deep,
slender lagoon on the landward side filling the whole length of its bight. About half the island
was flat and was covered with those strong marsh grasses for which you've seen cattle, on the
mainland, venture so hungrily into the deep ooze. The rest, the southern half, rose in dazzling
white dunes twenty feet or more in height and dappled green with patches of ragged sod and
thin groups of dwarfed and wind-flattened shrubs. As the sun rose, Sweetheart and her sailor
glided through a gap in the sand reef that closed the lagoon in, luffed, and as a great cloud
of nesting pelicans rose from their dirty town on the flats, ran softly upon the inner sands,
where a rillet, a mere thread of sweet water, trickled across the white beach. Here he waded
ashore with the utensils and provisions, made a fire, washed down a hot breakfast of bacon
and pone with a pint of black coffee, returned to his boat and slept until afternoon. Wakened
at length by the canting of the sloop with the fall of the tide, he rose, rekindled his fire,
cooked and ate again, smoked two pipes, and then, idly shouldering his gun, made a long half-circuit
of the beach to south and eastward, mounted the highest dune and gazed far and wide.

Nowhere on sand or sea under the illimitable dome was there sign of human presence on the earth.
Nor would there likely be any. Except by misadventure no ship on any course ever showed more
than a topmast above this horizon. Of the hunters and fishermen who roamed the islands nearer
shore, with the Chandeleurs, the storm-drowned Grand Gosiers and the deep- sea fishing grounds
beyond, few knew the way hither, and fewer ever sailed it. At the sound of his gun the birds
of the beach--sea-snipe, curlew, plover--showed the whites of their wings for an instant and
fell to feeding again. Save when the swift Wilderness--you remember the revenue cutter?-chanced
this way on her devious patrol, only the steamer of the light-house inspection service, once
a month, came up out of the southwest through yonder channel and passed within hail on her
way from the stations of the Belize to those of Mississippi Sound; and he knew--had known before
he left the New Basin--that she had just gone by here the day before.

But to Gregory this solitude brought no quick distress. With a bird or two at his belt he turned
again toward his dying fire. Once on the way he paused, as he came in sight of the sloop, and
gazed upon it with a faintness of heart he had not known since his voyage began. However, it
presently left him, and hurrying down to her side he began to unload her completely, and to
make a permanent camp in the lee of a ridge of sand crested with dwarfed casino bushes, well
up from the beach. The night did not stop him, and by the time he was tired enough for sleep
he had lightened the boat of everything stowed into her the previous day. Before sunrise he
was at work again, removing her sandbags, her sails, flags, cordage, even her spars. The mast
would have been heavy for two men to handle, but he got it out whole, though not without hurting
one hand so painfully that he had to lie off for over two hours. But by midday he was busy
again, and when at low water poor Sweetheart comfortably turned upon her side on the odorous,
clean sand, it was never more to rise. The keen, new axe of her master ended her days.

"No! O no!" he said to me, "call it anything but courage! I felt--I don't want to be sentimental--I'm
sure I was not sentimental at the time, but--I felt as though I were a murderer. All I knew
was that it had to be done. I trembled like a thief. I had to stoop twice before I could take
up the axe, and I was so cold my teeth chattered. When I lifted the first blow I didn't know
where it was going to fall. But it struck as true as a die, and then I flew at it. I never
chopped so fast or clean in my life. I wasn't fierce; I was as full of self-delight as an overpraised
child. And yet when something delayed me an instant I found I was still shaking. Courage,"
said he, "O no; I know what it was, and I knew then. But I had no choice; it was my last chance."

I told him that anyone might have thought him a madman chopping up his last chance.

"Maybe so," he replied, "but I wasn't; it was the one sane thing I could do;" and he went on
to tell me that when night fell the tallest fire that ever leapt from those sands blazed from
Sweetheart's piled ribs and keel.

It was proof to him of his having been shrewd, he said, that for many days he felt no repentance
of the act nor was in the least lonely. There was an infinite relief merely in getting clean
away from the huge world of men, with all its exactions and temptations and the myriad rebukes
and rebuffs of its crass propriety and thrift. He had endured solitude enough in it; the secret
loneliness of a spiritual bankruptcy. Here was life begun over, with none to make new debts
to except nature and himself, and no besetments but his own circumvented propensities. What
humble, happy masterhood! Each dawn he rose from dreamless sleep and leaped into the surf as
into the embrace of a new existence. Every hour of day brought some unfretting task or hale
pastime. With sheath-knife and sail-needle he made of his mainsail a handsome tent, using the
mainboom for his ridge- pole, and finishing it just in time for the first night of rain--when,
nevertheless, he lost all his coffee!

He did not waste toil. He hoarded its opportunities as one might husband salt on the mountains
or water in the desert, and loitering in well calculated idleness between thoughts many and
things of sea and shore innumerable, filled the intervals from labor to labor with gentle entertainment.
Skyward ponderings by night, canny discoveries under foot by day, quickened his mind and sight
to vast and to minute significancies, until they declared an Author known to him hitherto only
by tradition. Every acre of the barren islet grew fertile in beauties and mysteries, and a
handful of sand at the door of his tent held him for hours guessing the titanic battles that
had ground the invincible quartz to that crystal meal and fed it to the sea.

I may be more rhetorical than he was, but he made all the more of these conditions while experiencing
them, because he knew they could not last out the thirty days, nor half the thirty, and took
modest comfort in a will strong enough to meet all present demands, well knowing there was
one exigency yet to arise, one old usurer still to be settled with who had not yet brought
in his dun.

V

It came--began to come--in the middle of the second week. At its familiar approach he felt
no dismay, save a certain inert dismay that it brought none. Three, four, five times he went
bravely to the rill, drowned his thirst and called himself satisfied; but the second day was
worse than the first; the craving seemed better than the rill's brief cure of it, and once
he rose straight from drinking of the stream and climbed the dune to look for a sail.

He strove in vain to labor. The pleasures of toil were as stale as those of idleness. His books
were put aside with a shudder, and he walked abroad with a changed gait; the old extortioner
was levying on his nerves. And on his brain. He dreamed that night of war times; found himself
commander of a whole battery of heavy guns, and lo, they were all quaker cannon. When he would
have fled, monstrous terrors met him at every turn, till he woke and could sleep no more. Dawn
widened over sky and sea, but its vast beauty only mocked the castaway. All day long he wandered
up and down and along and across his glittering prison, no tiniest speck of canvas, no faintest
wreath of smoke, on any water's edge; the horror of his isolation growing-growing?-like the
monsters of his dream, and his whole nature wild with a desire which was no longer a mere physical
drought, but a passion of the soul, that gave the will an unnatural energy and set at naught
every true interest of earth and heaven. Again and again he would have shrieked its anguish,
but the first note of his voice rebuked him to silence as if he had espied himself in a glass.
He fell on his face voiceless, writhing, and promised himself, nay, pledged creation and its
Creator, that on the day of his return to the walks of men he would drink the cup of madness
and would drink it thenceforth till he died.

When night came again he paced the sands for hours and then fell to work to drag by long and
toiling zigzags to a favorable point on the southern end of the island the mast he had saved,
and to raise there a flag of distress. In the shortness of his resources he dared not choose
the boldest exposures, where the first high wind would cast it down; but where he placed it
it could be seen from every quarter except the north, and any sail approaching from that direction
was virtually sure to come within hail even of the voice.

Day had come again as he left the finished task, and once more from the highest wind-built
ridge his hungering eyes swept the round sea's edge. But he saw no sail. Nerveless and exhausted
he descended to the southeastern beach and watched the morning brighten. The breezes, that
for some time had slept, fitfully revived, and the sun leaped from the sea and burned its way
through a low bank of dark and ruddy clouds with so unusual a splendor that the beholder was
in some degree both quickened and tranquillized. He could even play at self-command, and in
child fashion bound himself not to mount the dunes again for a northern look within an hour.
This southern half circle must suffice. Indeed, unless these idle zephyrs should amend, no
sail could in that time draw near enough to notice any signal he could offer.

Playing at self-command gave him some earnest of it. In a whim of the better man he put off
his clothes and sprang into the breakers. He had grown chill, but a long wrestle with the surf
warmed his blood, and as he reclothed himself and with a better step took his way along the
beach toward his tent a returning zest of manhood refreshed his spirit. The hour was up, but
in a kind of equilibrium of impulses and with much emptiness of mind, he let it lengthen on,
made a fire, and for the first time in two days cooked food. He ate and still tarried. A brand
in his camp fire, a piece from the remnant of his boat, made beautiful flames. He idly cast
in another and was pleased to find himself sitting there instead of gazing his eyes out for
sails that never rose into view. He watched a third brand smoke and blaze. And then, as tamely
as if the new impulse were only another part of a continued abstraction, he arose and once
more climbed the sandy hills. The highest was some distance from his camp. At one point near
its top a brief northeastward glimpse of the marsh's outer edge and the blue waters beyond
showed at least that nothing had come near enough to raise the pelicans. But the instant his
sight cleared the crown of the ridge he rushed forward, threw up his arms, and lifted his voice
in a long, imploring yell. Hardly two miles away, her shapely canvas leaning and stiffening
in the augmented breeze, a small yacht had just gone about, and with twice the speed at which
she must have approached was, hurrying back straight into the north.

The frantic man dashed back and forth along the crest, tossing his arms, waving his Madras
handkerchief, cursing himself for leaving his gun so far behind, and again and again repeating
his vain ahoys in wilder and wilder alternations of beseeching and rage. The lessening craft
flew straight on, no ear in her skilled enough to catch the distant cry, and no eye alert enough
to scan the dwindling sand-hills. He ceased to call, but still, with heavy notes of distress
to himself, waved and waved, now here, now there, while the sail grew smaller and smaller.
At length he stopped this also and only stood gazing. Almost on first sight of the craft he
had guessed that the men in her had taken alarm at the signs of changing weather, and seeing
the freshening smoke of his fire had also inferred that earlier sportsmen were already on the
island. Oh, if he could have fired one shot when she was nearest! But already she was as hopelessly
gone as though she were even now below the horizon. Suddenly he turned and ran down to his
camp. Not for the gun; not in any new hope of signalling the yacht. No, no; a raft! a raft!
Deliverance or destruction, it should be at his own hand and should wait no longer!

A raft forthwith he set about to make. Some stout portions of his boat were still left. Tough
shrubs of the sand-hills furnished trennels and suppler parts. Of ropes there was no lack.
The mast was easily dragged down again to the beach to be once more a mast, and in nervous
haste, yet with skill and thoroughness, the tent was ripped up and remade into a sail, and
even a rude centreboard was rigged in order that one might tack against unfavorable winds.

Winds, at nightfall, when the thing began to be near completion, there were none. The day's
sky had steadily withdrawn its favor. The sun shone as it sank into the waves, but in the northwest
and southeast dazzling thunderheads swelled from the sea's line high into the heavens, and
in the early dusk began with silent kindlings to challenge each other to battle. As night swiftly
closed down the air grew unnaturally still. From the toiler's brow, worse than at noon, the
sweat rolled off, as at last he brought his work to a close by the glare of his leaping camp-fire.
Now, unless he meant only to perish, he must once more eat and sleep while he might. Then let
the storm fall; the moment it was safely over and the wind in the right quarter he would sail.
As for the thirst which had been such a torture while thwarted, now that it ruled unchallenged,
it was purely a wild, glad zeal as full of method as of diligence. But first he must make his
diminished provisions and his powder safe against the elements; and this he did, covering them
with a waterproof stuff and burying them in a northern slope of sand.

He awoke in the small hours of the night. The stars of the zenith were quenched. Blackness
walled and roofed him in close about his crumbled fire, save when at shorter and shorter intervals
and with more and more deafening thunders the huge clouds lit up their own forms, writhing
one upon another, and revealed the awe-struck sea and ghostly sands waiting breathlessly below.
He rose to lay on more fuel, and while he was in the act the tornado broke upon him. The wind,
as he had forecast, came out of the southeast. In an instant it was roaring and hurtling against
the farther side of his island rampart like the charge of a hundred thousand horse and tossing
the sand of the dunes like blown hair into the northwest, while the rain in one wild deluge
lashed the frantic sea and weltering lagoon as with the whips of the Furies.

He had kept the sail on the beach for a protection from the storm, but before he could crawl
under it he was as wet as though he had been tossed up by the deep, and yet was glad to gain
its cover from the blinding floods and stinging sand. Here he lay for more than an hour, the
rage of the tempest continually growing, the heavens in a constant pulsing glare of lightnings,
their terrific thunders smiting and bellowing round and round its echoing vault, and the very
island seeming at times to stagger back and recover again as it braced itself against the fearful
onsets of the wind. Snuggling in his sailcloth burrow, he complacently recalled an earlier
storm like this, which he and Sweetheart, the only other time they ever were here, had tranquilly
weathered in this same lagoon. On the mainland, in that storm, cane- and rice-fields had been
laid low and half destroyed, houses had been unroofed, men had been killed. A woman and a boy,
under a pecan tree, were struck by lightning; and three men who had covered themselves with
a tarpaulin on one of the wharves in New Orleans were blown with it into the Mississippi, poor
fellows, and were drowned; a fact worthy of second consideration in the present juncture.

This second thought had hardly been given it before he crept hastily from his refuge and confronted
the gale in quick alarm. The hurricane was veering to southward. Let it shift but a point or
two more, and its entire force would sweep the lagoon and its beach. Before long the change
came. The mass of canvas at his feet leapt clear of the ground and fell two or three yards
away. He sprang to seize it, but in the same instant the whole storm--rain, wind, and sand--whirled
like a troop of fiends round the southern end of the island, the ceaseless lightnings showing
the way, and came tearing and howling up its hither side. The white sail lifted, bellied, rolled,
fell, vaulted into the air, fell again, tumbled on, and at the foot of a dune stopped until
its wind-buffeted pursuer had almost overtaken it. Then it fled again, faster, faster, higher,
higher up the sandy slope to its top, caught and clung an instant on some unseen bush, and
then with one mad bound into the black sky, unrolled, widened like a phantom, and vanished forever.

Gregory turned in desperation, and in the glare of the lightning looked back toward his raft.
Great waves were rolling along and across the slender reef in wide obliques and beating themselves
to death in the lagoon, or sweeping out of it again seaward at its more northern end. On the
dishevelled crest of one he saw his raft, and on another its mast. He could not look a second
time. The flying sand blinded him and cut the blood from his face. He could only cover his
eyes and crawl under the bushes in such poor lee as he could find; and there, with the first
lull of the storm, heavy with exhaustion and despair, he fell asleep and slept until far into
the day. When he awoke the tempest was over.

Even more completely the tumult within him was quieted. He rose and stood forth mute in spirit
as in speech; humbled, yet content, in the consciousness that having miserably failed first
to save himself and then to rue himself back to destruction, the hurricane had been his deliverer.
It had spared his supplies, his ammunition, his weapons, only hiding them deeper under the
dune sands; but scarce a vestige of his camp remained and of his raft nothing. As once more
from the highest sand-ridge he looked down upon the sea weltering in the majestic after-heavings
of its passion, at the eastern beach booming under the shock of its lofty rollers, and then
into the sky still gray with the endless flight of southward-hurrying scud, he felt the stir
of a new attachment to them and his wild prison, and pledged alliance with them thenceforth.

VI

Here, in giving me his account, Gregory asked me if that sounded sentimental. I said no, and
thereupon he actually tried to apologize to me as though I were a professional story-teller,
for having had so few deep feelings in the moments where the romancists are supposed to place
them. I told him what I had once seen a mechanic do on a steep, slated roof nearly a hundred
feet from the pavement. He had faced round from his work, which was close to the ridge-tiles,
probably to kick off the shabby shoes he had on, when some hold failed him and he began to
slide toward the eaves. We people in the street below fairly moaned our horror, but he didn't
utter a sound. He held back with all his skill, one leg thrust out in front, the other drawn
up with the knee to his breast, and his hands flattened beside him on the slates, but he came
steadily on down till his forward foot passed over the eaves and his heel caught on the tin
gutter. Then he stopped. We held our breath below. He slowly and cautiously threw off one shoe,
then the other, and then turned, climbed back up the roof and resumed his work. And we two
or three witnesses down in the street didn't think any less of him because he did so without
any show of our glad emotion.

"O, if I had that fellow's nerve," said Gregory, "that would be another thing!"

My wife and I smiled at each other. "How would it be 'another thing?'" we asked. "Did you not
quietly get up and begin life over again as if nothing had occurred?"

"There wasn't anything else to do," he replied, with a smile. "The feelings came later, too,
in an easy sort o' gradual way. I never could quite make out how men get such clear notions
of what they call 'Providence,' but, just the same, I know by experience there's all the difference
of peace and misery, or life and death, whether you're in partnership with the things that
help the world on, or with those that hold it back."

"But with that feeling," my wife asked, "did not your longing for our human world continue?"

"No," he replied, "but I got a new liking for it--although, you understand, I never had anything
against it, of course. It's too big and strong for me, that's all; and that's my fault. Your
man on that slippery roof kicking his shoes off is a sort of parable to me. If your hand or
your foot offend you and you have to cut it off, that's a physical disablement, and bad enough.
But when your gloves and your shoes are too much for you, and you have to pluck them off and
cast them from you, you find each one is a great big piece of the civilized world, and you
hardly know how much you did like it, till you've lost it. And still, it's no use longing,
when you know your limitations, and I saw I'd got to keep my world trimmed down to where I
could run barefooted on the sand."

He told us that now he began for the first time since coming to the island, to find his books
his best source of interest and diversion. He learned, he said, a way of reading by which sea,
sky, book, island, and absent humanity, all seemed parts of one whole, and all to speak together
in one harmony, while they toiled together for one harmony some day to be perfected. Not all
books, nor even all good books, were equally good for that effect, he thought, and the best----

"You might not think it," he said, "but the best was a Bible I'd chanced to carry along;" he
didn't know precisely what kind, but "just one of these ordinary Bibles you see lying around
in people's houses." He extolled the psalms and asked Mrs. Smith if she'd ever noticed the
beauty of the twenty-third. She smiled and said she believed she had.

One day, after a most marvellous sunset, he had been reading, he said, "that long psalm with
twenty-two parts in it--a hundred and seventy-six verses." He had intended to read "Lord, my
heart is not haughty" after it, though the light was fast failing, but at the hundred and seventy-sixth
verse he closed the book. Thus he sat in the nearly motionless air, gazing on the ripples of
the lagoon as, now singly, and now by twos or threes, they glided up the beach tinged with
the colors of parting day as with a grace of resignation, and sank into the grateful sands
like the lines of this last verse sinking into his heart; now singly--"I have gone astray like
a lost sheep;" and now by twos--"I have gone astray like a lost sheep; save thy servant;" or
by threes--"I have gone astray like a lost sheep; save thy servant; for I do not forget thy
commandments."

"I shouldn't tell that," he said to us, "if I didn't know so well how little it counts for.
But I knew at the time that when the next day but one should bring the lighthouse steamer I
shouldn't be any more fit to go ashore, to stay, than a jellyfish." We agreed, he and I that
there can be as wide a distance between fine feelings and faithful doing as, he said, "between
listening to the band and charging a battery."

On the islet the night deepened. The moon had not risen, and the stars only glorified the dark,
as it, in turn, revealed the unearthly beauties of a phosphorescent sea. It was one of those
rare hours in which the deep confessed the amazing numbers of its own living and swarming constellations.
Not a fish could leap or dart, not a sinuous thing could turn, but it became an animate torch.
Every quick movement was a gleam of green fire. No drifting, flaccid life could pulse so softly
along but it betrayed itself in lambent outlines. Each throb of the water became a beam of
light, and every ripple that widened over the strand--still whispering, "I have gone astray"--was
edged with luminous pearls.

In an agreeable weariness of frame, untroubled in mind, and counting the night too beautiful
for slumber he reclined on the dry sands with an arm thrown over a small pile of fagots which
he had spent the day in gathering from every part of the island to serve his need for the brief
remainder of his stay. In this search he had found but one piece of his boat, a pine board.
This he had been glad to rive into long splinters and bind together again as a brand, with
which to signal the steamer if--contrary to her practice, I think he said--she should pass
in the night. And so, without a premonition of drowsiness, he was presently asleep, with the
hours radiantly folding and expiring one upon another like the ripples on the beach.

When he came to himself he was on his feet. The moon was high, his fire was smouldering; his
heart was beating madly and his eyes were fixed on the steamer, looming large, moving at full
speed, her green light showing, her red light hid, and her long wake glowing with comet fire.
In a moment she would be passing. It was too late for beacon-flame or torch. He sprang for
his gun, and mounting the first low rise fired into the air, once!-- twice! --and shouted,
"Help!--help!"

She kept straight on. She was passing, she was passing! In trembling haste he loaded and fired
again, again wailed out his cry for help, and still she kept her speed. He had loaded for the
third discharge, still frantically calling the while, and was lifting his gun to fire when
he saw the white light at her foremast-head begin to draw nearer to the green light at her
waist and knew she was turning. He fired, shouted, and tried to load again; but as her red
light brightened into view beside the green, he dropped his gun and leaped and crouched and
laughed and wept for joy.

*       *       *       *       *

"Why, Gregory!" the naval lieutenant cried, as the castaway climbed from the steamer's boat
to her deck. "Why, you blasted old cracked fiddle! what in----"

"Right, the first guess!" laughed Gregory, "there's where I've been!" and in the cabin he explained
all.

"The fiddle's mended," he concluded. "You can play a tune on it--by being careful."

"But what's your tune?" asked his hearer; "you cannot go back to that island."

"Yes, I'll be on it in a week--with a schooner-load of cattle. I can get them on credit. Going
to raise cattle there as a regular business. They'll fatten in that marsh like blackbirds."

True enough, before the week was up the mended fiddle was playing its tune. It was not until
Gregory's second return from his island that he came to see us and told us his simple story.
We asked him how it was that the steamer, that first time, had come so much earlier than she
generally did.

"She didn't," he replied. "I had miscounted one day."

"Don't you," asked my wife, who would have liked a more religious tone in Gregory's recital,
"don't you have trouble to keep run of your Sabbaths away out there alone?"

"Why"--he smiled--"it's always Sunday there. Here almost everybody feels duty bound to work
harder than somebody else, or else make somebody else work harder than he, and you need a day
every now and then for Sunday--or Sabbath, at least. Oh, I suppose it's all one in the end,
isn't it? You take your's in a pill, I take mine in a powder. Not that it's the least bit like
a dose, however, except for the good it does."

"And you're really prospering, even in a material way!" I said.

"Yes," he answered. "O yes; the island's already too small for us."

"It's certainly very dangerously exposed," said my wife, and I guessed her thought was on Last
Island, which, you remember, though very large and populous, had been, within our recollection,
totally submerged, with dreadful loss of life.

"O yes," he responded, "there's always something wherever you are. One of these days some storm's
going to roll the sea clean over the whole thing."

"Then, why don't you move to a bigger island closer inshore?" she asked.

"I'm afraid," said Gregory, and smiled.

"Afraid!" said my wife, incredulously.

"Yes," he responded. "I'm afraid my prisoner'll get away from me."

As his hand closed over hers in good-by I saw, what he could not, that she had half a notion
to kiss it. I told her so when he was gone, and kissed hers--for him.

"I don't care," she said, dreamily, as it lingered in mine, "I'm glad I mended his coat for
him that time."

*       *       *       *       *

The Taxidermist

I

One day a hummingbird got caught in a cobweb in our greenhouse. It had no real need to seek
that damp, artificial heat. We were in the very heart of that Creole summer-time when bird-notes
are many as the sunbeams. The flowers were in such multitude they seemed to follow one about,
offering their honeys and perfumes and begging to be gathered. Our little boy saw the embodied
joy fall, a joy no longer, seized it, and clasping it too tightly, brought it to me dead.

He cried so over the loss that I promised to have the body stuffed. This is how I came to know
Manouvrier, the Taxidermist in St. Peter Street.

I passed his place twice before I found it. The front shop was very small, dingily clean and
scornfully unmercantile. Of the very few specimens of his skill to be seen round about not
one was on parade, yet everyone was somehow an achievement, a happy surprise, a lasting delight.
I admit that taxidermy is not classed among the fine arts; but you know there is a way of making
everything--anything--an art instead of a craft or a commerce, and such was the way of this
shop's big, dark, hairy-faced, shaggy-headed master. I saw his unsmiling face soften and his
eye grow kind as mine lighted up with approbation of his handiwork.

When I handed him the hummingbird he held it tenderly in his wide palm, and as I was wondering
to myself how so huge a hand as that could manipulate frail and tiny things and bring forth
delicate results, he looked into my face and asked, with a sort of magisterial gentleness:

"How she git kill', dat lill' bird?"

I told him. I could feel my mood and words take their tone from him, though he outwardly heard
me through with no show of feeling; and when I finished, I knew we were friends. I presently
ventured to praise the specimen of his skill nearest at hand; a wild turkey listening alarmedly
as if it would the next instant utter that ringing "quit!" which makes each separate drop of
a hunter's blood tingle. But with an odd languor in his gravity, he replied:

"Naw, dass not well make; lill' bit worse, bad enough to put in front window. I take you inside;
come."

II

We passed through into a private workroom immediately behind the shop. His wife sat there sewing;
a broad, motherly woman of forty-five, fat, tranquil, kind, with an old eye, a young voice,
and a face that had got its general flabbiness through much paddling and gnawing from other
women's teething babes. She sat still, unintroduced, but welcomed me with a smile.

I was saying to her husband that a hummingbird was a very small thing to ask him to stuff.
But he stopped me with his lifted palm.

"My fran', a hummingbird has de pas-sione'--de ecstacie! One drop of blood wid the pas-sione
in it"--He waved his hand with a jerk of the thumb in disdain of spoken words, and it was I
who added,

"Is bigger than the sun?"

"Hah!" was all he uttered in approval, turning as if to go to work. I feared I had disappointed
him.

"God measures by the soul, not by the size," I suggested. But he would say no more, and his
wife put in as softly as a kettle beginning to sing,

"Ah, ha, ha! I t'ink dass where de good God show varrie good sanse."

I began looking here and there in heartiest admiration of the products of his art and presently
we were again in full sympathy and talking eagerly. As I was going he touched my arm:

"You will say de soul is parted from dat lill' bird. And--yass; but"--he let a gesture speak
the rest.

"I know," replied I; "you propose to make the soul seem to come back and leave us its portrait.
I believe you will." Whereupon he gave me his first, faint smile, and detained me with another
touch.

"Msieu Smeet; when you was bawn?"

"I? December 9, 1844. Why do you ask?"

"O nut'n'; only I thing you make me luck; nine, h-eighteen, fawty-fo'--I play me doze number'
in de lott'ree to-day."

"Why, pshaw! you don't play the lottery, do you?"

"Yass. I play her; why not? She make me reech some of doze day'. Win fifty dollah one time
las' year."

The soft voice of the wife spoke up--"And spend it all to the wife of my dead brother. What
use him be reech? I think he don't stoff bird' no betteh."

But the husband responded more than half to himself,

"Yass, I think mebbe I stoff him lill' more betteh."

When, some days afterward I called again, thinking as I drew near how much fineness of soul
and life, seen or unseen, must have existed in earlier generations to have produced this man,
I noticed the in conspicuous sign over his door, P.T.B. Manouvrier, and as he led me at once
into the back room I asked him playfully what such princely abundance of initials might stand for.

"Doze? Ah, doze make only Pas-Trop-Bon."

I appealed to his wife; but she, with her placid laugh, would only confirm him:

"Yass; Pastropbon; he like that name. Tha's all de way I call him-- Pastropbon."

III

The hummingbird was ready for me. I will not try to tell how lifelike and beautiful the artist
had made it. Even with him I took pains to be somewhat reserved. As I stood holding and admiring
the small green wonder, I remarked that I was near having to bring him that morning another
and yet finer bird. A shade of displeasure (and, I feared, of suspicion also) came to his face
as he asked me how that was. I explained.

Going into my front hall, whose veranda-door framed in a sunny picture of orange-boughs, jasmine-vines,
and white-clouded blue sky, I had found a male ruby-throat circling about the ceiling, not
wise enough to stoop, fly low, and pass out by the way it had come in. It occurred to me that
it might be the mate of the one already mine. For some time all the efforts I could contrive,
either to capture or free it, were vain. Round and round it flew, silently beating and bruising
its exquisite little head against the lofty ceiling, the glory of its luminous red throat seeming
to heighten into an expression of unspeakable agony. At last Mrs. Smith ran for a long broom,
and, as in her absence I stood watching the self-snared captive's struggle, the long, tiny
beak which had never done worse than go twittering with rapture to the grateful hearts of thousands
of flowers, began to trace along the smooth, white ceiling a scarlet thread of pure heart's
blood. The broom came. I held it up, the flutterer lighted upon it, and at first slowly, warily,
and then triumphantly, I lowered it under the lintel out into the veranda, and the bird darted
away into the garden and was gone like a soul into heaven.

In the middle of my short recital Manouvrier had sunk down upon the arm of his wife's rocking-chair
with one huge hand on both of hers folded over her sewing, and as I finished he sat motionless,
still gazing into my face.

"But," I started, with sudden pretence of business impulse, "how much am I to pay?"

He rose, slowly, and looked dreamily at his wife; she smiled at him, and he grunted,

"Nut'n'."

"Oh, my friend," I laughed, "that's absurd!"

But he had no reply, and his wife, as she resumed her sewing, said, sweetly, as if to her needle,
"Ah, I think Pastropbon don't got to charge nut'n' if he don't feel like." And I could not
move them.

As I was leaving them, a sudden conjecture came to me.

"Did those birthday numbers bring you any luck?"

The taxidermist shook his head, good-naturedly, but when his wife laughed he turned upon her.

"Wait! I dawn't be done wid doze number' yet."

I guessed that, having failed with them in the daily drawings, he would shift the figures after
some notion of magical significance and venture a ticket, whole or fractional, in the monthly
drawing.

Scarcely ten days after, as I sat at breakfast with my newspaper spread beside my plate, I
fairly spilled my coffee as my eye fell upon the name of P.T.B. Manouvrier, of No.--St. Peter
Street. Old Pastropbon had drawn seventy-five thousand dollars in the lottery.

IV

All the first half of the day, wherever I was, in the street-car, at my counting-desk, on the
exchange, no matter to what I gave my attention, my thought was ever on my friend the taxidermist.
At luncheon it was the same. He was rich! And what, now? What next? And what--ah! what?-at
last? Would the end be foul or fair? I hoped, yet feared. I feared again; and yet I hoped.

A familiar acquaintance, a really good fellow, decent, rich, "born of pious parents," and determined
to have all the ready-made refinements and tastes that pure money could buy, came and sat with
me at my lunch table.

"I wonder," he began, "if you know where you are, or what you're here for. I've been watching
you for five minutes and I don't believe you do. See here; what sort of an old donkey is that
bird-stuffer of yours?"

"You know, then, his good fortune of yesterday, do you?"

"No, I don't. I know my bad fortune with him last week."

I dropped my spoon into my soup. "Why, what?"

"Oh, no great shakes. Only, I went to his place to buy that wild turkey you told me about.
I wanted to stand it away up on top of that beautiful old carved buffet I picked up in England
last year. I was fully prepared to buy it on your say-so, but, all the same, I saw its merits
the moment I set eyes on it. It has but one fault; did you notice that? I don't believe you
did. I pointed it out to him."

"You pointed--what did he say?"

"He said I was right."

"Why, what was the fault?"

"Fault? Why, the perspective is bad; not exactly bad, but poor; lacks richness and rhythm."

"And yet you bought the thing."

"No, I didn't."

"You didn't buy it?"

"No, sir, I didn't buy it. I began by pricing three or four other things first, so he couldn't
know which one to stick the fancy price on to, and incidentally I thought I would tell him--you'd
told me, you remember, how your accounts of your two birds had warmed him up and melted his
feelings----"

"I didn't tell you. My wife told your wife, and your wife, I----"

"Yes, yes. Well, anyhow, I thought I'd try the same game, so I told him how I had stuffed a
bird once upon a time myself. It was a pigeon, with every feather as white as snow; a fan-tail.
It had belonged to my little boy who died. I thought it would make such a beautiful emblem
at his funeral, rising with wings outspread, you know, typical of the resurrection--we buried
him from the Sunday-school, you remember. And so I killed it and wired it and stuffed it myself.
It was hard to hang it in a soaring attitude, owing to its being a fan-tail, but I managed it."

"And you told that to Manouvrier! What did he say?"

"Say? He never so much as cracked a smile. When I'd done he stood so still, looking at me,
that I turned and sort o' stroked the turkey and said, jestingly, says I, 'How much a pound
for this gobbler?'"

"That ought to have warmed him up."

"Well, it didn't. He smiled like a dancing-master, lifted my hand off the bird and says, says
he, 'She's not for sale.' Then he turned to go into his back room and leave me standing there.
Well, that warmed me up. Says I, 'What in thunder is it here for, then? and if it ain't for
sale, come back here and show me what is!'

"'Nawtin',' says 'e, with the same polite smile. 'Nawtin' for sale. I come back when you gone.'
His voice was sweet as sugar, but he slammed the door. I would have followed him in and put
some better manners into him with a kick, but the old orang-outang had turned the key inside,
and when I'd had time to remember that I was a deacon and Sunday-school teacher I walked away.
What do you mean by his good fortune of yesterday?"

"I mean he struck Charlie Howard for seventy-five thousand."

My hearer's mouth dropped open. He was equally amazed and amused. "Well, well, well! That accounts
for his silly high-headedness."

"Ah! no: that matter of yours was last week and the drawing was only yesterday."

"Oh, that's so. I don't keep run of that horrible lottery business. It makes me sick at heart
to see the hideous canker poisoning the character and blasting the lives of every class of
our people--why, don't you think so?"

"Oh, yes, I--I do. Yes, I certainly do!"

"But your conviction isn't exactly red-hot, I perceive. Come, wake up."

We rose. At the first street corner, as we were parting, I noticed he was still talking of
the lottery.

"Pestilential thing," he was calling it. "Men blame it lightly on the ground that there are
other forms of gambling which our laws don't reach. I suppose a tiger in a village mustn't
be killed till we have killed all the tigers back in the woods!"

I assented absently and walked away full of a vague shame. For I know as well as anyone that
a man without a quick, strong, aggressive, insistent indignation against undoubted evil is
a very poor stick.

V

At dinner that evening, Mrs. Smith broke a long silence with the question:

"Did you go to see Manouvrier?"

"Nn--o."

She looked at me drolly. "Did you go half way and turn back?"

"Yes," said I, "that's precisely what I did." And we dropped the subject.

But in the night I felt her fingers softly touch my shoulder.

"Warm night," I remarked.

"Richard," said she, "it will be time enough to be troubled about your taxidermist when he's
given you cause."

"I'm not troubled; I'm simply interested. I'll go down to-morrow and see him." A little later
it rained, very softly, and straight down, so that there was no need to shut the windows, and
I slept like an infant until the room was full of sunshine.

All the next day and evening, summer though it was and the levee and sugar sheds and cotton-yards
virtually empty, I was kept by unexpected business and could not go near St. Peter Street.
Both my partners were away on their vacations. But on the third afternoon our office regained
its summer quiet and I was driving my pen through the last matter that prevented my going where
I pleased, when I was disturbed by the announcement of a visitor. I pushed my writing on to
a finish though he stood just at my back. Then I turned to bid him talk fast as my time was
limited, when who should it be but Manouvrier. I took him into my private office, gave him
a chair and said:

"I was just coming to see you."

"You had somet'in' to git stoff'?"

"No; I--Oh, I didn't know but you might like to see me."

"Yass?--Well--yass. I wish you come yesterday."

"Indeed? Why so; to protect you from reporters and beggars?"

"Naw; my wife she keep off all doze Peter an' John. Naw; one man bring me one wile cat to stoff.
Ah! a so fine as I never see! Beautiful like da dev'l! Since two day' an' night' I can't make
out if I want to fix dat wile cat stan'in' up aw sittin' down!"

"Did you decide at last?"

"Yass, I dis-ide. How you think I diside?"

"Ah! you're too hard for me. But one thing I know."

"Yass? What you know?"

"That you will never do so much to anything as to leave my imagination nothing to do. You will
always give my imagination strong play and never a bit of hard work."

"Come! Come and see!"

I took my hat. "Is that what you called to see me about?"

"Ah!" He started in sudden recollection and brought forth the lottery company's certified check
for the seventy-five thousand dollars. "You keep dat?--lill' while?--for me? Yass; till I mek
out how I goin' to spend her."

"Manouvrier, may I make one condition?"

"Yass."

"It is that you will never play the lottery again."

"Ah! Yass, I play her ag'in! You want know whan ole Pastropbon play her ag'in? One doze fine
mawning--mebbee--dat sun--going rise hisself in de wes'. Well: when ole Pastropbon see dat,
he play dat lott'ree ag'in. But biffo' he see dat"--He flirted his thumb.

Not many days later a sudden bereavement brought our junior partner back from Europe and I
took my family North for a more stimulating air. Before I went I called on my St. Peter Street
friend to say that during my absence either of my partners would fulfil any wish of his concerning
the money. In his wife's sewing-basket in the back room I noticed a batch of unopened letters,
and ventured a question which had been in my mind for several days.

"Manouvrier, you must get a host of letters these days from people who think you ought to help
them because you have got money and they haven't. Do you read them?"

"Naw!" He gave me his back, bending suddenly over some real or pretended work. "I read some--first
day. Since dat time I give 'em to old woman-- wash hand--go to work ag'in--naw use."

"Ah! no use?" piped up the soft-voiced wife. "I use them to light those fire to cook those
soup." But I felt the absence of her accustomed laugh.

"Well, it's there whenever you want it," I said to the husband as I was leaving.

"What?" The tone of the response was harsh. "What is where?"

"Why, the money. It's in the bank."

"Hah!" he said, with a contemptuous smile and finished with his thumb. That was the first time
I ever saw a thumb swear. But in a moment his kindly gravity was on him again and he said,
"Daz all right; I come git her some day."

VI

I did not get back to New Orleans till late in the fall. In the office they told me that Manouvrier
had been in twice to see if I had returned, and they had promised to send him word of my arrival.
But I said no, and went to see him.

I found new lines of care on his brow, but the old kindness was still in his eye. We exchanged
a few words of greeting and inquiry, and then there came a pause, which I broke.

"Well, stuffing birds better than ever, I suppose."

"Naw," he looked around upon his work, "I dawn't think. I dunno if I stoff him quite so good
like biffo'." Another pause. Then, "I think I mek out what I do wid doze money now."

"Indeed," said I, and noticed that his face was averted from his wife.

She lifted her eyes to his broad back with a quizzical smile, glanced at me knowingly, and
dropped them again upon her sewing, sighed:

"Ah-bah!" Then she suddenly glanced at me with a pretty laugh and added, "Since all that time
he dunno what he goin' to make with it. If he trade with it I thing he don't stoff bird no
mo', and I thing he lose it bis-ide--ha, ha, ha!--and if he keep it all time lock in doze bank
I thing, he jiz well not have it." She laughed again.

But he quite ignored her and resumed, as if out of a revery, "Yass, at de las' I mek dat out."
And the wife interrupted him in a tone that was like the content of a singing hen.

"I think it don't worth while to leave it to our chillun, en't it?"

"Ah!" said the husband, entirely to me, "daz de troub'! You see?--we dawn't got some ba-bee'!
Dat neveh arrive to her. God know' dass not de fault of us."

"Yass," put in his partner, smiling to her needle, "the good God know' that verrie well." And
the pair exchanged a look of dove-like fondness.

"Yass," Manouvrier mused aloud once more, "I think I build my ole woman one fine house."

"Ah! I don't want!"

"But yass! Foudre tonnerre! how I goin' spend her else? w'iskee? hosses? women? what da dev'l!
Naw, I build a fine 'ouse. You see! she want dat house bad enough when she see her. Yass; fifty
t'ousan' dollah faw house and twenty-five t'ousan'"--he whisked his thumb at me and I said for him,

"Yes, twenty-five thousand at interest to keep up the establishment."

"Yass. Den if Pastropbon go first to dat boneyard--" And out went his thumb again, while his
hairy lip curled at the grim prospect of beating Fate the second time, and as badly, in the
cemetery, as the first time, in the lottery.

He built the house--farther down town and much farther from the river. Both husband and wife
found a daily delight in watching its slow rise and progress. In the room behind the shop he
still plied his art and she her needle as they had done all their married life, with never
an inroad upon their accustomed hours except the calls of the shop itself; but on every golden
morning of that luxurious summer-land, for a little while before the carpenters and plasterers
arrived and dragged off their coats, the pair spent a few moments wandering through and about
the building together, she with her hen-like crooning, he with his unsmiling face.

Yet they never showed the faintest desire to see the end. The contractor dawdled by the month.
I never saw such dillydallying. They only abetted it, and when once he brought an absurd and
unasked-for excuse to the taxidermist's shop, its proprietor said--first shutting the door
between them and the wife in the inner room:

"Tek yo' time. Mo' sloweh she grow, mo' longeh she stan'."

I doubt that either Manouvrier or his wife hinted to the other the true reason for their apathy.
But I guessed it, only too easily, and felt its pang. It was that with the occupancy and care
of the house must begin the wife's absence from her old seat beside her husband at his work.

Another thing troubled me. I did persuade him to put fittings into his cistern which fire-engines
could use in case of emergency, but he would not insure the building.

"Naw! Luck bring me dat--I let luck take care of her."

"Ah! yass," chimed the wife, "yet still I think mebbee the good God tell luck where to bring
her. I'm shoe he got fing-er in that pie."

"Ah-ha? Daz all right! If God want to burn his own fing-er----"

At length the house was finished and was beautiful within and without. It was of two and a
half stories, broad and with many rooms. Two spacious halls crossed each other, and there were
wide verandas front and back, and a finished and latticed basement. The basement and the entire
grounds, except a few bright flower-borders, were flagged, as was also the sidewalk, with the
manufactured stone which in that nearly frostless climate makes such a perfect and beautiful
pavement, and on this fair surface fell the large shadows of laburnum, myrtle, orange, oleander,
sweet-olive, mespelus, and banana, which the taxidermist had not spared expense to transplant
here in the leafy prime of their full growth.

Then almost as slowly the dwelling was furnished. In this the brother-in- law's widow co-operated,
and when it was completed Manouvrier suggested her living in it a few days so that his wife
might herself move in as leisurely as she chose. And six months later, there, in the old back
room in St. Peter Street, the wife still sat sewing and now and then saying small, wise, dispassionate
things to temper the warmth of her partner's more artistic emotions. Every fair day, about
the hour of sunset, they went to see the new house. It was plain they loved it; loved it only
less than their old life; but only the brother-in-law's widow lived in it.

VII

I happened about this time to be acting as president of an insurance company on Canal Street.
Summer was coming in again. One hot sunny day, when the wind was high and gusty, the secretary
was remarking to me what sad ruin it might work if fire should start among the frame tenement
cottages which made up so many neighborhoods that were destitute of watermains, when right
at our ear the gong sounded for just such a region and presently engine after engine came thundering
and smoking by our open windows. Fire had broken out in the street where Manouvrier's new house
stood, four squares from that house, but straight to windward of it.

We knew only too well, without being there to witness, that our firemen would find nothing
with which to fight the flames except a few shallow wells of surface water and the wooden rain-water
cisterns above ground, and that both these sources were almost worthless owing to a drouth.
A man came in and sat telling me of his new device for lessening the risks of fire.

"Where?" asked I, quickly.

"Why, as I was saying, on steamboats loaded with cotton."

"Oh, yes," said I, "I understand." But I did not. For the life of me I couldn't make sense
of what he said. I kept my eyes laboriously in his face, but all I could see was a vision of
burning cottages; hook-and- ladder-men pulling down sheds and fences; ruined cisterns letting
just enough water into door-yards and street-gutters to make sloppy walking; fire-engines standing
idle and dropping cinders into their own puddles in a kind of shame for their little worth;
here and there one furiously sucking at an exhausted well while its firemen stood with scorching
faces holding the nozzles almost in the flames and cursing the stream of dribbling mud that
fell short of their gallant endeavor. I seemed to see streets populous with the sensation-seeking
crowd; sidewalks and alleys filled with bedding, chairs, bureaus, baskets of crockery and calico
clothing with lamps spilling into them, cheap looking-glasses unexpectedly answering your eye
with the boldness of an outcast girl, broken tables, pictures of the Virgin, overturned stoves,
and all the dear mantlepiece trash which but an hour before had been the pride of the toiling
housewife, and the adornment of the laborer's home.

"Where can I see this apparatus?" I asked my patient interviewer.

"Well--ahem! it isn't what you'd call an apparatus, exactly. I have here----"

"Yes; never mind that just now; I'm satisfied you've got a good thing and --I'll tell you!
Can you come in to-morrow at this hour? Good! I wish you would! Well, good-day."

The secretary was waiting to speak to me. The fire, he said, had entirely burned up one square
and was half through a second. "By the way, isn't that the street where old P.T.B.----"

"Yes," I replied, taking my hat; "if anyone wants to see me, you'd better tell him to call
to-morrow."

I found the shop in St. Peter's Street shut, and went on to the new residence. As I came near
it, its beauty seemed to me to have consciously increased under the threatenings of destruction.

In the front gate stood the brother-in-law's widow, full of gestures and distressful smiles
as she leaned out with nervously folded arms and looked up and down the street. "Manouvrier?
he is ad the fire since a whole hour. He will break his heart if dat fire ketch to dat 'ouse
here. He cannot know 'ow 'tis in danger! Ah! sen' him word? I sen' him fo' five time'--he sen'
back I stay righd there an' not touch nut'n'! Ah! my God! I fine dat varrie te-de-ous, me, yass!"

"Is his wife with him?"

"Assuredly! You see, dey git 'fraid 'bout dat 'ouse of de Sister', you know?"

"No, where is it?"

"No? You dunno dat lill' 'ouse where de Sister' keep dose orphelin' ba-bee'?-juz big-inning
sinse 'bout two week' ago?-round de corner--one square mo' down town--'alf square mo' nearer
de swamp? Well, I thing 'f you pass yondeh you fine Pastropbon."

VIII

Through smoke, under falling cinders, and by distracted and fleeing households I went. The
moment I turned the second corner I espied the house. It was already half a square from the
oncoming fire, but on the northern side of the street, just out of its probable track and not
in great danger except from sparks. But it was old and roofed with shingles; a decrepit Creole
cottage sitting under dense cedars in a tangle of rose and honeysuckle vines, and strangely
beautified by a flood of smoke-dimmed yellow sunlight.

As I hurried forward, several men and boys came from the opposite direction at a run and an
engine followed them, jouncing and tilting across the sidewalk opposite the little asylum,
into a yard, to draw from a fresh well. Their leader was a sight that drew all eyes. He was
coatless and hatless; his thin cotton shirt, with its sleeves rolled up to the elbows, was
torn almost off his shaggy breast, his trousers were drenched with water and a rude bandage
round his head was soaked with blood. He carried an axe. The throng shut him from my sight,
but I ran to the spot and saw him again standing before the engine horses with his back close
to their heads. A strong, high board fence shut them off from the well and against it stood
the owner of the property, pale as death, guarding the precious water with a shotgun at full
cock. I heard him say:

"The first fellow that touches this fence----"

But he did not finish. Quicker than his gun could flash and bang harmlessly in the air the
man before him had dropped the axe and leaped upon him with the roar of a lion. The empty gun
flew one way and its owner another and almost before either struck the ground the axe was swinging
and crashing into the fence.

As presently the engine rolled through the gap and shouting men backed her to the edge of the
well, the big axeman paused to wipe the streaming sweat from his begrimed face with his arm.
I clutched him.

"Manouvrier!"

A smile of recognition shone for an instant and vanished as I added,

"Come to your own house! Come, you can't save it here."

He turned a quick, wild look at the fire, seized me by the arm and with a gaze of deepest gratitude,
asked:

"You tryin' save her?"

"I'll do anything I can."

"Oh, dass right!" His face was full of mingled joy and pain. "You go yondeh--mek yo' possible!"
We were hurrying to the street--"Oh, yass, faw God's sake go, mek yo' possible!"

"But, Manouvrier, you must come too! Where's your wife? The chief danger to your house isn't
here, it's where the fire's between it and the wind!"

His answer was a look of anguish. "Good God! my fran'. We come yondeh so quick we can! But--foudre
tonnerre!--look that house here fill' with ba-bee'! What we goin' do? Those Sister' can't climb
on roof with bocket' wateh. You see I got half-dozen boy' up yondeh; if I go 'way they dis-cend
and run off at the fire, spark' fall on roof an'--" his thumb flew out.

"Sparks! Heavens! Manouvrier, your house is in the path of the flames!"

The man flew at me and hung over me, his strong locks shaking, his great black fist uplifted
and the only tears in his eyes I ever saw there. "Damnession! She's not mine! I trade her to
God faw these one! Go! tell him she's his, he kin burn her if he feel like'!" He gave a half
laugh, fresh witness of his distress, and went into the gate of the asylum.

I smiled--what could I do?--and was turning away, when I saw the chief of the fire department.
It took but one moment to tell him my want, and in another he had put the cottage roof under
the charge of four of his men with instructions not to leave it till the danger was past or
the house burning. The engine near us had drawn the well dry and was coming away. He met it,
pointed to where, beneath swirling billows of black smoke, the pretty gable of the taxidermist's
house shone like a white sail against a thundercloud, gave orders and disappeared.

The street was filling with people. A row of cottages across the way was being emptied. The
crackling flames were but half a square from Manouvrier's house. I called him once more to
come. He waved his hand kindly to imply that he knew what I had done. He and his wife were
in the Sisters' front garden walk conversing eagerly with the Mother Superior. They neared
the gate. Suddenly the Mother Superior went back, the lay-sister guarding the gate let the
pair out and the three of us hurried off together.

We found ourselves now in the uproar and vortex of the struggle. Only at intervals could we
take our attention from the turmoil that impeded or threatened us, to glance forward at the
white gable or back--as Manouvrier persisted in doing--to the Sisters' cottage. Once I looked
behind and noticed, what I was loath to tell, that the firemen on its roof had grown busy;
but as I was about to risk the truth, the husband and wife, glancing at their own roof, in
one breath groaned aloud. Its gleaming gable had begun to smoke.

"Ah! that good God have pity on uz!" cried the wife, in tears, but as she started to run forward
I caught her arm and bade her look again. A strong, white stream of water was falling on the
smoking spot and it smoked no more.

The next minute, with scores of others, choking and blinded with the smoke, we were flying
from the fire. The wind had turned.

"It is only a gust," I cried, "it will swing round again. We must turn the next corner and
reach the house from the far side." I glanced back to see why my companions lagged and lo!
they had vanished.

IX

I reached the house just in time to save its front grounds from the invasion of the rabble.
The wind had not turned back again. The brother-in law's widow was offering prayers of thanksgiving.
The cisterns were empty and the garden stood glistening in the afternoon sun like a May queen
drenched in tears; but the lovely spot was saved.

I left its custodian at an upper window, looking out upon the fire, and started once more to
find my friends. Half-way round to the Sisters' cottage I met them. With many others I stepped
aside to make a clear way for the procession they headed. The sweet, clean wife bore in her
arms an infant; the tattered, sooty, bloody-headed husband bore two; and after them, by pairs
and hand in hand, with one gray sister in the rear, came a score or more of pink-frocked, motherless
little girls. An amused rabble of children and lads hovered about the diminutive column, with
leers and jests and happy antics, and the wife smiled foolishly and burned red with her embarrassment;
but in the taxidermist's face shone an exaltation of soul greater than any I had ever seen.
I felt too petty for such a moment and hoped he would go by without seeing me; but he smiled
an altogether new smile and said,

"My fran', God A'mighty, he know a good bargain well as anybody!"

I ran ahead with no more shame of the crowd than Zaccheus of old. I threw open the gate, bounded
up the steps and spread wide the door. In the hall, the widow, knowing naught of this, met
me with wet eyes crying,

"Ah! ah! de 'ouse of de orphelin' is juz blaze' up h-all over h-at once!" and hushed in amazement
as the procession entered the gate.

P.T.B. Manouvrier, Taxidermist!

When the fire was out the owner of that sign went back to his shop and to his work, and his
wife sat by him sewing as before. But the orphans stayed in their new and better home. Two
or three years ago the Sisters--the brother-in-law's widow is one of them--built a large addition
behind; but the house itself stands in the beauty in which it stood on that day of destruction,
and my friend always leaves his work on balmy afternoons in time to go with his wife and see
that pink procession, four times as long now as it was that day, march out the gate and down
the street for its daily walk.

"Ah! Pastropbon, we got ba-bee' enough presently, en't it?"

"Ole woman, nobody else ever strock dat lott'ree for such a prize like dat."

*       *       *       *       *

The Entomologist

I

An odd feature of New Orleans is the way homes of all ranks, in so many sections of it, are
mingled. The easy, bright democracy of the thing is what one might fancy of ancient Greeks;
only, here there is a general wooden frailty.

A notable phase of this characteristic is the multitude of small, frame, ground-story double
cottages fronting endwise to the street, on lots that give either side barely space enough
for one row of twelve-foot rooms with windows on a three-foot alley leading to the narrow backyard.

Thus they lie, deployed in pairs or half-dozens, by hundreds, in the variable intervals that
occur between houses and gardens of dignity and elegance; hot as ovens, taking their perpetual
bath of the great cleanser, sunshine. Sometimes they open directly upon the banquette (sidewalk),
but often behind as much as a fathom of front-yard, as gay with flowers as a girl's hat, and
as fragrant of sweet-olive, citronelle, and heliotrope as her garments. In the right-hand half
of such a one, far down on the Creole side of Canal street, and well out toward the swamp,
lived our friend the entomologist.

Just a glance at it was enough to intoxicate one's fancy. It seemed to confess newness of life,
joy, passion, temperance, refinement, aspiration, modest wisdom, and serene courage. You would
say there must live two well-mated young lovers--but one can't always tell.

II

We first came to know the entomologist through our opposite neighbors, the Fontenettes, when
we lived in the street that still bears the romantic name, Sixth. What a pity nothing rhymes
to it. Their ground-story cottage was of a much better sort. It lay broadside to the street,
two-thirds across a lot of forty feet width, in the good old Creole fashion, its front garden
twelve feet deep, and its street fence, of white palings, higher than the passer's head. The
parlor and dining-room were on the left, and the two main bedrooms on the right, next the garden;
Mrs. Fontenette's in front, opening into the parlor, Monsieur's behind, letting into the dining-room.
For there had been a broader garden on the parlor and dining-room side, but that had been sold
and built on. "A madman must be confined, sir," replies Dr. Johnson. "But," says the other, "I
am now apprehensive for his general health, he will lose the benefit of exercise." "Exercise!"
returns the Doctor, "I never heard that he used any: he might, for aught I know, walk to the
alehouse; but I believe he was always carried home again."

It was, however, unlucky for those who delighted to echo Johnson's sentiments, that he would
not endure from them to-day what perhaps he had yesterday, by his own manner of treating the
subject, made them fond of repeating; and I fancy Mr. B--- has not forgotten that though his
friend one evening in a gay humour talked in praise of wine as one of the blessings permitted by heaven,
when used with moderation, to lighten the load of life, and give
men strength to endure it; yet, when in consequence of such talk he
thought fit to make a Bacchanalian discourse in its favour, Mr. Johnson
contradicted him somewhat roughly, as I remember; and when, to assure
himself of conquest, he added these words: "You must allow me, sir,
at least that it produces truth; in vino veritas, you know, sir."

"That," replied Mr. Johnson, "would be useless to a man who knew he was not a liar when he was
sober."

When one talks of giving and taking the lie familiarly, it is impossible to forbear recollecting
the transactions between the editor of "Ossian," and the author of
the "Journey to the Hebrides."

It was most observable to me, however, that Mr. Johnson never bore his antagonist the slightest
degree of ill-will. He always kept those quarrels which belonged to him as a writer separate
from those which he had to do with as a man; but I never did hear him say in private one malicious
word of a public enemy; and of Mr. Macpherson I once heard him speak respectfully, though his reply
to the friend who asked him if any man living could have written
such a book, is well known, and has been often repeated--"Yes, sir,
many men, many women, and many children."

I inquired of him myself if this story was authentic, and he said it was. I made the same inquiry
concerning his account of the state of literature in Scotland, which was repeated up and down at one
time by everybody--"How knowledge was divided among the Scots, like bread in a besieged town,
to every man a mouthful, to no man a bellyful." This story he likewise acknowledged, and said, besides,
"that some officious friend had carried it to Lord Bute, who only answered, 'Well, well! never
mind what he says, he will have the pension all one.'"

Another famous reply to a Scotsman who commended the beauty and dignity of Glasgow, till Mr.
Johnson stopped him by observing, "that he probably had never yet seen Brentford," was one of
the jokes he owned; and said himself "that when a gentleman of that
country once mentioned the lovely prospects common in his nation,
he could not help telling him that the view of the London road was
the prospect in which every Scotsman most naturally and most rationally
delighted."

Mrs. Brooke received an answer not unlike this, when expatiating on the accumulation of sublime
and beautiful objects, which form the fine prospect up the River
St. Lawrence, in North America.

"Come, madam," says Dr. Johnson, "confess that nothing ever equalled your pleasure in seeing
that sight reversed; and finding yourself looking at the happy prospect
down the River St. Lawrence."

The truth is, he hated to hear about prospects and views, and laying out ground and taste in
gardening. "That was the best garden," he said, "which produced most roots and fruits; and that water
was most to be prized which contained most fish." He used to laugh at Shenstone most unmercifully
for not caring whether there was anything good to eat in the streams he was so fond of, "as
if," says Johnson, "one could fill one's belly with hearing soft
murmurs, or looking at rough cascades!"

He loved the sight of fine forest trees, however, and detested Brighthelmstone Downs, "because it was a country
so truly desolate," he said, "that if one had a mind to hang one's self for desperation at
being obliged to live there, it would be difficult to find a tree on which to fasten the rope."

With
such notions, who can wonder he passed his time uncomfortably enough
with us, who he often complained of for living so much in the country,
"feeding the chickens," as he said I did, "till I starved my own understanding.

Get, however," said he, "a book about gardening, and study it hard, since you will pass your
life with birds and flowers, and learn to raise the largest turnips, and to breed the biggest
fowls." It was vain to assure him that the goodness of such dishes did not depend upon their
size. He laughed at the people who covered their canals with foreign fowls, "when," says he,
"our own geese and ganders are twice as large. If we fetched better animals from distant nations,
there might be some sense in the preference; but to get cows from Alderney, or water- fowl from China,
only to see nature degenerating round one, is a poor ambition indeed."

Nor was Mr. Johnson more merciful with regard to the amusements people
are contented to call such.

"You hunt in the morning," says he, "and crowd to the public rooms at night, and call it diversion,
when your heart knows it is perishing with poverty of pleasures, and your wits get blunted
for want of some other mind to sharpen them upon. There is in this world no real delight (excepting
those of sensuality), but exchange of ideas in conversation; and whoever has once experienced the
full flow of London talk, when he retires to country friendships, and rural sports, must either
be contented to turn baby again and play with the rattle, or he will pine away like a great fish
in a little pond, and die for want of his usual food."

"Books without the knowledge of life are useless," I have heard him say; "for what should books
teach but the art of living? To study manners, however, only in coffee-houses, is more than
equally imperfect; the minds of men who acquire no solid learning, and only exist on the daily forage
that they pick up by running about, and snatching what drops from their neighbours as ignorant as
themselves, will never ferment into any knowledge valuable or durable;
but like the light wines we drink in hot countries, please for the
moment, though incapable of keeping.

In the study of mankind much will be found to swim as froth, and much must sink as feculence,
before the wine can have its effect, and become that noblest liquor which rejoices the heart,
and gives vigour to the imagination."

I am well aware that I do not and cannot give each expression of Dr. Johnson with all its force
or all its neatness; but I have done my best to record such of his
maxims, and repeat such of his sentiments, as may give to those who
know him not a just idea of his character and manner of thinking.

To endeavour at adorning, or adding, or softening, or meliorating such anecdotes, by any tricks
my inexperienced pen could play, would be weakness indeed; worse than the Frenchman who presides
over the porcelain manufactory at Seve, to whom, when some Greek vases were given him as models,
he lamented la tristesse de telles formes; and endeavoured to assist them by clusters of flowers,
while flying Cupids served for the handles of urns originally intended to contain the ashes of
the dead.

The misery is, that I can recollect so few anecdotes, and that I
have recorded no more axioms of a man whose every word merited attention,
and whose every sentiment did honour to human nature.

Remote from affectation as from error or falsehood, the comfort a reader has in looking over
these papers is the certainty that these were really the opinions
of Johnson, which are related as such.

Fear of what others may think is the great cause of affectation; and he was not likely to disguise
his notions out of cowardice. He hated disguise, and nobody penetrated it so readily. I showed
him a letter written to a common friend, who was at some loss for
the explanation of it.

"Whoever wrote it," says our doctor, "could, if he chose it, make
himself understood; but 'tis the letter of an embarrassed man sir;"
and so the event proved it to be.

Mysteriousness in trifles offended him on every side. "It commonly ended in guilt," he said;
"for those who begin by concealment of innocent things will soon have something to hide which
they dare not bring to light." He therefore encouraged an openness of conduct, in women particularly,
"who," he observed, "were often led away when children, by their delight and power of surprising."
He said, indeed, "that women were very difficult to be taught the proper manner of conferring
pecuniary favours; that they always gave too much money or too little; for that they had an
idea of delicacy accompanying their gifts, so that they generally rendered them either useless
or ridiculous."

He did, indeed, say very contemptuous things of our sex, but was exceedingly angry when I told
Miss Reynolds that he said "It was well managed of some one to leave his affairs in the hands
of his wife, because, in matters of business," said he, "no woman stops at integrity." This was,
I think, the only sentence I ever observed him solicitous to explain
away after he had uttered it.

He was not at all displeased at the recollection of a sarcasm thrown on a whole profession at
once; when a gentleman leaving the company, somebody who sat next Dr. Johnson asked him, who
he was? "I cannot exactly tell you, sir," replied he, "and I would be loth to speak ill of any
person who I do not know deserves it, but I am afraid he is an attorney." He did not, however,
encourage general satire, and for the most part professed himself to feel directly contrary
to Dr. Swift; "who," says he, "hates the world, though he loves John and Robert, and certain individuals."

Johnson
said always, "that the world was well constructed, but that the particular people disgraced the
elegance and beauty of the general fabric." In the same manner I was relating once to him how
Dr. Collier observed that the love one bore to children was from the anticipation one's mind
made while one contemplated them. "We hope," says he, "that they will sometime make wise men or
amiable women; and we suffer 'em to take up our affection beforehand. One cannot love lumps
of flesh, and little infants are nothing more."

"On the contrary," says Johnson, "one can scarcely help wishing, while one fondles a baby, that
it may never live to become a man; for it is so probable that when he becomes a man, he should
be sure to end in a scoundrel." Girls were less displeasing to him; "for as their temptations
were fewer," he said, "their virtue in this life, and happiness in the next, were less improbable;
and he loved," he said, "to see a knot of little misses dearly."

Needlework had a strenuous approver in Dr. Johnson, who said "that one of the great felicities
of female life was the general consent of the world that they might amuse themselves with petty
occupations, which contributed to the lengthening their lives, and
preserving their minds in a state of sanity."

"A man cannot hem a pocket-handkerchief," said a lady of quality
to him one day, "and so he runs mad, and torments his family and friends."

The expression struck him exceedingly, and when one acquaintance grew troublesome, and another unhealthy,
he used to quote Lady Frances's observation, "That a man cannot hem a pocket-handkerchief."

The nice people found no mercy from Mr. Johnson; such, I mean, as can only dine at four o'clock,
who cannot bear to be waked at an unusual hour, or miss a stated meal without inconvenience.
He had no such prejudices himself, and with difficulty forgave them in another. "Delicacy
does not surely consist," says he, "in impossibility to be pleased, and that is false dignity
indeed which is content to depend upon others." On that principle it was that he preferred winter
to summer, when the heat of the weather gave people an excuse to stroll about and walk for pleasure
in the shade, while he wished to sit still on a chair and chat day after day, till somebody
proposed a drive in the coach, and that was the most delicious moment
of his life.

"But the carriage must stop some time," he said, "and the people would come home at last," so his
pleasure was of short duration.

And when the first paralytic stroke took his speech from him, he
instantly set about composing a prayer in Latin, at once to deprecate
God's mercy, to satisfy himself that his mental powers remained unimpaired,
and to keep them in exercise, that they might not perish by permitted
stagnation.

This was after we parted; but he wrote me an account of it, and I intend to publish that letter,
with many more.

When one day he had at my house taken tincture of antimony instead of emetic wine, for a vomit,
he was himself the person to direct us what to do for him, and managed with as much coolness
and deliberation as if he had been prescribing for an indifferent person. Though on another occasion,
when he had lamented in the most piercing terms his approaching dissolution, and conjured me solemnly
to tell him what I thought, while Sir Richard Jebb was perpetually on the road to Streatham,
and Mr. Johnson seemed to think himself neglected if the physician
left him for an hour only, I made him a steady, but as I thought a
very gentle harangue, in which I confirmed all that the doctor had
been saying; how no present danger could be expected, but that his
age and continued ill- health must naturally accelerate the arrival
of that hour which can be escaped by none.

"And this," says Johnson, rising in great anger, "is the voice of female friendship, I suppose,
when the hand of the hangman would be softer." I relate these instances chiefly to show that the
fears of death itself could not suppress his wit, his sagacity, or his temptation to sudden
resentment.

Mr. Johnson did not like that his friends should bring their manuscripts
for him to read, and he liked still less to read them when they were
brought.

Sometimes, however, when he could not refuse, he would take the play or poem, or whatever it
was, and give the people his opinion from some one page he had peeped
into.

Seeing me laugh most violently, "Why, what would'st have, child?" said he. "I looked at the
dramatis, and there was Tigranes and Tiridates, or Teribazus, or such stuff. A man can tell but
what he knows, and I never got any farther than the first page. Alas, madam!" continued he,
"how few books are there of which one ever can possibly arrive at the last page. After Homer's
Iliad, Mr. Johnson confessed that the work of Cervantes was the greatest in the world, speaking
of it I mean as a book of entertainment. And when we consider that every other author's admirers
are confined to his countrymen, and perhaps to the literary classes among them, while "Don Quixote" is
a sort of common property, an universal classic, equally tasted by the court and the cottage,
equally applauded in France and England as in Spain, quoted by every servant, the amusement of every
age from infancy to decrepitude; the first book you see on every shelf, in every shop, where
books are sold, through all the states of Italy; who can refuse his consent to an avowal of
the superiority of Cervantes to all other modern writers? Shakespeare himself has, till lately, been
worshipped only at home, though his plays are now the favourite amusements of Vienna; and when
I was at Padua some months ago, Romeo and Juliet was acted there
under the name of Tragedia Veronese; while engravers and translators
live by the hero of La Mancha in every nation, and the sides of miserable
inns all over England and France, and I have heard Germany too, are
adorned with the exploits of Don Quixote.

May his celebrity procure my pardon for a digression in praise of a writer who, through four volumes
of the most exquisite pleasantry and genuine humour, has never been
seduced to overstep the limits of propriety, has never called in the
wretched auxiliaries of obscenity or profaneness; who trusts to nature
and sentiment alone, and never misses of that applause which Voltaire
and Sterne labour to produce, while honest merriment bestows her unfading
crown upon Cervantes.

Dr. Johnson was a great reader of French literature, and delighted exceedingly in Boileau's works.
Moliere, I think, he had hardly sufficient taste of, and he used to condemn me for preferring
La Bruyere to the Duc de Rochefoucault, who, he said, was the only gentleman writer who wrote
like a professed author.

The asperity of his harsh sentences, each of them a sentence of condemnation, used to disgust
me, however; though it must be owned that, among the necessaries of human life, a rasp is
reckoned one as well as a razor.

Mr. Johnson did not like any one who said they were happy, or who said any one else was so. "It is
all cant," he would cry; "the dog knows he is miserable all the time." A friend whom he loved
exceedingly, told him on some occasion, notwithstanding, that his wife's sister was really
happy, and called upon the lady to confirm his assertion, which she did somewhat roundly,
as we say, and with an accent and manner capable of offending Mr. Johnson, if her position
had not been sufficient, without anything more, to put him in very ill-humour. "If your sister-in-law
is really the contented being she professes herself, sir," said he,
"her life gives the lie to every research of humanity; for she is
happy without health, without beauty, without money, and without understanding."

This story he told me himself, and when I expressed something of the horror I felt, "The same
stupidity," said he, "which prompted her to extol felicity she never felt, hindered her from feeling
what shocks you on repetition.

I tell you, the woman is ugly and sickly and foolish and poor; and
would it not make a man hang himself to hear such a creature say it
was happy?

"The life of a sailor was also a continual scene of danger and exertion,"
he said; "and the manner in which time was spent shipboard would make
all who saw a cabin envy a gaol."

Even dress itself, when it resembled that of the vulgar, offended him exceedingly; and when
he had condemned me many times for not adorning my children with more show than I thought useful
or elegant, I presented a little girl to him who came o'visiting one evening covered with shining
ornaments, to see if he would approve of the appearance she made.

When they were gone home, "Well, sir," said I, "how did you like little miss? I hope she was
fine enough." "It was the finery of a beggar," said he, "and you know it was; she looked like
a native of Cow Lane dressed up to be carried to Bartholomew Fair."

His reprimand to another lady for crossing her little child's handkerchief before, and by that
operation dragging down its head oddly and unintentionally, was on the same principle. "It
is the beggar's fear of cold," said he, "that prevails over such
parents, and so they pull the poor thing's head down, and give it
the look of a baby that plays about Westminster Bridge, while the
mother sits shivering in a niche."

My compliances, however, were of little worth. What really surprised me was the victory he gained over
a lady little accustomed to contradiction, who had dressed herself for church at Streatham one
Sunday morning in a manner he did not approve, and to whom he said such sharp and pungent
things concerning her hat, her gown, etc., that she hastened to change them, and returning quite
another figure received his applause, and thanked him for his reproofs, much to the amazement
of her husband, who could scarcely believe his own ears.

When Mr. Thrale built the new library at Streatham, and hung up over the books the portraits
of his favourite friends, that of Dr. Johnson was last finished, and closed the number. It was
almost impossible not to make verses on such an accidental combination of circumstances, so I made the
following ones. But as a character written in verse will for the most part be found imperfect
as a character, I have therefore written a prose one, with which I mean, not to complete, but to
conclude these "Anecdotes" of the best and wisest man that ever came within the reach of my
personal acquaintance, and I think I might venture to add, that of
all or any of my readers:--

Gigantic in knowledge, in virtue, in
strength, Our company closes with JOHNSON at length; So the Greeks
from the cavern of Polypheme past, When wisest, and greatest, Ulysses
came last.

To his comrades contemptuous we see him look down, On their wit and their worth with a general
frown. Since from Science' proud tree the rich fruit he receives, Who could shake the whole trunk
while they turned a few leaves. His piety pure, his morality nice-- Protector of virtue, and
terror of vice; In these features Religion's firm champion displayed, Shall make infidels
fear for a modern crusade. While th' inflammable temper, the positive tongue, Too conscious
of right for endurance of wrong: We suffer from JOHNSON, contented to find, That some notice
we gain from so noble a mind; And pardon our hurts, since so often
we've found The balm of instruction poured into the wound.

'Tis thus for its virtues the chemists extol Pure rectified spirit,
sublime alcohol; From noxious putrescence, preservative pure, A cordial
in health, and in sickness a cure; But exposed to the sun, taking
fire at his rays, Burns bright to the bottom, and ends in a blaze.

It is usual, I know not why, when a character is given, to begin with
a description of the person.

That which contained the soul of Mr. Johnson deserves to be particularly
described.

His stature was remarkably high, and his limbs exceedingly large. His strength was more than
common, I believe, and his activity had been greater, I have heard, than such a form gave one
reason to expect.

His mind was so comprehensive, that no language but that he used could have expressed its contents;
and so ponderous was his language, that sentiments less lofty and less solid than his were would
have been encumbered, not adorned by it.

Mr. Johnson was not intentionally, however, a pompous converser; and though he was accused of using
big words, as they are called, it was only when little ones would
not express his meaning as clearly, or when, perhaps, the elevation
of the thought would have been disgraced by a dress less superb.

He used to say, "that the size of a man's understanding might always
be justly measured by his mirth," and his own was never contemptible.

He was no enemy to splendour of apparel or pomp of equipage. "Life," he would say, "is barren
enough surely with all her trappings; let us therefore be cautious
how we strip her."

In matters of still higher moment he once observed, when speaking
on the subject of sudden innovation, "He who plants a forest may doubtless
cut down a hedge; yet I could wish, methinks, that even he would wait
till he sees his young plants grow."

With regard to common occurrences, Mr. Johnson had, when I first knew him, looked on the still-shifting
scenes of life till he was weary; for as a mind slow in its own nature, or unenlivened by information,
will contentedly read in the same book for twenty times, perhaps, the very act of reading it being
more than half the business, and every period being at every reading better understood; while
a mind more active or more skilful to comprehend its meaning is made sincerely sick at the second
perusal; so a soul like his, acute to discern the truth, vigorous to embrace, and powerful to retain
it, soon sees enough of the world's dull prospect, which at first,
like that of the sea, pleases by its extent, but soon, like that,
too, fatigues from its uniformity; a calm and a storm being the only
variations that the nature of either will admit.

Of Mr. Johnson's erudition the world has been the judge, and we who produce each a score of his
sayings, as proofs of that wit which in him was inexhaustible, resemble travellers who, having
visited Delhi or Golconda, bring home each a handful of Oriental pearl to evince the riches of
the Great Mogul.
 But tell me, tell se company, vhat new
sings have you found? I know you have not hunt' all se day and nussing new found."

But the Baron had found nothing new. He told us so with his mouth dripping and his nose in
the trough--his plate I should say. You could hear him chew across the room. Suddenly, however,
he ceased eating and began to pour forth an account of his day's observation; in response to
which M. Fontenette, to my amused mystification, led us all in the interest with which we listened.
The Baron forgot his food, and when reminded of it, pushed it away with a grunt and talked
on and on, while we almost forgot our own.

As we rose to return to the veranda, the Creole still offered him an undivided attention, which
the Baron rewarded with his continued discourse. As I gave Fontenette a light for his cigarette
I held his eye for a moment with a brightness of face into which I put as significant approval
as I dared; for I fancied the same unuttered word was brooding in both our hearts: "A new vay
to remoof old stains."

Then he turned and gave all his attention once more to the entomologist, as they walked out
upon the gallery together behind their wives. And the German woman courted the pretty New Englander
as sweetly as the Creole courted her husband, and with twice the energy. She was a bubbling
spring of information in the Baron's science; she was a well of sweet philosophy on life and
conduct, and at every turn of their conversation, always letting Mrs. Fontenette turn it, she
showed her own to be the better mind and the better training.

When Mrs. Fontenette, before any one else, rose to go--maybe my dislike of her only made it
seem so--but I believed she did it out of pure bafflement and chagrin.

Not so believed her husband. He responded gratefully; yet lingered, still listening to the
entomologist, until she fondlingly chid him for forgetting that while he had been all day in
his swivel-chair, she had passed the hours in unusual fatigues!

She declined his arm in our garden walk, and positively forbade me to cut a rose for her--but
with a grace almost maidenly. As I let them out, the heat-lightning gleamed again low in the
west. A playfulness came into M. Fontenette's face and he murmured to me, "See se lightening."

"Yes," I replied, pressing his hand, "but I sink sare vill be no storm if sare iss no sunder."

Mrs. Fontenette gave a faint gasp of impatience and left us at a run, tripping fairily across
the rough street at the only point visible to those on the veranda. Fontenette scowled unaware
as he started to follow, and the next moment a short "aha!" escaped him. For, at her gate,
to my unholy joy, she stumbled just enough to make the whole performance unspeakably ridiculous,
and flirted into her cottage----

"In tears!" I offered to bet myself as I turned to rejoin my companions on the veranda, and
wished with all my soul the goggled Baron could have seen it.

VIII

But the best of eyes would not have counted this time, for he was not there. He had accepted
the offer of a room, where he was giving the day's specimens certain treatments which he believed,
or pretended, could not wait until he should reach his far downtown cottage. His hostess and
his wife had gone with him, but now some light discussion of house adornment was drawing them
to the parlor. As this room was being lighted I saw our guest, evidently through force of an
early habit, turn a critical glance to the music on the piano, and as quickly withdraw it.
Both of us motioned her solicitously to the music-stool.

"No, I do not play."

"Then you sing."

"No, not now, any more yet." But when she had let us tease her a wee bit just for one little
German song, she went to the instrument, talking slowly as she went, and closing the door in
the entomologist's direction as she talked.

"Siss a great vhile I haf not done siss," she concluded, as her fingers began to drift over
the keys, and then she sang, very gently, even guardedly, but oh, so sweetly!

We were amazed. Here, without the slightest splendor of achievement or adventure, seemed to
be the most incredible piece of real life we had ever seen. Why, I asked myself, was this woman
so short even of German friends as to be condemned to a seamstress's penury? And my best guess
was to lay it to the zeal of her old-fashioned--and yet not merely old-fashioned- wifehood,
which could accept no friendship that did not unqualifiedly accept him; and he?--Goodness!

When she ceased neither listener spoke; the tears were in our throats. She bent her head slightly
over the keys, and said, "I like to sing you anusser." We accepted eagerly, and she sang again.
There was nothing of personal application in either song, yet now, near the end, where there
was a purposed silence in the melody, the silence hung on and on until it was clear she was
struggling with herself; but again the strain arose without a tremor, and so she finished.
"Oh, no, no," she replied, to our solicitation, with the grateful emphasis of one who declines
a third glass, "se sooneh I stop, se betteh for ever'body," meaning specially herself, I fancy,
speaking, as she rose, in a tone of such happy decision, and yet so melodiously, that two or
three strings in the piano replied.

Her hostess took her hands and said there was one thing she could and must do; she and her
husband must spend the night with us. There was a bed-chamber connected with the room where
the Baron was still at work, and, really--this and that, and that and this--until in the heat
of argument they called each other "My dear," and presently the ayes had it. The last word
I heard from our fair guest was to her hostess at the door of her chamber, the farthest down
the hall. It was as to shutting or not shutting the windows. "No," she said, "I sink sare vill
be no storm, because sare is yet no sunder vis se lightening." And so it turned out. But at
the same time----

IX

My room adjoined the Baron's in frontas his wife's did farther back. A door of his and window
of mine stood wide open on the one balcony, from which a flight of narrow steps led down into
the side garden. Thus, for some time after I was in bed I heard him stirring; but by and by,
with no sound to betoken it except the shutting of this door, it was plain he had lain down.

I awoke with a sense of having been some hours asleep, and in fact the full moon, shining gloriously,
had passed the meridian. The balcony was lighted up by it like noon, and on it stood the entomologist,
entirely dressed. The door was shut behind him. He was looking in at my window, but he did
not know the room was mine, and with eyes twice as good as he had he could not have seen through
my mosquito-bar. I wondered, but lay still till he had started softly down the steps. Then
I sprang out of bed on the dark side, and dressed faster than a fireman.

When half-clad I went and looked out a parlor window. He was trying the gate, which was locked.
But he knew where the key always hung, behind the post, and turned to get it. I went back and
finished dressing, stole down the inner, basement stairs and out into the deep shadows of the
garden, and presently saw my guest passing in through the Fontenettes' gate, whose bolt he
had drawn from the outside. As angry now as I had been amazed I hurried after.

To avoid the moonlight I followed the shadows of the sidewalk-trees down to the next corner,
to cross there and come back under a like cover on the other side. But squarely on the crossing
I was met and stopped by a belated drunkard, who had a proposition to make to me which he thought
no true gentleman, such as he was, for instance, could decline. I was alone, he asked me to
notice; and he was alone; but if he should go with me, which he would be glad to do, why, then,
you see, we should be together. He stuck like a bur, and it was minutes before I got him well
started off in his own right direction. I slipped to the Fontenettes' gate, as near as was
best, and instantly saw, between one of its posts and a very black myrtle-orange, Fontenette
himself, standing as still as the trees. I was not in so deep a shade as he, but I might have
stepped right out into the moonlight without his seeing me, so intensely was he watching his
wife's front door. For there stood the entomologist. He had evidently been knocking, and was
about to knock again when there came some response from within, to which he replied, in a suppressed
yet eager and agitated voice, "Mine Psyche! Oh, mine Psyche! She is come to me undt she is
bringing me already more as a hoondredt--vhat?" He had been interrupted from within. "Vhat
you say?"

Fontenette drew his knife.

I stood ready to spring the instant he should stir to advance. I realized almost unbearably
my position, stealing thus at such a moment on the heels of my neighbor and friend, but this
is not a story of feelings, at any rate, not of mine.

"Vhat?" said the entomologist. "Go avay? Mien Gott! No, I vill not ko avay. Mien gloryform!
Gif me first mine gloryform! Dot Psyche hass come out fon ter grysalis! she hass drawn me dot
room full mit oder Psyches, undt you haf mine pottle of gloryform in your pocket yet! Yes,
ko kit ut; I vait; ach!" Presently he seemed to hear from inside a second approach. Then the
door opened an inch or so, and with another "Ach!" and never a word of thanks, he, snatched
the vial and, turning to make off with it, came nose to nose with M. Fontenette, who stood
in the moonlight gateway holding a blazing match to his cigarette.

"Well, sir, good-evening again," said the Creole. I noticed the perfection of his dress; evidently
he had not as yet loosed as much as a shoestring. And then I observed also that the visitor
so close before him was without his shoes.

"Good-evening--or, good-morning, perchance," said Fontenette. "I suepose thaz a great thing
to remove those old stain' that chloroform, eh?"

"Ach! it iss you? Ach, you must coom--coom undt hellup me! Coom! you shall see someding."

"A moment," said the Creole. "May I inquire you how is that, that you call on us in yo' sock feet?"

"Ach! I am already t'e socks putting on pefore I remember I do not need t'em! But coom! coom!
see a vonderfool!" He led, and Fontenette, when he had blown a cloud of smoke through his nose,
followed, saying exclusively for his own ear:

"A wonder fool, yes! But a fool is no wonder to me any more; I find myself to be that kind."

X

When, hypocritically clad in dressing-gown and slippers, I stopped at my guest's inner door
and Fontenette opened it just enough to let me enter, I saw, indeed, a wonderful sight. The
entomologist had lighted up the room, and it was filled, filled! with gorgeous moths as large
as my hand and all of a kind, dancing across one another's airy paths in a bewildering maze
or alighting and quivering on this thing and that. The mosquito-net, draping almost from ceiling
to floor, was beflowered with them majestically displaying in splendid alternation their upper
and under colors, or, with wings lifted and vibrant, tipping to one side and another as they
crept up the white mesh, like painted and gilded sails in a fairies' regatta.

And all this life and beauty, this gay glory and tremorous ecstasy and effort was here for
moth-love of one incarnate fever of frail-winged loveliness! Oh! to what unguessed archangelic
observation, to what infinite seraphic compassion, may not our own swarming race, who dare
not too much pity ourselves, be but just such dainty ephemera! Splendid in purposes, intelligence,
and affections as these in colors and grace, glorious when on the wing, and marvellous still,
riddles of wonder, even when crawling and quivering, tipping and swerving from the upright
and true, like these palpitating flowers of desire, now this way and now that, forever drawn
and driven by the sweet tyrannies of instinct and impulse.

So rushed the thought in upon me, and if it was not of the divinest or manliest inspiration,
at least it took some uncharity out of me for the moment. As in mechanical silence Fontenette
obeyed the busy requests of the entomologist, I presently looked more on those two than on
the winged multitude, and thought on, of the myriad true tales of love-weakness and love-wrath
for which they and their two pretty mates were just now so unlucky as to stand; of the awful
naturalness of such things; of the butterfly beauty and wonder--nay, rather the divine possibilities
of the lives such things so naturally speed to wreck; and then of Tom Moore almost too playfully
singing:

     Ah! did we take for Heaven above
       But half such pains as we
     Take, day and night, for woman's love,
       What Angels we should be!

But while I moralized there came a change. Beneath the entomologist's dark hand, as it searched
and hurried throughout the room, the flutter of wings had ceased as under a wind of death.

"You must have a hundred and fifty of them," I said as the last victim ceased to flutter.

"Yes."

"Their sale is slow, of course, but every time you sell one, you ought to get"--I was judging
by some prices he had charged me--"you ought to get two dollars." And I secretly rejoiced for
Senda.

"I not can afford to sell t'em," he replied, with his back to me.

"Why, how so?"

"No, it iss t'is kind vhat I can exshange for five, six, maybe seven specimenss fon Ahfrica
undt Owstrahlia. No, I vill not sell t'em."

"Oh, I see," said I, in mortal disgust. "Fontenette, I'm going to bed." And Fontenette went too.

The next day was cloudless--in two hearts; Senda's, and Fontenette's. As to the sky, that is
another matter; one of the charms of that warm wet land is that, with all its sunshine, it
is almost never without clouds. And indeed it would be truer to say of my two friends' skies,
that they had clouds, but the clouds were silvered through with happy reassurances. Jealousy,
we are told, once set on fire, burns without fuel; but I must think that that is oftenest,
if not always, the jealousy of a selfish love. Or, rather--let me quote Senda, as she spoke
the only other time she ever touched upon the subject with us. Our fat neighbor had dragged
it in again as innocently as a young dog brings an old shoe into the parlor, and, the Fontenettes
being absent, she had the nerve and wisdom not to avoid it. Said she:

"Some of us--not all--have great power to love. Some, not all, who have sis power--to love--have
also se power to trust. Me, I rasser be trustet and not loved, san to be loved and not trustet."

"How about a little of each?" asked our neighbor.

"Oh! If se nature iss little, sat iss, maybe, very vell--?" She spoke as kindly as a mother
to her babe, but he stole a slow glance here and there, as though some one had shot him with
a pea in church, and dropped the theme.

Which I, too, will do when I have noted the one thing I had particularly in mind to say, of
Fontenette: that, as Senda remarked--for the above is an abridgment--"I rasser see chalousie
vissout cause, san cause vissout chalousie;" and that even while I was witness of the profound
ferocity of his jealousy when roused, and more and more as time passed on, I was impressed
with its sweet reasonableness.

XI

Time did pass--in days and weeks of that quiet sort which make us forget in actual life that
such is the way in good stories also. Innumerable crops were growing in the fields, countless
ships were sailing or steaming the monotonous leagues of their long wanderings from port to
port, some empty, some heavy-laden, like bees between garden and hive:

     The corn-tops were ripe and the meadows were in bloom
     And the birds made music all the day.

Many of our days must not be the wine, but only small bits of the vine, of life. We cannot
gather or eat them; we can only let them grow, branch, blossom, get here and there green grapes,
scarce a tenth of a tithe, in bulk or weight, of the whole growth, and "in due season--if we
faint not" pluck the purpled clusters. And as the vine is--much, too, as the vine is tended,
so will be the raisins and the wine. There is nothing in life for which to be more thankful,
or in which to be more diligent, than its intermissions. This is not my sermonizing. I am not
going to put everything off upon "Senda," but really this was hers. I have edited it a trifle;
her inability to make, in her pronunciation, a due difference between wine and vine rather
dulled the point of her moral.

Fontenette remarked to her one Sunday afternoon in our garden, that she must have got her English
first from books.

"Yes," she said, "I didt. Also I have many, many veeks English conversations lessons befo'e
Ame'ica. But I cannot se p'onunciation get; because se spelling. Hah! I can not sat spelling get!"

O, but didn't I want to offer my services? But, like Bunyan's Christian, I recalled a text
and so got by; which text was the wise saying of that female Solomon, "se aunt of my muss-er"--"One
man can't ever'sing have, and mine"--establishment is already complete.

Meantime, Mrs. Fontenette, from farthest off in our group, had slipped around to the Baroness.
She spoke something low, stroking her downy fan and blushing with that damsel sweetness of
which her husband was so openly fond.

"O no, I sank you!" answered Senda, in an undulating voice. "I sank you v'ey much, but I cannot
take se time to come to yo' house, and I cannot let you take se trouble too come too mine.
No, if I can have me only se right soughts, and find me se right vords for se right soughts,
I sink I leave se p'onunciation to se mercy of P'ovidence."

Mrs. Fontenette blushed as prettily as a child, and let her husband take her hand as he said,
"The Providence that wou'n' have mercy on such a pronunshation like that--ah well, 'twould
have to become v'ey unpopular!"

"Anyhow," cooed Senda, "I risk it;" and then to his wife--"For se present, siss betteh I sew
for you san spell for you."

Thus was our fair neighbor at every turn overmatched by the trustful love of the man and watchful
love of the woman, whose fancied inferiority was her excuse for an illicit infatuation; an
infatuation which little by little became a staring fact--only not to Fontenette. You know,
you can hide such a thing from those who love and trust you, but not long from those who do
not; and if you are not old in sin--Flora and the Baron were infants--you will almost certainly
think that a condition hid from those who love and trust you is hid from all! O fools! the
very urchins of the playground will presently have found you out and be guessing at broken
laws, though there be only broken faiths and the anguish of first steps in perfidy.

We could not help but see, and yet for all our seeing we could not help. The matter never took
on flagrancy enough to give ever so kind an intervener a chance to speak with effect. It was
pitiful to see how little gratification they got out of it; especially she, with that silly
belief in her ability to rekindle his spiritual energies and lift him into the thin air of
her transcendentalisms; slipping, nevertheless, bit by bit, down the precipitous incline between
her vaporous refinements and his wallowing animalisms; too destitute of the love that loves
to give, or of courage, or of cunning, to venture into the fires of real passion, but forever
craving flattery and caresses, and for their sake forever holding him over the burning coals
of unfulfilled desire.

How could we know these things so positively?

By the entomologist; the child of science. Science yearns ever to know and to tell. Truth for
truth's sake! He had no strong moral feeling against a lie; but he had never had the slightest
use for a lie, and a prevarication on his tongue would have been as strange to him as castanets
in his palms. Guile takes alertness, adroitness; and the slim pennyworth of these that he could
command he used up, no doubt, on Fontenette. I noticed that after an hour with the Creole he
always looked tortured and exhausted. With us he was artless to the tips of his awful finger-nails.

Nor was Mrs. Fontenette a skilful dissembler; she over-concealed things so revealingly. Then
she was so helplessly enamoured and in so childish a way. I venture one of the penalties almost
any woman may have to pay for bringing to the altar only the consent to be loved is to find
herself, some time, at last, far from the altar, a Titania, a love's fool. Our Titania pointed
us to the fact that the Baron's wife never tried to divert his mind from the one pursuit that
enthralled it; and she borrowed one of our garden alleys in which to teach him--grace-hoops!
He never caught one from her nor threw one that she could catch; but, ah! with her coaxing
and commanding, her sweet taunting and reprimanding and his utter lack of surprise at them,
how much she betrayed! Fontenette came, learned in a few throws, and was charmed with the toys--a
genuine lover always takes to them kindly--but Mrs. Fontenette was by this time tired, and
she never again felt rested when her husband mentioned the game.

Furthermore, their countenances!--hers and the entomologist's--especially when in repose--you
could read the depths of experience they had sounded, by the lines and shadows that came and
went, or stayed, as one may read the depths of a bay by the passing of wind and light, day
by day, over its waters--particularly if the waters are not very deep.

They made painful reading. What degrees of heart-wretchedness came and went or stayed with
them, we may have over--we may have underestimated. God knows. In two months Mrs. Fontenette
grew visibly older and less pretty, yet more nearly beautiful; while he, by every sign, was
gradually awakening back--or, shall we not say, being now first born?--to life, through the
pangs of a torn mind; mind, not conscience; but pangs never of sated, always of the famished sort.

XII

It was he who finally put the very seal of confirmation upon both our hopes and our fears.

The time was the evening of the same Sunday in whose afternoon his wife had declined those
transparent spelling-lessons. A certain preacher, noted for his boldness, was drawing crowds
by a series of sermons on the text "Be thou clean," and our fat neighbor and his wife took
us, all six, to hear him. Their pew was well to the front and we were late, so that going down
the aisle unushered, with them in the lead--husband and spouse, husband and spouse, four couples--we
made a procession which became embarrassingly amusing as the preacher simultaneously closed
the Scripture lesson with, "And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives
with him into the ark."

That has been our fat neighbor's best joke ever since, though he always says after it, "The
poor Baron!" and often adds--"and poor Mrs. Fontenette! Little did we think," etc. But he has
never even suspected their secret.

The entomologist was the last of our pew-full to give heed to the pulpit. When the preacher
said that because it was a year of state elections, for which we ought already to be preparing,
he had in his first discourse touched upon political purity--cleanness of citizenship--the
Baron showed no interest. He still showed none when the speaker said again, that because the
pestilence was once more with us--that was in the terrible visitation of 1878--he had devoted
his second discourse to the hideous crime of a great city whose voters and tax-payers do not
enable and compel it to keep the precept, "Be thou clean." I thought of the clean little home
from whose master beside me came no evidence that he thought at all. But the moment the preacher
declared his purpose to consider now the application of this great command to the individual
life and character of man and woman as simply man and woman, the entomologist became the closest
listener in the crowded throng.

The sermon was a daring one. I was struck by the shrewd concessions with which the speaker
defined personal purity and the various false conceptions of it that pass current; abandoning
the entrenched hills, so to speak, of his church's traditional rigor and of many conventional
rules, and drawing after him into the unfortified plain his least persuadable hearers of whatever
churchly or unchurchly prejudice, to surround them finally at one wide sweep and receive their
unconditional surrender. His periods were not as embarrassing to a mixed audience as my citations
would indicate. Those that I bring together were wisely subordinated and kept apart in the
discourse, and ran together only in minds like my own, eager for one or two other hearers to
be specially impressed by them. And one, at least, was. Before the third sentence of the main
discourse was finished the fierceness of the Baron's attention was provoking me to ask myself
whether a conscience also was not coming to birth in him.

In a spiritual-material being, said the speaker, the spirit has a rightful, happy share in
every physical delight, and no physical delight need be unclean in which the spirit can freely
enjoy its just share as senior member in the partnership of soul and body. Without this spiritual
participation it could not be clean, though church, state, and society should jointly approve
and command it. Mark, I do not answer for the truth of these things; I believe them, but that
is quite outside of our story.

The commonest error, he said, of those who covet spiritual cleanness is to seek a purification
of self for self-purification's sake.

The Baron grunted. He was drinking in the words; had forgotten his surroundings.

Only those are clean, continued the speaker, whose every act, motive, condition is ordered
according to their best knowledge of the general happiness, whether that happiness is for the
time embodied in millions, or in but one beyond themselves. Through errors of judgment they
may fall into manifest outward uncleannesses; but they, and none but they, are clean within.

Because women, he went on, are in every way more delicately made than men, we easily take it
for granted they are more spiritual. From Genesis to Revelation the Bible never does so. It
is amazing how feeble a sense of condemnation women--even as compared with men--often show
for the spirit of certain misdeeds if only it be unaccompanied by the misdeed's performance;
or what loathing so many of them--"of you," he really said, and the Baron grunted as though
his experience had been with droves of them--what loathing so many of you heap upon certain
things without reference to the spirit by which they are accompanied and on which their nobility
or baseness, their cleanness or foulness, entirely depends.

Nothing is unclean that is to no one anywhere unjust or unkind; and nothing is unjust, unkind,
or unclean which cannot easily be shown to be so without inventing an eleventh commandment.
To him, he said, no uncleanness was more foul than that which, not for kindness, or for righteousness,
but for a fantastical, self-centred refinement, invents some eleventh commandment to call that
common which God hath cleansed; to call anything brutish which the incarnation of the soul
has made sacred to spotless affections.

The Baron muttered something in German, and Fontenette shut his mouth tight and straightened
up in approbation.

At the close of the service we were not out of the pew before our escort was introducing Senda
to his friends in front and behind as busily and elaborately as if that was what we had come
for. Twice and again she cast so anxious an eye upon her husband--from whom Mrs. Fontenette
had wisely taken shelter behind hers--that I softly said to her, "We'll take care of him."

A care he was! All the way down the aisle, amid the peals of the organ, he commented on the
sermon aloud, mostly to himself but also to whichever of us he could rub his glasses against.
Sometimes he mistook others for us until they stared. His face showed a piteous, weary distress,
his thin hair went twenty ways, he seemed scarcely to know where he was or how to take his
steps, and presently was saying to a strange lady crowded against him, as though it was with
her he had been talking all along:

"Undt vhy shall we haf t'at owfool troubple? No-o, t'at vould kill me! I am not a cat to keep
me alvays clean--no more as a hogk to keep me always not clean. No, I keep me--owdside--inside--always
so clean as it comes eassy, undt I leave me so dirty as it comes eassy."

XIII

I took his arm into mine--his hand was hot--and drew him on alone. "Undt t'ose vomens," he
persisted in the vestibule, "t'ey are more troubple yet as t'eir veight in goldt! I vish, mine
Gott! t'ere be no more any vomens ut all, undt we haf t'e shiltern by mutchinery."

On the outer steps I sprang with others to save a young girl, who had stumbled, from pitching
headlong to the sidewalk. Once on her feet again, after a limp or two she walked away uninjured;
but when I looked around for my real charge he was not in sight. I hurried to Fontenette and
his wife a few steps away, but he was not with them. The three of us turned back and came upon
the rest of our group, but neither had they seen him. Our other neighbor said he must have
got into a car. I asked Senda if it was likely he would go home without trying to find us,
and she replied that he might; but when we had all looked at one another for a moment she dded,
with a distinct tremor of voice--and I saw that she feared temptation and conscience had unsettled
his wits--"I sink he iss not ve'y vell. I sink he is maybe--I ton't know, but--I--I sink he
iss not ve'y vell." She averted her face.

She agreed with us, of course, that there was no call for alarm, and Mrs. Smith and I had to
plead that we could not, the six of us, let her go home, away downtown, alone, while we should
go as far the other way and remain all night ignorant of her husband's whereabouts. So our
next door neighbor, my wife and I went with her, and his wife and the Fontenettes went home;
for a conviction probably common to us all, but which no one cared to put into downright words,
was that the entomologist, whether dazed or not, might wander up to one of our homes in preference
to his own. In the street-car and afterward for a full hour at her house, Senda was very silent,
only saying now a little and then a little more.

"He iss all right! He vill sure come. Many times he been avay se whole night. Sat is se first
time I am eveh afraid; is sat se vay when commencing to grow old? Yes, I sink sat is se reason."

When we had been at her cottage for nearly an hour, my neighbor started out on a systematic
search; and half an hour later, I left Mrs. Smith with her and went also.

About one o'clock in the night, I came back as far as the corner nearest her house, but waited
there, by appointment, with my neighbor; and very soon--stepping softly--he appeared.

"No sign of him?"

"None."

"You don't suppose he's done himself any violence, do you?" he asked.

"No, no. O no."

"And yet," he said, "I think we ought to tell the police at once."

I advanced some obvious objections. "At any rate," I said, "go in, will you, please, and see
if he hasn't come home, while we were away."

"Why, yes, that is the first thing," laughed he, and went.

As I waited for him in the still street, I heard far away a quick footstep. By and by I saw
a man pass under a distant lamp, coming toward me. I looked with all my eyes. Just then my
neighbor came back. "Listen," I murmured. "Watch when that man comes under the next light."

He watched. "It's Fontenette!"

"Well," said the Creole as he joined us, "he's yondeh all right--except sick.

"Yes, he cou'n't tell anybody where to take him, and a doctor found that letteh on him print'
outside with yo' uptown address; and so he put him in a cab an' sen' him yondeh, and sen' word
he muz 'ave been sick sinze sev'l hours, an' get him in bed quick don't lose a minute."

"And so he's in bed at my house!" I put in approvingly.

"Ah, no! I coul'n' do like that; but I do the bes' I could; he is at my 'ouse in bed. An' my
own doctor sen' word what to do an' he'll come in the mawning. And (to our neighbor) yo' madame
do uz that kineness to remain with Madame Fontenette whiles I'm bringing his wife."

At the cottage my companions remained outside. As I entered Senda caught one glance and exclaimed,
"Ah, mine hussbandt is foundt and is anyhow alife!"

"Yes," I replied, "but he's ill. Mr. Fontenette met him and took him to his house. He's there
now with Mrs. Fontenette and Mrs. Blank. Get a change of dress and come, we'll all go together."

Senda stared. "A shange of dtress?" Then, with a most significant mingling of relief and new
disturbance, she said, "Ah, I see!" and looking from me to Mrs. Smith and from Mrs. Smith to
me, while she whipped her bonnet ribbons into a bow, she cried, with shaking voice and streaming
eyes:

"Oh, sank Kott! sank Kott! it iss only se yellow feveh."

XIV

No sick man could have been better cared for than was the entomologist at our neighbor's over
the way. "The fever," as in the Creole city it used to be sufficiently distinguished, is not
so deadly, nor so treacherous, nor nearly so repulsive, as some other maladies, but none requires
closer attention. After successive days and nights of unremitting vigilance, should there occur
a momentary closing of the nurse's eyes, or a turning from the bedside for a quarter of a minute,
the irresponsible patient may attempt to rise and may fall back dying or dead. So, the attendant
must have an attendant. In the case of the entomologist, his wife became the bedside nurse
and sentinel.

In the next room, now and then Mrs. Smith, and now and then our fat neighbor's wife, waited
on her, but by far the most of the time, Mrs. Fontenette was her assistant. When Senda, while
the patient dozed, stole brief moments of sleep to keep what she could of her overtasked powers,
her place, at the bedside, was always filled by Fontenette, who as often kept his promise to
call her the instant her husband should rouse.

Thus we brought our precious entomologist through the disorder's first crisis, which generally
comes exactly on the seventy-second hour, and in due time through the second, which falls,
if I remember aright, on the ninth day. What I do recall with certainty, was that it came on
one of the days of the city's heaviest mortality and that two of our children, and my next
neighbor's wife, came down with the scourge.

And O, the beautiful days and the beautiful nights! It seemed the illusion of a dream, that
between such land and sky, there should be not one street in that embowered city unsmitten
by sorrow and death. Out of yonder fair home on the right, they carried yesterday, the loved
mother of five children--but the Baron is better. From this one on the left, will be borne
to-morrow such a man as no city can lightly spare, till now a living fulfilment of the word
"Be thou clean"--but the entomologist will be ever so much better.

To be glad of it, you needed only to hear Senda allude to him as "Mine hussbandt." Why did
she never mention him in any other way? The little woman was a riddle to me. I did not see
how she could give such a man such a love, and yet I never could see but she was as frank as
a public record. Stranger still was it how she could be the marital partner--the mate, to speak
plainly--of such a one, without showing or feeling the slightest spiritual debasement. Finally,
however, I caught some light. I had stepped over to ask after "Mine hussbandt," everyone else
of us being busy with our own sick. Senda was letting Fontenette take her place in the sick-room,
which, of course, was shut close. I silently entered the room in front of it, and perceiving
that Mrs. Fontenette had drawn her into the other front room, adjoining--a door stood half
open between--and was tempting her with refreshments, I sat down to await their next move.
So presently I began to hear what they said to each other in their gentle speculations.

"A wife who has realized her ideal," Mrs. Fontenette was saying, when Senda interrupted:

"Ah! vhat vife is sat? In vhat part of se vorldt does she lif, and how long she is marriedt?
No-o, no! Sare is only vun kindt of vife in se whole vorldt vhat realize her ideal hussbandt;
and sat is se vife vhat idealize her real hussbandt. Also not se hussbandt and se vife only;
I sink you even cannot much Christ-yanity practice vis anybody--close related--vissout you
idealize sem. But ze hussbandt and vife--

"You remembeh sat sehmon, 'Be'--O yes, of course. Vell, sat is vun sing se preacher forget
to say--May be he haf not se time, but I sink he forget: sat sare is no hussbandt in se whole
vorldt--and also sare is no vife--so sp'--spirit'--spirited? no? Ah, yes--spiritual!--yes,
sank you. Vhen I catch me a bigk vord I am so proudt, yet, as I hadt a fish caught!"

I was willing to believe it, but thought how still more true it was of Mrs. Fontenette. But
the gentle speaker had not paused. "Sare iss no vife so spiritual," she repeated, triumphantly,
"and who got a hussbandt so spiritual, sat eeser vun--do you say 'eeser vun'?"

"Either one," said her hostess, reassuringly.

"Yes, so spiritual sat eeser vun can keep sat rule inside--to be pairfect' clean, if sat vun
do not see usseh vun idealize."

I made a stir--"Hmm!" Whereupon she came warily to the door. I sat engrossed in a book and
wishing I could silently crawl under it snake fashion; but I could feel her eyes all over me,
and with them was a glimmering smile that helped them to make me tingle as she softly spoke.

"Ah!--See se book-vorm! He iss all eyes--and ee-ahs. Iss it not so?"

"Pardon," I murmured; "did you spe'--has  any one been speaking and I have failed to give attention?"

"O no, sir! I sink not! Vell, you are velcome to all you haf heardt; but I am ve'y much oblige'
to you for yo' 'hmm.' It vas se right sing in se right place. But do you not sink I shouldt
haf been a pre-eacheh? I love to preach."

I said I knew of three men in one neighborhood with whom she might start a church, and asked
how was the Baron.

Improving--would soon be able to sit up. She inquired after my children.

It was quite in accord with a late phase of Mrs. Fontenette's demeanor that on this occasion
she did not appear until I mentioned her. She had not come near me by choice since the night
the Baron was found and sent to my address, although I certainly was in every way as nice to
her as I had ever been, and I was not expecting now to be less so.

When she appeared I asked her if a superb rose blooming late in August was not worth crossing
to our side of the way to see. She knew, of course, that sooner or later, as the best of a
bad choice, she must allow me an interview; yet now she was about to decline on some small
excuse, when her eyes met mine, and she saw that in my opinion the time had come. He attributed
his own superiority of vision, in this respect, to long practice
in using the microscope.

The philosopher exulted in his enviable distinction, when a peasant, to whom he showed his animalcula,
could perceive nothing but muddy water.--Ibid.

Faculties of Brutes.

The dog is the only animal that dreams; and he and the elephant the only animals that understand
looks; the elephant is the only animal that, besides man, feels ennui; the dog, the only quadruped
that has been brought to speak. Leibnitz bears witness to a hound in Saxony, that could speak
distinctly thirty words.--Medical Gazette.

Sea Air.

The atmosphere, in the vicinity of the sea, usually contains a portion of the muriates over
which it has been wafted.

It is a curious fact, but well ascertained, that the air best adapted to vegetables is pernicious
to animal life, and vice versa. Now, upon the sea-coast, accordingly, animals thrive, and
vegetables decline.--Hurwood's Southern Coast.

* * * * *

Chingford Church.

The roof with moss is green, and twines Dark ivy round the sculptur'd
lines.

DELTA.

The pleasant village of CHINGFORD, in Essex, may be called a vignette of the topographer's
"rus in urbe," it being only nine miles distant from the heart of London, and consequently
almost within its vortex. It stands on the banks of the river Lea,
and derives its name from the Saxon word Cing and ford, (signifying
the king's ford,) there having formerly been a ford here; the adjoining
meadows being designated the king's meads, and the Lea, the king's
stream. There appears to have been two manors in this parish, one
of which was granted by Edward the Confessor to the cathedral of St.
Paul's, but surrendered at the reformation to Henry VIII.; the other,
according to Domesday Book, was held by Orgar, the Thane; and from
the latter another manor has since been taken.

The "ivy-mantled"
church, represented in the above vignette, is dedicated to St. Peter
and St. Paul, and consists of a chancel, nave, and south aisle, with
a low square tower at the west end, containing three bells. Within
the church are a few interesting monuments, among which is one to
the memory of Robert Rampton, who died in 1585 and was yeoman of the
chamber to Edward VI., and the Queens Mary and Elizabeth. It stands
in the south aisle, with an inscription on a brass plate against the
wall, underneath which is an altar tomb covered with a slab of black
marble, on which are the effigies, in brass, of Robert Rampton, and
his wife Margaret, who died in 1590.

She broke a silence with a suppressed exclamation of pain, while for the eyes of possible observers
I imitated her in a nonchalant pose. "You wouldn't despise me if you knew the half I've suffered
or how I've striv-- --"

I interrupted again. "O Mrs. Fontenette, any true gentleman--at thirty- five--knows it all--himself.
And he had better go and cut his throat than give himself airs, even of pity, over a lady who
has made a misstep she cannot retrace."

Her foot played with a brick that was loose in the pavement, but she gave me a melting glance
of gratitude. After a considerable pause she murmured, "I will retrace it."

"I have kept you here a good while," I said. "After a moment or so drop your handkerchief,
and as I return it to you the letter will be with it. Or, better, if you choose to trust me,
we'll not do that, but as soon as I get into the house I'll burn it."

"I can trust you," she replied, "but----"

"What; the Baron--when he misses it? O I'll settle that."

She gave a start as though I had shouted.

I thought it a bad sign for the future, and the words that followed seemed to me worse. "Isn't
it my duty," she asked--and her eyes betrayed unconsciously the desperateness of her desire--"to
explain to him myself?" 

"I hope you beat him off, however," said I. "The greater danger the
more honour you know, Mr. Tims."

"Of that anon, sir.--Lucy, on her part, angelic creature, professed that she could not dream of being
undutiful towards kind old Pa; and that, unless desperate measures were resorted to, quamprimum,
in the twinkling of a bed-post she would be under the disagreeable
necessity to bundle and go with the disabled man of war to the temple
of Hymen.

Sacrilegious thought! I could not permit it to enter my bosom, and (pardon me for a moment,
sir) when I looked down, and caught a glance of my own natty-looking,
tight little leg, and dapper Hessians, I recommended her strongly
to act on the principle of the Drury-lane play-bill, which says, 'All
for Love, or the World well lost.'

"Well, sir, hark ye, just to show
how things come about.

Shortly after this, on the anniversary of my honoured old master, Zachariah Pigtail's birth,
when we were allowed to strike work at noon, I determined, as a dernier resort, as a clincher,
sir, to act the genteel, and invite Miss Lucy, in her furs and falderals, to accompany me to
the Exhibition of Pictures. Heavens, sir, how I dressed on that day! The Day and Martin of my
boots reflected on the shady side of the street. I took half an hour in tying and retying my
neckcloth en mode.

My handkerchief smelt of lavender, and my hair of oil of thyme--my waistcoat of bergamot, and my
inexpressibles of musk. I was a perfect civet for perfumery.


XV

Mrs. Fontenette and the maid silently ran in ahead of me; I went first to the mother. When
I found Mrs. Fontenette again she had the child undressed and in his crib, and I remembered
how often I had, in my heart, called her a coward.

She saw me pencil on a slip of paper at the mantelpiece, and went and read -"You mustn't stay.
He has the fever. You've never had it."

She wrote beneath--"I should have got it weeks ago if God paid wages every day. Don't turn me off."

I dropped the paper into the small firegrate, added the other from my breastpocket, and set
them ablaze, and the new maid, entering, praised burning paper as one of the best deodorizers
known.

So my dainty rose-neighbor stayed; stayed all night, and all the next day and night, and on
and on with only flying visits to her home over the way, until we were amazed at her endurance.
The little fellow was never at ease with her out of his wild eyes. Her touch was balm to him,
and her words peace. Oh, that they might have been healing also! But that was beyond the reach
of all our striving. His days were as the flowers and winged things of the garden-kingdom,
wherein he had been--without ever guessing it-- their citizen-king.

It awakens all the tenderness at once that I ever had for Mrs. Fontenette, to recall what she
was to him in those hours, and to us when his agonies were all past, and he lay so stately
on his short bier, and she could not be done going to it and looking--looking--with streaming eyes.

As she stood close by the tomb, while we dumbly watched the masons seal it, I began to believe
that she blamed herself for the child's sickness and death, and presently I knew it must be
so. One of those quaint burial societies of Negro women, in another quarter of the grounds,
but within plain hearing, chose for the ending of their burial service--with what fitness to
their burial service I cannot say, maybe none--a hymn borrowed, I judge, from the rustic whites,
as usual, but Africanized enough to thrill the dullest nerves; and the moment it began my belief
was confirmed.

     My sin is so dahk, Lawd, so dahk and so deep,
       My grief is so po', Lawd, so po' and so mean,
     I wisht I could weep, Lawd, I wisht I could weep,
       Oh, I wisht I could weep like Mary Mahgaleen!

     Oh, Sorroh! sweet Sorroh! come, welcome, and stay!
       I'd welcome thy swode howsomever so keen,
     If I could jes' pray, Lawd, if I could jes' pray,
       Oh! if I could jes' pray, like Mary Mahgaleen!

My belief was confirmed, I say; but I was glad to see also that no one else read as I read
the signs by which I was guided. At the cemetery gate I heard some one call--"Yo' madam is
sick, sih," and, turning, saw Mrs. Fontenette, deathly white, lift her blue eyes to her husband
and he get his arm about her just in time to save her from falling. She swooned but a moment,
and, in the carriage, before it started off, tried to be quite herself, though very pale.

"It's nothing but the reaction," said to me the lady who fanned her, and we agreed it was a
wonder she had held up so long.

"Hyeh, honey," put in the child's old black nurse, in a voice that never failed to soothe,
however grotesque its misinterpretations, "lay yo' head on me; an' lay it heavy: dass what
I'm use-en to. Blessed is de pyo in haht; she shall res' in de fea' o' de Lawd, an' he shall
lafe at heh calamity."

I was glad to send the old woman with them, for as we turned away to our own carriage, I said
in my mind, "All that little lady needs is enough contrition, and she'll give away the total
of any secret of which she owns an undivided half."

But a night and a day passed, and a second, and a third, and I perceived she had told nothing.

It was a terrible time, with many occasions of suspense more harrowing than that. Our other
children were getting on, yet still needed vigilant care; the Baron was to be let out of his
room in a day or two, but my fat neighbor had come down with the disease, while his wife still
lay between life and death--how they finally got well, I have never quite made out, they were
so badly nursed--and all about us were new cases, and cases beyond hope, and retarded recoveries,
and relapses, and funerals, and nurses too few, and ice scarce, and everybody worn out with
watching-- physicians compelled to limit themselves to just so many cases at a time, to avoid
utterly breaking down.

As I was in my fat neighbor's sick chamber one evening, giving his nurse a respite, word came
that Fontenette was at my gate. I went to him with misgivings that only increased as we greeted.
He was dejected and agitated. His grasp was damp and cold.

"It cou'n' stay from me always," he said in an anguished voice, and I cried in my soul, "She's
told him!"

But she had not. I asked him what his bad news was that had come at last, but his only reply was,

"Can you take him? Can you take him out of my house--to-night--this evening--now?"

"Who, the Baron? Why, certainly, if you desire it?" I responded; wondering if the entomologist,
by some slip, had betrayed her. There was an awe in my visitor's eyes that was almost fright.

"Fontenette," I exclaimed, "what have you heard--what have you done?"

"My frien', 'tis not what I 'ave heard, neitheh what I 'ave done; 'tis what I 'ave got."

"Got? Why, you've got nothing, you Creole of the Creoles. Your skin's as cool as mine."

"Feel my pulse," he said. I felt it. It wasn't less than a hundred and fifty.

"Go, get into bed while I bring the Baron over here," I said, and by the time I had done this
and got back to him his skin was hot enough! An hour or two after, I recrossed the street on
the way to my night's rest, leaving his wife to nurse him, and Senda to attend on her and keep
house. I paused in the garden and gazed up among the benignant stars. And then I looked onward,
through and beyond their ranks, seemingly so confused, yet where such amazing hidden order
is, and said, for our good Fontenette, and for his watching wife, and for all of us--even for
my wife and me in our unutterable loss--"Sank Kott! sank Kott! it iss only se yellow fevah!"

XVI

Three days more. In the third evening I found the doctor saying to Mrs. Fontenette:

"Nine o'clock. A LETTER FROM INDIA.

LUCKNOW, INDIA, June 20, 1880.

My Dear Friends,--My auntie has sent me several copies of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, and I thought
maybe you would like to know a little how we children in India live.
I don't know anything about your life except what I read, and my mamma
tells me, because I was born here. I am nine years old, and in a little
while we are going home. I say home because mamma and papa do, but
the only home I know is here, where it is so hot sometimes it seems
as if I should die. I had a patient, left alone for a moment on the
climacteric day, who was found standing at her mirror combing her hair, and to-day she's as
well as you or I. I had another who got out of bed, walked down a corridor, fell face downward
and lay insensible at the crack of a doorsill with the rain blowing in on him under the door--and
he got well. As to Fontenette, all his symptoms so far are good. Well--I'll be back in the
morning."

So ran the time. There were no more new cases in our house; Mrs. Smith and I had had the scourge
years before, as also had Senda, who remained over the way. Fontenette passed from one typical
phase of the disorder to another "charmingly" as the doctor said, yet he specially needed just
such exceptionally delicate care as his wife was giving him. In the city at large the deaths
per day were more and more, and one night when it showered and there was a heavenly cooling
of the air, the increase in the mortality was horrible. But the weather, as a rule, was steady
and tropically splendid; the sun blazed; the moonlight was marvellous; the dews were like rains;
the gardens were gay with butterflies. Our convalescent little ones hourly forgot how gravely
far they were from being well, and it became one of our heavy cares to keep the entomologist
from entomologizing--and from overeating.

From time to time, when shorthanded we had used skilled nurses; but when Mrs. Fontenette grew
haggard and we mentioned them, she said distressfully: "O! no hireling hands! I can't bear
the thought of it!" and indeed the thought of the average hired "fever-nurse" of those days
was not inspiring; so I served as her alternate when she would accept any and throw herself
on the couch Senda had spread in the little parlor.

XVII

At length one day I was called up at dawn and went over to take her place once more, and when
after several hours had passed I was still with him, Fontenette said, while I bent down,

"I have the fear thad's going to go hahd with my wife, being of the Nawth."

"Why, what's going to go hard, old fellow?"

"The feveh. My dear frien', don't I know tha'z the only thing would keep heh f'om me thad long?"

"Still, you don't know her case will be a hard one; it may be very light. But don't talk now."

"Well--I hope so. Me, I wou'n' take ten thousand dollahs faw thad feveh myself--to see that
devotion of my wife. You muz 'ave observe', eh?"

"Yes, indeed, old man; nobody could help observing. I wouldn't talk any more just now."

"No," he insisted, "nobody could eveh doubt. 'Action speak loudeh than word,' eh?"

"Yes, but we don't want either from you just now." I put his restless arms back under the cover;
not to keep the outer temperature absolutely even was counted a deadly risk. "Besides," I said,
"you're talking out of character, old boy."

He looked at me mildly, steadily, for several moments, as if something about me gave him infinite
comfort. It was a man's declaration of love to a man, and as he read the same in my eyes, he
closed his own and drowsed.

Though he dozed only at wide intervals and briefly, he asked no more questions until night;
then--"Who's with my wife?"

"Mine."

He closed his eyes again, peacefully. It was in keeping with his perfect courtesy not to ask
how the new patient was. If she was doing well,--well; and if not, he would spare us the pain
of informing or deceiving him.

Senda became a kind of chief-of-staff for both sides of the street. She would have begged to
be Mrs. Fontenette's nurse, but for one other responsibility, which we felt it would be unsafe,
and she thought it would be unfair, for her to put thus beyond her own reach: "se care of mine
hussbandt."

She wore a plain path across the unpaved street to our house, and another to our neighbor's.
"Sat iss a too great risk," she compassionately maintained, "to leaf even in se daytime sose
shiltren--so late sick--alone viss only mine hussbandt and se sairvants!"

The doctor was concerned for Mrs. Fontenette from the beginning. "Terribly nervous," he said,
"and full from her feet to her eyes, of a terror of death--merely a part of the disease, you
know." But in this case I did not know.

"Pathetic," he called the fevered satisfaction she took in the hovering attentions of our old
black nurse, who gave us brief respites in the two sick-rooms by turns, and who had according
to Mrs. Fontenette, "such a beautiful faith!" The doctor thought it mostly words, among which
"de Lawd willin'" so constantly recurred that out of the sick-room he always alluded to her
as D.V., though never without a certain sincere regard. This kind old soul had nursed much
yellow fever in her time, and it did not occur to us that maybe her time was past.

When Mrs. Fontenette had been ill something over a week, the doctor one evening made us glad
by saying as he came through the little dining-room and jerked a thumb back toward Fontenette's
door, "Just keep him as he is for one more night and, I promise you, he'll get well; but!"--He
sat down on the couch--Senda's--in the parlor, and pointed at the door to Mrs. Fontenette's
room--"You've got to be careful how you let even that be known--in there! She can get well
too--if--" And he went on to tell how in this ailment all the tissues of the body sink into
such frail deterioration, that so slight a thing as the undue thrill of an emotion, may rend
some inner part of the soul's house and make it hopelessly untenable.

"Iss sat not se condition vhat make it so easy to relapse?" asked Senda.

He said it was, I think, and went his way, little knowing to what a night he was leaving us--except
for its celestial beauty, upon which he expatiated as I stepped with him to the gate. 

This people, now so innocent and harmless, shall draw the sword against
their mother country, and bathe its point in the blood of their benefactors;
this people, now contented with a little, shall then refuse to spare
what they themselves confess they could not miss; and these men, now
so honest and so grateful, shall, in return for peace and for protection,
see their vile agents in the House of Parliament, there to sow the
seeds of sedition, and propagate confusion, perplexity, and pain.

Be not dispirited, then, at the contemplation of their present happy state: I promise you that
anarchy, poverty, and death shall, by my care, be carried even across the spacious Atlantic,
and settle in America itself, the sure consequences of our beloved Whiggism.'"

This I thought a thing so very particular that I begged his leave to write it down directly, before
anything could intervene that might make me forget the force of the
expressions.

A set of acquaintance joined in familiar chat may say a thousand
things which, as the phrase is, pass well enough at the time, though
they cannot stand the test of critical examination; and as all talk
beyond that which is necessary to the purposes of actual business
is a kind of game, there will be ever found ways of playing fairly
or unfairly at it, which distinguish the gentleman from the juggler.

Dr. Johnson, as well as many of my acquaintance, knew that I kept
a common-place book, and he one day said to me good-humouredly that
he would give me something to write in my repository.

 Loath to see him open his eyes, I kept very still, while nearly another hour
dragged by, listening hard for Senda's return, but hearing only, once or twice, through the
narrow stairway and closets between the two bedrooms, a faint stir that showed Mrs. Fontenette
was awake and being waited on.

I was grateful for the rarity of outdoor sounds; a few tree-frogs piped, two or three solitary
wayfarers passed in the street; twice or more the sergeant of the night-watch trilled his whistle
in a street or two behind us, and twice or more in front; and once, and once again, came the
distant bellow of steamboats passing each other--not the famous boats whose whistle you would
know one from another, for they were laid up. I doubt if I have forgotten any sound that I
noticed that night. I remember the drowsy rumble of the midnight horse-car and tinkle of its
mule's bell, first in Prytania street and then in Magazine. It was just after these that at
last a black hand beckoned me to the door, and under her breath the old nurse told me she was
just back from our house, where her mistress had sent her, and that--"De-eh--de-eh"--

"The Baroness?"

"Yass, sih, de--de outlayndish la-ady--"

Senda had sent word that the child had only an indigestion--a thing serious enough in such
a case--and though still slightly feverish was now asleep, but restless.

"Sih? Yass, sir--awnressless--dass 'zac'ly what I say!"

Wherefore Senda would either remain in the nursery or return to us, as we should elect.

"O no, sih, she no need to come back right now, anyhow; yass, sih, dass what de Mis' say, too."

"Then you'll stay here," I whispered.

"Yass, sih, ef de Lawd wil'--I mean ef you wants me, sih--yass, sih, thaynk you, sih. I loves
to tend on Mis' Fontenette, she got sich a bu'ful fa aith, same like she say I got. Yass, sih,
I dess loves to set an' watch her--wid dat sweet samtimonious fa-ace."

Fontenette being still asleep I gave her my place for a moment, and went to the door between
the parlor and his wife's room. Mrs. Smith came to it, barely breathing the triumphant word--"Just
dropped asleep!"

When I replied that I would take a little fresh air at the front door she asked if at my leisure
I would empty and bring in from the window-sill, around on the garden side of her patient's
room a saucer containing the over-sweetened remains of some orange-leaf tea, that "D.V." had
made "for to wrench out de nerves." She wanted the saucer.

I went outside a step or two and took in a long draught of good air--the air of a yellow-fever
room is dreadful. It was my first breath of mental relief also; almost the first that night,
and the last.

I paced once or twice the short narrow walk between the front flower-beds, surprised at their
well-kept and blooming condition until I remembered Senda. The moths were out in strong numbers,
and it was delightful to forget graver things for a moment and see the flowers bend coyly under
their passionate kisses and blushingly rise again when the sweet robbery was finished. So it
happened that I came where a glance across to my own garden showed me, on the side farthest
from the nursery, a favorite bush, made pale by a light that could come only from the entomologist's
window! I went in promptly, told what I proposed to do, and hurried out again.

XIX

I crossed into my garden and silently mounted the balcony stairs I have mentioned once before.
His balcony door was ajar. His room was empty. He had occupied the bed. A happy thought struck
me--to feel the spot where he had lain; it was still warm. Good! But his clothes were all gone
except his shoes, and they, you remember, were no proof that he was indoors.

I stole down into the garden once more, and looked hurriedly in several directions, but saw
no sign of him. I am not a ferocious man even when alone, but as I came near the fence of our
fat neighbor--once fat, poor fellow, and destined to be so again in time--and still saw no
one, I was made conscious of waving my fist and muttering through my gritting teeth, by hearing
my name softly called. It was an unfamiliar female voice that spoke, from a window beyond the
fence, and it flashed on my remembrance that two kinswomen of my neighbor were watching with
his wife, whose case was giving new cause for anxiety. It was Mrs. Soandso, the voice explained,
and could I possibly come in there a moment?--if only to the window!

"Is our friend the Baron over here?" I asked, as I came to it. He was not. "Well, never mind,"
I said; "how is your patient?"

"Oh that's just what we wish we knew. In some ways she seems better, but she's more unquiet.
She's had some slight nausea and it seems to increase. Do you think that is important?"

"Yes," I said, "very. I hear some one cracking ice; you are keeping ice on her throat--no?
Well, begin it at once, and persuade her to lie on her back as quietly as she can, and get
her to sleep if possible! Doctor--no; he wouldn't come before morning, anyhow; but I'll send
Mrs. Smith right over to you, if she possibly can come."

I turned hurriedly away and had taken only a few steps, when I lit upon the entomologist. "Well,
I'll just--what are you doing here? Where were you when I was in your room just now?" His shoes
were on.

"Vhat you vanted mit me? I vas by dot librair' going. For vhat you moof dot putterfly-net fon
t'e mandtelpiece? You make me too much troubple to find dot vhen I vas in a hurry!" He shook
it at me.

"Hurry!" In my anger and distress I laughed. "My friend"--laying a hand on him--"you'll hurry
across the street with me."

He waved me off. "Yes; go on, you; I coom py undt py; I dtink t'ere iss vun maud come into
dot gardten, vhat I haf not pefore seen since more as acht years, alreadty!"

"Yes," I retorted, "and so you're here at the gate alone. Now come right along with me! Aren't
there enough lives in danger to-night, but you must" -He stopped me in the middle of the street.

"Mine Gott! vhat iss dot you say? Who--who--mine Gott! who iss her life in dtanger? Iss dot--mine
Gott! is dot he-ere?" He pointed to Mrs. Fontenette's front window.

I could hardly keep my fist off him. "Hush! you--For one place it's here." I pushed him with
my finger.

"Ach!" he exclaimed in infinite relief. "I dt'ought you mean--I--I dt'ought--hmm!--hmm! I am
dtired." He leaned on me like a sick child and we went into the cottage parlor. The moment
he saw the lounge he lay down upon it, or I should have taken him back into the dining-room.

"Sha'n't I put that net away for you?" I murmured, as I dropped a light covering over him.

But he only hugged the toy closer. "No; I geep it--hmm!--hmm!--I am dtired--"

XX

Both patients, I found, were drowsing; the husband peacefully, the wife with troubled dreams.
When the Baron spoke her eyes opened with a look, first eager and then distressful, but closed
again. We put the old black woman temporarily into her room and Mrs. Smith hurried to our other
neighbors, whence she was to despatch one of their servants to bid Senda come to us at once.
But "No battle"--have I already used the proverb? She gave the message to the servant, but
it never reached Senda. Somebody forgot. As I sat by Fontenette with ears alert for Senda's
coming and was wondering at the unbroken silence, he opened his eyes on me and smiled.

"Ah!" he softly said, "thad was a pleasan' dream!"

"A pleasant dream, was it?"

"Yes; I was having the dream thad my wife she was showing me those rose- bushes; an' every
rose-bush it had roses, an' every rose it was perfect."

I leaned close and said that he had been mighty good not to ask about her all these many days,
and that if he would engage to do as well for as long a time again, and to try now to have
another good dream I would tell him that she was sleeping and was without any alarming symptoms. Mr.
Bowman, F.L.S. says, "We arrested several of these little aëronauts
in their flight, and placed them on the brass gnomon of the sundial,
and had the gratification to see them prepare for, and recommence,
their aerial voyage.

Having crawled about for a short time, to reconnoitre, they turned their abdomens from the current
of air, and elevated them almost perpendicularly, supporting themselves solely on the claws of
their fore legs, at the same instant shooting out four or five, often six or eight, extremely
fine webs, several yards long, which waved in the breeze, diverging from each other like a
pencil of rays, and strongly reflecting the sunbeams. After the insects had remained stationary
in this apparently unnatural position for about half a minute, they sprang off from the stage
with considerable agility, and launched themselves into the air. In a few seconds after they
were seen sailing majestically along, without any apparent effort, their legs contracted together,
and lying perfectly quiet on their backs, suspended from their silken
parachutes, and presenting to the lover of nature a far more interesting
spectacle than the balloon of the philosopher.

One of these natural aëronauts I followed, which, sailing in the sunbeams, had two distinct and
widely diverging fasciculi of webs, and their position in the air was such, that a line uniting them
would have been at right angles with the direction of the breeze."--Mag. Natural History.

The Ichneumon Fly.

There are several species of ichneumon which make thinnings among
the caterpillars of the cabbage butterfly.

The process of one species is this:--while the caterpillar is feeding,
the ichneumon fly hovers over it, and, with its piercer, perforates
the fatty part of the caterpillar's back in many places, and in each
deposits an egg, by means of the two parts of the sheath uniting together,
and thus forming a tube down which the egg is conveyed into the perforation
made by the piercer of the fly.

The caterpillar unconscious of what will ensue keeps feeding on, until it changes into a chrysalis;
while in that torpid state, the eggs of the ichneumon are hatched, and the interior of the body
of the caterpillar serves as food for the caterpillars of the ichneumon fly.
 But he'll not tell his wife, and she
mustn't know."

As I ran across the street I divined almost in full what had taken place.

I had noticed the possibility of some of the facts when I had left the Baron asleep on the
parlor lounge, but they could have done no harm, even when Senda did not come, had it not been
for two other facts which I had failed to foresee; one, that we had unwittingly overtasked
our willing old nurse, and in her chair in Mrs. Fontenette's room she was going to fall asleep;
and the other that the entomologist would waken.

XXI

And now see what a cunning trap the most innocent intentions may sometimes set. There was a
mirror in the sick-room purposely so placed that, with the parlor door ajar, the watcher, but
not the patient, could see into the parlor, and could be seen from the parlor when sitting
anywhere between the mirror and the window beyond it. This window was the one that looked into
the side garden. Purposely, too, the lounge had been placed so as to give and receive these
advantages. A candle stood on the window's inner ledge and was screened from the unseen bed,
but shone outward through the window and inward upon the mirror. The front door of the parlor
opened readily to anyone within or without who knew enough to use its two latches at once,
but neither within nor without to--the Baron, say--who did not know.

Do you see it? As he lay awake on the lounge his eye was, of course, drawn constantly to the
mirror by the reflected light of the candle, and to its images of the nodding watcher and of
the window just beyond. So lying and gazing, he had suddenly beheld that which brought him
from the lounge in an instant, net in hand, and tortured to find the front door--by which he
would have slipped out and around to the window--fastened! What he saw was the moth--the moth
so many years unseen. Now it sipped at the saucer of sweet stuff, now hovered over it, now
was lost in the dark, and now fluttered up or slid down the pane, lured by the beam of the candle.

If he was not to lose it, there was but one thing to do. With his eyes fixed, moth-mad, on
the window, he glided in, passed the two sleepers, and stealthily lifted the sash with one
hand, the other poising the net. The moth dropped under, the net swept after it, and the sash
slipped and fell. Mrs. Fontenette rose wildly, and when she saw first the old woman, half starting
from her seat with frightened stare, and then the entomologist speechless, motionless, and
looming like an apparition, she gave that cry her husband heard, and fell back upon the pillow
in a convulsion.

I found the Baron sitting on the side of his bed like a child trying to be awake without waking.
No, not trying to do or be anything; but aimless, dazed, silent, lost.

He obeyed, automatically, my every request. I set about getting him to bed at once, putting
his clothes beyond his reach, and even locking his balcony door, without a sign of objection
from him. Then I left him for a moment, and calling Senda from the nursery to the parlor told
her the state of the different patients, including her husband, but without the hows and whys
except that I had found him in our garden with his precious net. "And now, as it will soon
be day, Mrs. Smith and I--with the servants and others--can take care of the four."

"If I"--meekly interrupted the sweet woman--"vill go for se doctors? I vill go." Soon she was off.

Then I went back to her husband, and finding his mood so changed that he was eager to explain
everything, I let him talk; which I soon saw was a blunder; for he got pitifully excited, and
wanted to go over the same ground again and again. One matter I was resolved to fix in his
mind without delay. "Mark you," I charged him, "your wife must never know a word of this!"

"Eh?--No"--and the next instant the sick woman across the way was filling all his thought:
"Mine Gott! she rice oop scaredt in t'e bedt, choost so!" and up he would start. Then as I
pressed him down--"Mine Gott! I vould not go in, if I dhink she would do dot. Hmm! Hmm! I am
sorry!--Undt I tidt not t'e mawdt get.

"Hmm! Even I titn't saw vhere it iss gone. Hmm! Hmm! I am sorry!

"Undt dot door kit shtuck! Hmm! Undt dot vindow iss not right made. Hmm!

"I tidn't vant to do dot--you know? Hmm! I am sorry!--Ach, mine Gott! she rice oop scaredt
in t'e bedt, choost so!" Thus round and round. What to do for him I did not know!

Yet he grew quiet, and was as good as silent, when Senda, long before I began to look for her,
stood unbonneted at my side in a soft glow of physical animation, her anxiety all hidden and
with a pink spot on each cheek. I was startled. Had I slept--or had she somehow ridden?

"Are the street-cars running already?" I asked.

"No," she murmured, producing a vial and looking for a glass. "'Tis I haf been running alreadty.
Sat iss not so tiresome as to valk. Also it is safeh. I runned all se vay. Vill you sose drops
drop faw me?" Her hand trembled.

I took the vial but did not meet her glance: for I was wondering if there was anything in the
world she could ask of me that I would not do, and at such a time it is good for anyone as
weak as I am to look at inanimate things.

"You got word to all three doctors?"

"Yes;" she gave her chin the drollest little twist--"sey are all coming --vhen sey get ready."

XXII

That is what they did; but the first who came, and the second, brought fresh courage; for the
Baron--"would most likely be all right again, before the day was over"; our child was "virtually
well"; and from next door-"better!" was the rapturous news. The third physician, too, was pleased
with Fontenette's case, and we began at once to send the night- watchers to their rest by turns.

But there the gladness ended. At Mrs. Fontenette's bedside he asked no questions. In the parlor
he said to us:

"Well, ... you've done your best; ... I've done mine; ... and it's of no use."

"Oh, Doctor!" exclaimed Mrs. Smith.

"Why, didn't you know it?" He jerked his thumb toward the sick-room. "She knows it. She told
me she knew it, with her first glance."

He pondered. "I wish she were not so near him. If she were only in here --you see?"

Yes, we saw; the two patients would then be, on their either hand, one whole room apart, as
if in two squares of a checkerboard that touch only at one corner.

"Well," he said, "we must move her at once. I'll show you how; I'll stay and help you."

It seemed more as though we helped him--a very little--as we first moved her and then took
the light bedstead apart, set it up again in the parlor, and laid her in it, all without a
noticeable sound, and with only great comfort of mind to her--for she knew why we did it. Then
I made all haste to my own house again and had the relief to see, as Senda came toward me from
her husband's room, that he had told her nothing. "Vell?" she eagerly asked.

"Well, Monsieur Fontenette is greatly improved!"

"O sat iss goodt! And se Madame; she, too, is betteh?--a little?--eh-- no-o?"

I said that what the doctor had feared, a "lesion," had taken place, and that there was no
longer any hope of her life. At which she lighted up with a lovely defiance.

"Ho-o! no long-eh any hope! Yes, sare iss long-er any hope! Vhere iss sat doc-toh? Sare shall
be hope! Kif me sat patient! I can keep se vatch of mine huss-bandt at se same time. He hass
not a relapse! Kif me se patient! Many ossehs befo'e I haf savedt vhen hadt sose doctohs no
long-eh any hope! Mine Gott! vas sare so much hope vhen she and her hussbandt mine sick hussbandt
and me out of se street took in? Vill you let stay by mine hussbandt, anyhow a short vhile,
one of yo' so goodt sairvants?" The instant I assented she flew down the veranda steps, through
the garden, and out across the street.

I lingered a few moments with the entomologist before leaving him with others. He asked me
only one question: "Hmm! Hmm! 'Spose then, that I have handed you down to the bottom of five-and-twenty
couple at a country-dance, to the tune of Sir Roger de Coverley, Morgiana
in Ireland, Petronella, or the Triumph; and, notwithstanding our having
sucked a couple of oranges a-piece, we are both quite in a broth of
perspiration.

Very good--so says I to you, making a genteel bow, 'Do you please
to walk aside, and cool yourself in them there green arbours, and
I will be with you as quick as directly, with a glass of lemonade
or cherry brandy?' So says you to me, dropping a curtsey a la mode,
'With ineffable pleasure, sir;' and away you trip into the shade like
a sunbeam.

"'Now, Lucy, my love, take a good look of that picture. That is you, 'spose, seated on the turf, a leetle
behind the pillar dedicated to Apollar; and you, blooming like a daffodilly in April, are
waiting with great thirst, and not a little impatience, for my promised appearance, from the
sign of the Hen and Chickens, with the cordials, and a few biscuits on a salver--when, lo! an
old bald-pated, oily-faced, red-nosed Cameronian ranter, whom by
your elegant negligee capering you have fairly danced out of his dotard
senses, comes pawing up to you like Polito's polar bear, drops on
his knees, and before you can avert your nose from a love-speech,
embalmed in the fumes of tobacco and purl, the hoary villain has beslobbered
your lily-white fingers, and is protesting unalterable affection,
at the rate of twelve miles an hour, inclusive of stoppages.

Now, Lucy, love, did you ever,--say upon your honour,--did you ever witness such a spectacle of
humanity? Tell me now?

"'Very well.
 "Go in," she said.

As I entered, Senda tenderly disengaged herself, went out, and closed the door.

I drew near in silence and she began at once to speak, bidding me take the chair Senda had
left, and with a tender smile thanking me for coming.

Then she said faintly and slowly, but with an unfaltering voice, "I want you to know one or
two things so that if it ever should be my husband's affliction to find out how foolish and
undutiful I have been, you can tell them to him. Tell him my wrongdoing was, from first to
last, almost totally--almost totally----"

"Do you mean--intangible?"

"Yes, yes, intangible. Then if he should say that the intangible part is the priceless part--the
life, the beauty, the very essence of the whole matter--isn't it strange that we women are
slower than men to see that-- tell him I saw it, saw it and confessed it when for his sake
I was slipping away from him by stealth out of life up to my merciful Judge.

"I may not be saying these things in their right order, but--tell him I wish he'd marry again;
only let him first be sure the woman loves him as truly and deeply as he is sure to love her.
I find I've never truly loved him till now. If he doesn't know it don't ever tell him; but
tell him I died loving him and blessing him--for the unearned glorious love he gave me all
my days. That's all. That's all to him. But I would like to send one word to"--she lifted her
hand--

"Across the street?" I murmured.

Her eyes said yes. "Tell him--you may never see the right time for it, but if you do--tell
him I craved his forgiveness."

I shook my head.

"Yes--yes, tell him so; it was far the most my fault; he is such a child; such a child of nature,
I mean. Tell him I said it sounds very pretty to call ourselves and each other children of
nature, but we have no right to be such. The word is 'Be thou clean,' and if we are not masters
of nature we can't do it. Tell him that, will you? And tell him he has nothing to grieve for;
I was only a dangerous toy, and I want him to love the dear Father for taking it away from
him before he had hurt himself.

"Now I am ready to go--only--that hymn those black women--in the cemetery --you remember? I've
made another verse to it. You'll find it--afterward-- on a scrap of paper between the leaves
of my Bible. It isn't good poetry, of course; it's the only verse I ever composed. May I say
it to you just for my--my testimony? It's this:

     Yet though I have sinned, Lord, all others above,
     Though feeble my prayers, Lord; my tears all unseen;
     I'll trust in thy love, Lord; I'll trust in thy love--
     O I'll trust in thy love like Mary Mahgaleen."

An exalted smile lighted her face as she sunk deeper into the pillows. She tried to speak again,
but her voice failed. I bent my ear and she whispered--"Senda."

As I beckoned Senda in, Mrs. Smith motioned for me to come to her where she stood at a window
whose sash she had slightly lifted; the same to which the moth had once been lured by the little
puddle of sweet drink and the candle.

"Do you want to see a parable?" she whispered, and all but blinded with tears, she pointed
to the lost moth lying half in, half out of the window, still beautiful but crushed; crushed
with its wings full spread, not by anyone's choice, but because there are so many things in
this universe that not even God can help from being as they are.

At a whispered call we turned, and Senda, in the door, herself all tears, made eager signs
for us to come. The last summons had surprised even the dying. We went in noiseless haste,
and found her just relaxing on Senda's arm. Yet she revived an instant; a quiver went through
her frame like the dying shudder of a butterfly, her eyes gazed appealingly into Senda's, then
fixed, and our poor little Titania was gone.

XXIII

The story is nearly told. Before I close let me confess how heartlessly I have told it. Pardon
that; and pardon, too, the self-consciousness that makes me beg not to be remembered as I seem
to myself in the tale--a tiptoeing, peeping figure prowling by night after undue revelations,
and using them--to the humiliation of souls cleaner than mine could ever pretend to be.

Next day, by stealth again, we buried the little rose-lady, unknown to her husband. We could
not keep the fact long from the entomologist, for he was up and about the house again. Nor
was there equal need. So when the last rites were over I told him, but without giving any part
of her message--I couldn't do it! I just said she had left us.

His eye did not moisten, but he paled, trembled, wiped his brow. Then I handed him the crushed
moth, and he was his convalescent self again.

"Hmm!--Dot iss a pity she kit smashed; I titn't vant to do dot."

I thought maybe he felt more than he showed, for he fretted to be allowed to take a walk alone
beyond the gate and the corner. With some misgivings his wife let him go, and when she was
almost anxious enough over his tardy stay to start after him he came back looking very much
better. But the next morning, when we found him in the burning fever of an unmistakable relapse,
he confessed that the German keeper of an eating-stall in the neighboring market, for his hunger's
and the Fatherland's sake, had treated him to his "whole pifshtea-ak undt glahss be-eh."

He lived only a few days. Through all his deliriums he hunted butterflies and beetles, and
died insensible to his wife's endearments, repeating the Latin conjugations of his inconceivable
boyhood.

So they both, caterpillar and rose, were gone; but the memory of them stays, green--yes, and
fragrant--not alone with Fontenette, and not only with Senda besides, but with us also. How
often I recall the talks on theology I had used sometimes to let myself fall into with the
little unsuccessful mistress of "rose-es" who first brought the miser of knowledge into our
garden, and whenever I do so I wonder, and wonder, and lose my bearings and find and lose them
again, and wonder and wonder--what God has done with the entomologist.

We never had to tell Fontenette that he was widowed. * * * * *

SPIRIT OF DISCOVERY

Aerial Voyages of Spiders.

The number of the aëronautic spiders occasionally suspended in the atmosphere, says Mr. Murray,
I believe to be almost incredible, could we ascertain their amount. I was walking with a friend
on the 9th, and noticed that there were four of these insects on his hat, at the moment there
were three on my own; and from the rapidity with which they covered its surface with their
threads, I cannot doubt that they are chiefly concerned in the production of that tissue which
intercepts the dew, and which, illuminated by the morning sun, "glitters with gold, and with
rubies and sapphires." Indeed, I have noticed that, when the frequent descent of the aëronautic
spider was determined, a newly rolled turnip field was, in a few hours, overspread by a carpet
of their threads.

It may be remarked that our little aëronaut is very greedy of moisture, though abstemious in
other respects. Its food is perhaps peculiar, and only found in the
superior regions of the sky.

Like the rest of its tribe, it is doubtless carnivorous, and may
subserve some highly important purpose in the economy of Providence;
such, for instance, as the destruction of that truly formidable, though
almost microscopically minute insect, the Fùria infernàlis, whose
wounds are stated to be mortal.

Its existence has been indeed questioned, but by no means disapproved;
that, and some others, injurious to man, or to the inferior creation,
may be its destined prey, and thus our little aëronaut, unheeded by
the common eye, may subserve an important good. Of co'se, besides--"

"Yes, I know: of course."

"But tha'z what puzzle' me. What I'm going do with that house heah, whilse I'm yondeh! I wou'n'
sell it--ah no! I wou'n' sell one of those roses! An' no mo' I wou'n' rent it. Tha's a monument,
that house heah, you know?"

"Yes, I know." He never found out how well I knew.

"Fontenette, I'll tell you what to do with it."

"No, you don't need; I know whad thad is. An' thaz the same I want--me. Only--you thing thad
wou'n' be hasking her too much troub'?"

"No, indeed. There's nothing else you could name that she'd be so glad to do."

When I told Senda I had said that, the tears stood in her eyes. "Ah, sat vass ri-ight! O, sare
shall neveh a veed be in sat karten two dayss oldt! An' sose roses--sey shall be pairfect ever'
vun!"

XXIV

As perfect as roses every one were her words kept. And Fontenette got his new business but
could not come back that year, nor the second, nor the third. The hither-side of his affairs
he assigned for the time to a relative, a very young fellow, but ever so capable--"a hustler,"
as our fat friend would say in these days. We missed the absentee constantly, but forgave his
detention the easier because incidentally he was clearing up a matter of Senda's over there,
in which certain displeased kindred had overreached her. He can tell when there is going to be
an eruption, and always notifies the people.

There we found guides
and men with saddled horses waiting to take us to the foot of the
cone. After a short ride we reached it, and dismounted, and started
up.

The first few were brief, formal and colorless; but after some time they began to take on grace
after grace, until at length we had to confess that to have known him only as we had known
him hitherto would have been to have been satisfied with the reverse of the tapestry, and never
fully to have seen the excellence of his mind or the modest nobility of his spirit. Frequently
we felt very sure we saw also that no small share of their captivating glow was reflected from
Senda's replies--of which she never would tell us a word. The faults in his written English
were surprisingly few, and to our minds only the more endeared it and him. Maybe we were not
judicial critics.

Yet we could pass strictures, and as the months lengthened out into years these winged proxies
stirred up, on our side of the street, a profound and ever-growing impatience. O, yes, every
letter was a garden of beautiful thoughts, still; but think of it! pansies where roses might
have been; and a garden wherein--to speak figuratively--the nightingale never sang.

On a certain day of All Saints, the fourth after the scourge, Senda sat at tea with us. Our
mood was chastened, but peaceful. We had come from visiting at the sunset hour the cemetery
where in the morning the two women and our old nurse had decked the tombs of our dead with
flowers. Nature has given the camel, you must remember, no means of defense except its prolonged
piercing cry, and a horrible sneeze of its own, whereby the object
of its hatred is sometimes covered with a mass of filth from its mouth.
 I
had remarked this on the spot, and Senda, with her rearranging touch still caressing their
splendid masses, replied,

"So?--vell--I hope siss shall mine vork and mine pleassure be until mineself I shall fade like
se floweh."

I inwardly resented the speech, but said nothing. I suppose it was over my head.

Now, at the table, she explained as to certain costly blooms about which I had inquired, that
they were Fontenette's special offering, for which he always sent the purchase money ahead
of time and with detailed requests. Whereat, remembering how she had formerly glozed and gilded
the entomologist's unthrift, I remarked, one-fourth in play, three-fourths in earnest,

"A good plain business man isn't the least noble work of God, after all."

"No," said Senda, without looking up; and, after a long, meditative breath, she added, very slowly,

"Se koot Kott makes not all men for se same high calling. If Kott make a man to do no betteh
san make a living or a fawtune, it iss right for se man to make it; se man iss not to blame.
And now I vant to tell you se news of sat letteh from----"

"The other side," we suggested, and invited her smile, but without success. 

Christmas-day we always have a picnic. The children of the native Sunday-schools and English
schools join together, and have a good time in some grove.

And all through the winter we play out under the trees, just as mamma
says you do in the summer. Se fairst is a ve'y small, but
se secondt iss a ve'y lahge. And se fairst is sat that I am now se Countess.

"So? you are glad? I sank you ve'y much. I sink sat iss not much trouble --to be a countess--in
Ame'ica?

"Se secondt sing"--here a servant entered, and, it seemed to me, never would go out, but Senda
waited till we were again alone--"se secondt-- pahdon me, I sink I shall betteh se secondt
sing divide again into two aw sree. And se fairst is sat Monsieur Fontenette vill like ve'y--ve'y
much to come home--now--right avay."

We lifted hands to clap and opened mouths to hurrah, but she raised a warning hand.

"No, vait--if you pleass.

"Se secondt of sose two or sree sings--it is sat--he--Monsieur Fontenette --hass ask me--"
Our hearts rose slowly into our throats--"Ze vun qvestion to vich sare can be only--se--vun--answeh."

At this we gulped our breath like schoolgirls and glowed. But the more show we made of hopeful
and pleading smiles, the more those dear eyes, so seldom wet, filled up with tears. 

Although I saw abundance of comfortable-looking desks and arm chairs, yet this room seemed
rather too large and fine for work, and I found accordingly, after
passing a double pair of doors, that there was a sanctum within and
beyond this library.

 She smiled heroically.

I could be silent no longer. "Senda, what have you answered?"

"I haf answered"--her lips quivered till she gnawed them cruelly--"I am sorry to take such
a long time to tell you sat--but--I--I find sat--ve'y hahd--to tell." She smiled and gnawed
her lips again. "I haf answered--

"Do you sink, my deah, sat siss is ri-ight to tell the we'y vords sat I haf toldt him?--yes?--vell--he
tell me I shall se answeh make in vun vord --is sat not like a man?

"But I had to take six. And sey are sese: I cannot vhispeh across se ocean."

