"THY ears tickled!" said the King; "that must be with a woodcock's feather, and not with sweet
sounds. Hark thee, Thomas, do thine ears know the singing of Blondel from the braying of an ass?"

"In faith, my liege," replied Thomas, "I cannot well say; but setting Blondel out of the question,
who is a born gentleman, and doubtless of high acquirements, I shall never, for the sake of
your Grace's question, look on a minstrel but I shall think upon an ass."

"And might not your manners," said Richard, "have excepted me, who am a gentleman born as well
as Blondel, and, like him, a guild-brother of the joyeuse science?"

"Your Grace should remember," said De Vaux, smiling, "that 'tis useless asking for manners
from a mule."

"Most truly spoken," said the King; "and an ill-conditioned animal thou art. But come hither,
master mule, and be unloaded, that thou mayest get thee to thy litter, without any music being
wasted on thee. Meantime do thou, good brother of Salisbury, go to our consort's tent, and
tell her that Blondel has arrived, with his budget fraught with the newest minstrelsy. Bid
her come hither instantly, and do thou escort her, and see that our cousin, Edith Plantagenet,
remain not behind."

His eye then rested for a moment on the Nubian, with that expression of doubtful meaning which
his countenance usually displayed when he looked at him.

"Ha, our silent and secret messenger returned?--Stand up, slave, behind the back of De Neville,
and thou shalt hear presently sounds which will make thee bless God that He afflicted thee
rather with dumbness than deafness."

So saying, he turned from the rest of the company towards De Vaux, and plunged instantly into
the military details which that baron laid before him.

About the time that the Lord of Gilsland had finished his audience, a messenger announced that
the Queen and her attendants were approaching the royal tent.--"A flask of wine, ho!" said
the King; "of old King Isaac's long-saved Cyprus, which we won when we stormed Famagosta. Fill
to the stout Lord of Gilsland, gentles--a more careful and faithful servant never had any prince."

"I am glad," said Thomas de Vaux, "that your Grace finds the mule a useful slave, though his
voice be less musical than horse-hair or wire."

"What, thou canst not yet digest that quip of the mule?" said Richard. "Wash it down with a
brimming flagon, man, or thou wilt choke upon it. Why, so--well pulled!--and now I will tell
thee, thou art a soldier as well as I, and we must brook each other's jests in the hall as
each other's blows in the tourney, and love each other the harder we hit. By my faith, if thou
didst not hit me as hard as I did thee in our late encounter! thou gavest all thy wit to the
thrust. But here lies the difference betwixt thee and Blondel. Thou art but my comrade--I might
say my pupil--in the art of war; Blondel is my master in the science of minstrelsy and music.
To thee I permit the freedom of intimacy; to him I must do reverence, as to my superior in
his art. Come, man, be not peevish, but remain and hear our glee."

"To see your Majesty in such cheerful mood," said the Lord of Gilsland, "by my faith, I could
remain till Blondel had achieved the great romance of King Arthur, which lasts for three days."

"We will not tax your patience so deeply," said the King. "But see, yonder glare of torches
without shows that our consort approaches. Away to receive her, man, and win thyself grace
in the brightest eyes of Christendom. Nay, never stop to adjust thy cloak. See, thou hast let
Neville come between the wind and the sails of thy galley."

"He was never before me in the field of battle," said De Vaux, not greatly pleased to see himself
anticipated by the more active service of the chamberlain.

"No, neither he nor any one went before thee there, my good Tom of the Gills," said the King,
"unless it was ourself, now and then."

"Ay, my liege," said De Vaux, "and let us do justice to the unfortunate. The unhappy Knight
of the Leopard hath been before me too, at a season; for, look you, he weighs less on horseback,
and so--"

"Hush!" said the King, interrupting him in a peremptory tone, "not a word of him," and instantly
stepped forward to greet his royal consort; and when he had done so, he presented to her Blondel,
as king of minstrelsy and his master in the gay science. Berengaria, who well knew that her
royal husband's passion for poetry and music almost equalled his appetite for warlike fame,
and that Blondel was his especial favourite, took anxious care to receive him with all the
flattering distinctions due to one whom the King delighted to honour. Yet it was evident that,
though Blondel made suitable returns to the compliments showered on him something too abundantly
by the royal beauty, he owned with deeper reverence and more humble gratitude the simple and
graceful welcome of Edith, whose kindly greeting appeared to him, perhaps, sincere in proportion
to its brevity and simplicity.

Both the Queen and her royal husband were aware of this distinction, and Richard, seeing his
consort somewhat piqued at the preference assigned to his cousin, by which perhaps he himself
did not feel much gratified, said in the hearing of both, "We minstrels, Berengaria, as thou
mayest see by the bearing of our master Blondel, pay more reverence to a severe judge like
our kinswoman than to a kindly, partial friend like thyself, who is willing to take our worth
upon trust."

Edith was moved by this sarcasm of her royal kinsman, and hesitated not to reply that, "To
be a harsh and severe judge was not an attribute proper to her alone of all the Plantagenets."

She had perhaps said more, having some touch of the temper of that house, which, deriving their
name and cognizance from the lowly broom (PLANTA GENISTA), assumed as an emblem of humility,
were perhaps one of the proudest families that ever ruled in England; but her eye, when kindling
in her reply, suddenly caught those of the Nubian, although he endeavoured to conceal himself
behind the nobles who were present, and she sunk upon a seat, turning so pale that Queen Berengaria
deemed herself obliged to call for water and essences, and to go through the other ceremonies
appropriate to a lady's swoon. Richard, who better estimated Edith's strength of mind, called
to Blondel to assume his seat and commence his lay, declaring that minstrelsy was worth every
other recipe to recall a Plantagenet to life. "Sing us," he said, "that song of the Bloody
Vest, of which thou didst formerly give me the argument ere I left Cyprus. Thou must be perfect
in it by this time, or, as our yeomen say, thy bow is broken."

The anxious eye of the minstrel, however, dwelt on Edith, and it was not till he observed her
returning colour that he obeyed the repeated commands of the King. Then, accompanying his voice
with the harp, so as to grace, but yet not drown, the sense of what he sung, he chanted in
a sort of recitative one of those ancient adventures of love and knighthood which were wont
of yore to win the public attention. So soon as he began to prelude, the insignificance of
his personal appearance seemed to disappear, and his countenance glowed with energy and inspiration.
His full, manly, mellow voice, so absolutely under command of the purest taste, thrilled on
every ear and to every heart. Richard, rejoiced as after victory, called out the appropriate
summons for silence, "Listen, lords, in bower and hall"; while, with the zeal of a patron at
once and a pupil, he arranged the circle around, and hushed them into silence; and he himself
sat down with an air of expectation and interest, not altogether unmixed with the gravity of
the professed critic. The courtiers turned their eyes on the King, that they might be ready
to trace and imitate the emotions his features should express, and Thomas de Vaux yawned tremendously,
as one who submitted unwillingly to a wearisome penance. The song of Blondel was of course
in the Norman language, but the verses which follow express its meaning and its manner.

                THE BLOODY VEST.

     'Twas near the fair city of Benevent,
     When the sun was setting on bough and bent,
     And knights were preparing in bower and tent,
     On the eve of the Baptist's tournament;
     When in Lincoln green a stripling gent,
     Well seeming a page by a princess sent,
     Wander'd the camp, and, still as he went,
     Inquired for the Englishman, Thomas a Kent.

     Far hath he far'd, and farther must fare,
     Till he finds his pavilion nor stately nor rare,--
     Little save iron and steel was there;
     And, as lacking the coin to pay armourer's care,
     With his sinewy arms to the shoulders bare,
     The good knight with hammer and file did repair
     The mail that to-morrow must see him wear,
     For the honour of Saint John and his lady fair.

     "Thus speaks my lady," the page said he,
     And the knight bent lowly both head and knee,
     "She is Benevent's Princess so high in degree,
     And thou art as lowly as knight may well be--
     He that would climb so lofty a tree,
     Or spring such a gulf as divides her from thee,
     Must dare some high deed, by which all men may see
     His ambition is back'd by his hie chivalrie.

     "Therefore thus speaks my lady," the fair page he said,
     And the knight lowly louted with hand and with head,
     "Fling aside the good armour in which thou art clad,
     And don thou this weed of her night-gear instead,
     For a hauberk of steel, a kirtle of thread;
     And charge, thus attir'd, in the tournament dread,
     And fight as thy wont is where most blood is shed,
     And bring honour away, or remain with the dead."

Untroubled in his look, and untroubled in his breast, The knight the weed hath taken, and reverently
hath kiss'd. "Now blessed be the moment, the messenger be blest! Much honour'd do I hold me
in my lady's high behest; And say unto my lady, in this dear night-weed dress'd, To the best
armed champion I will not veil my crest; But if I live and bear me well 'tis her turn to take
the test." Here, gentles, ends the foremost fytte of the Lay of the Bloody Vest.

"Thou hast changed the measure upon us unawares in that last couplet, my Blondel," said the King.

"Most true, my lord," said Blondel. "I rendered the verses from the Italian of an old harper
whom I met in Cyprus, and not having had time either to translate it accurately or commit it
to memory, I am fain to supply gaps in the music and the verse as I can upon the spur of the
moment, as you see boors mend a quickset fence with a fagot."

"Nay, on my faith," said the King, "I like these rattling, rolling Alexandrines. Methinks they
come more twangingly off to the music than that briefer measure."

"Both are licensed, as is well known to your Grace," answered Blondel.

"They are so, Blondel," said Richard, "yet methinks the scene where there is like to be fighting
will go best on in these same thundering Alexandrines, which sound like the charge of cavalry,
while the other measure is but like the sidelong amble of a lady's palfrey."

"It shall be as your Grace pleases," replied Blondel, and began again to prelude.

"Nay, first cherish thy fancy with a cup of fiery Chios wine," said the King. "And hark thee,
I would have thee fling away that new-fangled restriction of thine, of terminating in accurate
and similar rhymes. They are a constraint on thy flow of fancy, and make thee resemble a man
dancing in fetters."

