He first wrote Berkeley asking for a commission to go out to attack the Indians, and then,
without waiting for a reply, crossed the Chickahominy into New Kent to overawe or perhaps attack
the Pamunkeys. He found the people of this county "ripe for rebellion" and eager to wipe out
their treacherous neighbors. But when he heard that the Pamunkeys had fled from their villages
to the inaccessible Dragon's Swamp, he turned back to pursue a body of Susquehannocks who had
moved south to the Roanoke river.

When the news reached Berkeley that the frontier planters had assembled in arms, chosen Bacon
their leader, denounced his administration, and driven the Pamunkeys into hiding, he was furious.
But as he had broken up previous mutinies by proclamations, he tried the same expedient now.
He declared the action of Bacon and his men illegal and rebellious. But pardon would be granted
provided they disperse at once and return to their duty and allegiance.

Bacon had already written the governor to assure him that in taking up arms he was acting only
in self-defense and for the country's safety. But now he sent another letter reiterating that
he had no evil intentions to him or the government. "I am now going out to seek a more agreeable
destiny than you are pleased to design me," he added. As to the money he owed him he enclosed
an order for its payment.

He then turned his back on the settlements and plunged into the forests. Although he said he
distrusted all Indians, he went out of his way to enlist a few warriors from the allied Nottoways
and Meherrins. He then followed a trail used by fur traders and headed for an island in the
Roanoke river. Here a friendly tribe, the Occaneechees, had established two forts and a village.
They welcomed Bacon, ferried his men over to the island, and went themselves to attack a band
of Susquehannocks in a nearby fort. With the aid of some Mannikins, whom the Susquehannocks
had forced to accompany them, they took the fort and came back leading a number of captives.

Having accomplished what he had set out to do without the loss of a man, Bacon probably would
have started home, had he had provisions enough for the long march through the wilderness.
As it was his men faced starvation. So he demanded supplies of food from the Occaneechee chief.
Berkeley's friends later accused him of demanding also beaver taken from the Susquehannock
fort. The ensuing dispute led to a bloody battle on the island, in which the English rushed
up to the palisaded fort, began firing in at the portholes, and set fire to the village. The
next day the Indians sallied out, and hiding behind trees, tried to pick off the English. But
when many of their warriors had been killed, the chief, with twenty men, tried to circle the
English. This too failed, the chief was killed, and the remaining Indians with their wives
and children, taking to their canoes, made their escape. Bacon and his men gathered up the
spoils, plundered the Occaneechee larder, swam their horses over to the mainland, and started
on the return march.

When Berkeley found that his proclamation had had no effect, he gathered a force of about three
hundred men, and set out for the falls of the James. But he was too late. When he arrived Bacon
and his men had disappeared into the forest on their way to the Roanoke. So the governor had
to content himself with issuing another proclamation. Nathaniel Bacon, junior, of Henrico County,
with divers rude, dissolute, and tumultuous persons, contrary to the laws of England and their
allegiance to the King, had taken up arms without obtaining from him any order or commission.
Since this tended to the ruin and overthrow of the government, he declared that Bacon and his
aiders were unlawful, mutinous, and rebellious.

At the same time, Lady Berkeley issued a statement of her own. It had been rumored among the
people that Bacon would not only be their captain, but provide out of his own pocket for their
wives and children. This was a vain hope, she said. His entire estate was bound over, his father
had refused to honor his bills of exchange, he owed William Byrd £400 and his cousin Colonel
Nathaniel Bacon, senior, £200. "I do accuse him of a worse crime than poverty," she added,
"I do accuse him of ingratitude, and that of a deep dye, to return the favorable amity of the
governor with casting all kinds of aspersions upon his courage and conduct in the government
of this colony."

In the meanwhile, awaiting Bacon's return, the governor turned his attention to the defences
on the upper James. He commanded the queen of the Pamunkeys to return to her reservation, and
when she refused, prepared to drive her out of the Dragon Swamp. But at this moment word reached
him that the people in all parts of the colony were rising against him. Now that they had a
leader to redress their wrongs, in many an humble cabin men seized their fusils, swords, and
halberds, and waited for him to call them to his side. They expected him to end corruption
and favoritism in the government, to lower taxes, to correct private injustices, to give them
a really representative Assembly.

Berkeley was astonished. Hastening back to Green Spring he questioned his Council. What do
they want? What have I done in all the years I have been governor to turn so many thousands
against me? What do you advise me to do? The Council replied that his keeping the Assembly
for so many years was one of the chief grievances and advised him to have a new election. Later
he stated that it was Bacon who made "the rabble cry out for a new Assembly." Reluctantly he
complied. He had every reason to expect that the new House of Burgesses would be overwhelmingly
hostile to him, and as the returns came in he saw that his worst fears would be realized. The
final count showed that one after another the old Burgesses were defeated at the polls until
in the end all but eight of the new House were of "Bacon's faction."

When Bacon returned from the Occaneechee fight, he was elated with the acclaim of the people,
not only on the frontier but in all parts of the colony, but he was aggrieved that the governor
had proclaimed him a rebel and threatened his life. On May 25, he wrote to Berkeley: "I am
sorry to find that for the expence of our estates and hazard of our lives in the country's
service we should by misinformers have our true intentions so falsely represented to you....
We have all along manifested our abhorrence of mutiny and rebellion.... If your honor were
in person to lead or command I would follow and obey." But then he continued with a veiled
threat. If he sought to revenge himself he had only to listen to all the stories of "your honor's
falsehood, cowardice, treachery, receiving bribes." He had heard that Lady Berkeley had raised
"several scandalous and false reports" against him, that he was not worth a groat and that
his notes had been protested. He could hear enough about her, he retorted, if he would permit
himself to listen.

When Berkeley showed this letter to the Council, they wrote Bacon: "Our advice to you is that
the most honorable, the most secure, and most safe way for yourself [is for] you forthwith
in the most humble manner present yourself to the governor and, acknowledging your errors,
humbly crave his pardon." If he preferred to justify his conduct, they promised him a fair
trial either in Virginia or in England.

But with the plaudits of the people ringing in his ears, Bacon was unwilling to humble himself.
"My submissions are unacceptable, my real intentions misunderstood," he wrote Berkeley. "I
am sorry that your honor's resentments are of such violence and growth as to command my appearance
with all contempt and disgrace and my disowning and belying so glorious a cause as the country's
defence. I know my person safe in your honor's word, but only beg what pledge or warranty I
shall have for my reputation."

So, when the sheriff of Henrico rose in court to read Berkeley's proclamation, he was interrupted
by Bacon, who was there with thirty or forty of his men. "If you dare read a line of that proclamation,
I will make you regret it," he said. Then, as though to show their defiance of the governor,
the people elected Bacon and his ardent friend, Captain James Crews, to represent them in the
House of Burgesses.

It would have been well for Bacon had he chosen to ride down to Jamestown with a heavy escort.
Instead he decided on the easier and usual method of travel by boat, and so set out in his
sloop with forty armed men. On June 6, when they came abreast Jamestown, they were fired on
by the guns of the fort. So they turned about and sailed further up the river. With the coming
of darkness Bacon, with twenty of his men, rowed ashore, and held a long conference with Richard
Lawrence and William Drummond, Berkeley's inveterate enemies. It is obvious that Bacon had
known these men before. It is even possible that he had boarded at Mrs. Lawrence's tavern while
a member of the Council, and that her husband had done his best to turn him against Sir William
with charges of arbitrary and corrupt government.

One wishes that one might have sat in on that night meeting. What did the young popular leader
discuss with these two embittered men? The Indian war beyond doubt. But also Berkeley's "French
despotism," and how best to curb it. With an Assembly hostile to Berkeley in session, Lawrence
and Drummond must have recognized their chance. In fact Berkeley had warned the Burgesses not
to be misled by these "two rogues." So it seems extremely probable that they drilled Bacon
on what measures to propose when he took his seat in the House.

At early dawn, when Bacon was returning, he was discovered and chased up the river by several
armed boats. He seems to have reached his sloop, but when he tried to escape up the river,
he was forced under the guns of the Adam and Eve, a warship commanded by Captain Thomas Gardiner,
and forced to surrender.

When Bacon was led before the governor, the old man exclaimed: "Now I behold the greatest rebel
that ever was in Virginia."

Then, after a pause, he asked: "Mr. Bacon, have you forgot to be a gentleman?"

"No, may it please your honor."

"Then, I'll take your parole."

Soon after this scene Bacon had a conference with his cousin in which the latter pleaded with
him to make his submission and give up the idea of reforming the government and going out to
fight the Indians. If he would promise to do so, he said, he would turn over to him a part
or his estate and leave him the remainder after his own and his wife's deaths. In the end the
younger Bacon yielded and signed a paper engaging to refrain from further disobedience to the
government.

A few days later the governor summoned the Burgesses to meet with the Council in the Court
Room of the State House. I forgive you!"

"And all that were with him?" asked one of the Councillors.

"Yes, and all that were with him," replied the governor.

"Mr. Bacon,'" he added, "if you will live civilly but till next Quarter Court, I will promise
to restore you again to your place there." But he decided not to wait so long, and the following
day permitted him to resume his seat.

We are left in no doubt as to why Berkeley was so lenient. "Why did I not put him to death
when I had him in my power?" he asked later. "I must have been judge, jury, and executioner
to have done it, for the Assembly ... were all picked for him. The Council frightened with
hearing 2000 men were armed to deliver him." Philip Ludwell wrote Lady Berkeley who a few weeks
before had sailed for England, that she must wonder why instead of death "such favors were
heaped on." But it was unavoidable, since hundreds of enraged men were within a day's march
of Jamestown, and the forces at hand to oppose them secretly in sympathy with Bacon. "There
is not a part of the country free from the infection. Never was there so great a madness as
the people generally were seized with."

But in restoring Bacon to the Council Berkeley was no doubt actuated as much by policy as by
fear, for it was better to have him there where he could keep his eye on him than in the House
of Burgesses where he might attempt to carry through reform legislation.

By this time anyone less stubborn and arbitrary than Berkeley would have learned his lesson.
On June 12, when Bacon was still in the governor's power, Philip Ludwell wrote his brother:
"It now looks like general ruin for the country.... The governor seems determined to leave
for England.... If he does he leaves a lost country." Had he given Bacon a commission to fight
the Indians and permitted the Assembly to carry out adequate reforms in the government, the
people might have been satisfied. But when the Assembly met things seemed to be going in the
old way.

If we are to understand the transactions of this historic Assembly it is necessary to divide
the session into two parts, the part when Berkeley had Bacon in his power, and the part when
Bacon had escaped and was once more at the head of his army. During the first part Berkeley
seems to have dominated the Assembly despite the pro-Bacon majority, during the second part
the threat of coercion by Bacon's angry frontiersmen undoubtedly affected all legislation.
Without this division many of the known facts seem incongruous and conflicting; with it they
fit together like the pieces of a jig-saw puzzle.

At the opening of the session "some gentlemen took this opportunity to endeavor the redressing
several grievances the country then labored under," and a committee was about to be named for
this purpose when they "were interrupted by pressing messages from the governor to meddle with
nothing until the Indian business was dispatched." So the matter of grievances was sidetracked.

Then followed a heated debate on whether the House would ask that two Councillors sit with
the committee on Indian Affairs. In the end "this was huddled off without coming to a vote,
and so the committee must submit to be overawed, and have every carped at expression carried
straight to the governor."

And the governor, closing his eyes to the fact that the Pamunkeys hated the English and were
sullen and resentful, insisted that they return to their towns and join in the defence of the
colony. So their queen was brought in and asked how many men she would furnish. In reply she
reproached the English for not giving her people compensation for their aid in a former war
in which her husband had been killed. In the end she promised twelve men, but it must have
been obvious to all that she and they were not to be trusted. When she had gone the committee
proceeded with their plans for prosecuting the war. Some of the forts were to be abandoned
and their garrisons distributed among fourteen frontier plantations, and an army of 1,000 men
was to be raised and sent out against the enemy.

Bacon was a discontented spectator of these proceedings. The governor was as overbearing as
ever, the Burgesses were overawed, the plans for reform were set aside, the Indian war was
mismanaged. He must have been disgusted that the Burgesses were too cowardly to vote down a
resolution requesting the governor not to resign. The Assembly did not prove "answerable to
our expectations", he said later, for which he thought they should be censured. So, telling
Berkeley that his wife was ill, he got permission to visit her. No sooner had he gone than
the governor heard that he intended to place himself once more at the head of his volunteer
army. In desperate haste horsemen galloped off to intercept him. But they were too late. Bacon
had made good his escape.

In Henrico angry men gathered around him. And when he told them that the governor had not given
him a commission and that he still persisted in carrying out essentially the old plan for the
war, they were furious. In Bacon's absence the Indians had renewed their raids, and had wiped
out many whole families. The frontiersmen vowed that they would have a commission or they would
march on Jamestown and "pull down the town."

So off they went, some mounted, others on foot. There was talk of sharing the estates of the
rich, of making Lady Berkeley discard her fine gowns for "canvas linen," of ending all taxes.
"Thus the raging torrent came down to town."

When the governor heard that they were coming he made desperate efforts to gather a force to
resist them. But it was too late. It was rumored that Bacon had threatened that if a gun was
fired at his men he would "kill and destroy all." Since resistance was useless, Berkeley threw
the guns from their carriages and waited for Bacon's arrival.

So the motley band came streaming into town. "Now tag, rag and bobtail carry a high hand."
Bacon drew up a double line before the State House and demanded that some members of the Council
come out to confer with him. When Colonel Spencer and Colonel Cole appeared he told them he
had come for a commission. Then he said that the people would not submit to taxes to pay for
the proposed new army. And his men shouted: "No levies! No levies!"

At this juncture Berkeley rushed out, gesticulating wildly and denouncing Bacon to his face
as a traitor.

Then he threw back his coat and shouted: "Here, shoot me, 'fore God, fair mark, shoot."

Bacon replied that he would not hurt a hair of his head. They had come for a commission to
save their lives from the Indians, which had so often been promised.

The Burgesses hearing the noise below, crowded to the windows. But they drew back when the
soldiers pointed their fusils at them, calling out: "We will have it. We will have it." One
of the Burgesses called back: "For God's sake hold your hands; forbear a little and you shall
have what you please."

After walking up and down before the State House for some time, muttering threats and "new
coined oaths," Bacon mounted the steps to the Long Room, where the Burgesses sat, and demanded
a commission to lead a force out against the Indians. One of them told him that governor alone
had the right to grant a commission. But when he left they sent a message to Sir William advising
him to issue the commission. The Council, too, pointing out that he and they were in Bacon's
power, added their voices. At last, though with intense bitterness, he yielded.

But new humiliations awaited him. He was forced to write the King justifying Bacon's conduct,
sign blank commissions for Bacon's officers, and imprison some of his most loyal friends. So
long as it did not concern "life and limb" he was willing to do anything to be rid of him.

In his determination to secure a commission Bacon did not neglect the matter of reform. When
Berkeley suggested that they decide their controversy by a duel with swords, he replied that
"he came for redress of the people's grievances." After this impassioned plea he must have
been greatly surprised when the Assembly told him "that they had already redressed their grievances."
Since, had the so-called Bacon's Laws been passed while he was sitting in the Council he would
have known it, they must have been rushed through during the brief period between his flight
from Jamestown and his return.

