     FULL CHORUS.

     There's victory at last, boys, victory at last!
     O'er land and sea
     Our flag is free;
     We'll nail it to the mast;
     Yes, we'll nail it to the mast, boys,
     Nail it to the mast;
     For there's victory, victory, victory at last!

     2. The heroes who have gained it,
       And lived to see the day,
     We will meet with flying banners
       And honors on the way;
     And all their sad privations
       Shall to the winds be cast,
     For all the boys are coming home--
       There's victory at last.--CHORUS.

     3. O happy wives and children,
       Light up your hearts and homes,
     For see, with martial music,
       "The conquering hero comes,"
     With flags and streamers flying,
       While drums are beating fast;
     For all the boys are coming home--
       There's victory at last.--CHORUS.

Sung at Fort Sumter, April 14, 1865.

See page 42.]

APPENDIX.

From the Charleston Mercury of January 19, 1865.

(A month before the evacuation of the city.)

CHARLESTON A SARAGOSSA!

"... The same tenacity and daring which has held Charleston and the Savannah line for four
years, can hold Charleston now, if brought to bear upon the emergency. Too long we have been
fighting here, around these old walls, to yield them now without a struggle. We say, unhesitatingly,
to those in authority, there are brave men here, who are prepared to make of Charleston a second
Saragossa. We use no fancy phrase. We mean the exact thing. We mean fight the country inch
by inch to her outside lines; and we mean, then, fight it inch by inch to the foot of old St.
Michael's walls.... We want no Atlanta, no Savannah business here.... Let Charleston be strictly
a military camp. The opportunity is offered--let the commanding general make a fight here that
will ring round the world. We will not fail him. There are men here to do it. We have made
names historic before. We can do it now. Let us strip and enter the arena for life or for death.
Will he stand by us?"

From the Charleston Mercury of February 10, 1865.

(A week before the evacuation of the city.)

"Amidst the dark shadows that envelop the destinies of the Confederate States at the present
moment, we think--we dream perhaps, perhaps we imagine--that we see a faint streak of light,
struggling up across the eastern horizon through the darkness of the night. Is it the early
messenger of morn? or is it an aurora of the night? Yet we imagine we see a streak of dawn
upon the horizon. A new Yankee Congress comes in on the fourth of March next. What sort of
body is it? Wild lunatics. They come into power flushed with success, and are themselves the
very dregs of radicalism. Every one of them are drunken mobocrats and bloody Puritans of the
deepest dye. What will they not do and say? Can Lincoln control them? Can Seward control them?
We think not. In their very violence and brutality lies our hope. Can Europe stand them six
months? We think not. Must not Europe see that if they are successful in destroying US, that
their own time is not far off when they will be swept from off this continent? Will not this
coming Yankee Congress force all the world either to cower before them, or check them by upholding
us? We think it must. This is a streak of dawn that we imagine we see. Perhaps we are only
nodding--and only dream. Still we fancy the thing. Let us stand to our arms, and watch for
the morning."

The morning dawns at length.

From the Charleston Mercury, February 11, 1865.

(The last edition published in the city.)

TO OUR READERS.

"The progress of military events, which has occasioned so much public and private inconvenience
and suffering, has not spared the newspaper interest. The interruption of railroad communication
between Charleston and the interior, produces a state of affairs which compels us, temporarily,
to transfer the publication office of the Mercury elsewhere; and to-day's paper will be our
last issue, for the present, in the city of Charleston." (The editor then moved his establishment
to Cheraw, S.C., directly in the line of General Sherman's advance.)