The Americans do not affect a brutal indifference to a future state; they affect no puerile
pride in despising perils which they hope to escape from. They therefore profess their religion
without shame and without weakness; but there generally is, even in their zeal, something so
indescribably tranquil, methodical, and deliberate, that it would seem as if the head, far
more than the heart, brought them to the foot of the altar. The Americans not only follow their
religion from interest, but they often place in this world the interest which makes them follow
it. In the Middle Ages the clergy spoke of nothing but a future state; they hardly cared to
prove that a sincere Christian may be a happy man here below. But the American preachers are
constantly referring to the earth; and it is only with great difficulty that they can divert
their attention from it. To touch their congregations, they always show them how favorable
religious opinions are to freedom and public tranquillity; and it is often difficult to ascertain
from their discourses whether the principal object of religion is to procure eternal felicity
in the other world, or prosperity in this.

Chapter X: Of The Taste For Physical Well-Being In America

In America the passion for physical well-being is not always exclusive, but it is general;
and if all do not feel it in the same manner, yet it is felt by all. Carefully to satisfy all,
even the least wants of the body, and to provide the little conveniences of life, is uppermost
in every mind. Something of an analogous character is more and more apparent in Europe. Amongst
the causes which produce these similar consequences in both hemispheres, several are so connected
with my subject as to deserve notice.

When riches are hereditarily fixed in families, there are a great number of men who enjoy the
comforts of life without feeling an exclusive taste for those comforts. The heart of man is
not so much caught by the undisturbed possession of anything valuable as by the desire, as
yet imperfectly satisfied, of possessing it, and by the incessant dread of losing it. In aristocratic
communities, the wealthy, never having experienced a condition different from their own, entertain
no fear of changing it; the existence of such conditions hardly occurs to them. The comforts
of life are not to them the end of life, but simply a way of living; they regard them as existence
itself--enjoyed, but scarcely thought of. As the natural and instinctive taste which all men
feel for being well off is thus satisfied without trouble and without apprehension, their faculties
are turned elsewhere, and cling to more arduous and more lofty undertakings, which excite and
engross their minds. Hence it is that, in the midst of physical gratifications, the members
of an aristocracy often display a haughty contempt of these very enjoyments, and exhibit singular
powers of endurance under the privation of them. All the revolutions which have ever shaken
or destroyed aristocracies, have shown how easily men accustomed to superfluous luxuries can
do without the necessaries of life; whereas men who have toiled to acquire a competency can
hardly live after they have lost it.

If I turn my observation from the upper to the lower classes, I find analogous effects produced
by opposite causes. Amongst a nation where aristocracy predominates in society, and keeps it
stationary, the people in the end get as much accustomed to poverty as the rich to their opulence.
The latter bestow no anxiety on their physical comforts, because they enjoy them without an
effort; the former do not think of things which they despair of obtaining, and which they hardly
know enough of to desire them. In communities of this kind, the imagination of the poor is
driven to seek another world; the miseries of real life inclose it around, but it escapes from
their control, and flies to seek its pleasures far beyond. When, on the contrary, the distinctions
of ranks are confounded together and privileges are destroyed--when hereditary property is
subdivided, and education and freedom widely diffused, the desire of acquiring the comforts
of the world haunts the imagination of the poor, and the dread of losing them that of the rich.
Many scanty fortunes spring up; those who possess them have a sufficient share of physical
gratifications to conceive a taste for these pleasures--not enough to satisfy it. They never
procure them without exertion, and they never indulge in them without apprehension. They are
therefore always straining to pursue or to retain gratifications so delightful, so imperfect,
so fugitive.

If I were to inquire what passion is most natural to men who are stimulated and circumscribed
by the obscurity of their birth or the mediocrity of their fortune, I could discover none more
peculiarly appropriate to their condition than this love of physical prosperity. The passion
for physical comforts is essentially a passion of the middle classes: with those classes it
grows and spreads, with them it preponderates. From them it mounts into the higher orders of
society, and descends into the mass of the people. I never met in America with any citizen
so poor as not to cast a glance of hope and envy on the enjoyments of the rich, or whose imagination
did not possess itself by anticipation of those good things which fate still obstinately withheld
from him. On the other hand, I never perceived amongst the wealthier inhabitants of the United
States that proud contempt of physical gratifications which is sometimes to be met with even
in the most opulent and dissolute aristocracies. Most of these wealthy persons were once poor;
they have felt the sting of want; they were long a prey to adverse fortunes; and now that the
victory is won, the passions which accompanied the contest have survived it: their minds are,
as it were, intoxicated by the small enjoyments which they have pursued for forty years. Not
but that in the United States, as elsewhere, there are a certain number of wealthy persons
who, having come into their property by inheritance, possess, without exertion, an opulence
they have not earned. But even these men are not less devotedly attached to the pleasures of
material life. The love of well-being is now become the predominant taste of the nation; the
great current of man's passions runs in that channel, and sweeps everything along in its course.

Chapter XI: Peculiar Effects Of The Love Of Physical Gratifications In Democratic Ages

