The little wicker houses at Tullagh, where the Brothers were accustomed to pray, or bend over
many handicrafts, when twilight had driven them from the fields, were empty, for the hardness
of the winter had brought the brotherhood together in the little wooden house under the shadow
of the wooden chapel; and Abbot Malathgeneus, Brother Dove, Brother Bald Fox, Brother Peter,
Brother Patrick, Brother Bittern, Brother Fair-Brows, and many too young to have won names
in the great battle, sat about the fire with ruddy faces, one mending lines to lay in the river
for eels, one fashioning a snare for birds, one mending the broken handle of a spade, one writing
in a large book, and one shaping a jewelled box to hold the book; and among the rushes at their
feet lay the scholars, who would one day be Brothers, and whose school-house it was, and for
the succour of whose tender years the great fire was supposed to leap and flicker. One of these,
a child of eight or nine years, called Olioll, lay upon his back looking up through the hole
in the roof, through which the smoke went, and watching the stars appearing and disappearing
in the smoke with mild eyes, like the eyes of a beast of the field. He turned presently to
the Brother who wrote in the big book, and whose duty was to teach the children, and said,
'Brother Dove, to what are the stars fastened?' The Brother, rejoicing to see so much curiosity
in the stupidest of his scholars, laid down the pen and said, 'There are nine crystalline spheres,
and on the first the Moon is fastened, on the second the planet Mercury, on the third the planet
Venus, on the fourth the Sun, on the fifth the planet Mars, on the sixth the planet Jupiter,
on the seventh the planet Saturn; these are the wandering stars; and on the eighth are fastened
the fixed stars; but the ninth sphere is a sphere of the substance on which the breath of God
moved in the beginning.'

'What is beyond that?' said the child. 'There is nothing beyond that; there is God.'

And then the child's eyes strayed to the jewelled box, where one great ruby was gleaming in
the light of the fire, and he said, 'Why has Brother Peter put a great ruby on the side of
the box?'

'The ruby is a symbol of the love of God.'

'Why is the ruby a symbol of the love of God?'

'Because it is red, like fire, and fire burns up everything, and where there is nothing, there
is God.'

The child sank into silence, but presently sat up and said, 'There is somebody outside.'

'No,' replied the Brother. 'It is only the wolves; I have heard them moving about in the snow
for some time. They are growing very wild, now that the winter drives them from the mountains.
They broke into a fold last night and carried off many sheep, and if we are not careful they
will devour everything.'

'No, it is the footstep of a man, for it is heavy; but I can hear the footsteps of the wolves
also.'

He had no sooner done speaking than somebody rapped three times, but with no great loudness.

'I will go and open, for he must be very cold.'

'Do not open, for it may be a man-wolf, and he may devour us all.'

But the boy had already drawn back the heavy wooden bolt, and all the faces, most of them a
little pale, turned towards the slowly-opening door.

'He has beads and a cross, he cannot be a man-wolf,' said the child, as a man with the snow
heavy on his long, ragged beard, and on the matted hair, that fell over his shoulders and nearly
to his waist, and dropping from the tattered cloak that but half-covered his withered brown
body, came in and looked from face to face with mild, ecstatic eyes. Standing some way from
the fire, and with eyes that had rested at last upon the Abbot Malathgeneus, he cried out,
'O blessed abbot, let me come to the fire and warm myself and dry the snow from my beard and
my hair and my cloak; that I may not die of the cold of the mountains, and anger the Lord with
a wilful martyrdom.'

'Come to the fire,' said the abbot, 'and warm yourself, and eat the food the boy Olioll will
bring you. It is sad indeed that any for whom Christ has died should be as poor as you.'

The man sat over the fire, and Olioll took away his now dripping cloak and laid meat and bread
and wine before him; but he would eat only of the bread, and he put away the wine, asking for
water. When his beard and hair had begun to dry a little and his limbs had ceased to shiver
with the cold, he spoke again.

'O blessed abbot, have pity on the poor, have pity on a beggar who has trodden the bare world
this many a year, and give me some labour to do, the hardest there is, for I am the poorest
of God's poor.'

Then the Brothers discussed together what work they could put him to, and at first to little
purpose, for there was no labour that had not found its labourer in that busy community; but
at last one remembered that Brother Bald Fox, whose business it was to turn the great quern
in the quern-house, for he was too stupid for anything else, was getting old for so heavy a
labour; and so the beggar was put to the quern from the morrow.

The cold passed away, and the spring grew to summer, and the quern was never idle, nor was
it turned with grudging labour, for when any passed the beggar was heard singing as he drove
the handle round. The last gloom, too, had passed from that happy community, for Olioll, who
had always been stupid and unteachable, grew clever, and this was the more miraculous because
it had come of a sudden. One day he had been even duller than usual, and was beaten and told
to know his lesson better on the morrow or be sent into a lower class among little boys who
would make a joke of him. He had gone out in tears, and when he came the next day, although
his stupidity, born of a mind that would listen to every wandering sound and brood upon every
wandering light, had so long been the byword of the school, he knew his lesson so well that
he passed to the head of the class, and from that day was the best of scholars. At first Brother
Dove thought this was an answer to his own prayers to the Virgin, and took it for a great proof
of the love she bore him; but when many far more fervid prayers had failed to add a single
wheatsheaf to the harvest, he began to think that the child was trafficking with bards, or
druids, or witches, and resolved to follow and watch. He had told his thought to the abbot,
who bid him come to him the moment he hit the truth; and the next day, which was a Sunday,
he stood in the path when the abbot and the Brothers were coming from vespers, with their white
habits upon them, and took the abbot by the habit and said, 'The beggar is of the greatest
of saints and of the workers of miracle. I followed Olioll but now, and by his slow steps and
his bent head I saw that the weariness of his stupidity was over him, and when he came to the
little wood by the quern-house I knew by the path broken in the under-wood and by the footmarks
in the muddy places that he had gone that way many times. I hid behind a bush where the path
doubled upon itself at a sloping place, and understood by the tears in his eyes that his stupidity
was too old and his wisdom too new to save him from terror of the rod. When he was in the quern-house
I went to the window and looked in, and the birds came down and perched upon my head and my
shoulders, for they are not timid in that holy place; and a wolf passed by, his right side
shaking my habit, his left the leaves of a bush. Olioll opened his book and turned to the page
I had told him to learn, and began to cry, and the beggar sat beside him and comforted him
until he fell asleep. When his sleep was of the deepest the beggar knelt down and prayed aloud,
and said, "O Thou Who dwellest beyond the stars, show forth Thy power as at the beginning,
and let knowledge sent from Thee awaken in his mind, wherein is nothing from the world, that
the nine orders of angels may glorify Thy name"; and then a light broke out of the air and
wrapped Aodh, and I smelt the breath of roses. I stirred a little in my wonder, and the beggar
turned and saw me, and, bending low, said, "O Brother Dove, if I have done wrong, forgive me,
and I will do penance. It was my pity moved me"; but I was afraid and I ran away, and did not
stop running until I came here.' Then all the Brothers began talking together, one saying it
was such and such a saint, and one that it was not he but another; and one that it was none
of these, for they were still in their brotherhoods, but that it was such and such a one; and
the talk was as near to quarreling as might be in that gentle community, for each would claim
so great a saint for his native province. At last the abbot said, 'He is none that you have
named, for at Easter I had greeting from all, and each was in his brotherhood; but he is Aengus
the Lover of God, and the first of those who have gone to live in the wild places and among
the wild beasts. Ten years ago he felt the burden of many labours in a brotherhood under the
Hill of Patrick and went into the forest that he might labour only with song to the Lord; but
the fame of his holiness brought many thousands to his cell, so that a little pride clung to
a soul from which all else had been driven. Nine years ago he dressed himself in rags, and
from that day none has seen him, unless, indeed, it be true that he has been seen living among
the wolves on the mountains and eating the grass of the fields. Let us go to him and bow down
before him; for at last, after long seeking, he has found the nothing that is God; and bid
him lead us in the pathway he has trodden.'

They passed in their white habits along the beaten path in the wood, the acolytes swinging
their censers before them, and the abbot, with his crozier studded with precious stones, in
the midst of the incense; and came before the quern-house and knelt down and began to pray,
awaiting the moment when the child would wake, and the Saint cease from his watch and come
to look at the sun going down into the unknown darkness, as his way was.

OF COSTELLO THE PROUD, OF OONA THE DAUGHTER OF DERMOTT, AND OF THE BITTER TONGUE.

Costello had come up from the fields and lay upon the ground before the door of his square
tower, resting his head upon his hands and looking at the sunset, and considering the chances
of the weather. Though the customs of Elizabeth and James, now going out of fashion in England,
had begun to prevail among the gentry, he still wore the great cloak of the native Irish; and
the sensitive outlines of his face and the greatness of his indolent body had a commingling
of pride and strength which belonged to a simpler age. His eyes wandered from the sunset to
where the long white road lost itself over the south-western horizon and to a horseman who
toiled slowly up the hill. A few more minutes and the horseman was near enough for his little
and shapeless body, his long Irish cloak, and the dilapidated bagpipes hanging from his shoulders,
and the rough-haired garron under him, to be seen distinctly in the grey dusk. So soon as he
had come within earshot, he began crying: 'Is it sleeping you are, Tumaus Costello, when better
men break their hearts on the great white roads? Get up out of that, proud Tumaus, for I have
news! Get up out of that, you great omadhaun! Shake yourself out of the earth, you great weed
of a man!'

Costello had risen to his feet, and as the piper came up to him seized him by the neck of his
jacket, and lifting him out of his saddle threw him on to the ground.

'Let me alone, let me alone,' said the other, but Costello still shook him.

'I have news from Dermott's daughter, Winny,' The great fingers were loosened, and the piper
rose gasping.

'Why did you not tell me,' said Costello, that you came from her? You might have railed your fill.'

'I have come from her, but I will not speak unless I am paid for my shaking.'

Costello fumbled at the bag in which he carried his money, and it was some time before it would
open, for the hand that had overcome many men shook with fear and hope. 'Here is all the money
in my bag,' he said, dropping a stream of French and Spanish money into the hand of the piper,
who bit the coins before he would answer.

'That is right, that is a fair price, but I will not speak till I have good protection, for
if the Dermotts lay their hands upon me in any boreen after sundown, or in Cool-a-vin by day,
I will be left to rot among the nettles of a ditch, or hung on the great sycamore, where they
hung the horse-thieves last Beltaine four years.' And while he spoke he tied the reins of his
garron to a bar of rusty iron that was mortared into the wall.

'I will make you my piper and my bodyservant,' said Costello, 'and no man dare lay hands upon
the man, or the goat, or the horse, or the dog that is Tumaus Costello's.'

'And I will only tell my message,' said the other, flinging the saddle on the ground, 'in the
corner of the chimney with a noggin in my hand, and a jug of the Brew of the Little Pot beside
me, for though I am ragged and empty, my forbears were well clothed and full until their house
was burnt and their cattle harried seven centuries ago by the Dillons, whom I shall yet see
on the hob of hell, and they screeching'; and while he spoke the little eyes gleamed and the
thin hands clenched.

Costello led him into the great rush-strewn hall, where were none of the comforts which had
begun to grow common among the gentry, but a feudal gauntness and bareness, and pointed to
the bench in the great chimney; and when he had sat down, filled up a horn noggin and set it
on the bench beside him, and set a great black jack of leather beside the noggin, and lit a
torch that slanted out from a ring in the wall, his hands trembling the while; and then turned
towards him and said: 'Will Dermott's daughter come to me, Duallach, son of Daly?'

'Dermott's daughter will not come to you, for her father has set women to watch her, but she
bid me tell you that this day sennight will be the eve of St. John and the night of her betrothal
to Namara of the Lake, and she would have you there that, when they bid her drink to him she
loves best, as the way is, she may drink to you, Tumaus Costello, and let all know where her
heart is, and how little of gladness is in her marriage; and I myself bid you go with good
men about you, for I saw the horse-thieves with my own eyes, and they dancing the "Blue Pigeon"
in the air.' And then he held the now empty noggin towards Costello, his hand closing round
it like the claw of a bird, and cried: 'Fill my noggin again, for I would the day had come
when all the water in the world is to shrink into a periwinkle-shell, that I might drink nothing
but Poteen.'

Finding that Costello made no reply, but sat in a dream, he burst out: 'Fill my noggin, I tell
you, for no Costello is so great in the world that he should not wait upon a Daly, even though
the Daly travel the road with his pipes and the Costello have a bare hill, an empty house,
a horse, a herd of goats, and a handful of cows.' 'Praise the Dalys if you will,' said Costello
as he filled the noggin, 'for you have brought me a kind word from my love.'

For the next few days Duallach went hither and thither trying to raise a bodyguard, and every
man he met had some story of Costello, how he killed the wrestler when but a boy by so straining
at the belt that went about them both that he broke the big wrestler's back; how when somewhat
older he dragged fierce horses through a ford in the Unchion for a wager; how when he came
to manhood he broke the steel horseshoe in Mayo; how he drove many men before him through Rushy
Meadow at Drum-an-air because of a malevolent song they had about his poverty; and of many
another deed of his strength and pride; but he could find none who would trust themselves with
any so passionate and poor in a quarrel with careful and wealthy persons like Dermott of the
Sheep and Namara of the Lake.

Then Costello went out himself, and after listening to many excuses and in many places, brought
in a big half-witted fellow, who followed him like a dog, a farm-labourer who worshipped him
for his strength, a fat farmer whose forefathers had served his family, and a couple of lads
who looked after his goats and cows; and marshalled them before the fire in the empty hall.
They had brought with them their stout cudgels, and Costello gave them an old pistol apiece,
and kept them all night drinking Spanish ale and shooting at a white turnip which he pinned
against the wall with a skewer. Duallach of the pipes sat on the bench in the chimney playing
'The Green Bunch of Rushes', 'The Unchion Stream,' and 'The Princes of Breffeny' on his old
pipes, and railing now at the appearance of the shooters, now at their clumsy shooting, and
now at Costello because he had no better servants. The labourer, the half-witted fellow, the
farmer and the lads were all well accustomed to Duallach's railing, for it was as inseparable
from wake or wedding as the squealing of his pipes, but they wondered at the forbearance of
Costello, who seldom came either to wake or wedding, and if he had would scarce have been patient
with a scolding piper.

On the next evening they set out for Cool-a-vin, Costello riding a tolerable horse and carrying
a sword, the others upon rough-haired garrons, and with their stout cudgels under their arms.
As they rode over the bogs and in the boreens among the hills they could see fire answering
fire from hill to hill, from horizon to horizon, and everywhere groups who danced in the red
light on the turf, celebrating the bridal of life and fire. When they came to Dermott's house
they saw before the door an unusually large group of the very poor, dancing about a fire, in
the midst of which was a blazing cartwheel, that circular dance which is so ancient that the
gods, long dwindled to be but fairies, dance no other in their secret places. From the door
and through the long loop-holes on either side came the pale light of candles and the sound
of many feet dancing a dance of Elizabeth and James.

They tied their horses to bushes, for the number so tied already showed that the stables were
full, and shoved their way through a crowd of peasants who stood about the door, and went into
the great hall where the dance was. The labourer, the half-witted fellow, the farmer and the
two lads mixed with a group of servants who were looking on from an alcove, and Duallach sat
with the pipers on their bench, but Costello made his way through the dancers to where Dermott
of the Sheep stood with Namara of the Lake pouring Poteen out of a porcelain jug into horn
noggins with silver rims.

'Tumaus Costello,' said the old man, 'you have done a good deed to forget what has been, and
to fling away enmity and come to the betrothal of my daughter to Namara of the Lake.'

'I come,' answered Costello, 'because when in the time of Costello De Angalo my forbears overcame
your forbears and afterwards made peace, a compact was made that a Costello might go with his
body-servants and his piper to every feast given by a Dermott for ever, and a Dermott with
his body-servants and his piper to every feast given by a Costello for ever.'

