     "Jack sitting for his picture" is a very pleasing group, and
     savors of the manner of Hogarth, who is introduced in the
     company.  The "Murder of Trenchard" must be noticed too as
     remarkable for the effect and terrible vigor which the
     artist has given to the scene. The "Willesden Churchyard"
     has great merit too, but the gems of the book are the little
     vignettes illustrating the escape from Newgate. Here, too,
     much anatomical care of drawing is not required; the figures
     are so small that the outline and attitude need only to be
     indicated, and the designer has produced a series of figures
     quite remarkable for reality and poetry too.  There are no
     less than ten of Jack's feats so described by Mr.
     Cruikshank.  (Let us say a word here in praise of the
     excellent manner in which the author has carried us through
     the adventure.)  Here is Jack clattering up the chimney, now
     peering into the lonely red room, now opening "the door
     between the red room and the chapel."  What a wild, fierce,
     scared look he has, the young ruffian, as cautiously he
     steps in, holding light his bar of iron.  You can see by his
     face how his heart is beating!  If any one were there! but
     no!  And this is a very fine characteristic of the prints,
     the extreme LONELINESS of them all. Not a soul is there to
     disturb him--woe to him who should--and Jack drives in the
     chapel gate, and shatters down the passage door, and there
     you have him on the leads.  Up he goes! it is but a spring
     of a few feet from the blanket, and he is gone--abiit,
     evasit, erupit! Mr. Wild must catch him again if he can.

     We must not forget to mention "Oliver Twist," and Mr.
     Cruikshank's famous designs to that work.*  The sausage
     scene at Fagin's, Nancy seizing the boy; that capital piece
     of humor, Mr. Bumble's courtship, which is even better in
     Cruikshank's version than in Boz's exquisite account of the
     interview; Sykes's farewell to the dog; and the Jew,--the
     dreadful Jew--that Cruikshank drew!  As for the Jew in the dungeon, let us say
     nothing of it--what can we say to describe it?  What a fine
     homely poet is the man who can produce this little world of
     mirth or woe for us!  Does he elaborate his effects by slow
     process of thought, or do they come to him by instinct?
     Does the painter ever arrange in his brain an image so
     complete, that he afterwards can copy it exactly on the
     canvas, or does the hand work in spite of him?

             * Or his new work, "The Tower of London," which promises
             even to surpass Mr. Cruikshank's former productions.

A great deal of this random work of course every artist has done in his time; many men produce
effects of which they never dreamed, and strike off excellences, haphazard, which gain for
them reputation; but a fine quality in Mr. Cruikshank, the quality of his success, as we have
said before, is the extraordinary earnestness and good faith with which he executes all he
attempts--the ludicrous, the polite, the low, the terrible. In the second of these he often,
in our fancy, fails, his figures lacking elegance and descending to caricature; but there is
something fine in this too: it is good that he SHOULD fail, that he should have these honest
naive notions regarding the beau monde, the characteristics of which a namby-pamby tea-party
painter could hit off far better than he. He is a great deal too downright and manly to appreciate
the flimsy delicacies of small society--you cannot expect a lion to roar you like any sucking
dove, or frisk about a drawing-room like a lady's little spaniel.

If then, in the course of his life and business, he has been occasionally obliged to imitate
the ways of such small animals, he has done so, let us say it at once, clumsily, and like as
a lion should. Many artists, we hear, hold his works rather cheap; they prate about bad drawing,
want of scientific knowledge:--they would have something vastly more neat, regular, anatomical.

Not one of the whole band most likely but can paint an Academy figure better than himself;
nay, or a portrait of an alderman's lady and family of children. But look down the list of
the painters and tell us who are they? How many among these men are POETS (makers), possessing
the faculty to create, the greatest among the gifts with which Providence has endowed the mind
of man? Say how many there are, count up what they have done, and see what in the course of
some nine-and-twenty years has been done by this indefatigable man.

What amazing energetic fecundity do we find in him! As a boy he began to fight for bread, has
been hungry (twice a day we trust) ever since, and has been obliged to sell his wit for his
bread week by week. And his wit, sterling gold as it is, will find no such purchasers as the
fashionable painter's thin pinchbeck, who can live comfortably for six weeks, when paid for
and painting a portrait, and fancies his mind prodigiously occupied all the while. There was
an artist in Paris, an artist hairdresser, who used to be fatigued and take restoratives after
inventing a new coiffure. By no such gentle operation of head-dressing has Cruikshank lived:
time was (we are told so in print) when for a picture with thirty heads in it he was paid three
guineas--a poor week's pittance truly, and a dire week's labor. We make no doubt that the same
labor would at present bring him twenty times the sum; but whether it be ill paid or well,
what labor has Mr. Cruikshank's been! Week by week, for thirty years, to produce something
new; some smiling offspring of painful labor, quite independent and distinct from its ten thousand
jovial brethren; in what hours of sorrow and ill-health to be told by the world, "Make us laugh
or you starve--Give us fresh fun; we have eaten up the old and are hungry." And all this has
he been obliged to do--to wring laughter day by day, sometimes, perhaps, out of want, often
certainly from ill-health or depression--to keep the fire of his brain perpetually alight:
for the greedy public will give it no leisure to cool. This he has done and done well. He has
told a thousand truths in as many strange and fascinating ways; he has given a thousand new
and pleasant thoughts to millions of people; he has never used his wit dishonestly; he has
never, in all the exuberance of his frolicsome humor, caused a single painful or guilty blush:
how little do we think of the extraordinary power of this man, and how ungrateful we are to him!

Here, as we are come round to the charge of ingratitude, the starting-post from which we set
out, perhaps we had better conclude. The reader will perhaps wonder at the high-flown tone
in which we speak of the services and merits of an individual, whom he considers a humble scraper
on steel, that is wonderfully popular already. But none of us remember all the benefits we
owe him; they have come one by one, one driving out the memory of the other: it is only when
we come to examine them all together, as the writer has done, who has a pile of books on the
table before him--a heap of personal kindnesses from George Cruikshank (not presents, if you
please, for we bought, borrowed, or stole every one of them)--that we feel what we owe him.
Look at one of Mr. Cruikshank's works, and we pronounce him an excellent humorist. Look at
all: his reputation is increased by a kind of geometrical progression; as a whole diamond is
a hundred times more valuable than the hundred splinters into which it might be broken would
be. A fine rough English diamond is this about which we have been writing.