Mrs. Balchristie was completely caught in the manner. She was aware, from the unusual warmth
with which the Laird expressed himself, that he was quite serious in this matter, and she knew,
that with all his indolence of nature, there were points on which he might be provoked, and
that, being provoked, he had in him something dangerous, which her wisdom taught her to fear
accordingly. She began, therefore, to retract her false step as fast as she could. "She was
but speaking for the house's credit, and she couldna think of disturbing his honour in the
morning sae early, when the young woman might as weel wait or call again; and to be sure, she
might make a mistake between the twa sisters, for ane o' them wasna sae creditable an acquaintance."

"Haud your peace, ye auld jade," said Dumbiedikes; "the warst quean e'er stude in their shoon
may ca' you cousin, an a' be true that I have heard.--Jeanie, my woman, gang into the parlour--but
stay, that winna be redd up yet--wait there a minute till I come down to let ye in--Dinna mind
what Jenny says to ye."

"Na, na," said Jenny, with a laugh of affected heartiness, "never mind me, lass--a' the warld
kens my bark's waur than my bite--if ye had had an appointment wi' the Laird, ye might hae
tauld me--I am nae uncivil person--gang your ways in by, hinny," and she opened the door of
the house with a master-key.

"But I had no appointment wi' the Laird," said Jeanie, drawing back; "I want just to speak
twa words to him, and I wad rather do it standing here, Mrs. Balchristie."

"In the open court-yard!--Na, na, that wad never do, lass; we mauna guide ye that gate neither--And
how's that douce honest man, your father?"

Jeanie was saved the pain of answering this hypocritical question by the appearance of the
Laird himself.

"Gang in and get breakfast ready," said he to his housekeeper--"and, d'ye hear, breakfast wi'
us yoursell--ye ken how to manage thae porringers of tea-water--and, hear ye, see abune a'
that there's a gude fire.--Weel, Jeanie, my woman, gang in by--gang in by, and rest ye."

"Na, Laird," Jeanie replied, endeavouring as much as she could to express herself with composure,
notwithstanding she still trembled, "I canna gang in--I have a lang day's darg afore me--I
maun be twenty mile o' gate the night yet, if feet will carry me."

"Guide and deliver us!--twenty mile--twenty mile on your feet!" ejaculated Dumbiedikes, whose
walks were of a very circumscribed diameter,--"Ye maun never think o' that--come in by."

"I canna do that, Laird," replied Jeanie; "the twa words I have to say to ye I can say here;
forby that Mrs. Balchristie"

"The deil flee awa wi' Mrs. Balchristie," said Dumbiedikes, "and he'll hae a heavy lading o'
her! I tell ye, Jeanie Deans, I am a man of few words, but I am laird at hame, as well as in
the field; deil a brute or body about my house but I can manage when I like, except Rory Bean,
my powny; but I can seldom be at the plague, an it binna when my bluid's up."

"I was wanting to say to ye, Laird," said Jeanie, who felt the necessity of entering upon her
business, "that I was gaun a lang journey, outby of my father's knowledge."

"Outby his knowledge, Jeanie!--Is that right? Ye maun think ot again--it's no right," said
Dumbiedikes, with a countenance of great concern.

"If I were ance at Lunnon," said Jeanie, in exculpation, "I am amaist sure I could get means
to speak to the queen about my sister's life."

"Lunnon--and the queen--and her sister's life!" said Dumbiedikes, whistling for very amazement--"the
lassie's demented."

