Eberhard adapted himself to his changed condition quickly and with but little apparent effort:
the chaos of opinions left him virtually unmoved. To become the master of so much and so many
people, and to do it so suddenly, necessitated dignity, a clear eye, and a firm hand. His being
was in no danger from an excess of zeal or up-start conceit, suffer though he might from too
great seriousness and his preference for a place in the shadow. Strangely enough, the abundance
of his responsibilities made him more cheerful. And where he was unable to take his part in
the world of outward unrest, Sylvia’s influence interceded and made it possible for him to
do what was expected of him.

In May he accompanied her and her mother to Erfft. There they took long walks together every
day, and talked a great deal about Eleanore. At first he spoke with noticeable reserve. But
when he felt that he had gained the confidence of his auditor, and she his, he spoke quite
candidly, so candidly in truth that Sylvia came to look upon his action as one of inner liberation.

When he told of Eleanore’s marriage to Daniel Nothafft, Sylvia interrupted him, and asked a
number of questions concerning Daniel. “Oh, yes, he was our guest once; he is the Kapellmeister,”
she said. And then she told him all about Daniel’s visit at Erfft, and did it with a smile
in which there were both indulgence and re-awakened astonishment.

Her smile made the same appeal to Eberhard that Eleanore’s had. And yet, when he was in Sylvia’s
company, he seemed to recognise more distinctly than ever what had drawn him with such irresistible
power to Eleanore, possibly because Sylvia was of a less ardent and forceful nature. He could
not exactly express it in words; he merely felt that it was the unknown realm of tones, the
unknown melting of melodies, the ringing order of the music transformed into soul.

At the beginning of June, Sylvia went back to Nuremberg with Eberhard and her parents. A few
days later the betrothal took place in the baronial residence.

                                  VII

Herr Carovius had been paid. The consortium of silent backers had been dissolved.

Never in the history of finance had there been a satisfied creditor who was so unhappy as Herr
Carovius. He was without a goal, and the sign posts had been destroyed. He had received his
money; so far so good. His share of the profit was something over sixty thousand marks. But
what was this in comparison with the great noise? What comparison was there between living
in ease and the gorgeous sight of falling stars? What attraction could the world offer him
after this hopeful affair, which had begun as a tragedy, and had increased in interest and
suspense until one was justified in believing that all the contradictory forces in human nature
were going to collide with one mighty bang, when, in reality, the whole incident flattened
out into an ordinary drama of emotion, with the curtain going down on reconciliation all around?

But this was not the sole reason why Herr Carovius, up until this time a most elastic figure,
one of those imperturbable bachelors for whom no hurdle was too high, suddenly felt that he
was growing old. His soul was filled with unrest; he was seeing bad omens; he feared there
was going to be a change in the weather.

He felt an inner hunger, and yet he somehow lacked appetite for his kind of things. “Down and
out, lost and no good,” he sighed within. But those who had got rich at his expense could not
possibly succeed. This much he knew.

He began to lose his hair; he became rheumatic. As soon as the thermometer began to fall he
shivered; if it rained he stayed at home. He began to study medicine, all by himself. He took
up the various remedies of our remote ancestors. He read the works of Paracelsus, and declared
that all those who had written on medicine since Paracelsus were quacks and poison-mixers.

His ideas with regard to music became also more and more strange and bizarre. He had discovered
an old Nuremberg composer by the name of Staden. His opera entitled “Seelewig”—the first of
all German operas, by the way—he insisted was the very zenith of musical art, eminently superior
to Mozart and Bach. He played arias and melodies from “Seelewig” to Dorothea.

“Now, when you can get that,” he exclaimed, “when you come to the point where I can see from
your playing what is in it and at the bottom of it, Heaven and Hell in one stroke of the bow,
then, you little jackanapes, I’m going to make you my heiress.”

That was precisely what Dorothea had been longing to hear; it confirmed her calculations and
crowned her dreams. To hear these words roll from her uncle’s tongue had been her ambition;
and she had spared no pains to arrive at her goal.

Herr Carovius was not spoiled. Since the days his sister had kept house for him, no woman had
ever concerned herself about him in the least. But at that time he was young; and he had wheedled
himself into believing that the women were merely waiting for him, that all he had to do was
to beckon to them with his finger and they would come rushing up to him in battalions. But
because he had dreaded the idea of making an unhappy selection, and by reason of the expense
of the enterprise, he had neglected to give the necessary signal, and hence had been so generous
as to leave them in complete possession of their freedom.

He never knew until now that the soft, little hand of a woman could bring out effects as if
they had come from the touch of a magic wand. “What a pleasant little phiz Döderlein’s offspring
has,” he thought. And if Dorothea, who had made him believe that she was visiting him on the
sly, though her father had given his consent long ago, chanced to remain away for a few days,
he would become wild with rage, and go into the kitchen and chop wood merely to enjoy the sensation
of destroying something.

Moreover, the music lessons Dorothea was taking at Herr Carovius’s expense gave the girl a
new conception of her art, and awakened in her a measure of wholesome ambition. Satisfied as
he was with her docility and her progress, Herr Carovius referred to her at times as the coming
female Paganini, and pictured himself in the rôle of a demoniacal impresario.

But the thing about Dorothea that struck him most forcibly and filled him with such astonishment
was her relation to mirrors.

A mirror exercised a tremendous influence on her. If she passed by one, her face became coloured
with a charming blush of desire; if she stood before one and saw her picture reflected in it,
she was filled, first with sexual unrest, and then with retreating uncertainty. In the brightness
of her eyes there was always a longing for the mirror. Her gait and her gestures seemed to
have duties imposed on them by the mirror; it seemed to be their task to prepare surprises.
Her whole body seemed to live in common with a spectral mirror sister, and to catch sight of
this beloved sister was her first wish, fulfilment of which she effected as often as possible.

                                 VIII

Dorothea had succeeded in making it clear to her father that it would be highly advantageous
to her, as the nearest relative, to show Herr Carovius every conceivable favour. Andreas Döderlein
baulked at first; but he could not refuse recognition to the far-seeing penetration of his
daughter.

When she told him of her appearance in the baronial residence, and mentioned the enormous sum
Herr Carovius had collected with the mien of an undaunted victor, Döderlein became serious;
he stared into space and did some hard thinking. Recalling the now superannuated feud, he preserved
the appearance of inapproachability, and said: “We will not debase ourselves for the sake of
Mammon.”

A few days later, however, he said, quite of his own free will, sighing like a man who has
gone through some great moral struggle and come out of it victorious, “Well, do as you think
best, my child, but don’t let me know anything about it.”

His argument, had he expressed it in so many words, would have been something like the following:
We are poor; we are living from hand to mouth. The negligible dowry Herr Carovius gave his
sister has been used up. Marguerite would have been perfectly justified in putting in her claim
for thirty thousand marks, but Herr Carovius settled with her for only twelve thousand, and
there was no possibility of redress. For Herr Carovius had wheedled his sister into giving
him a written statement that she was satisfied with the sum of twelve thousand: the remaining
eighteen thousand was the price he demanded in return for her consent to have his sister, who
was slavishly submissive to him, marry the man of her choice.

“I have been duped,” said Andreas Döderlein, and bore up under his grudge with becoming dignity.

The director of the conservatory died, and Andreas Döderlein, who, by virtue of his achievements
and his personality, had the first right to the vacant position, was appointed to it. His former
colleagues were stout in their contention that the appointment cost him many a bitter visit
to the powers that be. Döderlein read envy in their eyes and smiled to himself.

But it was a hard life. “Art cannot live without bread,” said Döderlein, with a heroic glance
into the future. “But oh, what works I could bring out if I only had time! Give me time, time,
and,” swinging his hands cloudward, “the eagles above would greet me!”

                                  IX

Herr Carovius and death were intimate friends. Whenever death had an errand to run, it always
knocked on Herr Carovius’s door, as if to find a person who approved of its deeds and who had
a just appreciation of them, for there were so many of the other kind.

But when Herr Carovius heard that Eleanore Nothafft had died, he felt that his old friend had
gone a bit too far. He was touched. He was seized with griping pains in the abdominal region,
and locked himself up for the period of one whole day in his court room. There he was taken
down with catalepsy; his face went through a horrible transformation: it came to look as if
all the wickedness, hopelessness, and despair of the man who had never become reconciled to
life through love had been concentrated in it and petrified.

His forebodings had come true.

Eleanore’s funeral took place on a rainy June day. Herr Carovius, dressed in his shabby old
yellow raincoat with its big pockets, was present. There were also many others present. Every
face was touched with grief; every eye was filled with tears, like the earth round about. Those
who had not known her had at least heard of her. They had known that she had been there in
some capacity, just as one hears of some unusual phenomenon among the celestial bodies, and
that she was gone; that she was no more to be seen. For one moment at least all these people
were changed into deep, seeing, feeling beings; for one moment they laid aside their fruitless
activities, their petty misdeeds, desires, anxieties, and vanities, and became conscious of
the fact that the truth, purity, love, and loveliness of this earth had been decreased.

Herr Carovius went home and made a lime-blossom tea; such a tea had often helped him when he
had not felt well.

The rain dripped down on the kitchen window sill. Herr Carovius said to himself: “That is my
last funeral.”

Along in the evening Dorothea came in and after her Philippina Schimmelweis. Herr Carovius
had paid her many a penny for her services as a spy, and now she wanted to hear what he had
to say to this last and greatest of misfortunes. His infatuated interest in everything Eleanore
did had been a source of unmitigated pleasure to her, though she had been exceedingly cautious
never to let him see how she felt about it all. On the contrary, she never failed to affect
a hypocritical seriousness in the face of all his questions, orders, instructions, and caustic
observations. She had egged him on; she had flattered him; she had used every opportunity to
fan the flames of his ridiculous hopes. Owing to this the confidence between the two had grown
to considerable proportion; the man’s senile madness, born of his love for Eleanore, had even
aroused Philippina’s lewd lasciviousness.

She said she would have to be going home; the child was asleep; and though she had locked the
front door, you could never tell what was going to happen over there. “My God,” she said, “things
take place in that house that are never heard of in any other home.”

The presence of Dorothea disturbed and annoyed her. She sat down on the kitchen bench, and
looked at the young girl with poison in her eyes. Dorothea on the other hand found it painfully
difficult to conceal her disgust at the mere sight of Philippina: her ugliness defied descriptive
adjectives. Dorothea never took her eyes off the creature who sat there talking in a screeching
voice, and who, as if her normal unattractiveness were not enough, had her head bandaged.

The fact is that Philippina had the toothache; for this reason her face was wrapped in a loud,
checkered cloth, while out from underneath her hat stuck two little tassels.

She told the story of Eleanore’s death with much satisfaction to herself, and with that delight
in the tragic in which she revelled by instinct. “And now,” she said, “old Jordan sits over
there in his attic rooms and sobs, and Daniel goes moping about, refusing to eat any food and
looking at you with eyes that would fill you with fear even if everything else was as it should
be.”

This is the point to which Daniel has brought things, she showed in her gratuitous report,
in which there was an attempt to chide him for his waywardness: He has put two women under
the ground, has a helpless child in the house, is out of a job, is not making a cent. Now what
could this kind of doings lead to? Judge Rübsam’s wife had paid the funeral expenses. Why,
you know, Daniel didn’t even know what they were talking about when the bill came in, and old
Jordan, he didn’t have twenty marks to his name. She swore she wasn’t going to stand for it
much longer, and if Daniel didn’t quit his piano-strumming—he wasn’t getting a cent for it—she
was going to know a thing or two.

Quite contrary to his established custom, Herr Carovius failed to show the slightest interest
in her gabble; at least he made no concessions to her. Nor did he fuss and fume; he gazed into
space, and seemed to be thinking about many serious things all at the same time. His silence
made Philippina raging mad. She jumped up and left without saying good-bye to him, slamming
first the room door and then the hall door behind her.

Dorothea was standing by the piano rummaging around in some note books. Her thoughts were on
what she had just been hearing.

She remembered Daniel Nothafft quite well. She knew that there was an irreconcilable feud between
him and her father. She had seen him; people had pointed out the man with the angry looking
eyes to her on the street. She had felt at the time as if she had already talked with him,
though she could not say when or where. She had a vague idea as to what people said about him,
and she knew that he was looked upon in the city as the adversary of evil himself.

Her breast was filled with an aimless longing. Her blood began to run warm, the fusty milieu
in which she just then chanced to be cleared up and began to bestir itself. She took her violin
and began to play a Hungarian dance, while an enlivening smile flitted across her face, and
her eyes shone with the audacity of an ambitious and temperamental girl.

Herr Carovius raised his head: “Tempo!” he exclaimed, “Tempo!” and began to beat time with
his hands and stamp the floor with his feet.

Dorothea smiled, shook her head, and played more and more rapidly.

“Tempo,” howled Herr Carovius. “Tempo!”

The barking of a sad dog was wafted into the room from the court below. It was Cæsar: he was
on his last legs.

                                   X

Daniel’s mother had come; she had brought little Eva along.

Marian had learned of Eleanore’s death through the newspaper. No one had thought of her; no
one had written to her. She had not read it in the newspaper herself. The doctor in Eschenbach,
who had subscribed to the Fränkischer Herold, had read it one morning, and had given her the
paper with considerable hesitation, calling her attention to the death notice.

She was not present at the funeral. But she went out to the cemetery and prayed by Eleanore’s
grave.

She appreciated Daniel’s loss. When she met him he was precisely as she thought he would be.
She recognised her son in his great grief and mute despair: he was nearer to her then than
at any other time of his life. She honoured his grief; she did not need to decrease it or divert
it. She was silent, just as Daniel himself was silent. All she did was to lay her hand on his
forehead occasionally. He murmured: “Mother, oh Mother!” She replied: “Now don’t! Don’t think
of me!”

She said to herself: “When an Eleanore dies in the full bloom of youth, one must mourn until
the soul of its own accord again grows hungry for life.”

At first Eva had tried to play with her little step-sister; but Philippina had chased her from
the room. Once she turned against the enraged daughter of Jason Philip Schimmelweis, and said:
“I’ll tell my father on you!”

“Yes? You’ll tell your father? Well, tell him! Who cares?” replied Philippina scornfully. “But
who is your father? What is he? Where is he? In Pomerania perhaps?” Whereupon she added in
a sing-song voice: “Pomerania is burnt to the ground. Fly, cockchafer, fly!”

“My father? He’s in the room there,” replied Eva surprised and offended: “I am in his house,
and little Agnes is my sister.”

Philippina tore open her eyes and her mouth: “Your father—is in the room—” she stammered, “and
little Agnes—is your sister?” She got up, seized Eva by the shoulders, and dragged her across
the floor into the room where Daniel and Marian were sitting. With an outburst of laughter
that sounded as though she were not quite in her right mind, and with an expression of impudence
and rage on her face, she panted forth her indignation in the following terms: “This brat says
Daniel is her father and Agnes is her sister! A scurvy chit—I’ll say!”

Marian, terrified, sprang to her feet, ran over to Eva, and began to scream: “Let her go, take
your hands off that child!” Eva was pale, the tears were rolling down her cheeks, her little
arms were stretched out as if in urgent need of help from an older hand. Philippina let go
of her and stepped back. “Is it really true?” she whispered, “is it really true?” Marian knelt
down and picked up her foster child: “Now you mind your own business, you rogue,” she said
to Philippina.

“Daniel?” Philippina turned to Daniel with uplifted arms, and repeated, “Daniel?” She seemed
to be challenging him to speak; and to be reproaching him for having deceived her. There was
something quite uncanny about the way she said, “Daniel? Daniel?”

“You go back and mind Agnes!” said Daniel, worried as he had never been before: he felt more
than ever under obligations to Philippina. And what could he do now without her? She was the
sole guardian of his child. His mother could not remain in the city; she had to make her living,
and that she could do only over in Eschenbach. Her business was located there; and there Eva
was growing up in peace and happiness. On the other hand, he did not feel that it would be
possible or advisable to take Agnes away from Philippina, even if his mother saw fit to adopt
her too. Philippina was attached to the child with an ape-like affection. And more than this:
Who would take care of old Jordan if Philippina were discharged? Daniel could not make his
bed or get his meals.

Philippina went out. “The damned scoundrel!” she said as soon as she had left the room. She
clenched her horny fists, and continued Daniel’s life history: “The brute has a bastard, he
has. You wait, you little chit, and the first chance I get I’ll scratch your eyes out!”

Taking the child on her lap, Marian sat down by Daniel’s side. “Don’t cry, Eva, don’t cry;
we’re going back home now in a minute.”

Daniel looked at his mother most attentively, and told her how Philippina had chanced to come
into his family. He told her all about Jason Philip’s attempt to rob him of his inheritance,
and how his own daughter had betrayed him; how his father had taken three thousand talers to
Jason Philip; how Jason Philip had been forced to hand over a part of the money when Jordan
was in trouble because of his son; and how he had waived his claims to the rest of the money.

Marian’s head sank low on her breast. “Your father was a remarkable man, Daniel,” she said
after a long silence, “but he never did understand people; and the person whom he misunderstood
most of all was his wife. He was like a man who is blind, but who does not want to let it be
known that he is blind: he walks around, but where does he go? He stands still and has not
the faintest idea where he is. And by the way, Daniel, it seems to me that you are a little
bit like him. Open your eyes, Daniel, I beg you, open your eyes!”

The child in her lap had fallen asleep. Daniel looked into Eva’s face—yes, he opened his eyes—and
as he saw this delicate, sweet, charming countenance so close before him, he could no longer
control himself. He turned to the wall, and cried as if his heart would break: “I am a murderer!”

“No, Daniel,” said Marian gently, “or if you are, then everybody who lives is a murderer, the
dead of the past being the victims.”

Daniel writhed in agony and gnashed his teeth.

“Father is in the room there,” whispered Eva in her dreams.

                                  XI

The hardest of all for Marian was to get along with old Jordan; for he was only a shadow of
his former self. He never entered Daniel’s room; if Marian wanted to see him she went upstairs,
and there he sat, quiet, helpless, extinguished, a picture of utter dereliction.

He never mentioned his sorrows; it made him restless to see that Marian sympathised with him.
When she did, he became quite courteous; he even tried to act the part of a man of the world.
The effect of this assumed sprightliness, seen from the background of his physical impoverishment
and spiritual decay, was terrifying.

Marian hoped to hear something from him concerning Daniel’s present situation. She knew, in
a general way, that he was in profound distress, that he was living in most straightened circumstances,
and this worried her tremendously. But she wanted to know how he stood in the world; whether
people felt there was anything to him; and whether music was something from which a man could
make a decent living. On this last point her distrust was as strong as ever; her fear showed
no signs of weakening. It was Eleanore, and she only, that had given her a measure of confidence:
it seemed that Eleanore’s disposition, her very presence, had inspired her with a vague, far-away
idea of music. But now Eleanore was gone, and all her old doubts returned.

Jordan however became painfully secretive whenever she referred to Daniel. He seemed to be
grieved at the mere mention of his name. He would merely look at the door, tuck his hands up
his coat-sleeves, and draw his head down between his shoulders.

Once he said: “Can you explain to me, my good woman, why I am alive? Can you throw any light
on such a preposterous paradox as my present existence? My son—a wretch, vanished without a
trace, so far as I am concerned no longer living. My daughters, both of them, in the grave;
my dear wife also. I have been a man, a husband, and a father; that is, I have been a father!
My existence scorns the laws and purposes of nature. To eat, to drink, to sleep—oh, what repulsive
occupations! And yet, if I do not eat, I get hungry; if I do not drink, I get thirsty; if I
do not sleep, I get sick. How simple, how aimless it all is! For me the birds no longer sing,
the bells no longer ring, the musicians have no more music.”

Owing to her desire to find consolation of some kind and at any price, she turned to Eberhard
and Sylvia; they were now visiting Daniel almost every day. She liked them; there was so much
consideration for other people in their behaviour, so much delicacy and refinement in their
conversation. Sylvia was not in the least offended by Daniel’s sullen silence; she treated
him with a respect and deference that made Marian feel good; for it was proof to her that in
the eyes of good and noble people Daniel stood in high esteem. The Baron seemed in some mysterious
way to be continually talking about Eleanore, though he never mentioned her name. There was
a sadness in his eyes that reminded her of Eleanore; there was something supersensuous in its
power. Marian often felt as though this strange nobleman and her son were brothers and at the
same time enemies, as seen in the light of painful memories. Sylvia also seemed to have the
same feeling; but she found nothing objectionable in the relation.

One day, as Marian accompanied the two to the hall door, she decided to pick up her courage;
and she did. “Well, how do you think he is going to make out?” she asked; “he has no work;
as a matter of fact he never speaks of work. What will that lead to?”

“We have been thinking about that,” replied Sylvia, “and I believe a way has been found to
help him. He will hear about it in a short while. But he must not suspect that we have anything
to do with it.” She looked at her fiancé; he nodded approvingly.

Eberhard and Sylvia knew perfectly well from the very beginning that there could be no thought
of lending Daniel money. Gifts, large or small, merely humiliated him; they disgraced him.
It was a case where eagerness to serve on the part of those who have meets with insurmountable
obstacles, whether they wish to be lavish in their generosity or of seeming calculation. There
was no use to appeal to delicacy; attenuating provisos would not help; small deceptions practised
in the spirit of love would prove ineffectual. Riches stood face to face with poverty, and
was as helpless as poverty usually is when obliged to enter the lists against riches. The case
was striking, but not unique.

Having made up her mind to come to the assistance of the musician, Sylvia turned to her mother.
But it was idle to count on the backing of the Baroness: Andreas Döderlein had so poisoned
her mind against Daniel that the mere mention of his name caused her brow to wrinkle, her lips
to drop.

Agatha von Erfft got in touch, by letter, with some business people who were in a position
to give her some practical advice. Their assistance was helpful in that it at least saved her
the invaluable time she might have lost by appealing to the wrong people. One day she appeared
before Eberhard and Sylvia with her plans all drawn up.

One of the most reputable music houses of Mayence had been nursing the idea for years of bringing
out a pretentious collection of mediæval church music. A great deal of material had already
been assembled under the supervision of a writer on musical subjects who had recently died.
But there was still much to be collected. To do this, it would be necessary to go on long journeys,
and these would entail the expenditure of a good deal of money. Moreover, it was necessary
to find a man who would not be afraid of the work attached to the undertaking, and on whose
judgment one could rely without doubt or cavil. Owing to the fact that the expenses up to the
present had far exceeded the initial calculations, and since it seemed impossible to engage
the right sort of man to place in charge of the work, the publisher had become first sceptical
and then positive; positive that he would invest no more money in it.

Agatha had heard of this some time ago. That the enterprise might be revived she learned from
direct inquiry; indirect investigation confirmed what she had been told. But the publisher
was unwilling to assume all the financial responsibility; he was looking for a patron who would
be disposed to invest capital in the plan. If such a person could be found, he was willing
to place Daniel Nothafft, whose name was now known to him, in the responsible position of making
the collections and editing them. There would be a good deal of work connected with the undertaking:
the treasures of the archives, libraries, and convents would have to be investigated; corrections
would have to be made; notes would have to be written; and the entire work would have to be
seen through the press. To do this would take several years. The publisher consequently insisted
that whoever was placed in charge should sign a contract to remain until the work had been
finished, he in turn agreeing to pay the editor a salary of three thousand marks a year.

Eberhard made careful inquiries as to the standing of the firm, and finding that it enjoyed
a rating well above the average, he agreed to furnish the requisite capital.

A few days after the conversation between Sylvia and Marian, Daniel received a letter in the
morning mail from Philander and Sons, requesting him to accept the position, a detailed description
of which was given. In the event of his acceptance, all he had to do was to sign the enclosed
contract.

He read the letter carefully and quietly from beginning to end. His face did not brighten up.
He walked back and forth in the room a few times, and then went to the window and looked out.
“It seems to rain every day this summer,” he said.

Marian had returned to the table. She took the letter with the enclosed contract and read both
of them. Her heart beat with joy, but she was exceedingly careful not to betray her state of
mind to Daniel: she was afraid of his contradictory and crotchety disposition. She hardly dared
look at him, as she waited in anxious suspense to see what he would do.

Finally he came back to the table, made a wry face, stared at the letter, and then said quite
laconically: “Church music? Yes, I will do it.” With that he took his pen, and scrawled his
name to the contract.

“Thank God,” whispered Marian.

That afternoon they left Daniel. Eva hung on her father’s neck, quite unwilling to leave him.
Without the least display of shyness, she kissed him many times, laughing as she did so. She
was overflowing with a natural and whole-hearted love for him. Daniel offered no resistance.
He looked serious. As his eye caught that of the child, he shuddered at the abundant fulness
of her life; but he was aware at the same time of a promise, and against this he struggled
with all the power there was in him.

                                  XII

It was a sunny day in September. Eberhard, who had spent the entire August at Erfft, had returned
to the city to attend to some urgent business—and also to hasten the arrangements for his coming
wedding.

As the streets were filled with playing children, he sauntered along on his way up to the Castle
on the hill. He wanted to look up his little house; he had not been in it for months. He had
a feeling that he would enjoy the quiet up there; he longed to look back over and into scenes
from the past; he wanted to pass in review the shadowy pictures of his former self; pictures
he saw before him wherever he went, wherever he was. One of these was always with him; if he
found himself in a certain room it was there; if he went on a long journey it was with him.
He even found it on the faded pages of books he had taken to himself as companions in his loneliness.

He hesitated from time to time, stopped, and seemed quite irresolute. All of a sudden he turned
around, and started back with hasty steps to Ægydius Place. Just as he was entering the hall
of Daniel’s apartment, he met Daniel coming out. He greeted Eberhard and gave him his hand.

“I was just going to call for you,” said the Baron. “Won’t you come with me up to my old hermitage?”

Daniel looked out through his glasses at a swallow that was just then circling around over
the square; there was something fabulous in its flight. “To tell you the truth, Baron, I have
very little inclination to gossip at present.” He made the remark with as much consideration
for the laws of human courtesy as lay within his power.

“There must be no gossiping,” said Eberhard. “I have a great secret, one that I can tell you
without saying a word.”

Daniel went along with him.

The air in the little house was dead, stuffy. But Eberhard did not open the windows; he wished
to have it as quiet as it was when they entered. Daniel took a seat on one of the chairs in
the former living room of the Baron. Eberhard thought he had sat down because he was tired;
he therefore took a seat opposite him. The evening sun cast a slanting ray on an old copper
engraving based on a scene from pastoral life. A mouse played around in the corner.

“Well, what is your secret?” asked Daniel brusquely, after they had sat in perfect silence
for some time.

Eberhard got up, and made a gesture which meant that Daniel was to follow him. They crossed
the narrow hall, climbed up a pair of small steps, and then Eberhard opened a door leading
into the attic room.

A stupefying, deadening odour of decayed flowers struck them in the face. Involuntarily Daniel
turned to go, but the Baron pointed at the walls in absolute silence.

“What is this? What kind of a room is this?” asked Daniel, rather forcibly.

The four walls of the room were completely covered with bouquets, garlands, and wreaths of
withered flowers. The leaves had fallen from most of them, and were now lying scattered about
the floor. Leaves that had once been green had turned brown; the grasses and mosses were in
shreds, the twigs were dry and brittle. Many of the bouquets had had ribbons attached to them;
these, once red or blue, were now faded. Others had been bound with gold tinsel; this had rusted.
The slanting rays of the sun fell on others, and lighted them as it had shone on the copper
engraving in the room below. Through the purple rays could be seen a dancing stream of dust.

It was a flower mausoleum; a vault of bouquets, a death-house of memories. Daniel suspected
what it all meant. He felt his tongue cleaving to the roof of his mouth; a chill ran over him.
And when Eberhard at last began to speak, his eyes filled with hot, gushing tears.

“The flowers were all picked and bound by her hands, by Eleanore’s hands,” said Eberhard. And
then, after a pause: “She prepared the bouquets for a florist, and I bought them; she had no
idea who bought them.” That was all he said.

Daniel looked back into his past life, as if an invisible arm were drawing him to the pinnacle
of some high mountain. He looked, and his soul was dissolved in anxiety, torture, and repentance.

What had he left? Two graves: that was all. No, he had, aside from the two graves, a broken
harp, some withered flowers, and a mask of terracotta.

He looked at the dead stems and withered chalices: Eleanore’s fingers had once touched all
of these. Her fingers were even then hovering over the dead buds like figures from the realm
of spirits. In the dusty spider webs hung caught at present unused moments, kind words that
were never spoken, consolation that was never expressed, encouragement, consideration, and
happiness that were allowed to pass unclaimed and unapplied. Oh, this living and not knowing
what the present contains! Oh, this being with a living life, and remaining unaware of it!
This failure to avail one’s self of a wonderful day, a breathing, pulsing hour! This dragging,
falling, plunging into the night of desire and delusion, this proud, vain, criminal discontent!
O winged creature, winged creature, where art thou! Where can one call out to thee!

There was nothing left but two graves, a broken harp, withered flowers, and a mask! And a fair
child here, a foul one there, and a third that had come into life only to die! And up above
all this, up above even the tip of the mountain top, the gigantic, the inexpressible, the sea
of dreams and dreamed melodies, the breath of God, the annunciation of infernal darkness, the
message of eternity, the wonders of temporal existence, dance and dancing pipes, peals of thunder,
and sweet weavings of sound—Music!

It was evening. The Baron closed the door. Daniel reached him his hand in silence, and then
went home.

                        THE PROMETHEAN SYMPHONY

                                   I

During the following autumn and winter, Daniel lived a quiet, lonely life. In the spring, Sylvia
von Auffenberg wrote him a letter, asking him to come over to Siegmundshof and spend a few
weeks with her and Eberhard. He declined, though he promised to come later.

Old Herold visited him occasionally. He told all about the friction in the conservatory since
Döderlein had been in charge, and contended that the world was on the point of turning into
a pig-stye.

Herr Seelenfromm also came in from time to time, while among other visitors were the architect
who had a defect in his speech and Martha Rübsam. Toward the close of the winter Herr Carovius
also called. Socially he had become more nearly possible than he had been in former years.
He still held, however, some very remarkable views about music.

Whatever any of the visitors said went in one of Daniel’s ears and out of the other. It would
often happen that there would be a number of people in his presence, and he would seem to be
listening to them; and yet if you watched his face, you could see that he was completely absent-minded.
If some one turned to him with a question, he would not infrequently smile like a child, and
make no effort whatsoever to respond. No one had ever noticed him smile this way before.

He returned the money Philippina had loaned him at the time the piano was pawned. Philippina
said: “Oi, oi, Daniel, you seem to be swimming in money!” She brought him the receipt, and
then took the money to her room, where she did a lot of figuring to see whether the interest
had been accurately calculated.

Little Agnes was sitting on the floor, sucking a stick of candy. She was always happy when
Philippina was around; she was afraid of her father.

Friends had told him that his apartment was too large now; he was advised to give it up and
take a smaller one. He became enraged; he said he would never do this voluntarily, for the
house meant a great deal more to him than merely so many rented rooms; and he insisted that
everything be left just as it was.

One day at the beginning of spring he said to Philippina: “I am going away for a long time.
Watch the child, and don’t let the old man upstairs suffer for anything. I will send you the
money to keep up the house on the first day of each month, and you will be held responsible
for everything that takes place. Moreover; I want to pay you a set wage: I will give you five
talers a month. There is no reason why you should work for me for nothing.”

The shaking and shuddering that Daniel had often had occasion to notice in Philippina returned.
She shrugged her shoulders, looked as mean as only she could, and said: “Save your coppers;
you’ll need ’em; you mustn’t try to act so rich all of a sudden; it ain’t good for your health.
If you have any money to spend, go out and git Agnes a pair of shoes and a decent dress.” Daniel
made no reply.

Her greediness in money matters had certainly not diminished since the day she began to pilfer
from her parents. She loved money; she adored the shining metal; she liked to see it and feel
it; she liked to take bank notes in her hands and caress them. It gave her intense pleasure
to think that people looked upon her as being poor when she was actually carrying more than
a thousand marks around in an old stocking stuffed down in her corset between her breasts.
She loved to hear people complain of hard times. When a beggar reached out his hand to her
on the street, she felt that he was doing it as an act of homage to her; she would cause her
bosom to heave so that she might feel the presence of the stocking more keenly. She was pleased
to think that one so young had made herself so secure against future eventualities of any kind.

She felt, despite all this, like scratching Daniel’s eyes out when he spoke of paying her regular
monthly wages. This she regarded as base ingratitude. If it were at all possible for grief
to find ineradicable lodgment in her envious, unenlightened, malicious soul, Daniel’s offer
of so much per month made it so.

She ran into the kitchen, and hurled knives and forks in the sink. She went to old Jordan’s
room, knocked on his door, and made him open it; then she told him with all the anger at her
resourceful command that Daniel was going away. “There is hardly a cent in the house, and he’s
going on a jamboree!” she exclaimed. “There is some damned wench back of this. Go tell him,
Herr Inspector, go tell him what a dirty thing it is he’s doing—going away and leaving his
child and his old father in the lurch. Do it, Herr Inspector, and you’ll get potato dumplings,
ginger-bread, and sauce for dinner next Sunday.”

Jordan looked at Philippina timidly. His mouth watered for the food she had promised him; for
she was holding him down to a near-starvation diet. He was often so hungry that he would sneak
into the delicatessen shop, and buy himself ten pfennigs’ worth of real food.

“I will make inquiry as to the reason for his going,” murmured Jordan, “but I hardly believe
that I will be able to move him one way or the other.”

“Well, you go out and take a little walk; git a bit of fresh air,” commanded Philippina; “I’ve
got to straighten up your room. Your windows need washing; you can’t see through ’em for dirt.”

Late that evening Daniel came up to say good-bye to Jordan.

“Where are you going?” asked the old man.

“I want to see a little of the German Empire,” replied Daniel. “I have some business to attend
to up in the North, in the cities and also out in the country.”

“Good luck to you,” said Jordan, much oppressed, “good luck to you, my dear son. How long are
you going to be gone?”

“Oh, I don’t know yet; possibly for years.”

“For years?” asked Jordan. He looked at the floor; he tried to keep his eyes on the floor under
his feet: “Then I suppose we might as well say good-bye forever.”

Daniel shook his head. “It makes no difference when I return, I will find you here,” he said
with a note of strange assurance in his voice. “When fate has treated a man too harshly, there
seems to come a time when it no longer bothers him; it evades him, in fact. It seems to me
that this is the case with you: you are quite fateless.”

Jordan made no reply. He opened his eyes as if in fear, and sighed.

The next morning Daniel left home. He wore a brown hunting jacket buttoned close up to his
neck with hartshorn buttons. Over this hung a top-coat and a cape. His broad-brimmed hat overshadowed
his face, which looked young, although so serious and distracted that voices, glances, and
sounds of any kind seemed to rebound from it like swift-running water from a smooth stone wall.

Philippina carried his luggage to the station. Her dress was literally smothered in garish,
gaudy ribbons. The women in the market-place laughed on seeing her until they got a colic.

When Daniel took leave from her and boarded the train, she did not open her mouth; she wrinkled
her forehead, rubbed the ends of her fingers against each other, stood perfectly quiet, and
looked at the ground. Long after the train had left the station, she was still to be seen standing
there in that unique position. A station official went up to her, and, with poorly concealed
ridicule at the rare phenomenon, asked her what she was waiting for.

She turned her back on him, and started off. She came back by way of St. James’s Place, and
talked for a quarter of an hour with her friend Frau Hadebusch. It was Sunday. Benjamin Dorn
was just coming home from church. Seeing Philippina, he made a profound bow.

Frau Hadebusch slapped Philippina on the hip, and smiled at her knowingly.

Herr Francke was no longer living at Frau Hadebusch’s: he was in jail. He had promised to marry
the cook of a certain distinguished family; but instead of hastening the coming of the happy
day, he had gambled away the savings of his bride-to-be.

                                  II

Daniel had a letter of introduction to the Prior of the Monastery at Löhriedt. He was looking
for a manuscript that was supposed to have been written by a contemporary of Orlando di Lasso,
if not by Di Lasso himself.

He remained for over two months, working at his collection. He found his association with the
monks quite agreeable, and they liked him. One of them, who held him in especially high regard
because of his ability as an organist, gave him to understand that it was a matter of unaffected
regret to him that he could not greet him, Protestant that he was, with the confidence that
a man of his singular distinction deserved.

“So! I wish I were a Jew,” said Daniel to him, “then you would have a really unqualified opportunity
to see what God can do without your assistance.”

The monk in question was called Father Leonhard; he was a short, wiry fellow with black eyes
and a dark complexion. He seemed to have had a great deal of experience with the world, and
to have no little cause for contrition and repentance: there was nothing conventional about
his religious practices; they were, on the contrary, of almost redundant fervour and renunciation.
Daniel was impressed by the man’s faith, though his soul shuddered when in his presence: he
regarded him as an enemy, a Philistine, and preferred not to look at him at all.

He lived close by the monastery in the house of a railroad official. Father Leonhard came in
to visit him once. Daniel was sitting by the window busily engaged in making some corrections.
The Father looked about the room: his eyes fell on a round, wooden box lying on a chair; it
looked like a cake box.

“The people at home have sent you something to nibble at,” remarked the Father, as Daniel got up.

Daniel riveted his eyes on the monk, took the box, hesitated for a while, and then opened it.
In it, carefully packed in sawdust, was the mask of Zingarella. It was a part of Daniel’s meagre
luggage; wherever he went it followed him.

Father Leonhard sprang back terrified. “What does that mean?” he asked.

“It means sin and purification,” said Daniel, holding the mask up in the light of the setting
sun. “It means grief and redemption, despair and mercy, love and death, chaos and form.”

From that day on, Father Leonhard never said another word to Daniel Nothafft. And whenever
the strange musician chanced to play the organ, the monk arose as quickly as possible, left
the church, and sought out some place where the tones could not reach him.

                                  III

That summer Daniel came to Aix-la-Chapelle and the region of Liége, Louvain, and Malines. From
there he wandered on foot to Ghent and Bruges.

In places where he had to make investigations, he was obliged to depend upon the letters he
received from his publisher to make himself understood. Condemned to silence, he lived very
much alone; he was a stranger in a strange land.

He had no interest in sights. It was rare that he looked at old paintings. The beautiful never
caused him to stop unless it actually blocked his way. He went about as if in between two walls.
He followed his nose, turned around only with the greatest reluctance, and never felt tired
until he was ready to lie down to sleep.

And even when he was tired the feeling that he was being robbed of something gnawed at his
soul; he was restless even when he slept. Haste coloured his eye, fashioned his step, and moulded
his deeds. He ate his meals in haste, wrote his letters in haste, and talked in haste.

It pained him to feel that men were looking at him. Although he invariably sought out the most
deserted corner of whatever inn he chanced to stop at, and thereby avoided becoming, so far
as he might, the target of the curious, he was nevertheless gaped at, watched, and studied
wherever he went. For everything about him was conspicuous: the energy of his gestures, the
agility of his mimicry, the way he showed his teeth, and the nervous, hacking step with which
he moved through groups of gossiping people.

He had anticipated with rare pleasure the sight of the sea. He was prepared to behold the monstrous,
titanic, seething, and surging element, the tempest of the Apocalypse. He was disappointed
by the peaceful rise and fall of the tide, the harmless rolling back and forth of the waves.
He concluded that it were better for one not to become acquainted with things that had inspired
one’s fancy with reverential awe.

He could quarrel with nature just as he could quarrel with men. The phases of nature which
he regarded as her imperfections excited his anger. He was fond, however, of a certain spot
in the forest; or he liked a tree in the plain, or sunset along the canal.

He liked best of all the narrow streets of the cities, when the gentle murmurings of song wafted
forth from the open windows, or when the light from the lamp shone forth from the windows after
they had been closed. He loved to pass by courts and cellars, gates and fences; when the face
of an old man, or that of a young girl, came suddenly to view, when workmen went home from
the factories, or soldiers from the barracks, or seamen from the harbours, he saw a story in
each of them; he felt as one feels on reading an exciting book.

One day when he was in Cleve he walked the streets at night all alone. He noticed a man and
a woman and five children, all poorly dressed, standing near a church. Lying before them on
the pavement were several bundles containing their earthly possessions. A man came up after
a while and addressed them in a stern, domineering tone; they picked up their bundles and followed
him: it was a mournful procession. They were emigrants; the man had told them about their ship.

Daniel felt as if a cord in his soul had been made taut and were vibrating without making a
sound. The steps of the eight people, as they died away in the distance, developed gradually
into a rhythmical, musical movement. What had been confused became ordered; what had been dark
shone forth in light. Weighed down with heaviness of soul, he went on, his eyes fixed on the
ground as if he were looking for something. He no longer saw, nor could he hear. Nor did he
know what time it was.

After a year and a half of congealed torpidity, the March wind once more began to blow in his soul.

But it was like a disease; he was being consumed with impatience. His immediate goal was the
cloister of Œsede at Osnabrück, and from there he wanted to go to Berlin. He could not bear
to sit in the railway carriages: in Wesel he placed his trunk on a freight train, and went
from there on foot, his top-coat hung over his arm, his knapsack strapped across his back.
Despite the inclement weather he walked from eight to ten hours every day. It was towards the
end of October, the mornings and evenings were chilly, the roads were muddy, the inns were
wretched. This did not deter him from going on: he walked and walked, sought and sought, often
until late at night, passionately absorbed in himself.

When he came to the coal and iron district, he raised his head more and more frequently. The
houses were black, the earth and the air were black, blackened men met him on the road. Copper
wires hummed in the fog and mist, hammers clinked, wheels hummed, chimneys smoked, whistles
blew—it was like a dream vision, like the landscape of an unknown and accursed star.

One evening he left a little inn which he had entered to get something to eat and drink. It
was eight miles to Dortmund, where he planned to stay over night. He had left the main road,
when all of a sudden the fire from the blast-furnaces leaped up, giving the mist the appearance
of a blood-red sea. Miners were coming in to the village; in the light of the furnaces their
tired, blackened faces looked like so many demoniac caricatures. Far or near, it was impossible
to say, a horse could be seen drawing a car over shining rails. On it stood a man flourishing
his whip. Beast, man, and car all seemed to be of colossal size; the “gee” and “haw” of the
driver sounded like the mad cries of a spectre; the iron sounds from the forges resembled the
bellowing of tormented creatures.

Daniel had found what he had been looking for: he had found the mournful melody that had driven
him away the day Eleanore died. He had, to be sure, put it on the paper then and there, but
it had remained without consequence: it had been buried in the grave with Eleanore.

Now it had arisen, and its soul—its consequence—had arisen with it; it was expanded into a
wonderful arch, arranged and limbed like a body, and filled as the world is full.

Music had been born to him again from the machine, from the world of machinery.

                                  IV

Jason Philip Schimmelweis had been obliged to give up his house by the museum bridge. He could
not pay the rent; his business was ruined. By a mere coincident it came about that the house
on the Corn Market had a cheap apartment that was vacant, and he took it. It was the same house
in which he lived when he made so much money twenty years ago.

Was Jason Philip no longer in touch with modern business methods? Had he become too old and
infirm to make the public hungry for literary nourishment? Were his advertisements without
allurement, his baits without scent? No one felt inclined to buy expensive lexicons and editions
de luxe on the instalment plan. The rich old fellows with a nose for dubious reading matter
never came around any more. Jason Philip had become a dilatory debtor; the publishers no longer
gave him books on approval; he was placed on the black list.

He took to abusing modern writers, contending that it was no wonder that the writing of books
was left exclusively to good-for-nothing subjects of the Empire, for the whole nation was suffering
from cerebral atrophy.

But his reasoning was of no avail; his business collapse was imminent; in a jiffy it was a
hard reality. A man by the name of Rindskopf bought his stock and furnishings at brokers’ prices,
and the firm of Jason Philip Schimmelweis had ceased to exist.

In his distress Jason Philip appealed to the Liberal party. He boasted of his friendship with
the former leader of the party, Baron von Auffenberg, but this only made matters worse: one
renegade was depending upon the support of another. This was natural: birds of a feather flock
together.

Then he went to the Masons, and began to feel around for their help; he tried to be made a
member of one of the better lodges. He was given to understand that there was some doubt as
to the loyalty of his convictions, with the result that the Masons would have none of him.

For some time he found actual difficulty in earning his daily bread. He had resigned his position
with the Prudentia Insurance Company long ago. Ever since a certain interpellation in the Reichstag
and a long lawsuit in which the Prudentia became involved, and which was decided in favour
of its opponents, the standing of the company had suffered irreparably.

Jason Philip had no other choice: he had to go back to bookbinding; he had to return to pasting,
cutting, and folding. He returned in the evening of his life, downcast, impoverished, and embittered,
to the position from which he had started as an ambitious, resourceful, stout-hearted, and
self-assured man years ago. His eloquence had proved of no avail, his cunning had not helped
him, nor his change of political conviction, nor his familiarity with the favourable turns
of the market, nor his speculations. He had never believed that the order of things in the
world about him was just and righteous, neither as a Socialist nor as a Liberal. And now he
was convinced that it was impossible to write a motto on the basis of business principles that
would be fit material for a copy book in a kindergarten.

Willibald was still the same efficient clerk. Markus had got a job in a furniture store, where
he spent his leisure hours studying Volapük, convinced as he was that all the nations of the
earth would soon be using this great fraternal tongue.

Theresa moved into the house on the Corn Market with as much peace and placidity as if she
had been anticipating such a change for years. There was a bay window in the house, and by
this she sat when her work in the kitchen was done, knitting socks for her sons. At times she
would scratch her grey head with her knitting needle, at times she would reach over and take
a sip of cold, unsugared coffee, a small pot of which she always kept by her side. Hers was
the most depressed face then known to the human family; hers were the horniest, wrinkliest
peasant hands that formed part of any citizen of the City of Nuremberg.

She thought without ceasing of all that nice money that had passed through her hands during
the two decades she had stood behind the counter of the establishment in the Plobenhof Street.

She tried to imagine where all the money had gone, who was using it now, and who was being
tormented by it. For she was rid of it, and in the bottom of her heart she was glad that she
no longer had it.

One day Jason Philip came rushing from his workshop into her room. He had a newspaper in his
hand; his face was radiant with joy. “At last, my dear, at last! I have been avenged. Jason
Philip Schimmelweis was after all a good prophet. Well, what do you say?” he continued, as
Theresa looked at him without any noticeable display of curiosity, “what do you say? I’ll bet
you can’t guess. No, you will never be able to guess what’s happened; it’s too much for a woman’s
brain.” He mounted a chair, held the paper in his hand as if it were the flag of his country,
waved it, and shouted: “Bismarck is done for! He’s got to go. The Kaiser hates him! Now let
come what may, I have not lived in vain.”

Jason Philip had the feeling that it was due to his efforts that the reins of government had
been snatched from the hands of the Iron Chancellor. His satisfaction found expression in blatancy
and in actions that were thoroughly at odds with a man of his age. He held up his acquaintances
on the street, and demanded that they offer him their congratulations. He went to his favourite
café, and ordered a barrel of beer for the rejuvenation of his friends. He delivered an oration,
spiced with all the forms of sarcasm known to the art of cheap politics and embellished with
innumerable popular phrases, explaining why he regarded this as the happiest day of his eventful
life.

He said: “If fate were to do me the favour of allowing me to stand face to face with this menace
to public institutions, this unscrupulous tyrant, I would not, believe me, mince matters in
the slightest: I would tell him things no mortal man has thus far dared say to him.”

Several months passed by. Bismarck, then staying at his country place in Sachsenwald and quarrelling
with his lot, decided to visit Munich. There was tremendous excitement in Nuremberg when it
was learned that he would pass through the city at such and such an hour.

Everybody wanted to see him, young and old, aristocrats and humble folk. Early in the morning
the whole city seemed to be on its feet, making its way in dense crowds out through the King’s
Gate.

This was a drama in which Jason Philip had to play his part: without him it would be incomplete.
“To look into the eyes of a tiger whose claws have been chopped off and whose teeth have been
knocked out is a pleasure and a satisfaction that my mother’s son dare not forego,” said he.

His elbows stood him in good stead. When the train pulled into the station, our rebel was standing
in the front row, having pushed his way through the seemingly impenetrable mass of humanity.

The train stopped for a few minutes. The Iron Chancellor left his carriage amid deafening hurrahs
from the assembled multitude. He shook hands with the Mayor and a few high-ranking army officers.

Jason Philip never budged. It never occurred to him to shout his own hurrah. An acidulous smile
played around his mouth, his white beard quivered when he dropped the corners of his lips in
satanic glee. It never occurred to him to take off his hat, despite the threatening protests
all too audible round about him. “I am consistent, my dear Bismarck, I am incorruptible,” he
thought to himself.

And yet—the satisfaction which we have described as satanic seemed somehow or other to be ill
founded: it was in such marked contrast to the general enthusiasm. What had possessed this
imbecile pack? Why was it raging? It saw the enemy, the hangman, right there before it, immune
to the law, dressed in civilian clothes, and yet it was acting as though the Messiah had come
to town on an extra train!

Jason Philip had the feeling that Bismarck was looking straight at him. He fancied that the
fearfully tall man with the unusually small head and the enormously blue eyes had taken offence
at his silence. He feared some one had told him all about his political beliefs.

The scornful smile died away. Jason Philip detected a lukewarm impotency creeping over his
body. The sweat of solicitude trickled down across his forehead. Involuntarily he kneed his
way closer to the edge of the platform, threw out his chest, jerked his hat from his head,
opened his mouth, and cried: “Hurrah!”

He cried hurrah. The Prince turned his face from him, and looked in another direction.

But Jason Philip had cried hurrah.

He sneaked home shaking with shame. He drew his slippers, “For the tired Man—Consolation,”
on his feet. They had become quite worn in the course of his tempestuous life. He lay down
on the sofa with his face to the wall, his back to the window and against the world.

                                   V

Daniel had been in Berlin for weeks. He had been living a lonely life on the east side of the
gigantic city. One of the managers of Philander and Sons came to see him. He returned the call,
and in the course of two hours he was surrounded, contrary to his own will, by a veritable
swarm of composers, directors, virtuosos, and musical critics.

Some had heard of him; to them he appeared to be a remarkable man. They threw out their nets
to catch him, but he slipped through the meshes. Unprepared, however, as he was for their schemes,
he could not help being caught in time. He had to give an account of himself, to unveil himself.
He found himself under obligations, interested, and so forth, but in the end they could not
prevail against him: he simply passed through them.

They laughed at his dialect and his rudeness. What drew them to him was his self-respect; what
annoyed them was his secretiveness; what they found odd about him was the fact that, try as
they might to associate with him, he would disappear entirely from them for months at a time.

A divorced young woman, a Jewess by the name of Regina Sussmann, fell in love with him. She
recognised in Daniel an elemental nature. The more he avoided her the more persistent she became.
At times it made him feel good to come once again into intimate association with a woman, to
hear her bright voice, her step more delicate, her breathing more ardent than that of men.
But he could not trust Regina Sussmann; she seemed to know too much. There was nothing of the
plant-like about her, and without that characteristic any woman appealed to him as being unformed
and uncultured.

One winter day she came to see him in his barren hall room in Greifswald Street. She sat down
at the piano and began to improvise. At first it was all like a haze to him. Suddenly he was
struck by her playing. What he heard made a half disagreeable, half painful impression on him.
He seemed to be familiar with the piece. She was playing motifs from his quartette, his “Eleanore
Quartette” as he had called it. It came out that Regina Sussmann had been present at the concert
given in Leipzig three years ago when the quartette was performed.

After a painful pause Regina began to ask some questions that cut him to the very heart. She
wanted to know what relation, if any, the composition bore to actual life. She was trying to
lift the veil from his unknown fate. He thrust her from him. Then he felt sorry for her: he
began to speak, with some hesitation, of his symphony. There was something bewitching, enchanting
in the woman’s passionate silence and sympathy. He lost himself, forgot himself, disclosed
his heart. He built up the work in words before her, pictured the seven movements like seven
stairs in the tower of a temple, a glorious promenade in the upper spheres, a tragic storm
with tragically cheerful pauses of memory and meditation, all accompanied by laughing genii
that adorned and crowned the pillars of the structure of his dreams.

He went to the piano, began playing the melancholy leading motif and the two subsidiary themes,
counterpointed them, ran into lofty crescendos, introduced variations, modulated and sang at
the same time. The pupils of his eyes became distended until they shone behind his glasses
like seas of green fire. Regina Sussmann fell on her knees by the piano. It may be that she
was so affected by his playing that she could not act otherwise; and it may be that she wished
thereby to give him visible proof of her respect and adoration. All of a sudden the woman became
repulsive to him. The unleashed longing of her eyes filled him with disgust. Her kneeling position
appealed to him as a gesture of mockery and ridicule: a memory had been desecrated. He sprang
to his feet and rushed out of the room, leaving her behind and quite alone. He never said a
word; he merely bit his lips in anger and left. When he came back home late that night, he
was afraid he might meet her again; but she was not there. Only a letter lay on the table by
the lamp.

She wrote that she had understood him; that she understood he had been living in the past as
if in an impregnable fortress, surrounded by shadows that were not to be dispelled or disturbed
by the presumption of any living human being. She remarked that she had neither intention nor
desire to encroach upon his peace of mind, that she was merely concerned for his future, and
was wondering how he would fight down his hunger of body and soul.

“Shameless wretch,” cried Daniel, “a spy and a woman!”

She remarked, with almost perverse humility, that she had recognised his greatness, that he
was the genius she had been waiting for, and that her one desire was to serve him. That is,
she wished to serve him at a distance, seeing that he could not endure her presence. She implored
him to grant her this poor privilege, not merely for his own sake, but for the sake of humanity
as well.

Daniel threw the letter in the stove. In the night he woke up with a burning desire for delicate
contact with an untouched woman. He dreamed of a smile on the face of a seventeen-year-old
girl innocently playing around him—and shuddered at himself and the thought of himself.

Shortly after this he went to Dresden, where he had some work to do in the Royal library.

People came to him anxious to place themselves at his service. Many signs told him that Regina
Sussmann was making fervent propaganda for him.

One day he received a letter from a musical society in Magdeburg, asking him to give a concert
there. He hesitated for a long while, and then agreed to accede to their wish. Outwardly it
could not be called an unusually successful evening, but his auditors felt his power. People
with the thinnest smattering of music forgot themselves and became infatuated with his arms
and his eyes. An uncertain, undetermined happiness which he brought to the hearts of real musicians
carried him further along on his career. For two successive winters he directed concerts in
the provincial towns of North Germany. He was the first to accustom the people to strictly
classical programmes. It is rare that the first in any enterprise of this kind reaps the gratitude
of those who pay to hear him. Had he not desisted with such Puritanical severity from feeding
the people on popular songs, opera selections, and favourite melodies, his activity would have
been much better rewarded. As it was, his name was mentioned with respect, but he passed through
the streets unacclaimed.

Regina Sussmann was always on hand when he gave a concert. He knew it, even if he did not see
her. At times he caught sight of her sitting in the front row. She never approached him. Articles
redolent with adulation appeared in the papers about him: it was manifest that she had been
influential in having them written. Once he met her on the steps of a hotel. She stopped and
cast her eyes to the ground; she was pale. He passed by her. Again he was filled with longing
to come into intimate contact with an untouched woman. Was his heart already hungry, as she
had predicted? He bit his lips, and worked throughout the whole night. He felt that he was
being fearfully endangered by the prosy insipidity of the age and the world he was living in.
But could he not escape the terrors of such without having recourse to a woman? The shadows
receded, enveloped in sorrow, Gertrude and Eleanore, wrapped in the embrace of sisters.

“Don’t!” they cried. He saw at once that his provincial concerts were leading him to false
goals, enflaming false ambitions, robbing him of his strength. He no longer found it possible
to endure the sight of brilliantly lighted halls, and the over-dressed people who came empty
and left untransformed. It all seemed to him like a lie. He desisted; he threw it all overboard
just as the temptation was strongest, just as the Berlin Philharmonic invited him to give a
concert of his own works in its hall.

He had suddenly disappeared. In less than three months his name had become a saga.

                                  VI

He spent the summer, autumn, and winter of 1893 wandering around. Now he was in a remote Thuringian
village, now in some town in the Rhön region, now in the mountains of Saxony, now in a fishing
village on the Baltic. Throughout the day he worked on his manuscripts, in the evening he composed.
No one except the members of the firm of Philander and Sons knew where he was. He did not dare
hide himself from the people who were sending him the cheque at the end of the month.

He gradually became so unaccustomed to talking that it was only with difficulty that he could
ask a hotel-keeper about the price of his room. This unrelieved silence chiselled his lips
into ghastly sharpness.

He never heard from his mother or his children. He seemed to have forgotten that there were
human beings living who thought of him with affection and anxiety.

The only messages he received from the world were letters that were forwarded to him at intervals
of from four to five weeks by the musical firm in Mayence. These letters were written by Regina
Sussmann, though they were not signed in her name: the signature at the close of each one was
“The Swallow.” She addressed Daniel by the familiar Du, and not by the more conventional and
polite Sie.

She told him of her life, wrote of the books she had read, the people she had met, and gave
him her views on music. Her communications became in time indispensable to him; he was touched
by her fidelity; he was pleased that she did not use her own name. She had a remarkable finesse
and power of expression, and however ungenuine and artificial she may have appealed to him
in personal association, everything she wrote seemed to him to be natural and convincing. She
never expressed a wish that he do something impossible and never uttered a complaint. On the
other hand, there was a passion of the intelligence about her that was quite new to him; she
was unlike the women he had known. And there was a fervour and certainty in her appreciation
of his being before which he bowed as at the sound of a higher voice.

Though he never answered her letters, he looked forward to receiving them, and became impatient
if one were overdue. He often thought of the swallow when he would step to the window on a
dark night. He thought of her as an all-seeing spirit that hovered in the air. The swallow—that
was fraught with meaning—the restless, delicate, swift-flying swallow. And in his mind’s eye
he saw the swallow that hovered over Ægydius Place when Eberhard came to take him up to the
room with the withered flowers.

He wrote to Philippina: “Decorate my graves. Buy two wreaths, and lay them on the graves.”

“You must mount to the clouds, Daniel, otherwise you are lost,” was one passage in one of the
letters from the Swallow. Another, much longer, ran: “As soon as you feel one loneliness creeping
over you, you must hasten into another, an unknown one. If your path seems blocked, you must
storm the hedges before you. If an arm surrounds you, you must tear yourself loose, even though
it cost blood and tears. You must leave men behind and move above them; you dare not become
a citizen; you dare not allow yourself to be taken up with things that are dear to you; you
must have no companion, neither man nor maid. Time must hover over you cold and quiet. Let
your heart be encased in bronze, for music is a flame that breaks through and consumes all
there is in the man who created it, except the stuff the gods have forged about their chosen son.”

Why should the picture of this red-haired Jewess, from whom Daniel had fled in terror, not
have vanished? There was a Muse such as poets dream of! “Jewess, wonderful Jewess,” thought
Daniel, and this word—Jewess—took on for him a meaning, a power, and a prophetic flight all
its own.

“The work, Daniel Nothafft, the work,” wrote this second Rahel in another letter, “the rape
of Prometheus, when are you going to lay it at the feet of impoverished humanity? The age is
like wine that tastes of the earth; your work must be the filter. The age is like an epileptic
body convulsed with agonies; your work must be the healing hand that one lays on the diseased
brow. When will you finally give, O parsimonious mortal? when ripen, tree? when flood the valley,
stream?”

But the tree was in no hurry to cast off the ripened fruit; the stream found that the way to
the sea was long and tortuous; it had to break through mountains and wash away the rocks. Oh,
those nights of torment when an existing form crashed and fell to the earth in pieces! Oh,
those hundreds of laborious nights in which there was no sleep, nothing but the excited raging
of many voices! Those grey mornings on which the sun shone on tattered leaves and a distorted
face, a face full of suffering that was always old and yet new! And those moonlight nights,
when some one moved along singing, not as one sings with joy, but as the heretics who sat on
the martyr benches of the Inquisition! Then there were the rainy nights, the stormy nights,
the nights when it snowed, and when he chased after the phantom of a melody that was already
half his own, and half an incorporeal thing wandering around in boundless space under the stars.

Each landscape became a pale vision: bush and grass and flower, like spun yarn seen in a fever,
the people who passed by, and the clouds fibrillated above the forests were of one and the
same constituency. Nothing was tangible; the palate lost its sense of taste, the finger its
sense of touch. Bad weather was welcome; it subdued the noises, made men quieter. Cursed be
the mill that clappers, the carpenter who drives the nails, the teamster who calls to his jaded
pair, the laughter of children, the croaking of frogs, the twittering of birds! An insensate
man looks down upon the scene, one who is deaf and dumb, one who would snatch all clothing
and decorations from the world, to the end that neither colour nor splendour of any description
may divert his eye, one who mounts to heaven at night to steal the eternal fire, and who burrows
in the graves of the dead by day—an outcast.

In the beginning of spring, he started on the third movement, an andante with variations. It
expressed the gruesome peace that hovered over Eleanore’s slumbering face one night before
her death. The springs within him were all suddenly dried up; he could not tell why his hand
was paralysed, his fancy immobile.

One evening he returned from a long journey to Arnstein, a little place in Lower Franconia,
where he had then pitched his tent. He was living in the house of a seamstress, a poor widow,
and as he came into the room he noticed her ten-year-old daughter standing by the open box
in which he had kept the mask of Zingarella. Out of a perfectly harmless curiosity the child
had removed the lid, and was standing bewitched at the unexpected sight.

When Daniel’s eyes fell on her, she was frightened; her body shook with fear; she tried to
run away. “No, no, stay!” cried Daniel. He felt the emaciated body, the timidly quivering figure,
and a distant memory sunk its claws deep into his breast. The mouth of the mask seemed to speak;
the cheeks and forehead shone with a brilliant whiteness. And as he turned his eyes away there
was a little elf dancing over him; and this little elf aroused a guilty unrest in his heart.

                                  VII

Philippina would not permit little Agnes to play with other children.

One day the child went out on to the square, and stood and watched some other children playing
a game known as “Tailor, lend me the scissors.” She was much pleased at the sight of them,
as they ran from tree to tree and laughed. She would have been only too happy to join them,
but no one thought of asking the pale, shy little creature to take part. Philippina, seeing
her, rushed out like a fury, and cried in her very meanest voice: “You come back here in the
house, or I’ll maul you until your teeth will rattle in your mouth for three days to come!”

Philippina also disliked to have Jordan pay any attention to Agnes. If he did not notice that
he was making her angry by talking with the child, she would begin to sing, first gently, and
then more and more loudly. If this did not drive the old man away, she would unload some terrific
abuse on him, and keep at it until he would get up, sigh, and leave. He did not dare antagonise
her, for if he did, she would penalise him by giving him poor food and reduced portions. And
he suffered greatly from hunger. He was making only a few pennies a week, and had to save every
bit of it, if possible, so as to defray the expenses he was incurring while working on his
invention.

He had unbounded faith in his invention; his credulity became stronger and stronger as the
months rolled by. He could not be discouraged by seeming failure. He was convinced, on the
contrary, that each failure merely brought him so much nearer the desired goal.

He said to Philippina: “Why is it that you object to my playing once in a while with my little
grand-daughter? It gives me so much pleasure; it diverts me; it takes my mind off of my troubles.”

“Crazy nonsense,” replied Philippina. “Agnes has had trouble enough with her father. Her grandfather?
whew! That beats me!”

Another time the old man said: “Suppose we make an agreement: let me have the child a half-hour
each day, and in return for that I’ll run your errands down town.”

Philippina: “I’ll run my own errands. Agnes belongs to me. That settles it.”

And yet Philippina was in an especially good humour about this time. Benjamin Dorn, like Herr
Zittel, had left the Prudentia, and obtained a position with the Excelsior. He was taking unusual
interest in Philippina. In a dark hour, Philippina had told her friend, Frau Hadebusch, that
she had saved a good deal of money, and, equipped with this bit of earthly wisdom, Frau Hadebusch
had gone to the Methodist, told him all about it, and put very serious matrimonial ideas in
his head.

Benjamin Dorn took infinite pains to gain Philippina’s good graces. He was, to be sure, somewhat
dismayed at having her blasphemous system of theology dinned into his ears. He shook his head
wearily when she called him a sky-pilot and declared right out that all this sanctimonious
stuff was damned rot, and that the main thing was to have a fat wallet. In this philosophy
Frau Hadebusch was with her to the last exclamation point. She had told Benjamin Dorn that
a doughtier, bonnier, more capable person than Fräulein Schimmelweis was not to be found on
this earth, and that the two were as much made for each other as oil and vinegar for a salad.
She said: “You simply ought to see the dresses the girl has and how she can fix herself up
when she wants to go out. Moreover, she comes of a good family. In short, any man who could
get her would be a subject for real congratulations.”

To Philippina Frau Hadebusch said: “Dorn—he can write as no one else on this earth. Oh, you
ought to see him swing a pen! He limps a little, but what of it? Just think how many people
go around on two sound legs, but have their heads all full of rubbish! But Dorn! He’s whole
cloth and a yard wide! He’s as soft as prune juice. Why, when a dog barks at him, he gives
the beast a lump of sugar. That’s the kind of a man he is.”

In October Benjamin Dorn and Philippina went to the church fair, and naturally took Agnes along.
Benjamin Dorn knew what was expected of him. He had Philippina take two rides on the merry-go-round,
paid her way into the cabinet of wax figures, and took a chance on the lottery. It was a blank.
He then explained to Philippina that it was immoral to have anything to do with lotteries,
and bought her a bag of ginger snaps; and that was solid pleasure.

Philippina acted very nicely. She laughed when nothing amusing had taken place, rolled her
eyes, spoke with puckered lips, shook her hips when she walked, and never lost a chance to
show her learning. As they were coming home on the train, she said she felt she would like
to ride in a chaise, but there would have to be two horses and a coachman with a tile hat.
Benjamin Dorn replied that that was not an impossible wish, suggesting at the same time in
his best brand of juvenile roguishness that there was a certain solemn ceremony that he would
not think of celebrating without having a vehicle such as she had described. Philippina giggled,
and said: “Oi, oi, you’re all right.” Whereupon Benjamin Dorn, grinning with embarrassment,
looked down.

Then they took leave of each other, for Agnes had fallen asleep in Philippina’s arms.

How Philippina actually felt about the attention he was showing her would be extremely difficult
to tell, though she acted as if she felt honoured and flattered. Benjamin Dorn was by no means
certain of himself. Frau Hadebusch did all she could to bring Philippina around, but every
time she made a fresh onslaught Philippina put her off.

But Philippina had never sung as she had been singing recently, nor had she ever been so light
and nimble of foot. Every day she put on her Sunday dress and trimmed it with her choicest
ribbons. She washed her hands with almond soap, and combed her hair before the mirror. Bangs
had gone out of fashion, so she built her hair up into a tower and looked like a Chinese.

She visited Herr Carovius occasionally, and always found him alone, for Dorothea Döderlein
had been sent by her father to Munich to perfect herself in her art. In broken words, with
blinking eyes, from a grinning mouth and out of a dumb soul, she told Herr Carovius all about
her affair with Benjamin Dorn, evidently believing that he was all fire and flame to know how
she was getting along and what she had in petto. Herr Carovius had long since grown sick and
tired of her, though he did not show her the door. He had reached the point where he heaved
a sigh of relief when he heard a human voice, where he began to dread the stillness that ruled
supreme within his four walls. No one came to see him, no one spoke to him, and he in turn
no longer had the courage to speak to any one. His arrogance of former days had died a difficult
death, and now he saw no way of making friends. If he went to the café, there was no one there
whom he knew. The brethren of the Vale of Tears had been scattered to the four corners of the
earth; a new generation was having its fling; new customs were being introduced, new topics
discussed, and he was old.

He found it hard to get along without Dorothea. He counted the days, waiting for her to return.
He never opened the piano, because all music, and especially the music he loved, caused a melancholy
depression to arise that filled the room with miasma.

The Nero of our day was suffering from Cæsar sadness. The private citizen had sunk to the very
bottom of the ditch which he himself had dug with the idea of burying all that was new and
joyful, and all winged creatures in it.

The worst of it all was that he had nothing to do, and no brain racking could devise a position
he could fill. The world went on its way, progress was made, and, strangely enough, it was
made without his criticism, his adulation, his opinions, or his crepe-hanging.

Philippina was annoyed at the grudging squints cast at her by the old stay-at-home; her visits
became rarer and rarer. She did not feel like opening her heart to Frau Hadebusch, for she
did not appeal to her as a disinterested party. This completed her list of friends; she was
obliged to restrain her impatience and excitement.

It was Christmas. On Christmas Eve they had bought a tree for Agnes, trimmed it, and lighted
it with candles. Agnes’s Christmas gifts were placed under the tree: a big piece of ginger-bread,
a basket with apples and nuts, and a cheap doll. For Old Jordan she had bought a pair of boots
which he badly needed. He had been going around on his uppers since autumn.

Jordan was sitting by the door holding his boots on his knees. Agnes looked at the doll with
unhappy eyes; she did not dare touch it. After gazing for a while into the light of the fluttering
candles, Jordan said: “I thank you, Philippina, I thank you. You are a real benefactress. I
also thank you for remembering the child. It is a paltry makeshift you have bought there at
the bazaar, but any one who gives gifts to children deserves the reward of Heaven, and in such
giving we do not weigh the value or count the cost.”

“Don’t whine all the time so!” shrieked Philippina. She was chewing her finger nails, hardly
able to conceal her embarrassment. Frau Hadebusch had told her that Benjamin Dorn was coming
around that evening to make a formal proposal of marriage.

“Just wait, Agnes, just wait!” continued old Jordan, “you’ll soon get to see a wonder of a
doll. A few short years, and the world will be astonished. You are going to be the first to
see it when it is finished. You’ll be the first, little Agnes, just wait. What have we got
to eat on this holy evening?” asked Jordan, turning with fear and trembling to Philippina.

“Cold hash and broiled meal-beetles,” said Philippina scornfully.

“And ... and ... no letter from Daniel?” he asked in a sad voice, “nothing, nothing at all?”

Philippina shrugged her shoulders. The old man got up and tottered to his room.

A little later Philippina heard some one stumbling around in the hall, and then the bell rang.
“Open the door,” she said to Agnes, who did as she was told and returned with Benjamin Dorn.
The Methodist wore a black suit, and in his hand he had a black felt hat that was as flat as
a pancake. He bowed to Philippina, and asked if he was disturbing any one. Philippina pushed
a chair over to him. He sat down quite circumstantially, and laughed a hollow laugh. As Philippina
was as silent as the tomb and looked at him so tensely, he began to speak.

First he expatiated on the general advantages of a married life, and then remarked that what
he personally wished first of all was to be able to take a good, true woman into his own life
as his wife. He said that he had gone through a long struggle over the matter, but God had
finally shown him the light and pointed the way. He no longer hesitated, after this illumination
from above, to offer Fräulein Schimmelweis his heart and his hand forever and a day, insist
though he must that she give the matter due consideration, in the proper Christian spirit,
before taking the all-important step.

Philippina was restless; she rocked back and forth, first on one foot and then on another—and
then burst out laughing. She bent over and laughed violently. “No, you poor simpleton, what
you want is my money, hey? Be honest! Out with it! You want my money, don’t you?”

Her anger grew as Benjamin Dorn sat and looked on, his asinine embarrassment increasing with
each second of silence. “Listen! You’d like to git your fingers on it, wouldn’t you? Money—it
would taste good, wouldn’t it? You think I’m crazy? Scrape a few coppers together and lose
my mind and marry some poor fool, and let him loaf around and live on me. Nothing doin’! They
ain’t no man livin’ what can catch Philippina Schimmelweis so easy as all that. She knows a
thing or two about men, she does. D’ye hear me! Get out!” She sawed the air with her arms like
a mad woman, and showed him the door.

Benjamin Dorn rose to his feet, stuttered something unintelligible, moved backwards toward
the door, reached it, and left the place with such pronounced speed that Philippina once again
broke out in a shrill, piercing laughter. “Come here, Agnes,” she said, sat down on the step
in the corner, and took the child on her lap.

She was silent for a long while; the child was afraid to speak. Both looked at the lights on
the Christmas tree. “Let us sing something,” said Philippina. She began with a hoarse, bass
voice, “Stille Nacht, heilige Nacht,” and Agnes joined in with her high, spiritless notes.

Another pause followed after they had finished singing.

“Where is my father?” asked Agnes suddenly, without looking at Philippina. It sounded as if
she had waited for years for an opportunity to ask this question.

Philippina’s face turned ashen pale; she gritted her teeth. “Your father, he’s loafing around
somewhere in the country,” replied Philippina, and blew out one of the candles that had burned
down and was ready to set the twig on fire. “He’s done with women, it seems, but you can’t
tell. He strums the music box and smears good white paper full of crow-feet and pot-hooks.
A person can rot, and little does he worry.” Whereat she set the child on the floor, hastened
over to the window, opened it, and put her head out as if she were on the point of choking
with the heat.

She leaned out over the snow-covered window sill.

“I’m getting cold,” said Agnes; but Philippina never heard her.

                                 VIII

Daniel wrote to Eberhard and Sylvia asking them if he might visit them. He thought: “There
are friends; perhaps I need friends again.”

He received a note in a strange, secretarial hand informing him that the Baroness was indeed
very sorry but she could not receive him at Siegmundshof: she was in child-bed. She sent her
best greetings, and told him that the newest born was getting along splendidly, as well as
his brother who was now three years old.

“Everywhere I turn, children are growing up,” thought Daniel, and packed his trunk and started
south as slowly as he could go, so slowly indeed that it seemed as if he were approaching a
goal he was afraid to reach and yet had to.

He arrived in Nuremberg one evening in April. As he entered the room, Philippina struck her
hands together with a loud bang, and stood as if rooted to the floor.

Agnes looked at her father shyly. She had grown slim and tall far beyond her age.

Old Jordan came down. “You don’t look well, Daniel,” he said, and seemed never to let go of
his hand. “Let us hope that you are going to stay home now.”

“I don’t know,” replied Daniel, staring absent-mindedly around the walls. “I don’t know.”

On the third day he was seized with a quite unusual sense of fear and anxiety. He felt that
he had made a mistake; that he had lost his way; that something was driving him to another
place. He went into the kitchen. Philippina was cooking potato noodles in lard; they smelt good.

“I am going to Eschenbach,” he said, to his own astonishment, for the decision to do so had
come with the assertion.

Philippina jerked the pan from the stove; the flames leaped up. “You can go to Hell, so far
as I’m concerned,” she said in a furious rage. With the light from the fire flaring up through
the open top of the stove and reflected in her face, she looked like a veritable witch.

Daniel gazed at her questioningly. “What is the matter with Agnes?” he asked after a while.
“The child seems to try to avoid me.”

“You’ll find out what’s the matter with her,” said Philippina spitefully, and placed the pan
on the stove again. “She don’t swallow people whole.”

Daniel left the kitchen.

“He is going over to see his bastard, the damned scoundrel,” murmured Philippina. She crouched
down on the kitchen stool, and gazed into space.

The potato noodles burned up.

                                  IX

Daniel entered his mother’s little house in Eschenbach late at night. As soon as he saw her,
he knew that some misfortune had taken place.

Eva was gone. She had disappeared one evening four weeks ago. A troupe of rope dancers had
given an exhibition in the city, and it was generally suspected that they had abducted the
child. The people of Eschenbach were still convinced of their suspicion after the police had
rounded up the dancers without finding a trace of the child.

A general alarm had been sent out, and investigations were being made even at the time of Daniel’s
arrival. But they were in vain; it was impossible to find the slightest clue. To the authorities,
indeed to every one, the case was a hopeless riddle.

They made a thorough search of the forests; the canals were drained; vagabonds were cross-questioned.
It was all in vain; Eva had apparently been spirited away in some mysterious fashion. Then
the Mayor received an anonymous letter that read as follows: “The child you are looking for
is in safe keeping. She was not forced to do what she has done; of her own free will and out
of love for her art she went off with the people with whom she is at present. She sends her
grandmother the tenderest of greetings, and hopes to see her some time again, after she has
attained to what she now has in mind.”

To this Eva had added in a handwriting which Marian Nothafft could be reasonably certain was
her own: “This is true. Good-bye, grandmother!”

The people who mourned with Marian the loss of the child were convinced that if Eva had really
written these words herself, she had been forced to do it by the kidnappers.

The letter bore the postmark of a city in the Rhenish Palatinate. A telegram brought the reply
that a company of jugglers had been there a short while ago, but that they had already gone.
It was impossible to say in what direction, but it was most likely that they had gone to France.

Marian was completely broken up. She no longer had any interest in life. She did not even manifest
joy or pleasure at seeing Daniel.

Daniel in turn felt that the brightest star had fallen from his heaven. As soon as he had really
grasped the full meaning of the tragedy, he went quietly into the attic room, threw himself
across the bed of his lost daughter, and wept. “Man, man, are you weeping at last?” a voice
seemed to call out to him.

Of evenings he would sit with his mother, and they would both brood over the loss. Once Marian
began to speak; she talked of Eva. She had always been made uneasy by the child’s love for
mimicry and shows of any kind. Long ago, she said, when Eva was only eight years old, a company
of comedians had come to the village, and Eva had taken a passionate interest in them. She
would run around the tent in which they played, from early in the morning until late in the
evening. She had made the acquaintance of some of them at the time, and one of them took her
along to a performance. Whenever the circus came to town, it was impossible to keep her in
the house. “At times I thought to myself, there must be gipsy blood in her veins,” said Marian
sadly, “but she was such a good and obedient child.”

Another time she told the following story. One Sunday in spring she took a walk with Eva. It
had grown late, night had come on, and on the return journey they had to go through the forest.
Marian became tired, and sat down on the stump of a tree to rest. The moon was shining, and
there was a clearing in the forest where they had stopped. All of a sudden Eva sprang up and
began to dance. “It was marvellous the way she danced,” said Marian, at the close of her story.
“The girl’s slender, delicate little figure seemed to glide around on the moss in the moonlight
of its own accord. It was marvellous, but my heart grew heavy, and I thought to myself at the
time, she is not going to be with me much longer.”

Daniel was silent. “Oh, enchanting and enchanted creature!” he thought, “heredity and destiny!”

He remained with his mother for three weeks. Then he began to feel cramped and uneasy. The
house and the town both seemed so small to him. He left and went to Vienna, where the custodian
of the Imperial Institute had some invaluable manuscripts for him.

Six weeks later he received a letter that had followed him all over south Europe informing
him of the death of his mother. The school teacher at Eschenbach had written the letter, saying,
among other things, that the aged woman had died during the night, suddenly and peacefully.

A second letter followed, requesting him to state what disposition should be made of his mother’s
property. He was asked whether the house was to be put on the market. A neighbour, the green-grocer,
had expressed his willingness to look after Daniel’s interests.

Daniel wrote in reply that they should do whatever seemed best. There was a heavy mortgage
on the house, and the amount that could reasonably be asked for it was not large.

He retired to a desolate and waste place.

                                   X

While living in little towns and villages on the Danube, Daniel completed the third movement
of the Promethean symphony. When he awoke as if from a delirious fever, it was autumn.

One morning in October he heard a saint playing the organ. It was in the Church of St. Florian
near Enns. The great artist had lived in former years in the monastery, and now had the habit
of coming back once in a while to hold communion with his God. In his rapture, Daniel felt
as if his own crowned brother were at the organ. He sat in a corner and listened, meekly and
with overwhelming delight. Then when a man passed by him, a stooped, haggard, odd-looking old
fellow with a wrinkled face and dressed in shabby clothes, he was terror-stricken at the reality,
the corporeality of genius: he wondered whether he himself were not a ghost.

The Swallow wrote: “There is only one who can redeem us: the musician. The day of founders
of religion, builders of states, military heroes, and discoverers is gone. The poets have only
words, and our ears have grown tired of words, words, words. They have only pictures and figures,
and our eyes are tired beholding. The soul’s last consolation is to be found in music; of this
I am certain. If there is any one thing that can make restitution for the lost illusions of
religious faith, provide us with wings, transform us, and save us from the abyss to which we
are rushing with savage senses, it is music. Where are you, O redeemer? You are wandering about
over the earth, the poorest, the most abandoned, the guiltiest of men. When are you going to
pay your debts, Daniel Nothafft?”

Daniel spent seven months in Ravenna, Ferrara, Florence, and Pisa. He was looking for some
manuscripts by Frescobaldi, Borghesi, and Ercole Pasquini. Having found the most important
ones he could regard his collection as complete.

Men seemed to him like puppets, landscapes like paintings on glass. He longed for forests;
his dreams became disordered.

From Genoa he wandered on foot through Lombardy and across the Alps. He slept on hard beds
in order to keep his hot blood in check, and lived on bread and cheese. His attacks of weakness,
sometimes of complete exhaustion, did not worry him at first; he paid no attention to them.
But in Augsburg he swooned, falling headlong on the street. He was taken to a hospital, where
he lay for three months with typhus. From his window he could see the tall chimneys of factories
and an endless procession of wandering clouds. It had become winter; the ground was covered
with snow.

Two years after his last visit he again entered the house on Ægydius Place. When Philippina
saw him, so pale and emaciated, she uttered a cry of horror.

Agnes had grown still taller, thinner, and more serious. At times when she looked at her father
he felt like crying out to her in anger: “What do you mean by your everlasting questions?”
But he never said a word of this kind to her.

When Philippina saw that Daniel had returned as lonesome and uncommunicative as he was when
he went away, she took it upon herself to display a great deal of gentleness, kindness, sympathy
in his presence. Old Jordan was living the same life he had been living for years. Everything
in fact was just the same; it seemed that the household was run according to a prescribed routine.
It seemed as if Daniel had been away, not six years, but six days.

He did not feel strong yet, but he worked day and night. The fourth movement of the symphony
gave promise of being a miracle of polyphony. Daniel felt primeval existence, the original
of all longing, the basic grief of the world urging and pulsing in him, and this he was translating
into the symphony. The eternal wanderer had arrived at the gates of Heaven and was not admitted.
Supernal harmonies had borne him aloft. Muffled drum beats symbolised his beseeching raps on
closed doors. Within resounded the terrible “no” of the trumpets. The pleading of the violins
was in vain; in vain the intercession of the one angel standing at the right, leaning on a
harp without strings; in vain the melodious chants of the other angel at the left, crowned
with flowers and all together lovely; in vain the elfin chorus of the upper voices, in vain
the foaming lament of the voices below. No path here for him, and no space!

One evening Daniel noticed a strange girl at his window. She was beautiful. Struck by her charms,
he got up to go to her. She had vanished. It was an hallucination. He became afraid of himself,
left the house, and wandered through the streets as in days of long ago.

                                  XI

It was Carnival Week, and the people had resumed their wonted gaiety. Masked boys and girls
paraded the streets, making merry wherever they went.

As Daniel was passing through The Füll he was startled: the windows in the Benda house were
lighted. He suddenly recalled that Herr Seelenfromm had told him that Frau Benda had returned
from Worms some time ago, and was living with her niece; she had become totally blind.

He went up the steps and rang the bell. A grey-haired, distressed-looking woman came to the
door. He thought she must be the niece. He told her his name; she said she had heard of him.

“You probably know that Friedrich has disappeared,” she said in a sleepy, sing-song voice.
“It is eight years since we have heard from him. The last letter was from the interior of Africa.
We have given up all hope. Not even the newspapers say anything more about him.”

“I have read nothing about it,” murmured Daniel. “But Friedrich cannot be dead,” he continued,
shaking his head, “I will never believe it, never.” Partly in distraction and partly in anxiety,
he riveted his eyes on the woman, who stared at his glasses as if held by a charm.

“We have done everything that was humanly possible,” she said. “We have written to the consulates,
we have inquired of the military outposts and missionary stations, and all to no purpose.”
After a pause she said with a little more vivacity: “You do not wish me to ask you in, I hope.
It is so painful to my aunt to hear a strange voice, and I cannot think of letting you talk
to her. If I did, it would merely open her old wounds, and she has a hard enough time of it
as it is.”

Daniel nodded and went on his way. A coarse laugh could be heard down in the entrance hall;
it was painfully out of harmony with the depressed atmosphere of the Benda apartment. He felt
his heart grow faint; he felt a burning desire for something, though he was unable to say precisely
what, something sweet and radiant.

On the last landing he stopped, and looked with utter amazement into the hall below.

Herr Carovius was dancing like a Merry-Andrew around the door of his residence. He had a crown
of silver paper on his head, and was trying to ward off the importunate advances of a young
girl. His smiles were tender but senile. The girl wore a carnival costume. Her dark blue velvet
dress, covered with threads of silver, made her robust figure look slenderer than it actually
was. A black veil-like cloth hung from her shoulders to the ground, and then draped along behind
her for about three paces. It was sprinkled with glittering tinsel. In her hand she held a
hideous wax mask of the face of an old sot with a red nose. She was trying to fit the mask
to Herr Carovius’s face.

She was working hard to make him yield; she said she was not going to leave until she had put
the mask on his face. Herr Carovius shook the door, which in the meantime had closed, fumbled
about in his pockets for the key, but the girl gave him no peace.

“Come now, Teddy,” she kept crying, “come, Uncle, don’t be such an old bore.” She kept getting
closer and closer to him.

“You wait, I’ll show you how to make a fool of respectable people,” croaked Herr Carovius in
well-meaning anger. He resembled an old dog, hopping about and getting ready to make the plunge
when his master throws his walking stick into the water. In his zeal, however, to prevent the
girl from offending his dignity, he had forgotten the paper crown on his head. It wabbled and
shook so when he hopped around, that the girl nearly split her sides laughing.

A maid came in just then with an apronful of snow. The girl with the sweeping train ran up
to her, got some of the snow, and threatened to pelt Herr Carovius with it. He begged for mercy;
and rather than undergo a bombardment with this cold stuff, he ceased offering resistance,
whereupon the girl walked up to him and placed the mask on his face. Then, exhausted from laughter,
she laid her head on his shoulder. The maid—it was Döderlein’s maid—was delighted at the comedy,
and made a noise that resembled the cackling of a hen.

The scene was dimly lighted by a lamp attached to the adjacent wall, and had on this account,
quite apart from the sight of Herr Carovius with the paper crown and the toper’s mask, something
fantastic about it.

Daniel did not know that the girl was Dorothea Döderlein, though he half suspected as much.
But whoever she was, he was impressed by her jollity, her actual lust for laughter, her complete
lack of restraint. He had never known that sort of mirthful hilarity; and if he had known it,
he could not recall it. Her youthful features, her bright eyes, her white teeth, her agile
gestures filled him with deferential respect; his eyes swam with emotion. He felt so old, so
foreign; he felt that where he was the sun was not shining, the flowers were not budding. He
felt that life had appeared to him all of a sudden and quite unexpectedly in a new, kindly,
bewitching light.

He came slowly down the steps.

“Is it possible!” cried Herr Carovius, tearing the mask from his face. “Can I trust my own
eyes? It is our maestro! Or is it his ghost?”

“It is both he and his ghost,” replied Daniel drily.

“This is no place for ghosts,” cried Dorothea, and threw a snow ball, hitting him square on
the shoulder.

Daniel looked at her; she blushed, and looked at Herr Carovius questioningly. “Don’t you know
our Daniel Nothafft, you little ignoramus?” said Herr Carovius. “You know nothing of our coryphæus?
Hail to the Master! Welcome home! He is here, covered with fame!”

At any other time Herr Carovius’s biliary sarcasm would have aroused Daniel’s whole stock-in-trade
of aversion and indignation. To-day he was unimpressed by it. “How young she is,” he thought,
as he feasted his eyes on the embarrassed, laughing Dorothea, “how gloriously young!”

Dorothea was angry because she did not have on the red dress she had had made in Munich.

“Dorothea!” called a strong voice from the first floor.

“Oh, there’s father!” whispered Dorothea. She was frightened. She ran up the steps on her tiptoes,
dragging her long veil after her. The maid followed her.

“A devil, a regular little devil, Maestro,” said Herr Carovius turning to Daniel. “You must
come in some time and hear how she can draw the bow. She’s a regular little devil, I say.”

Daniel bade Herr Carovius adieu, and went walking down the street with bowed head.

                                  XII

In the province, Dorothea Döderlein, fresh from the Bavarian capital, was a phenomenon that
attracted general attention. Her conduct seemed, to be sure, a bit liberal, but then she was
an artist, and her name appeared in the newspapers every now and then, so it was only natural
to make allowances for her. When she gave her first concert, Adler Hall was almost completely
sold out.

The musical critic of the Herold was captivated by her capricious playing. He called her an
extraordinary talent, and predicted a brilliant future for her. Andreas Döderlein accepted
the congratulations in the spirit of a seasoned patron of the arts; Herr Carovius was in the
seventh heaven of joy. He who had formerly been so captious never uttered a critical word.
He had taken to worshipping the Dorothea cult, and this had made him quite indiscriminating.

At first Dorothea never suffered from want of invitations to all manner of clubs, dances, and
family gatherings. She was much adored by the young men, so much so that other daughters of
the city of matrimonial age could not sleep from envy. In a short while, however, the youth
of more sterling character, warned while there was yet time by their mothers, sisters, cousins,
and aunts, withdrew in fear.

Dorothea reaped the disapproval of her acquaintances by walking with her admirers in public,
unchaperoned. Moreover she could frequently be seen in the company of officers in the Eisenbeiss
pastry shop, drinking chocolate and having a good time generally. Once she had been seen in
the society of a big blonde Swede from Schuckert’s factory coming out of the Music Hall. The
rumour was spread that she had lived an irregular life in Munich, had gadded about the streets
at night, contracted a number of bad debts, and flirted with all kinds of men.

Yet there were a few serious wooers who, duped by Andreas Döderlein’s diplomacy, fell into
the habit of coming around on Sunday evenings and taking dinner with father and daughter. Dorothea,
however, always managed to play off one against the other; and as they were all serious and
provincial, they did not know precisely what to make of it. In order to instil patience into
them, Döderlein took to delivering them lectures on the intricate complications of the artistic
temperament, or he made mysterious allusions to the handsome legacy to which Dorothea would
one day fall heir.

It was this very fact, however, that made him exercise caution with regard to Dorothea. Knowing
her spirit of defiance, and appreciating her youthful lack of judgment, he was afraid she might
make some faux pas that would offend that old fool of a Carovius. He was already giving her
a little spending money, and the Döderleins found this a highly advantageous arrangement.

The state of Döderlein’s own finances was hopeless. It was with the greatest difficulty that
he kept up the appearance of a well-to-do man. The chief cause of his pecuniary embarrassment
was his relation of long standing with a woman by whom he had had three children. To support
this second family, of whose existence not a soul in his immediate surroundings knew a thing,
burdened him with a care that made it hard for him to preserve his cheerful, Jove-like disposition.

He had been leading a double life for fourteen years. His regular visits to the woman he loved—she
lived very quietly out in the remote suburbs of the city—had to be made without attracting
attention. To conceal his connection with her from the vigilant eyes of his fellow citizens
made constant dissimulation, discretion, and shrewdness a necessary part of his character.
But to practise these traits year in and year out and suffer at the same time from economic
pressure filled him with suppressed anger and fear.

He was afraid of Dorothea. There were moments when he would have liked to maul her; and yet
he saw himself obliged to hold her in check with kind words. He could not see through her.
But she was always around, always adding to his troubles with her plans, wishes, engagements
and intrigues. He thought he had her under control, only to discover that she was a tyrant,
lording it over him. Now she would burst out crying because of some bagatelle, now she was
laughing as though nothing had ever happened. The roses her serious and moneyed admirers brought
her she picked to pieces in their very presence, and threw the pieces in the waste-paper basket.
Döderlein would lecture her in the kindest and most intelligent way on good morals and gentle
manners, and she would listen as though she were a saint. Five minutes later she would be hanging
out of the window, flirting with the barber’s boy across the street.

“I am an unfortunate father,” said Andreas Döderlein to himself, when, apart from all his other
multifarious worries, he began to be sceptical about Dorothea’s artistic ability. Shortly after
her success in Nuremberg, she gave a concert in Frankfort, but everything was pretty quiet.
Then she toured the small towns of central Germany, and was received everywhere with the greatest
enthusiasm. But what of it? How much critical acumen is to be found in such places?

One evening she was at the home of a certain Frau Feistelmann, a woman whose past had some
connection with nearly every scandal of the city. While there she met an actor by the name
of Edmund Hahn. Herr Hahn had soft, blonde hair and a pale, bloated face. He was rather tall
and had long legs. Dorothea raved about long legs. There was a thoroughly sensual atmosphere
about the man; he devoured Dorothea with his impudent eyes. His build, his bearing, his half
blasé, half emphatic way of speaking made an impression on Dorothea. He sat next to her at
the table, and began to rub his feet against hers. Finally he succeeded in getting his left
foot on her slipper. She tried to pull her foot back, but the more she tried the harder he
bore down on it. She looked at him in amazement; but he smiled cynically, and in a few minutes
they were desperately intimate. After dinner they withdrew to a hidden corner, and you could
hear Dorothea giggling.

They arranged to meet each other on a certain street corner in the dark. He sent her free tickets
to “Maria Stuart” and “Die Räuber.” He played the rôles of Mortimer and Kosinsky; he roared
till you thought the roof would fall in. He introduced Dorothea to a number of his friends,
and these brought their girl friends along, and they all sat in the Nassau Cellar till break
of day. Among them was a certain Samuelsky, an employé of the Reutlinger Bank. He had the manners
of a man about town, drank champagne, and went mad over Dorothea. She submitted to his attention,
welcomed it in fact, and accepted presents from him, though, as it seemed, not until she had
received the permission from Edmund Hahn. Once he tried to kiss her: she gave him a ringing
box on the ears. He wiped his cheek, and called her a siren.

She liked the expression. At times she would stand before the mirror, and whisper: “Siren.”

When Andreas Döderlein heard of what was going on, he had an attack of mad rage. “I will put
you out of the house,” he exclaimed, “I will beat you until you are a helpless, despicable
cripple.” But in his eyes there was again the trace of that suppressed fear that gave the lie
to his seeming berserker rage.

“An artist does not need to adapt her morals to the code of the Philistine,” remarked Dorothea,
with complete imperturbability. “Those are all nice people with whom I am going. Every one
of them is a gentleman.”

A gentleman: that was an argument against which it was futile to enter a caveat. In her eyes
that man was a gentleman who ran risks, impressed waiters and coachmen, and wore creased trousers.
“No one dares come too close to me,” she said with much pride. That was the truth; no one had
thus far awakened her deepest curiosity, and she had determined to put a high price on herself.
Edmund Hahn was the only one who had any influence on her; and this was true of him because
he was absolutely devoid of feeling, and had a type of shamelessness that completely disarmed
and terrified her.

Andreas Döderlein had to let her have her way. If he had any consolation at all, it lay in
the belief on his part that a real Döderlein would never voluntarily come to grief. If Dorothea
was a genuine Döderlein, she would march straight to her objective, and take by storm the good
and useful things of life. If she failed, it would be proof that there was a flaw somewhere
in her birth. This was his logic; and having applied it, theoretically, he enshrouded himself
in the clouds of his Olympus.

Dorothea gave her uncle Carovius, however, detailed accounts of how she was making her suitors,
young and old, walk the war-path. They all had to do it, the actor and the banker, the candle
manufacturer and the engineer. She said she was leading the whole pack of them around by the
nose. Herr Carovius’s face beamed with joy when he heard her say this. He called her his little
jackanapes, and said she was the fortune of his old age. To himself he said that she was a
genuine Carovius destined to great deeds.

“You don’t have to get married,” he said with the urge of a zealot of old, and rubbed his hands.
“Oh, of course, if a Count comes along with a few millions and a castle in the background,
why, you might think it over. But just let some greasy comedian get it into his head that he
is going to steal you away from me! Or let some wabbly-hipped office-boy imagine for a minute
that he is going to drag you into his circle along with his other unwashed acquaintances! If
this ever happens, Dorothea, give it to ’em hot and heavy! Show the wanton satyrs what kind
of blood you have in you.”

“Ah, Uncle,” said Dorothea, “I know you mean well by me. You are the only one who does. But
if I were only not so poor! Look at me! Look at this dress I have on! It’s a sight!” And she
put her head in her uplifted arm and sobbed.

Herr Carovius pulled at his moustaches, moved his eyebrows up and down, went to his writing
desk, opened his strong box, took out a hundred-mark bill, and gave it to her with turned head,
as if he were afraid of the wrath of the protecting spirit of the money chest.

This was the state of affairs when Daniel met the youthful Dorothea in Herr Carovius’s home,
and went away with an unforgettable, unextinguishable picture of her in his soul.

                                 XIII

Daniel’s approaching fortieth birthday seemed like a sombre portal leading to the realm of
spent ambition. “Seize what remains to be seized,” a voice within him cried. “Grass is growing
on the graves.”

His senses were at war with his intellect and his heart. He had never looked on women as he
was looking on them now.

One day he went out to Siegmundshof. Eberhard was not at home. Sylvia’s face showed traces
of subdued sadness. She had three children, each one more beautiful than the other, but when
her eyes rested on them her heart was filled with grief. Women whose married life is unhappy
have dull, lifeless features; their hands are transparent and yellow.

Daniel took leave more quickly than he had wished or intended. He felt an egoistic aversion
to the joyless sons of man.

He went to see Herr Carovius. The laughing one whom he sought was not at home.

Herr Carovius looked at him at times distrustfully. The face of his former foe set him to thinking.
It was furrowed like a field under cultivation and burnt like a hearthstone. It was the face
of a criminal, crabbed, enervated, tense, and breathed upon, it seemed, by threatening clouds.
Herr Carovius was a connoisseur of faces.

In order to avoid the discomfort of fatuous conversation, Daniel played a number of old motetts
for Herr Carovius. Herr Carovius was so pleased that he ran into his pantry, and got a half
dozen Boxdorf apples and put them in Daniel’s pockets. He bought these apples every autumn
by the peck, and cherished them as so many priceless treasures.

“At the sound of such music it would not be difficult to become a real Christian,” he said.

“There is spring in them,” said Daniel, “they are art that is as innocent as new seed in the
soil. But your piano needs tuning.”

“Symbolic, symbolic, my dear friend,” cried Herr Carovius, and puffed out his cheeks. “But
you come back another time, and you will find it in the pink of condition. Come frequently,
please. You will reap the reward of Heaven if you do.”

Herr Carovius begging for company; it was touching. Daniel promised to bring some of the manuscripts
he had been collecting along with him. When he returned a few days later, Dorothea was there;
and from then on she was always there. His visits became longer and longer. When Herr Carovius
noticed that Dorothea was coming to see him more frequently now, he moved heaven and earth
to persuade Daniel to come more frequently. He rained reproach and abuse on him if he failed
to come; if he was late, he greeted him with a sour face and put indiscreet questions to him.
When he was alone of an afternoon, time stood still. He was like a drinker tantalised by seeing
his accustomed portion of brandy on the table but just beyond his reach. The company of these
two people, Daniel and Dorothea, had become as indispensable to his happiness as in former
years the reading of the newspapers, the brethren of the Vale of Tears, the troubles of Eberhard
and the funerals were indispensable if he were to feel at ease. It is the way of the small
citizen: each of his customs becomes a passion.

When Daniel played the old chorals, Dorothea listened quietly, though it could not be said
that she was perfect at concealing her tedium.

One time they began talking about Dorothea’s violin playing. Herr Carovius asked her to play
something. She declined without the slightest display of affectation. Daniel said nothing to
encourage her; he found that this modesty was becoming to her; he believed that he detected
wisdom and resignation in her behaviour; he smiled at her graciously.

“Tell us a story, Daniel,” she said, “that would be better.” It eventually came out that that
was what she had wanted all along.

“I am a poor raconteur,” said Daniel. “I have a thick tongue.”

She begged him, however, with stammering words and beseeching gestures. Herr Carovius tittered.
Daniel took off his glasses, polished them, and looked at the young girl with squinting eyes.
It seemed as if the glasses had made it difficult for him to see Dorothea distinctly, or as
if he preferred to see her indistinctly. “I really don’t know what I could tell in the way
of a story,” he replied, shaking his head.

“Tell us everything, anything,” cried Dorothea, seized with a veritable fit of eagerness to
hear him talk. She stretched out her hands toward him: that seemed to him to be so like a child.
He had never told stories to a child; he had never in truth told stories to any one. Gertrude
and Eleanore had, to be sure, forced a confession or a complaint from him at times, but that
was all, and all that was necessary or appropriate.

Suddenly he was drawn on by the word in which his fate would be quietly reflected; by the fiery
young eye in the brilliancy of which the complex became simple, the dark bright; by the wicked
old man to whom the whole world, as seen from his mire, had become a poisonous food.

And with his brittle, staccato voice he told of the countries through which he had journeyed;
of the sea and the cities by the sea; of the Alps and the Alpine lakes; of cathedrals, palaces,
and marvellous monasteries; of the queer people he had met, of his work and his loneliness.
It was all incoherent, arid, and loveless. Though sorely tempted, he desisted from mentioning
things that came close to his soul; things that moved his heart, fired his brain. When he told
of the Jewess, the Swallow, he did not even finish the sentence. He made a long pause, and
then shifted to the account of his visit to Eschenbach. Here he stopped again before he was
through.

But Dorothea began to ask questions. It was all too general and therefore unsatisfactory. “What
was there in Eschenbach? Why did you go there?” she asked boldly.

He was in error concerning the hot desire that burned in her eyes to know about Eschenbach.
Her question made him feel good; he believed that he was on the scent of warm-heartedness;
he thought he had found a soul that was eager to help through knowledge. He was seized with
the desire of the mature man to fashion an untouched soul in harmony with the picture of his
dreams. “My mother used to live there,” he replied hesitatingly, “she has died.”

“Yes—and?” breathed Dorothea. She saw that that was not all.

He felt that this uncompromising reticence was not right; he felt a sense of guilt. With still
greater hesitation—and immediate repentance—he added: “A child of mine also lived there; she
was eleven years old. She has disappeared; no one knows where she is.”

Dorothea folded her hands, “A child? And disappeared? Simply vanished?” she whispered excitedly.

Herr Carovius looked like a man sitting on a hot iron. “Eleven years old?” he asked, hungry
for sensation, “why—that was, then—before the time ...”

“Yes, it was before the time,” said Daniel gloomily and by way of confirmation. He had betrayed
himself, and was angry at himself for having done so. He became silent; it was impossible to
get him to say another word.

Herr Carovius noticed how Dorothea hung on Daniel’s eyes. A tormenting suspicion arose in him.
“Yesterday out on St. Joseph’s Place, I was talking with one of your admirers, the fellow who
shatters the wings of the stage with his ranting,” he began with malice aforethought. “The
blade had the nerve to say to me: ‘You’d better hurry up and get Dorothea Döderlein a husband,
or people will talk their tongues loose in their throats.’”

“That is not true,” cried Dorothea indignantly, blushing to the roots of her hair. “He didn’t
say that.”

Herr Carovius laughed malevolently. “Well, if it is not true, it is pretty well put together,”
he said with his usual bleat.

When Daniel left, Dorothea accompanied him to the outside door.

“It’s a pity,” murmured Daniel, “a pity!”

“Why a pity? I am free. There isn’t a soul in the world who has any claim on me.” She looked
at him with the courage of a real woman.

“There are remarks that are just like grease spots,” he replied.

“Well, who can keep from the dirt these days?” she asked, almost wild with excitement.

Daniel let his eyes rest on her as though she were some material object. He said slowly and
seriously: “Keep your hands and your eyes off of me, Dorothea. I will bring you no happiness.”

Her lips opened, thirsty. “I should like to take a walk with you some time,” she whispered,
and her features trembled with an ecstasy which he was dupe enough to believe was meant for
him; in reality Dorothea was thinking of the adventurer and the disclosure of the secret.

“Many years ago,” said Daniel, “you will scarcely recall it, I protected you here in this very
same gateway from a big dog. Do you remember?”

“No! Or do I? Wait a minute! Yes, I remember, that is, quite indistinctly. You did that?” Dorothea
seized his hands with gratitude.

“Fine! Then we will go walking to-morrow morning. Where? Oh, it doesn’t make much difference,”
said Daniel.

“But you must tell me everything, you hear? everything.” Dorothea was as insistent as she had
been in the room a short while ago; and she was more impetuous and impatient.

They agreed upon the place where they would meet.

                                  XIV

At first they took short walks in remote parts of the city; then they took longer ones. On
Mid-Summer Day they strolled out to Kraftshof and the grove of the Pegnitz shepherds. Daniel
made unconscious effort to avoid the places where he had once walked with Eleanore.

There came moments when Dorothea’s exuberance made him pensive and sad; he felt the weight
of his forty years; they were inclined to make him hypochondriacal. Was it the vengeance of
fate that made him slow up when they came to a hill, while Dorothea ran on ahead and waited
for him, laughing?

She did not see the flowers, the trees, the animals, or the clouds. But when she saw people
a change came over her: she would become more active; or she would mobilise her resources;
or she seemed to strike up a spiritual liaison with them. It might be only a peasant boy on
an errand or a vagabond going nowhere; she would shake her hips and laugh one note higher.

“Her youth has gone to her head, like wine,” Daniel thought to himself.

Once she took a box of chocolate bon-bons along. Having had enough of them herself and seeing
that Daniel did not care for them, she threw what was left away. Daniel reproached her for
her wastefulness. “Why drag it along?” she asked with perfect lack of embarrassment, “when
you have enough of a thing you throw it away.” She showed her white teeth, and took in one
deep breath of fresh air after another.

Daniel studied her. “She is invulnerable,” he said to himself; “her power to wish is invincible,
her fulness of life complete.” He felt that she bore a certain resemblance to his Eva; that
she was one of those elves of light in whose cheerfulness there is occasionally a touch of
the terrible. He decided then and there not to let mischievous chance have its own way: he
was going to put out his hand when he felt it was advisable.

“When are you going to begin to tell me the stories?” she asked: “I must, I must know all about
you,” she added with much warmth of expression. “There are days and nights when I cannot rest.
Tell me! Tell me!”

That was the truth. In order to penetrate his life history, which she pictured to herself as
full of passionate, checkered events, she had done everything that he had demanded of her.

Daniel refused; he was silent; he was afraid he would darken the girl’s pure mind, jeopardise
her unsuspecting innocence. He was afraid to conjure up the shadows.

One day she was talking along in her easy way, and while so doing she tripped herself up. She
had begun to tell him about the men she had been going with; and before she knew what she was
doing, she had fallen into the tone she used when she talked with her Uncle Carovius. Becoming
suddenly aware of her indiscretion, she stopped, embarrassed. Daniel’s serious questions caused
her to make some confessions she would otherwise never have thought of making. She told a goodly
number of rather murky and ugly stories, and it was very hard for her to act as though she
were innocent or the victim of circumstances. At last, unable longer to escape from the net
she had woven, she made a clean breast of her whole life, painted it all in the gaudiest colours,
and then waited in breathless—but agreeable—suspense to see what effect it would have on Daniel.

Daniel was silent for a while; then he made a motion with his outstretched hand as if he were
cutting something in two: “Away from them, Dorothea, or away from me!”

Dorothea bowed her head, and then looked at him timidly from head to foot. The decisiveness
with which he spoke was something new to her, though it was by no means offensive. A voluptuous
shudder ran through her limbs. “Yes,” she whispered girlishly, “I am going to put an end to
it. I never realised what it all meant. But don’t be angry, will you? No, you won’t, will you?”

She came closer to him; her eyes were filled with tears. “Don’t be angry at me,” she said again,
“poor Dorothea can’t help it. She is not responsible for it.”

“But how did you come to do it?” asked Daniel. “I can’t see how it was possible. Weren’t you
disgusted to the very bottom of your soul? How could you go about under God’s free heavens
with such hyenas? Why, girl, the very thought of it fills me with scepticism about everything.”

“What should I have done, Daniel?” she said, calling him by his baptismal name for the first
time. She spoke with a felicitous mixture of submissiveness and boldness that touched and at
the same time enchanted him. “What should I have done? They come and talk to you, and spin
their nets about you; and at home it is so dreary and lonely, and your heart is so empty and
Father is so mean, you haven’t got anybody else in the world to talk to.” Such was her defence,
effective even if more voluble than coherent.

They walked on. They were passing through a valley in the forest. On either side were tall
pine trees, the crowns of which were lighted by the evening sun.

“You can’t play with Fate, Dorothea,” said Daniel. “It does not permit smudging or muddling,
if we are to stand the test. It keeps a faultless ledger; the entries it makes on both sides
are the embodiment of accuracy. Debts that we contract must always be paid, somehow, somewhere.”

Dorothea felt that he was getting started; that the great, good story was about to come. She
stopped, spread her shawl on the ground, and took a graceful position on it, all eyes and ears.
Daniel threw himself on the moss beside her.

And he told his story—into the moss where little insects were creeping around. He never raised
either his eye or his voice. At times Dorothea had to bend over to hear him.

He told about Gertrude, her torpor, her awakening, her love, her resignation. He told about
Eleanore; told how he had loved her without knowing it. He told how Eleanore, out of an excess
of passion and suffering, became his, how Gertrude wandered about dazed, unhappy, lost, until
she finally took her life: “Then we went up to the attic, and found it on fire and her lifeless
body hanging from the rafter.”

He told how Gertrude had lived on as a shadow by the side of Eleanore, and how Eleanore became
a flower girl, and how Philippina the inexplicable, and still inexplicable, had come into his
family, and how Gertrude’s child lived there like an unfed foundling, and how the other child,
the child he had had by the maid, had found such a warm spot in his heart.

He told of his meeting the two sisters, their speaking and their remaining silent, his seeing
them in secret trysts, the moving about from house to house and room to room, the singing of
songs, his experiences with the Dörmaul opera company, the light thrown on his drab life by
a mask, his friend and the help he had received from him, his separation from him, the brush-maker’s
house on St. James’s Place, the three queer old maids in the Long Row, the days he spent at
Castle Erfft, the old father of the two sisters and his strange doings—all of this he described
in the tone of a man awakening from a deep sleep. There was a confidence in what he said and
the way he said it that mayhap terrified the hovering spirits of the evening, though it did
not fill Dorothea’s eyes, then glistening like polished metal, with a more intimate or cordial
light.

When he looked up he felt he saw two sombre figures standing on the edge of the forest; he
felt he saw the two sisters, and that they were casting mournful, reproachful glances at him.

He got up. “And all that,” he concluded, “all that has been drunk up, like rain by the parched
earth, by a work on which I have been labouring for the past seven years. For seven years.
Two more years, and I will give it to the world, provided this unsteady globe has not fallen
into the sun by that time.”

Dorothea had a confused, haphazard idea as to the type of man that was standing before her.
She was seized with a prickling desire for him such as she had thus far never experienced.
She began to love him, in her way. Something impelled her to seek shelter by him, near him,
somewhat as a bird flies under the crown of a tree at the approach of a storm. Daniel interpreted
the timidity with which she put her arm in his as a sign of gratitude.

And in this mood he took her back to the city.

                                  XV

It was in this pulsing, urging, joyful mood that Daniel worked at and completed the fifth movement
of his symphony, a scherzo of grand proportions, beginning with a clarinet figure that symbolised
laughing sans-souci. All the possibilities of joy developed from this simple motif. Nor was
retrospection or consolation lacking. If the main themes, mindful of their former pre-eminence,
seemed inclined to widen the bed of their stream, they were appeased and forced back into their
original channel by artistic and capriciously alternating means. Once all three themes flowed
along together, gaining strength apparently through their union, rose to a wonderful fugue,
and seemed to be just on the point of gaining the victory when the whole orchestra, above the
chord in D sevenths, was seized by the waltz melody, those melancholy sister-strains were taken
up by the violins, and fled, dirge-like, to their unknown abodes. Just before the jubilant
crescendo of the finale, a bassoon solo held one of them fast on its distant, grief-stricken
heights.

Daniel sketched the sixth movement in the following fourteen nights.

He was fully aware of the fact that he had never been able to work this way before. When a
man accomplishes the extraordinary, he knows it. It seizes him like a disease, and fills him
like a profound dream.

At times he felt as though he must tell some one about it, even if it were only Herr Carovius.
But once the flame had died down, he could not help but laugh at the temptation to which he
had felt himself subjected. “Patience,” he thought, feeling more assured than ever, “patience,
patience!”

Since his work on the manuscripts was completed and his connection with the firm of Philander
and Sons dissolved, he began to look around for another position. He had saved in the course
of the last few years four thousand marks, but he wished to keep this sum intact.

He learned that the position of organist at the Church of St. Ægydius was vacant; he went to
the pastor, who recommended him to his superiors. It was decided that he should play something
before the church consistory. This he did one morning in October. The trial proved eminently
successful to his exacting auditors.

He was appointed organist at St. Ægydius’s at a salary of twelve hundred marks a year. When
he played on Sundays and holidays, the people came into the church just to hear him.

                                  XVI

Among the suitors for the hand of Dorothea on whom Andreas Döderlein looked with special favour
was the mill owner, a man by the name of Weisskopf. Herr Weisskopf was passionately fond of
music. He had greatly admired Dorothea when she gave her concert, and had sent her a laurel wreath.

One day Herr Weisskopf came in and took dinner with the Döderleins. When he left, Döderlein
said to his daughter: “My dear Dorothea, from this day on you may consider yourself betrothed.
This admirable man desires to have you as his lawfully wedded wife. It is a great good fortune;
the man is as rich as Crœsus.”

Instead of making a reply, Dorothea laughed heartily. But she knew that the time had come when
something had to be done. Her mobile face twitched with scorn, fear, and desire.

“Think it over; sleep on it. I have promised Herr Weisskopf to let him know to-morrow,” said
Döderlein, black-browed.

A week before this, Andreas Döderlein, confidently expecting that Herr Weisskopf would ask
for the hand of his daughter, had borrowed a thousand marks from him. The miller had loaned
him the money believing that he was thereby securing a promissory note on Dorothea. Döderlein
had placed himself under obligations, and was consequently determined to carry out his plans
with regard to the marriage of his daughter.

But Dorothea’s behaviour made it safe to predict that objections would be raised on her part.
Döderlein was in trouble; he sought distraction. Sixteen years ago he had begun an opus entitled
“All Souls: a Symphonic Picture.” Five pages of the score had been written, and since then
he had never undertaken creative work. He rummaged around in his desk, found the score, went
to the piano, and tried to take up the thread where he had lost it sixteen years ago. He tried
to imagine the intervening time merely as a pause, an afternoon siesta.

It would not go. He sighed. He sat before the instrument, and stared at the paper like a schoolboy
who has a problem to solve but has forgotten the rule. He seemed to lament the loss of his
artistic ability. He felt so hollow. The notes grinned at him; they mocked him. His thoughts
turned involuntarily to the miller. He improvised for a while. Dorothea stuck her head in the
door and sang: “Rhinegold, Rhinegold, pu-re gold.”

He was enraged; he got up, slammed the lid of the piano, took his hat and top coat, left the
house, and went out to see his friend in the suburbs.

When he returned that night, he saw Dorothea standing in the door with a man. It was the actor,
Edmund Hahn. They were carrying on a heated conversation in whispers. The man was holding Dorothea
by the arm, but when Döderlein became visible from the unlighted street, he uttered an ugly
oath and quickly disappeared.

Dorothea looked her father straight, and impudently, in the face, and followed him into the
dark house.

When they were upstairs and had lighted the lamp, Döderlein turned to her, and asked her threateningly:
“What do you mean by these immodest associations? Tell me! I want an answer!”

“I don’t want to marry your flour sack. That’s my answer,” said Dorothea, with a defiant toss
of her head.

“Well, we’ll see,” said Döderlein, pale with rage and ploughing through his hair with his fingers,
“we’ll see. Get out of here! I have no desire to lose my well-earned sleep on account of such
an ungrateful hussy. We’ll take up the subject again to-morrow morning.”

The next morning Dorothea hastened to Herr Carovius. “Uncle,” she stammered, “he wants to marry
me to that flour sack.”

“Yes? Well, I suppose I’ll have to visit that second-rate musician in his studio again and
give him a piece of my mind. In the meantime be calm, my child, be calm,” said he, stroking
her brown hair, “Old Carovius is still alive.”

Dorothea nestled up to him, and smiled: “What would you say, Uncle,” she began with a knavish
and at the same time unusually attentive expression in her face, “if I were to marry Daniel
Nothafft? You like him,” she continued in a flattering tone, and held him fast by the shoulder
when he started back, “you like him, I know you do. I must marry somebody; for I do not wish
to be an old maid, and I can’t stand Father any longer.”

Herr Carovius tore himself loose from her. “To the insane asylum with you!” he cried. “I would
rather see you go to bed with that meal sack. Is the Devil in you, you prostitute? If your
skin itches, scratch it, so far as I am concerned, but take a stable boy to do it, as Empress
Katherine of blessed memory did. Buy fine dresses, bedizen yourself with tom-foolery of all
shades and colours, go to dances and lap up champagne, make music or throw your damn fiddle
on the dung heap, do anything you want to do, I’ll pay for it; but that green-eyed phantast,
that lunk-headed rat-catcher, that woman-eater and music-box bird, no, no! Never! Send him
humping down the stairs and out the front door! For God’s sake and the sake of all the saints,
don’t marry him! Don’t, I say. If you do, it’s all off between you and me.”

There was such a look of hate and fear in Herr Carovius’s face that Dorothea was almost frightened.
His hair was as towsled as the twigs of an abandoned bird’s nest; water was dripping from the
corners of his mouth; his eyes were inflamed; his glasses were on the tip of his nose.

Nothing could have made Dorothea more pleased with the story Daniel had told her than Herr
Carovius’s ravings. Her eyes were opened wide, her mouth was thirsty. If she had hesitated
at times before, she did so no more. She loved money; greed was a part of her make-up from
the hour she was born. But if Herr Carovius had laid the whole of his treasures at her feet,
and said to her, “You may have them if you will renounce Daniel Nothafft,” she would have replied,
“Your money, my Daniel.”

Something terribly strange and strong drew her to the man she had just heard so volubly cursed.
That sensual prickling was of a more dangerous violence and warmth in his presence than in
that of any other man she had ever known; and she had known a number. To her he was a riddle
and a mystery; she wanted to solve the one and clear up the other. He had possessed so many
women, indubitably more than he had confessed to her; and she wished now to possess him. He
was so quiet, so clever, so resolute: she wanted his quietness, his cleverness, his resoluteness.
She wanted everything he had, his charm, his magic, his power over men, all that he displayed
and all that he concealed.

She thought of him constantly; she thought in truth of no one else, and nothing else. Her thoughts
fluttered about his picture, shyly, greedily, and as playfully as a kitten. He had managed
to bring will power and unity into her senses. She wanted to have him.

The rain beat against the window. Terrified at Dorothea’s thoughtfulness, Herr Carovius pressed
his hands to his cheeks. “I see, I see, you want to leave me all alone,” he said in a tone
that sounded like the howling of a dog in the middle of the night. “You want to deceive me,
to surrender me to the enemy, to leave me nothing, nothing but the privilege of sitting here
and staring at my four walls. I see, I see.”

“Be still, Uncle, nothing is going to happen. It is all a huge joke,” said Dorothea with feigned
good humour and kind intentions. She walked to the door slowly, looking back every now and
then with a smile on her face.

                                 XVII

It was early in the morning when Dorothea rang Daniel’s bell. Philippina opened the door, but
she did not wish to let Dorothea in. She forced an entrance, however, and, standing in the
door, she inspected Philippina with the eye of arrogance, always a clear-sighted organ.

“Look out, Philippin’, there’s something rotten here,” murmured Philippina to herself.

Daniel was at work. He got up and looked at Dorothea, who carefully closed the door.

“Here I am, Daniel,” she said, and breathed a sigh of relief, like a swimmer who has just reached
the land.

“What is it all about?” asked Daniel, seemingly ill inclined to become excited.

“I have done what you wanted me to do, Daniel: I have broken away from them. I cannot tolerate
Father a minute longer. Where should I go if not to you?”

Daniel went up to her, and laid his hands on her shoulders. “Girl, girl!” he said as if to
warn her. He felt uneasy.

They looked into each other’s eyes for what seemed like an eternity. Daniel was apparently
trying to peer into the innermost recesses of her soul. Dorothea’s eyes sparkled with daring;
she did not lower her lids. Suddenly, as if moved from within, Daniel bent over and kissed
her on the forehead.

“You know who I am,” he said, and walked back and forth in the room. “You know how I have lived
and how I am living at present. I am a guilty man, and a lonely man. My nature craves tenderness,
but is unable to give tenderness in return. My lot is a hard one, and whoever decides to share
it with me must be able to bear her part of this hardness. I am frequently my own enemy and
the enemy of those who mean well by me. I am not a humourist, and make a poor impression in
society. I can be gruff, offensive, spiteful, irreconcilable, and revengeful. I am ugly, poor,
and no longer young. Are you not afraid of your twenty-three years, Dorothea?”

Dorothea shook her head vigorously.

“Test yourself, Dorothea, examine yourself,” he continued urgently, “don’t be too inexact,
too careless with me, nor with yourself. Study the situation from all sides, so that we may
make no false calculations. Fate, you know, is fate. Love can get control of me more than I
can get control of myself, and when this takes place I will do everything in my power. But
I must have confidence, unlimited confidence. If I were to lose confidence, I should be like
a mortal proscribed to Hell, an outcast, an evil spirit. Examine yourself, Dorothea. You must
know what you are doing; it is your affair, and it is a sacred one.”

“I cannot do otherwise, Daniel!” cried Dorothea, and threw herself on his bosom.

“Then God be merciful to us,” said Daniel.

                                 XVIII

Daniel took Dorothea over to Sylvia von Erfft’s at Siegmundshof. He had written to her, given
her all the details, explained the entire situation, and begged her to take Dorothea in and
entertain her until the day of the wedding. Sylvia had shown herself most obliging in the matter;
she met his requests with unaffected cordiality.

Dorothea had spent two nights at home, during which she had succeeded in evading all explanations
with her father. She did this by having him agree to give her three days to think it over.
On the morning of the third day, after her father had gone to the conservatory, she packed
up her belongings and left the house.

Andreas Döderlein found the following letter from her: “Dear Father: Abandon all your hopes
with regard to my marrying Herr Weisskopf. I am of age and can marry whomsoever I wish. I have
already made my choice. The man who is going to lead me to the altar is called Daniel Nothafft.
He loves me perhaps even more than I deserve, and I will make him a good wife. This is my unalterable
decision, and you yourself will certainly come to see that it is nobler to obey the impulses
of one’s own heart than to allow one’s self to be led on and blinded by material considerations.
Your loving daughter, Dorothea.”

Andreas Döderlein had a sinking spell. The letter slipped from his fingers and fell to the
floor. Trembling in his whole body, he walked up to the covered table, took a glass and hurled
it against the wall. The glass broke into a thousand pieces. “I will choke you, you impious
toad!” he panted, shook his clenched fist, went to Dorothea’s room, and, seized with boundless
wrath, upset the chairs and the little dressing table.

The maid, terrified, ran into the living room. She saw Dorothea’s letter lying on the floor,
picked it up, and read it. When she heard her mad master returning, she ran down stairs to
the ground floor, rang Herr Carovius’s bell, and showed him the letter. His face turned yellow
as he read it. The maid uttered a shrill, piercing cry, snatched the letter from Herr Carovius’s
hands, and ran out into the court, for she heard Andreas Döderlein stumbling down the steps.
He wanted to call the police and have them lock up the abductor of his daughter. Catching sight
of Herr Carovius in the hall, he stopped and fixed his eyes on him. In them there was a sea
of anger; and yet it was obvious that Andreas Döderlein was eager to ask a question or two.
It seemed indeed that just one conciliatory statement, even a single gesture on the part of
the man whom he had scrupulously avoided for years, would make bye-gones be bye-gones and convert
two implacable foes into friends, colleagues indeed in the business of revenge and punishment.

But Herr Carovius was done with the world. His face was distorted; grimaces of unrelieved meanness
furrowed his brow; his contempt knew no bounds. He turned about and slammed the door leading
into his apartment with a bang that showed his intention of shutting himself up in his own
stronghold.

Andreas Döderlein got as far as the entrance to the Town Hall. There he was suddenly seized
with grave doubts. He stared at the pavement for a while, sad and sinister, and then started
back home. His steps were not half so impetuous as they had been on the way over; they gave
evidence of weakened will and fading energy.

Hardly had he reached home when Daniel was announced. “You have the boldness, Sir,” he cried
out to Daniel on his entering. “You have the boldness to appear in my sight? By the gods above,
you are going far!”

“I will accept any challenge you make,” said Daniel, with the chilly dignity that was characteristic
of him in such circumstances and that never failed to have a sobering effect on his potential
antagonist. “I have nothing to fear. I should like to live in peace with the father of my wife,
and for this reason I have come to you.”

“Do you know what you are doing to me? You have stolen my daughter, man!” cried Döderlein with
pathos. “But just wait. I will checkmate your plans. I will make you feel the full measure
of my power.”

Daniel smiled contemptuously. “I am certain of that,” he replied. “I will feel your power as
long as I live; I have always felt it. But I have never submitted to it, and up to the present
I have always been able to break it. Think it over! Recall my past history! And devote a few
of your meditative moments to your child. Adieu!” With that Daniel left.

Andreas Döderlein was ill at ease. The man’s smile followed him wherever he went. What could
the desperado be planning? A bad conscience paralyses evil determinations. For more than a
week, Döderlein waged perpetual war with his pride. And then? Daniel did not allow himself
to be seen; he received no news of any kind from Dorothea; and, climax of it all, Herr Weisskopf
notified him that his note for one thousand marks, with interest, was due. Döderlein saw that
there was nothing to be done about it all except to recognise the dénouement as a fact and
not as a stage scene. And one day he hobbled up the steps of the house on Ægydius Place.

“I am glad to see you,” said Daniel as he reached out his hand to his visitor.

Andreas Döderlein spoke of a father’s bleeding heart, of the crushing of proud hopes, of the
impiety of youth, and the lonesomeness of old age. And then, rather disconnectedly, beating
a tattoo with the fingers of his big hand on the top of the table, he spoke of the constraint
in which he found himself with reference to the opulent owner of the mill. He told Daniel he
had gone on a man’s note, had been suddenly obliged to redeem the note, and not having so much
ready money at his disposal, had accepted a loan from the rich aspirant for Dorothea’s hand.

Daniel was forced to admit that his troubles were humiliating and that the money would have
to be raised. Döderlein said it amounted to fifteen hundred marks. He was surprised himself
when he mentioned the sum which assured him a clear gain of fifty per cent. It had been a clever
idea, serving as it did to put the generosity of his future son-in-law to test. At the bottom
of his heart he felt that his action was dishonourable, and was consequently touched when Daniel,
giving this inroad on his savings but a moment’s thought, promised to send him the money the
following day.

“You make me feel ashamed of myself, Daniel, really you do. Let us bury the hatchet! We are
after all colleagues in Apollo. Or aren’t we? Call me Father, and I will call you Son! Address
me with Du, and I will follow your example.”

Daniel gave him his hand without saying a word.

Döderlein asked about Dorothea; and when Daniel told him where she was, he seemed quite contented.
“Tell her my house and my arms are open to her; tell her of the change in the constellation,”
he said softly. “We have both done each other injustice and have both repented.”

Daniel replied quite conventionally that he thought it better to leave Dorothea with Sylvia
von Auffenberg.

“As you wish, my son,” said Andreas Döderlein, “I bow to the claims of your young happiness.
Now we should have a bottle of Malvoisie or Moselle, so that I can drink to the health of my
dear, unruly daughter. Or don’t you care to?”

Daniel went to send Philippina to the Golden Posthorn. But Philippina had gone out with Agnes.
He saw one of the maids from one of the other apartments standing on the steps, and got her
to run the errand. It was a long while before she returned, and when the wine was finally poured
out, Döderlein had not time to drink: he was scheduled to give a lecture in the conservatory
at seven. He drank about half of his glass, and then took hasty leave of Daniel, shaking his
hand with unwonted fervour.

Daniel sat for a while thinking it all over. There was a knock at the door, and old Jordan
came in. “May I?” he asked.

Daniel nodded. Jordan took a seat on the chair Döderlein had been sitting on. He looked into
Daniel’s face quizzically. “Is it true, Daniel, that you are going to get married again? That
you are going to marry the Döderlein girl?”

“Yes, Father, it is true,” replied Daniel. He got a fresh glass, filled it, and pushed it over
to the old man. “Drink, Father!” he said.

The old man sipped the wine with an air of adoration. “It must be nine or ten years since I
have had any wine,” he said more or less to himself.

“You have not had a happy life,” replied Daniel.

“I will not complain, Daniel. I bear it because I have to. And who knows? Perhaps there is
still a measure of joy in store for me. Perhaps; who knows?”

The two men sat in silence and drank. It was so still that you could hear the fluttering of
the light in the lamp.

“Where can Philippina be?” asked Daniel.

“Yes, Philippina. I had forgot to tell you,” began old Jordan sorrowfully. “She came to me
this afternoon, and told me she was going over to Frau Hadebusch’s with Agnes and was going
to stay there until after the wedding. But she spoke in such a confused way that I couldn’t
make out just what she planned to do. It sounded in fact as though she were thinking of leaving
the house for good and all. I wonder whether the girl isn’t a little off in her head? Day before
yesterday I heard an awful racket in the kitchen; and when I went down, I saw at least six
plates lying on the floor all smashed to pieces. And as if this was not enough, she threatened
to throw the dishwater on me. She was swearing like a trooper. Now tell me: how is this? Can
she go over to Frau Hadebusch’s, and take Agnes with her without getting any one’s consent?”

Daniel made no reply. The thought of Philippina filled him with anguish; he feared some misfortune.
He felt that he would have to let her have her way.

                                  XIX

In the night Daniel became very much excited. He left the house, and, despite the darkness
and the snow storm, wandered out to the country quite unmindful of the cold and snow and the wind.

He listened to the whisperings of his soul; he took council with himself. He looked up at the
great black vaulted arch of heaven as though he were beseeching the powers above to send him
the light he felt he needed. The morning of the approaching day seemed bleaker, blacker to
him than the night that was passing. He was lost in anxiety: he went over to his graves.

He did not stop to think until well on his way that the gate to the cemetery would be closed;
but he kept on going. He looked around for a place in the wall where he might climb over. Finally
he found one, climbed up, scratched his hands painfully, leaped down into some snow-covered
hedges, and then wandered around with his burden of grief over the stormy, desolate field of
the dead. As he stood before Gertrude’s grave he was overwhelmed with the feeling of the hour:
there were voices in the storm; he felt that the horror and the memory of it all would hurl
him to the ground. But when he stood by the grave of Eleanore, he felt his peace return. The
clouds suddenly opened on the distant horizon, and a moonbeam danced about him.

It was almost morning when he reached home.

A week later he went over to Siegmundshof and got Dorothea.

Sylvia and Dorothea came down through a snow-covered alley to meet him. They were walking arm
in arm, and Sylvia was laughing at Dorothea’s easy-flowing conversation. They seemed to be
getting along perfectly together: there could be no mistaking the picture he saw before him.
Sylvia told Daniel when she was alone with him that she had taken a great liking to Dorothea.
She remarked that her cheerfulness was irresistible and contagious, and that when she was with
children she became a child herself.

Yet, despite all this, Sylvia studied Daniel. And when Dorothea was present she studied her
too: she cast fleeting, searching, unassured glances at them—at Daniel and at Dorothea.

Daniel and Dorothea were married on a sunny day in December.

                               DOROTHEA

                                   I

For the past fortnight, Philippina and Agnes had been living at Frau Hadebusch’s. A message
came from Daniel telling Philippina that she and Agnes should return, or, if she preferred
to stay with Frau Hadebusch, she should send Agnes home at once.

“There you have it,” said Frau Hadebusch, “the master speaks.”

“Ah, him—he’s been speakin’ to me for a long while. Much good it does him,” said Philippina.
“The child stays with me, and I’m not going back. That settles it! What, Agnes? Yes?”

Agnes was sitting on the bench by the stove with Henry the idiot, reading the greasy pages
of a cheap novel. When Philippina spoke to her, she looked up in a distracted way and smiled.
The twelve-year-old child had a perfectly expressionless face; and as she never got out of
the house for any length of time, her skin was almost yellow.

“It ain’t no use to try to buck him,” continued Frau Hadebusch, who looked as old as the mountains
and resembled generally a crippled witch, “he c’n demand the kid, and if he does he’ll git
her. If you ain’t careful, I’ll get mixed up in the mess before long.”

“Well, how do you feel about it, Agnes? Do you want to go back to your daddy?” said Philippina,
turning to the girl, and looking at Frau Hadebusch in a knowing way.

Agnes’s face clouded up. She hated her father. This was the point to which Philippina had brought
matters by her incessant whisperings and ugly remarks behind Daniel’s back. Agnes was convinced
that she was a burden to her father, and his marriage had merely confirmed what she already
felt she knew. Deep in her silent soul she carried the picture of her prematurely deceased
mother, as if it were that of a woman who had been murdered, sacrificed. Philippina had told
her how her mother had committed suicide; it was a fearful tale in her language. It had been
the topic of conversation between her and her charge on many a cold, dark winter evening. Agnes
always said that when she was big and could talk, she would take vengeance on her father.

When she could talk! That was her most ardent wish. For she was silent-born. Her soul pined
in a prison that was much harsher and harder than that in which her mother’s soul had been
housed and harassed. Gertrude had some bright moments; Agnes never. She was incapable of enthusiasm;
she could not look up. For her heart, her soul was not merely asleep, torpid, lethargic; it
was hopelessly dried up, withered. Life was not in it.

“I am not going to those Döderleins,” she said, crying.

But in the evening Daniel came over. He took Philippina to one side, and had a serious talk
with her. He explained the reasons for his getting married a third time as well as he could
without going too deeply into the subject. “I needed a wife; I needed a woman to keep house
for me; I needed a companion. Philippina, I am very grateful to you for what you have done,
but there must also be a woman in my home who can cheer me up, turn my thoughts to higher things.
I have a heavy calling; that you cannot appreciate. So don’t get stubborn, Philippina. Pack
up your things, and come back home. How can we get along without you?”

For the first time in his life he spoke to her as though she were a woman and a human being.
Philippina stared at him. Then she burst out into a loud, boisterous laugh, and began to show
her whole supply of scorn. “Jesus, Daniel, how you c’n flatter a person! Who’d a thought it!
You’ve always been such a sour dough. Very well. Say: ‘Dear Philippina!’ Say it real slow:
‘D-e-a-r Philippina,’ and then I’ll come.”

Daniel looked into the face of the girl, who never did seem young and who had aged fearfully
in the last few months. “Nonsense!” he cried, and turned away.

Philippina stamped the floor with her foot. Henry, the idiot, came out into the hall, holding
a lamp above his head.

“Does the sanctimonious clerk still live here?” asked Daniel, looking up at the crooked old
stairway, while a flood of memories came rushing over him.

“Thank God, no!” snarled Philippina. “He’d be the last straw. I feel sick at the stomach when
I see a man.”

Daniel again looked into her detestable, ugly, distorted, and wicked face. He was accustomed
to question everything, eyes and bodies, about their existence in terms of tones, or their
transformation into tones. Here he suddenly felt the toneless; he had the feeling one might
have on looking at a deep-sea fish: it is lifeless, toneless. He thought of his Eva; he longed
for his Eva. Just then Agnes came out of the door to look for Philippina.

He laid his hand on Agnes’s hair, and said good-naturedly, looking at Philippina: “Well, then—d-e-a-r
Philippina, come back home!”

Agnes jerked herself away from him; he looked at the child amazed; he was angry, too. Philippina
folded her hands, bowed her head, and murmured with much humility: “Very well, Daniel, we’ll
be back to-morrow.”

                                  II

Philippina arrived at the front door at ten o’clock in the morning. In one hand she carried
her bundle; by the other she led Agnes, then studying her milieu with uneasy eyes.

Dorothea opened the door. She was neatly and tastefully dressed: she wore a blue gingham dress
and a white apron with a lace border. Around her neck was a gold chain, and suspended from
the chain a medallion.

“Oh, the children!” she cried cheerfully, “Philippina and Agnes. What do you think of that!
God bless you, children. You are home at last.” She wanted to hug Agnes, but the child pulled
away from her as timidly as she had pulled away from her father yesterday. In either case,
she pulled away!

Philippina screwed her mouth into a knot on hearing a woman ten years her junior call her a
child; she looked at Dorothea from head to foot.

Dorothea scarcely noticed her. “Just imagine, Philippin’, the cook didn’t come to-day, so I
thought I would try my own hand,” said Dorothea with glib gravity, “but I don’t know, the soup
meat is still as hard as a rock. Won’t you come and see what’s the matter?” She took Philippina
into the kitchen.

“Ah, you’ve got to have a lid on the pot, and what’s more, that ain’t a regular fire,” remarked
Philippina superciliously.

Dorothea had already turned to something else. She had found a glass of preserved fruit, had
opened it, taken a long-handled spoon, dived into it, put the spoon to her mouth, and was licking
away for dear life. “Tastes good,” she said, “tastes like lemon. Try it, Philippin’.” She held
the spoon to Philippina’s lips so that she could try it. Philippina thrust the spoon rudely
to one side.

“No, no, you have got to try it. I insist. Taste it!” continued Dorothea, and poked the spoon
tightly against Philippina’s lips. “I insist, I insist,” she repeated, half beseechingly, half
in the tone of a command, so that Philippina, who somehow or other could not find her veteran
power of resistance, and in order to have peace, let the spoon be shoved into her mouth.

Just then old Jordan came out into the hall, and with him the chimney-sweeper who wished to
clean the chimney.

“Herr Inspector, Herr Inspector,” cried Dorothea, laughing; and when the old man followed her
call, she gave him a spoonful, too. The chimney-sweep likewise; he had to have his. And last
but not least came Agnes.

They all laughed; a faint smile even ventured across Agnes’s pale face, while Daniel, frightened
from his room by the hubbub, came out and stood in the kitchen door and laughed with the rest.

“Do you see, Daniel, do you see? They all eat out of my hand,” said Dorothea contentedly. “They
all eat out of my hand. That’s the way I like to have things. To your health, folks!”

                                  III

One afternoon Dorothea, with an open letter in her hand, came rushing into Daniel’s room, where
he was working.

“Listen, Daniel, Frau Feistelmann invites me over to a party at her house to-morrow. May I go?”

“You are disturbing me, my dear. Can’t you see you are upsetting me?” asked Daniel reproachfully.

“Oh, I see,” breathed Dorothea, and looked helplessly at the stack of scores that lay on the
top of the table. “I am to take my violin along and play a piece or two for the people.”

Daniel gazed into space without being able to comprehend her remarks. He was composing.

Dorothea lost her patience. She stepped up to the place on the wall where the mask of Zingarella
had been hanging since his return home. “Daniel, I have been wanting for some time to ask you
what that thing is. Why do you keep it there? What’s it for? It annoys me with its everlasting
grin.”

Daniel woke up. “That is what you call a grin?” he asked, shaking his head; “Is it possible?
That smile from the world beyond appeals to you as a grin?”

“Yes,” replied Dorothea defiantly, “the thing is grinning. And I don’t like it; I can’t stand
that silly face; I don’t like it simply because you do like it so much. In fact, you seem to
like it better than you do me.”

“No childishness, Dorothea!” said Daniel quietly. “You must get your mind on higher things;
and you must respect my spirits.”

Dorothea became silent. She did not understand him. She looked at him with a touch of distrust.
She thought the mask was a picture of one of his old sweethearts. She made a mouth.

“You said something about playing at the party, Dorothea,” continued Daniel. “Do you realise
that I never heard you play? I will frankly confess to you that heretofore I have been afraid
to hear you. I could tolerate only the excellent; or the promise of excellence. You may show
both; and yet, what is the cause of my fear? You have not practised in a long while; not once
since we have been living together. And yet you wish to play in public? That is strange, Dorothea.
Be so good as to get your violin and play a piece for me, won’t you?”

Dorothea went into the next room, got her violin case, came out, took the violin, and began
to rub the bow with rosin. As she was tuning the A string, she lifted her eyebrows and said:
“Do you really want me to play?”

She bit her lips and played an étude by Fiorillo. Having finished it but not having drawn a
word of comment from Daniel, she again took up the violin and played a rather lamentable selection
by Wieniawski.

Daniel maintained his silence for a long while. “Pretty good, Dorothea,” he said at last. “You
have, other things being equal, a very pleasant pastime there.”

“What do you mean?” asked Dorothea with noticeable rapidity, a heavy blush colouring her cheeks.

“Is it anything more than that, Dorothea?”

“What do you mean?” she repeated, embarrassed and indignant. “I should think that my violin
is more than a pastime.”

Daniel got up, walked over to her, took the bow gently from her hands, seized it by both ends,
and broke it in two.

Dorothea screamed, and looked at him in hopeless consternation.

With great earnestness Daniel replied: “If the music I hear is not of unique superiority, it
sounds in my ears like something that has been hashed over a thousand times. My wife must consider
herself quite above a reasonably melodious dilettantism.”

Tears rushed to Dorothea’s eyes. Again she was unable to grasp the meaning of it all. She even
imagined that Daniel was making a conscious effort to be cruel to her.

For her violin playing had been a means of pleasing—pleasing herself, the world. It had been
a means of rising in the world, of compelling admiration in others and blinding others. This
was the only consideration that made her submit to the stern discipline her father imposed
upon her. She possessed ambition, but she sold herself to praise without regard for the praiser.
And whatever an agreement of unknown origin demanded in the way of feeling, she fancied she
could satisfy it by keeping her mind on her own wishes, pleasures, and delights while playing.

Daniel put his arms around her and kissed her. She broke away from him in petulance, and went
over to the window. “You might have told me that I do not play well enough for you,” she exclaimed
angrily and sobbed; “there was no need for you to break my bow. I never play. It never occurred
to me to bother you by playing.” She wept like a spoiled child.

It cost Daniel a good deal of persuasion to pacify her. Finally he saw that there was no use
to talk to her; he sighed and said nothing more. After a while he took her pocket handkerchief,
and dried the tears from her eyes, laughing as he did so. “What was really in my mind was that
party at Frau Feistelmann’s. I did not want you to go. For I do not put much faith in that
kind of entertainment. They do not enrich you, though they do incite all kinds of desires.
But because I have treated you harshly, you may go. Possibly it will make you forget your troubles,
you little fool.”

“Oh, I thank you for your offer; but I don’t want to go,” replied Dorothea snappishly, and
left the room.

                                  IV

Yet Dorothea said the next day at the dinner table that she was going to accept the invitation.
It would be much easier just to go and have it over with, she remarked, than to stay away and
explain her absence. She said this in a way that would lead you to believe that it had cost
her much effort to come to her decision.

“Certainly, go!” said Daniel. “I have already advised you to do it myself.”

She had had a dark blue velvet dress made, and she wanted to wear it for the first time on
this occasion.

Toward five o’clock Daniel went to his bedroom. He saw Dorothea standing before the mirror
in her new dress. It was a tall, narrow mirror on a console. Dorothea had received it from
her father as a wedding present.

“What is the matter with her?” thought Daniel, on noticing her complete lack of excitement.
She was as if lost in the reflection of herself in the mirror. There was something rigid, drawn,
transported about her eyes. She did not see that Daniel was standing in the room. When she
raised her arm and turned her head, it was to enjoy these gestures in the mirror.

“Dorothea!” said Daniel gently.

She started, looked at him thoughtfully, and smiled a heady smile.

Daniel was anxious, apprehensive.

                                   V

“I am related to Daniel, and we must address each other by the familiar Du,” said Philippina
to Dorothea. Daniel’s wife agreed.

Every morning when Dorothea came into the kitchen Philippina would say: “Well, what did you dream?”

“I dreamt I was at the station and it was wartime, and some gipsies came along and carried
me off,” said Dorothea on one occasion.

“Station means an unexpected visit; war means discord with various personalities; and gipsies
mean that you are going to have to do with some flippant people.” All this Philippina rattled
off in the High German of her secret code.

Philippina was also an adept in geomancy. Dorothea would often sit by her side, and ask her
whether this fellow or that fellow were in love with her, whether this girl loved that fellow
and the other girl another, and so on through the whole table of local infatuations. Philippina
would make a number of dots on a sheet of paper, fill in the numbers, hold the list up to the
light, and divulge the answer of the oracle.

In a very short while the two were one heart, one soul. Dorothea could always count on Philippina’s
laughter of approval when she fell into one of her moods of excessive friskiness. And if Agnes
failed to show the proper amount of interest, Philippina would poke her in the ribs and exclaim:
“You little rascallion, has the cat got your tongue?”

Agnes would then sneak off in mournful silence to her school books, and sit for hours over
the simplest kind of a problem in the whole arithmetic. Dorothea would occasionally bring her
a piece of taffy. She would wrap it up, put it in her pocket, and give it the next day to a
schoolmate from whose note book she had copied her sums in subtraction.

Herr Seelenfromm stopped Philippina on the street, and said to her: “Well, how are you getting
along? How is the young wife making out?”

“Oi, oi, we’re living on the fat of the land, I say,” Philippina replied, stretching her mouth
from ear to ear. “Chicken every day, cake too, wine always on hand, and one guest merely opens
the door on another.”

“Nothafft must have made a pile of money,” remarked Herr Seelenfromm in amazement.

“Yes, he must. Nobody works at our house. The wife’s pocket-book at least is always crammed.”

The sky was blue, the sun was bright, spring had come.

                                  VI

Andreas Döderlein always took Sunday dinner with his children. He loved a juicy leg of pork,
a salad garnished with greens and eggs, and a tart drowned in sugar. Old Jordan, who was privileged
to sit at the table, let the individual morsels dissolve on his tongue. He had never had such
delicacies placed before him in his life. At times he would cast a glance of utter astonishment
at Daniel.

He very rarely took part in the conversation. As soon as the dishes had been removed, he would
get up and quietly go to his room.

“A very remarkable old man,” said Andreas Döderlein one Sunday, as he sat tipped back on his
chair, picking his teeth.

“Ah, we have our troubles with him,” said Dorothea abusively, “he is an incorrigible pot-watcher.
He comes to the kitchen ten times a day, sticks his nose up in the air, asks what we are going
to have for dinner, and then goes out and stands in the hall, with the result that our guests
come and stumble over him.”

Andreas Döderlein emitted a growl of lament.

“How are your finances, my son?” he asked, turning to Daniel with an air of marked affability.
“Would you not like to bolster up your income by taking a position in the conservatory? You
would have time for it; your work as organist at St. Ægydius does not take up all your time.
Herold is going to be retired, you know. He is seventy-five and no longer able to meet the
requirements. All that we will have to do will be for me to give you my backing. Three thousand
marks a year, allocation to your widow after ten years of service, extra fees—I should think
you would regard that as a most enticing offer. Or don’t you?”

Dorothea ran up to her father in a spirit of unrestrained jubilation, threw her arms around
his bulky body, and kissed him on his flabby cheek.

“No thanks to me, my child,” said the Olympian; “to stand by you two is of course my duty.”

“What sort of a swollen stranger is that, anyhow?” thought Daniel to himself. “What does he
want of me? Why does he come into my house and sit down at my table? Why is he so familiar
with me? Why does he blow his breath on me?” Daniel was silent.

“I understand, my dear son, that you would abandon your leisure hours only with the greatest
reluctance,” continued Döderlein with concealed sarcasm, “but after all, who can live precisely
as he would like to live? Who can follow his own inclinations entirely? The everyday feature
of human existence is powerful. Icarus must fall to the earth. With your wife anticipating
a happy event, you cannot, of course, hesitate in the face of such an offer.”

Daniel cast an angry look at Dorothea.

“I will think it over,” said Daniel, got up, and left the room.

“It is unpleasant for him,” complained Dorothea; “he values his leisure above everything else
in the world. But I will do all in my power to bring him around, Father. And you keep at him.
He will resist and object. I know him.”

Thus it was brought to light that Daniel was no longer a mysterious and unfathomable individual
in her estimation. She had found him out; she had divined him, in her way to be sure. He was
much simpler than she had imagined, and at times she was really a bit angry at him for not
arousing her curiosity more than he did. What she had fancied as highly interesting, thrilling,
intoxicating, had proved to be quite simple and ordinary. The charm was gone, never to return.
Her sole diversion lay in her attempts to get complete control over him through the skilful
manipulation of her senses and her priceless youth.

Daniel felt that she was disappointed; he had been afraid of this all along. His anxiety increased
with time, for it was evident that everything he said or did disappointed her. His anxiety
caused him to be indulgent, where he had formerly been unbending. The difference in their ages
made him patient and tractable. He feared he could not show her the love that she in her freshness
and natural, unconsumed robustness desired. On this account he denied himself many things which
he formerly could not have got along without, and put up with, many things that would have
been intolerable to him as a younger man.

It needed only a single hour at night to make him promise to accept the position old Herold
was leaving. He, as parsimonious with words as in the expression of feelings, succumbed to
her cat-like cuddling. He capitulated in the face of her unpitying ridicule, and surrendered
all to the prurient agility of a young body. Dark powers there are that set up dependencies
between man and woman. When they rule, things do not work out in accordance with set calculation
or inborn character. It takes but a single hour of the night to bend the most sacred truth
of life into a lie.

                                  VII

In the course of time Daniel had to provide for an increase in his annual salary. Dorothea
had made a great many innovations that cost money. She had bought a dressing table, a number
of cabinets, and a bath tub. The lamps, dishes, bed covers, and curtains she found old-fashioned,
and simply went out and bought new ones.

Nothing gave her greater pleasure than to go shopping. Then the bills came in, and Daniel shook
his head. He begged her to be more saving, but she would fall on his neck, and beseech and
beseech until he acceded to every single one of her wishes.

She rarely came home with empty hands. It may have been only little things that she bought,
a manikin of porcelain with a tile hat and an umbrella, or a pagoda with a wag-head, or even
merely a mouse-trap—but they all cost money.

Philippina would be called in; Philippina was to admire the purchases. And she would say with
apparent delight: “Now ain’t that sweet!” Or, “Now that’s fine; we needed a mouse-trap so bad!
There was a mouse on the clothes rack just yesterday, cross my heart, Daniel.”

As to hats, dresses, stockings, shoes, laces, and blouses—when it came to these Dorothea was
a stranger to such concepts as measure or modesty. She wanted to compete with the wives of
the rich people whose parties she attended, and next to whom she sat in the pastry shop or
at the theatre.

She was given free tickets to the theatre and the concerts. But once when she had told Daniel
that the director had sent her a ticket, he learned from Philippina that she had bought the
ticket and paid for it with her own money. He did not call her to account, but he could not
get the thought out of his mind that she had believed she had deceived him.

He did not accompany her on her pleasure jaunts; he wanted to work and not double even the
smallest expenditure by going with her. Dorothea had become accustomed to this. She looked
upon his apathy toward the theatre and his dislike of social distractions as a caprice, a crotchet
on his part. She never considered what he had gone through in the way of theatricals and concerts;
she had completely forgotten what he had confessed to her in a decisive hour.

When she came home late in the evening with burning cheeks and glowing eyes, Daniel did not
have the courage to give her the advice he felt she so sorely needed. “Why snatch her from
her heaven?” he thought. “She will become demure and quiet in time; her wild lust for pleasure
will fade and disappear.”

He was afraid of her pouting mien, her tears, her perplexed looks, her defiant running about.
But he lacked the words to express himself. He knew how ineffectual warning and reproach might
be and were. Empty talking back and forth he could not stand, while if he made a really human
remark it found no response. She did not appreciate what he said; she misunderstood, misinterpreted
everything. She laughed, shrugged her shoulders, pouted, called him an old grouch, or cooed
like a dove. She did not look at him with real eyes; there was no flow of soul in what she did.

Gloom filled his heart.

The waste in the household affairs became worse and worse from week to week. Daniel would have
felt like a corner grocer if he had never let her know how much he had saved, or had given
her less than she asked for. And so his money was soon all gone. Dorothea troubled herself
very little about the economic side of their married life. She told Philippina what to do,
and fell into a rage if her orders were not promptly obeyed.

“It’s too dull for her here. My God, such a young woman!” said Philippina to Daniel with simulated
regret. “She wants to have a good time; she wants to enjoy her life. And you can’t blame her.”

Philippina was the mistress of the house. She went to the market, paid the bills, superintended
the cook and the washwoman, and rejoiced with exceeding great and fiendish joy when she saw
how rapidly everything was going downhill, downhill irresistibly and as sure as your life.

                                 VIII

As the time approached for Dorothea’s confinement she very rarely left the house. She would
lie in bed until about eleven o’clock, when she would get up, dress, comb her hair, go through
her wardrobe, and write letters.

She carried on a most elaborate correspondence; those who received her letters praised her
amusing style.

After luncheon she would go back to bed; and late in the afternoon her visitors came in, not
merely women but all sorts of young men. It often happened that Daniel did not even know the
names of the people. He would withdraw to the room Eleanore had formerly occupied, and from
which he could hear laughter and loud talk resounding through the hall.

By evening Dorothea was tired. She would sit in the rocking chair and read the newspaper, or
the Wiener Mode, generally not in the best of humour.

Daniel confidently believed that all this would change for the better as soon as the child
had been born; he believed that the feeling of a mother and the duties of a mother would have
a broadening and subduing effect on her.

Late in the autumn Dorothea gave birth to a boy, who was baptised Gottfried. She could not
do enough by way of showing her affection for the child; her transports were expressed in the
most childish terms; her display of tenderness was almost excessive.

For six days she nursed the child herself. Then the novelty wore off, friends told her it would
ruin her shape to keep it up, and she quit. “It makes you stout,” she said to Philippina, “and
cow’s milk is just as good, if not better.”

Philippina opened her mouth and eyes as wide as she could when she saw Dorothea standing before
the mirror, stripped to the hips, studying the symmetry of her body with a seriousness that
no one had ever noticed in her before.

Dorothea became coldly indifferent toward her child; it seemed that she had entirely forgotten
that she was a mother. The baby slept in the room with Philippina and Agnes, both of whom cared
for it. Its mother was otherwise engaged.

As if to make up for lost time and to indemnify herself for the suffering and general inconvenience
to which she had been put in the last few months, Dorothea rushed with mad greediness into
new pleasures and strange diversions. Soon however she found herself embarrassed from a lack
of funds. Daniel told her, kindly but firmly, that the salaries he was drawing as organist
and teacher were just barely enough to keep the house going, and that he was curtailing his
own personal needs as much as possible so that there would be no cause to discontinue or diminish
the home comforts they had latterly been enjoying. “We are not peasants,” he said, “and that
we are not living from the mercy of chance is a flaw in me rather than in my favour.”

“You old pinch-penny!” said Dorothea. Ugly wrinkles appeared on her brow. “If you had not made
me disgusted with my art, I might have been able to make a little money too,” she added.

He looked down at the floor in complete silence. She however began thinking about ways and
means of getting her hands on money. “Uncle Carovius might help me,” she thought. She took
to visiting her father more frequently, and every time she came she would stand out in the
hall for a while hoping to see Herr Carovius. One day he appeared. She wanted to speak to him,
smile at him, win him over. But one look from that face, filled with petrified and ineradicable
rage, showed her that any attempt to approach the old man and get him in a friendly frame of
mind would be fruitless.

On the way home she chanced to meet the actor Edmund Hahn. She had not seen him since she had
been married. The actor seemed tremendously pleased to see her. They walked along together,
engaged in a zealous conversation, talking at first loudly and then gently.

                                  IX

The day Dorothea got married, Herr Carovius had gone to his lawyer to have the will he had
drawn up the night before attested to. He had bequeathed his entire fortune, including his
home and the furniture, to an institution to be erected after his death for the benefit of
orphans of noble birth. Baron Eberhard von Auffenberg had been named as first director of the
institution and sole executor of his will.

Herr Carovius refused to have anything more to do with music. He had a leather cover made for
his long, narrow grand piano, and enshrouded in this, the instrument resembled a stuffed animal.
He looked back on his passion for music as one of the aberrations of his youth, though he realised
that he was chastising his spirit till it hurt when he took this attitude.

The method he employed to keep from having nothing to do was characteristic of the man: he
went through all the books of his library looking for typographical errors. He spent hours
every day at this work; he read the scientific treatises and the volumes of pure literature
with his attention fixed on individual letters. When, after infinite search, he discovered
a word that had been misspelled, or a grammatical slip, he felt like a fisherman who, after
waiting long and patiently, finally sees a fish dangling on the hook.

Otherwise he was thoroughly unhappy. The beautiful evenness of his hair on the back of his
neck had been transformed into a shaggy wilderness. He could be seen going along the street
in a suit of clothes that was peppered with spots, while his Calabrian hat resembled a war
tent that has gone through a number of major offensives.

He had again taken to frequenting the Paradise Café two or three times a week, not exactly
to surrender himself to mournful memories, but because the coffee there cost twenty pfennigs,
whereas the more modern cafés were charging twenty-five. His dinner consisted of a pot of coffee
and a few rolls.

It came about that old Jordan likewise began to frequent the Paradise. For a long while the
two men would go there, sit down at their chosen tables, and study each other at a distance.
Finally the day came when they sat down together; then it became a custom for them to take
their places at the same table, one back in the corner by the stove, where a quiet comradeship
developed between them. It was rare that their conversation went beyond external platitudes.

Herr Carovius acted as though he were merely enduring old Jordan. But he never really became
absorbed in his newspaper until the old man had come and sat down at the table with him, greeting
him with marked respect as he did so. Jordan, however, did not conceal his delight when, on
entering the café and casting his eyes around the room, they at last fell on Herr Carovius.
While he sipped his coffee, he never took them off the wicked face of his vis-à-vis.

                                   X

Philippina became Dorothea’s confidential friend.

At first it was nothing more than Dorothea’s desire to gossip that drew her to Philippina.
Later she fell into the habit of telling her everything she knew. She felt no need of keeping
any secret from Philippina, the inexplicable. The calm attentiveness with which Philippina
listened to her flattered her, and left her without a vestige of suspicion. She felt that Philippina
was too stupid and uncultivated to view her activities in perspective or pass judgment on them.

She liked to conjure up seductive pictures before the old maid’s imagination; for she loved
to hear Philippina abuse the male of the species. If some bold plan were maturing in her mind,
she would tell Philippina about it just as if it had already been executed. In this way she
tested the possibility of really carrying out her designs, and procured for herself a foretaste
of what was to follow.

It was chiefly Philippina’s utter ugliness that made her trust her. Such a homely creature
was in her eyes not a woman, hardly a human being of either sex; and with her she felt she
could talk just as much as she pleased, and say anything that came into her head. And since
Philippina never spoke of Daniel in any but a derogatory and spiteful tone, Dorothea felt perfectly
safe on that ground.

She would come into the kitchen, and sit down on a bench and talk: about a silk dress she had
seen for sale; about the fine compliments Court Councillor Finkeldey had paid her; about the
love affairs of these and the divorce proceedings of those; about Frau Feistelmann’s pearls,
remarking that she would give ten years of her life if she also had such pearls. In fact, the
word she used most frequently was “also.” She trembled and shook from head to foot with desires
and wishes, low-minded unrest and lusts that flourish in the dark.

Often she would tell stories of her life in Munich. She told how she once spent a night with
an artist in his studio, just for fun; and how on another occasion she had gone with an officer
to the barracks at night simply on a wager. She told of all the fine-looking men who ran after
her, and how she dropped them whenever she felt like it. She said she would let them kiss her
sometimes, but that was all; or she would walk arm in arm with them through the forest, but
that was all. She commented on the fact that in Munich you had to keep an eye out for the police
and observe their hours, otherwise there might be trouble. For example, a swarthy Italian kept
following her once—he was a regular Conte—and she couldn’t make the man go on about his business,
and you know he rushed into her room and held a revolver before her face, and she screamed,
of course she did, until the whole house was awake, and there was an awful excitement.

When Daniel endeavoured to put a stop to her wastefulness, she went to Philippina and complained.
Philippina encouraged her. “Don’t you let him get away with anything,” said she, “let him feel
that a woman with your beauty didn’t have to marry a skinflint.”

When she began to go with Edmund Hahn, she told Philippina all about it. “You ought to see
him, Philippina,” she whispered in a mysterious way. “He is a regular Don Juan; he can turn
the head of any woman.” She said he had been madly in love with her for two years, and now
he was going to gamble for her; but in a very aristocratic and exclusive club, to which none
but the nicest people belonged. “If I win, Philippina, I am going to make you a lovely present,”
she said.

From then on her conversation became rather tangled and incoherent. She was out a great deal,
and when she returned she was always in a rather uncertain condition. She had Philippina put
up her hair, and every word she spoke during the operation was a lie. One time she confessed
that she had not been in the theatre, as Daniel had supposed, but at the house of a certain
Frau Bäumler, a good friend of Edmund Hahn. They had been gambling: she had won sixty marks.
She looked at the door as if in fear, took out her purse, and showed Philippina three gold pieces.

Philippina had to swear that she would not give Dorothea away. A few days later Dorothea got
into another party and got out of it successfully, and Philippina had to renew her oath. The
old maid could take an oath with an ease and glibness such as she might have displayed in saying
good morning. In the bottom of her heart she never failed to grant herself absolution for the
perjury she was committing. For the time being she wished to collect, take notes, follow the
game wherever it went. Moreover, it tickled and satisfied her senses to think about relations
and situations which she knew full well she could never herself experience.

Dorothea became more and more ensnared. Her eyes looked like will-o’-the-wisps, her laugh was
jerky and convulsive. She never had time, either for her husband or her child. She would receive
letters occasionally that she would read with greedy haste and then tear into shreds. Philippina
came into her room once quite suddenly; Dorothea, terrified, hid a photograph she had been
holding in her hand. When Philippina became indignant at the secrecy of her action, she said
with an air of inoffensive superiority: “You would not understand it, Philippina. That is something
I cannot discuss with any one.”

But Philippina’s vexation worried her: she showed her the photograph. It was the picture of
a young man with a cold, crusty face. Dorothea said it was an American whom she had met at
Frau Bäumler’s. He was said to be very rich and alone.

Every evening Philippina wanted to know something about the American. “Tell me about the American,”
she would say.

One evening, quite late, Dorothea came into Philippina’s room with nothing on but her night-gown.
Agnes and little Gottfried were asleep. “The American has a box at the theatre to-morrow evening.
If you call for me you can see him,” she whispered.

“I am bursting with curiosity,” replied Philippina.

For a while Dorothea sat in perfect silence, and then exclaimed: “If I only had money, Philippin’,
if I only had money!”

“I thought the American had piles of it,” replied Philippina.

“Of course he has money, lots of it,” said Dorothea, and her eyes flashed, “but—”

“But? What do you mean?”

“Do you think men do things without being compensated?”

“Oh, that’s it,” said Philippina reflectively, “that’s it.” She crouched on a hassock at Dorothea’s
feet. “How pretty you are, how sweet,” she said in her bass voice: “God, what pretty little
feet you have! And what smooth white skin! Marble’s got nothing on you.” And with the carnal
concupiscence of a faun in woman’s form she took Dorothea’s leg in her hand and stroked the
skin as far as the knee.

Dorothea shuddered. As she looked down at the cowering Philippina, she noticed that there was
a button missing on her blouse. Through the opening, just between her breasts, she saw something
brown. “What is that on your body there?” asked Dorothea.

Philippina blushed. “Nothing for you,” she replied in a rough tone, and held her hand over
the opening in her blouse.

“Tell me, Philippina, tell me,” begged Dorothea, who could not stand the thought of any one
keeping a secret from her: “Possibly it is your dowry. Possibly you have made a savings bank
out of your bosom?” She laughed lustily.

Philippina got up: “Yes, it is my money,” she confessed with reluctance, and looked at Dorothea
hostilely.

“It must be a whole lot. Look out, or some one will steal it from you. You will have to sleep
on your stomach.”

Daniel came down from his study, and heard Dorothea laughing. Grief was gnawing at his heart;
he passed hastily by the door.

                                  XI

One evening, as Philippina came into the hall from the street, she saw a man coming up to her
in the dark; he called her by name. She thought she recognised his voice, and on looking at
him more closely saw that it was her father.

She had not spoken to him for ten years. She had seen him from time to time at a distance,
but she had always made it a point to be going in another direction as soon as she saw him;
she avoided him, absolutely.

“What’s the news?” she asked in a friendly tone.

Jason Philip cleared his throat, and tried to get out of the light in the hall and back into
the shadow: he wished to conceal his shabby clothes from his daughter.

“Now, listen,” he began with affected naturalness, “you might inquire about your parents once
in a while. The few steps over to our house wouldn’t make you break your legs. Honour thy father
and thy mother, you know. Your mother deserves any kindness you can show her. As for me, well,
I have dressed you down at times, but only when you needed it. You were a mischievous monkey,
and you know it.”

He laughed; but there was the fire of fear in his eyes. Philippina was the embodiment of silence.

“As I was saying,” Jason Philip continued hastily, as if to prevent any inimical memories of
his daughter from coming to his mind, “you might pay a little attention to your parents once
in a while: Can’t you lend me ten marks? I have got to meet a bill to-morrow morning, and I
haven’t got a pfennig. The boys, you know, I mean your brothers, are conducting themselves
splendidly. They give me something the first of each month, and they do it regularly. But I
don’t like to go to them about this piddling business to-morrow. I thought that as you were
right here in the neighbourhood, I could come over and see you about it.”

Jason Philip was lying. His sons gave him no help whatsoever. Willibald was living in Breslau,
where he had a poorly paid position as a bookkeeper and was just barely making ends meet. Markus
was good for nothing, and head over heels in debt.

Philippina thought the matter over for a moment, and then told her father to wait. She went
upstairs. Jason Philip waited at the door, whistling softly. Many years had passed by since
he first attacked the civil powers, urged on by a rebellion of noble thoughts in his soul.
Many years had passed by since he had made his peace with these same civil powers. Nevertheless,
he continued to whistle the “Marseillaise.”

Philippina came waddling down the steps, dragged herself over to the door, and gave her father
a five-mark piece. “There,” she bellowed, “I haven’t any more myself.”

But Jason Philip was satisfied with half the amount he had asked for. He was now equipped for
an onslaught on the nearest café with its corned beef, sausages, and new beer.

From this time on he came around to the house on Ægydius Place quite frequently. He would stand
in the hall, look around for Philippina, and if he found her, beg her for money. The amounts
Philippina gave him became smaller and smaller. Finally she took to giving him ten pfennigs
when he came.

                                  XII

It frequently happened that Daniel would not answer when any one asked him a question. His
ear lost the words, his eye the pictures, signs, faces, gestures. He was in his own way; he
was a torment to himself.

Something drew him there and then here. He would leave the house, and then be taken with a
longing to return. He noticed that people were laughing at him; laughing at him behind his
back. He read mockery in the eyes of his pupils; the maids in the house tittered when he passed by.

What did they know? What were they concealing? Perhaps his soul could have told what they knew
and what they concealed; but he was unwilling to drag it all out into the realm of known, nameable
things.

As if an invisible slanderer were at his side, unwilling to leave him, leave him in peace,
his despair increased. “What have you done, Daniel!” a voice within him cried, “what have you
done!” The shades of the sisters, arm in arm, arose before him.

The feeling of having made a mistake, a mistake that could never be rectified, burned like
fire within him. His work, so nearly completed, had suddenly died away.

For the sake of his symphony, he forced himself into a quiet frame of mind at night, made room
for faint-hearted hopes, and lulled his presentient soul into peace.

The thing that troubled him worst of all was the way Philippina looked at him.

Since the birth of the child he had been living in Eleanore’s room. Old Jordan was consideration
itself: he went around in his stocking feet so as not to disturb him.

One night Daniel took the candle, and went downstairs to Dorothea’s room. She woke up, screamed,
looked at him bewildered, recognised him, became indignant, and then laughed mockingly and
sensually.

He sat down on the side of her bed, and took her right hand between his two. But he had a disagreeable
sensation on feeling her hand in his, and looked at her fingers. They were not finely formed:
they were thicker at the ends than in the middle; they could not remain quiet; they twitched
constantly.

“This can’t keep up, Dorothea,” he said in a kindly tone, “you are ruining your own life and
mine too. Why do you have all these people around you? Is the pleasure you derive from associating
with them so great that it benumbs your conscience? I have no idea what you are doing. Tell
me about it. The household affairs are in a wretched condition; everything is in disorder.
And that cigar smoke out in the living room! I opened a window. And your child! It has no mother.
Look at its little face, and see how pale and sickly it looks!”

“Well, I can’t help it; Philippina puts poppy in the milk so that it will sleep longer,” Dorothea
answered, after the fashion of guilty women: of the various reproaches Daniel had cast at her,
she seized upon the one of which she felt the least guilty. But after this, Daniel had no more
to say.

“I am so tired and sleepy,” said Dorothea, and again blinked at him out of one corner of her
eye with that mocking, sensual look. As he showed no inclination to leave, she yawned, and
continued in an angry tone: “Why do you wake a person up in the middle of the night, if all
you want is to scold them? Get out of here, you loathsome thing!”

She turned her back on him, and rested her head on her hand. Opposite her bed was a mirror
in a gold frame. She saw herself in it; she was pleased with herself lying there in that offended
mood, and she smiled.

Daniel, who had been so cruel to noble women now become shades, saw how she smiled at herself,
infatuated with herself: he took pity on such child-like vanity.

“There is a Chinese fairy tale about a Princess,” he said, and bent down over Dorothea, “who
received from her mother as a wedding present a set of jewel boxes. There was a costly present
in each box, but the last, smallest, innermost one was locked, and the Princess had to promise
that she would never open it. She kept her promise for a while, but curiosity at last got the
better of her, she forgot her vow, and opened the last little box by force. There was a mirror
in it; and when she looked into it and saw how beautiful she was, she began to abuse her husband.
She tortured him so that he killed her one day.”

Dorothea looked at him terrified. Then she laughed and said: “What a stupid story! Such a tale
of horror!” She laid her cheek on the pillow, and again looked in the mirror.

The following morning Daniel received an anonymous letter. It read as follows: “You will be
guarding your own honour if you keep a sharp lookout on your wife. A Well-wisher.”

A cold fever came over him. For a few days he dragged his body from room to room as if poisoned.
He avoided every one in the house. One night he again felt a desire to go down to Dorothea.
When he reached the door to her room, he found it bolted. He knocked, but received no answer.
He knocked again, this time more vigorously. He heard her turn her head on the pillow. “Let
me sleep!” cried Dorothea angrily.

“Open the door, Dorothea,” he begged.

“No, I will not; I want to sleep.” These were the words that reached his ear from behind the
bolted door.

He pressed three or four times on the latch, implored her three or four times to let him come
in, but received no answer. He did not wish to make any more noise, looked straight ahead as
if into a dark hole, and then turned and went back to his room in the attic.

                                 XIII

Friedrich Benda was again in Europe. All the newspapers contained accounts of the discoveries
made on the expedition. Last autumn Arab dealers in ivory had found him in the land of Niam-Niam,
taken an interest in him, and finally brought him, then seemingly in the throes of imminent
death, back to the Nile. In England he was celebrated as a hero and a bold pioneer; the Royal
Geographical Society had made him an honorary member; and the incidents of his journey were
the talk of the day.

Toward the close of April he came to Nuremberg to visit his mother. The blind old woman had
been carefully and cautiously prepared for his coming. She nevertheless came very near dying
with joy; her life was in grave danger for a while.

Benda had not wished to stay more than a week: his business and his work called him back to
London; he had lectures to deliver, and he had to see a book through the press, a book in which
he had given a description of the years spent in Africa.

At the urgent request of his mother he had decided to stay longer. Moreover, during the first
days of his visit to Nuremberg, he suffered from a severe attack of a fever he had brought
with him from the tropics, and this forced him to remain in bed. The news of his presence in
the city finally became generally known, and he was annoyed by the curiosity of many people
who had formerly never concerned themselves about him in the slightest.

He was eager to see Daniel; every hour of delay in meeting his old friend was an hour of reproach.
But his mother insisted that he stay with her; he had to sit near her and tell of his experiences
in Africa.

When he heard of the outer events in Daniel’s life he was filled with terror. The fact that
made the profoundest impression on him was Daniel’s marriage to Dorothea Döderlein. People
told him a great many things about their life and how they were getting along, and with each
passing day he felt that it would be more difficult to go to Daniel. One evening he got his
courage together and decided to go. He got as far as Ægydius Place, when he was seized with
such a feeling of sadness and discomfort at the thought of all the changes that time and fate
had made that he turned back. He felt as if he might be deceived by a picture which would perhaps
still show the features of Daniel as he looked in former years, but that he would be so changed
inwardly that words would be unable to bring the two together.

He longed to talk with some one who loved Daniel and who had followed his career with pure
motives. He had to think for a long while: where was there such a person? He thought of old
Herold and went to him. He directed the conversation without digression to a point that was
of prime importance to him. And in order to put the old man in as confidential a frame of mind
as possible, he reminded him of a night when the three of them, Daniel, Herold, and Benda,
had sat in the Mohren Cellar drinking wine and discussing things in general, important and
unimportant, that have a direct bearing on life.

The old man nodded; he recalled the evening. He spoke of Daniel’s genius with a modesty and
a deference that made Benda’s heart swell. He raised his finger, and said with a fine fire
in his eye: “I’ll stand good for him. I prophesy on the word of the Bible: A star will rise
from Jacob.”

Then he spoke of Eleanore; he was passionately fond of her. He told how she had brought him
the quartette, and how she had glowed with inspiration and the desire to help. He also had
a good deal to say about Gertrude, especially with regard to her mental breakdown and her death.

Benda left the old man at once quiet and disquieted. He walked along the street for a long
while, rapt in thought. When he looked up he saw that he was standing before Daniel’s house.
He went in.

                                  XIV

Daniel knew that Benda had returned: Philippina had read it in the newspaper and told him about
it. Dorothea, who had learned of his return from her father, had also spoken to him about it.
He had also heard other people speak of it.

The first time he heard it he was startled. He felt he would have to flee to his friend of
former days. Then he was seized with the same fear that had come over Benda: Is our relation
to each other the same? The thought of meeting Benda filled him with a sense of shame, to which
was added a touch of bitterness as day after day passed by and Benda never called or wrote.
“It is all over,” he thought, “he has forgotten me.” He would have liked to forget too; and
he could have done it, for his mind was wandering, restless, strayed.

One evening as he crossed the square he noticed that the windows of his house were all brilliantly
lighted. He went to the kitchen, where he found Agnes at the table seeding plums.

“Who is here again?” he asked. One could hear laughter, loud and boisterous, in the living room.

Agnes, scarcely looking up, reeled off the names: Councillor Finkeldey, Herr von Ginsterberg,
Herr Samuelsky, Herr Hahn, a strange man whose name she did not know, Frau Feistelmann and
her sister.

Daniel remained silent for a while. Then he went up to Agnes, put his hand under her chin,
lifted her head, and murmured: “And you? And you?”

Agnes frowned, and was afraid to look into his face. Suddenly she said: “To-day is the anniversary
of mother’s death.” With that she looked at him fixedly.

“So?” said Daniel, sat down on the edge of the table, and laid his head in his hand. Some one
was playing the piano in the living room. Since Daniel had taken the grand piano up to his
room, Dorothea had rented a small one. The rhythmical movement of dancing couples could be
heard quite distinctly.

“I’d like to leave this place,” said Agnes, as she threw a worm-eaten plum in the garbage can.
“In Beckschlager Street there is a seamstress who wants to teach me to sew.”

“Why don’t you go?” asked Daniel. “It would be a very sensible thing to do. But what will Philippina
say about it?”

“Oh, she doesn’t object, provided I spend my evenings and Sundays with her.”

The front door bell rang, and Agnes went out: there was some one to see Daniel. He hesitated,
started toward the door, shook and stepped back, seized with trembling hand the kitchen lamp
in order to make certain that he was not mistaken, for it was dark, but there could be no mistake.
It was Benda.

They looked at each other in violent agitation. Benda was the first to reach out his hand;
then Daniel reached out his. Something seemed to snap within him. He became dizzy, his tall,
stiff body swung back and forth. Then he fell into the arms of his friend, whom he had lived
without for seventeen years.

Benda was not prepared for such a scene; he was unable to speak. Then Daniel tore himself loose
from the embrace of his old comrade, pushed the dishevelled hair back from his forehead, and
said hastily: “Come upstairs with me; no one will disturb us up there.”

Daniel lighted the lamp in his room, and then looked around to see whether old Jordan was at
home. Jordan’s room was dark. He closed the door and took a seat opposite Benda. He was breathing
heavily.

What meaning can be attached to the preliminary questions and answers that invariably accompany
such a meeting after such a long separation? “How are you? How long are you going to stay in
town? You still have the same old habits of life? Tell me about yourself.” What do such questions
mean? They mean virtually nothing. The protagonists thereby simply remove the rubbish from
the channels which have been choked up in the course of years, and try to build new bridges
carrying them over abysses that must be crossed if the conversation is to be connected and
coherent.

Benda had grown somewhat stout. His face was brownish yellow, about the colour of leather.
The deep wrinkles around his forehead and mouth told of the hardships he had gone through.
His eye was completely changed: it had the strong, vivacious, and yet quiet appearance of the
eye of a hunter or a peasant.

“You may well imagine that I have already told the story of my adventures in Africa a hundred
times and in the same way,” said Benda. “It has all been written down, and will shortly appear
in book form, where you can read it. It was an unbroken chain of toil and trouble. Frequently
I was as close to death as I am to this wall. I devoured enough quinine to fill a freight car,
and yet it was always the same old story, fever to-day, to-morrow, for six months in the year.
I have, I fear, ruined my health; I am afraid my old heart will not last much longer. The eternal
vigilance I was obliged to exercise, the incessant fight for so simple a thing as a path, or
for more urgent things such as food and drink, has told on me. I suffered terribly from the
sun; also from the rain. I had very few of the comforts of life; I was often forced to sleep
on the ground. And there was no one to talk to, no sense of security.”

“And yet,” he continued, “I had my reward. When I look back on it all, there is not an hour
that I would care to have wiped from my memory. I accomplished a great deal. I made some important
discoveries, brought back enough work to keep me busy for years to come, thirty-six boxes of
plant preparations, and this despite the fact that the entire fruit of my first seven years
of effort was burned in a tent near Nembos. But apart from what I have actually done, there
is something so real and solemn about such a life. You live with the sky above you and savages
round about you. These savages are like children. This state of affairs is, to be sure, being
rapidly changed: Europe is breathing its pest into the paradise. The wiles and weaknesses of
these savages are in a way touching; you feel sorry for them as you feel sorry for a dumb,
harassed beast. I had taken a boy along with me from the boundless, primeval forests north
of the Congo. He was a little bit of a fellow, almost a dwarf. I liked him; I even loved him.
And obedient! I merely had to make a sign, and he was ready. Well, we came back to the Italian
lakes, where I wished to remain for a while for the sake of the climate before returning to
England. What happened? At the sight of the snow-covered mountain peaks he was seized with
deathly fear; he became homesick; and in a few days he died of pneumonia.”

“Why is it that there was such a long period that we never heard from you?” asked Daniel, with
a timidity and shyness that made Benda’s heart ache.

“That is a long story,” said Benda. “It took me two years to get through that fearful forest
and out to a lake called Albert-Nyanza. From there I wanted to get over to Egypt, but the country
was in a state of revolution and was occupied by the soldiers of the Mahdi. I was forced to
take the route to the Northwest, ran into a pathless wilderness, and for five years was a captive
of a tribe of the Wadai. The Niam-Niam, who were at war with the Wadai, liberated me. I could
move about with relative freedom among them, but I could not go beyond their boundaries, for
they held me in high esteem as a medicine man and were afraid I would bewitch them if I ever
got out of their personal control. I had lost my guides, and I had no money to hire new ones.
The things I needed, because of the delicacy of my constitution, as compared with theirs, I
secured through the chieftain from a band of Arabian merchants. This was all very well so far
as it went, but the chieftain was careful to keep me concealed from the Arabs. I finally succeeded
in coming into personal touch with a Sheik to whom I could make myself understood. It was high
time, for I could not have stood it another year.”

Daniel was silent. It was all so strange; he could hardly adapt himself to Benda’s voice and
manner. Memory failed him. The world of Benda was all too foreign, unknown to him. What he
himself felt had no weight with his friend; it did not even have meaning. With the old sense
of dim defiance, he coaxed the ghost of disappointment into his soul; and his soul was weighed
down by the nocturnal darkness like the glass of his window.

“Now I am enjoying my home,” said Benda thoughtfully, “I am enjoying a milder light, a more
ordered civilisation. I have come to look upon Germany as a definite figure, to love it as
a composite picture. Nature, really great, grand nature such as formerly seemed beyond the
reach of my longings, such as constituted my idea, my presentiment of perfection, I have experienced
in person; I have lived it. It enticed me, taught me, and almost destroyed me. All human organisation,
on the contrary, has developed more and more into an idea. In hours that were as full of the
feeling of things as the heart is full of blood, I have seen the scales of the balance move
up and down with the weight of two worlds. The loneliness, the night, the heavens at night,
the forest, the desert have shown me their true faces. The terribleness that at times proceeds
from them has no equal in any other condition of existence. I understood for the first time
the law that binds families, peoples, states together. I have repudiated all thought of rebellion,
and sworn to co-operate, to do nothing but co-operate.

“I want to make a confession to you,” he continued. “I never had the faintest conception of
the rhythm of life until I went to Africa. I had known how long it takes to grow a tree; I
was familiar with the metamorphoses through which a plant must pass before it attains to perfection
and becomes what it is; but it had never occurred to me to apply these laws and facts to our
own lives; this had never entered my mind. I had demanded too much; I had been in too much
of a hurry. Egoistic impatience had placed false weights and measures in my hands. What I have
learned during these seventeen years of trial and hardship is patience. Everything moves so
slowly. Humanity is still a child, and yet we demand justice of it, expect right and righteous
action from it. Justice? Oh, there is still a long, long road to be travelled before we reach
Justice! The way is as long and arduous as that from the primeval forest to the cultivated
garden. We must exercise patience—for the benefit of the many generations of men that are to
come after us.”

Daniel got up and began to walk back and forth. After a silence that was exceedingly painful
to Benda, he said: “Let’s go out. Let’s go to a café, or take a long walk on the streets, or
go wherever you would like to go. Or if I am a burden to you, I will accompany you for a short
stretch and then remain alone. The point is, I cannot stay here any longer; I cannot stand
it here.”

“A burden to me?” replied Benda reproachfully. That was the tone, the look of years gone by.
Daniel felt at once that he was personally under no obligation to talk. He saw at once that
Benda knew a great deal and suspected the rest. He felt his heart grow lighter.

They went downstairs.

                                  XV

Daniel asked Benda to wait on the stairs, locked the door, and took his hat from the hook.
In the living room there was a great deal of noise punctuated with laughter. Philippina came
out of her room, and snarled: “The way they’re carrying on in there! You’d think they wuz all
drunk!”

“What is going on?” asked Daniel timidly, merely to have something to say.

“They are playing blindfold,” replied Philippina contemptuously, “every one of them is an old
bird, and they’re playing blindfold!”

There was a sound as if a plate had been broken; a piercing scream followed, and then silence.
But the silence was of momentary duration: that vulgar, slimy laughter soon broke out again.

Above the din of screaming voices, Daniel heard Dorothea’s. He hastened to the door and opened it.

His enraged eye fell on the table covered with pots, empty cups, and pastry. The chairs had
been pushed to one side; the new gas chandelier with its five frosted globes was functioning
at full force; there were seven or eight persons grouped around Dorothea, laughing and looking
at something that had fallen on the floor.

Dorothea had pushed the white sash she had been wearing while playing blindfold back on her
forehead. She was the first to see Daniel; she exclaimed: “There is my husband. Now don’t get
angry, Daniel; it’s nothing but that idiotic plaster mask.”

Councillor Finkeldey, a white-bearded man, nodded at Daniel, or at least at the spot where
he was standing, with marked enthusiasm. It was his way of paying homage to Dorothea: everything
she said he accompanied with an inspired nod of approval.

Daniel saw that the mask of Zingarella had been broken to pieces.

Without greeting a single person present, without even looking at a single one of them, he
stepped into the circle, knelt down, and tried to put the broken pieces of the mask together.
But there were too many small shreds. The nose, the chin, parts of the glorious forehead, a
piece with the mouth arched in sorrow, another piece of the cheek—there were too many; they
could not be put together.

He hurled the fragments to one side, and straightened up. “Philippina! The broom!” His command
was given in a loud tone. And when Philippina came in with the broom, he added: “Sweep the
dirt up on a pile, and then throw it in the garbage can.”

Philippina swept up, while Daniel, as silent and unsocial on going as he had been on coming,
left the room.

Frau Feistelmann made an indignant face, Edward Hahn breathed through his nose, Herr Samuelsky,
a fat man with a red beard, made a contemptuous remark, Dorothea, vexed and annoyed, stood
and looked on while the tears took their unrestrained course.

Benda had been waiting down at the front door. “She has broken my mask,” said Daniel with a
distorted smile, as he came down to his old friend, “the mask you gave me. You remember! Strange
that it should have been broken to-day of all days, the very day you come to see me after so
long a separation.”

“Possibly it can be glued together again,” said Benda, trying to console Daniel.

“I am not in favour of glueing things together,” replied Daniel. His eyes flashed green behind
his glasses.

                                  XVI

When the guests left, Philippina came in and cleaned up the room. Dorothea sat on the sofa.
Her hands were lying in her lap; she was unusually serious.

“Why don’t your American ever come to see us?” asked Philippina, without apparent motive.

Dorothea was terrified. “Lock the door, Philippina,” she whispered, “I have something to tell you.”

Philippina locked the door, and went over to the sofa. “The American has to see me,” continued
Dorothea, as her eyes roamed about the room in timid waywardness. “He says he wants to talk
to me about something that will be of very great importance to me the rest of my life. He is
living in a hotel, but I can’t go to a hotel. It will not do to have him come here, nor do
I wish to be seen on the street with him. He has suggested a place where we might meet, but
I am afraid: I do not know the people. Can’t you help me out, Philippina? Don’t you know some
one to whom we can go and in whose house we can meet?”

Philippina’s eyes shone with their veteran glitter. She thought for a second or two, and then
replied: “Oh, yes, I’ll tell you what you can do. Go down to Frau Hadebusch’s! She’s a good
friend of mine, and you c’n depend on her. It don’t make no difference what takes place in
her house; it won’t bother even the cat. You know Frau Hadebusch! Of course you do. What am
I talking about! She is a widow, and lives all alone in a little house. She won’t rent; she
says she don’t want the trouble. You know she’s no young woman any more. She is all alone,
mind you. No one there but her son, and he’s cracked. Honest, the boy ain’t right.”

“Well, you go and talk it over with Frau Hadebusch, Philippina,” said Dorothea timidly.

“Very well, I’ll go see her to-morrow morning,” replied Philippina, smiled subserviently, and
laid her horny hand on Dorothea’s tender shoulder.

“But listen, Philippina, be very, very careful. Do you hear?” Dorothea’s eyes became big and
threatening. “Swear that you will be as silent as the tombs.”

“As true as I’m standing here!” said Philippina. Just then she bent over to pick up a hair
pin from the floor.

The next morning Philippina ran over to Frau Hadebusch’s. The whole way she kept humming to
herself; she was happy; she was contented.

                 THE DEVIL LEAVES THE HOUSE IN FLAMES

                                   I

Despite the rain, Daniel and Benda strolled around the city moat until midnight.

The very thing that lay heaviest on Daniel’s heart, as was obvious from the expression on his
face, he never mentioned. He told of his work, his travels in connection with the old manuscripts,
his position as organist and in the conservatory, but all in such a general, detached, and
distraught way, so tired and bewildered, that Benda was filled with an embarrassed anguish
that made courteous attention difficult if not impossible.

In order to get him to talk more freely, Benda remarked that he had not heard of the death
of Gertrude and Eleanore until his return. He said he was terribly pained to hear of it, and,
try as he might, he could not help but brood over it. But he had no thought of persuading Daniel
to give him the mournful details. He merely wished to convince himself that Daniel had become
master of the anguish he had gone through,—master of it at least inwardly.

Instead of making a direct and logical reply, Daniel said with a twitching of his lips: “Yes,
I know, you have been here for quite a while already. Inwardly I was surprised at your silence.
But it is not easy to start up a renewed friendship with such a problematic creature as I am.”

“You know you are wrong when you say that,” responded Benda calmly, “and therefore I refuse
to explain my long waiting. You never were problematic to me, nor are you now. I find you at
this moment just as true and whole as you always were, despite the fact that you avoid me,
crouch before me, barricade yourself against me.”

Daniel’s breast heaved as if in the throes of a convulsion. He said falteringly: “First let
that old confidence return and grow. I must first become accustomed to the thought that there
is a man near me who feels with me, sympathises with me, understands me. To be sure, you want
me to talk. But I cannot talk, at least not of those things about which you would like to hear.
I am afraid: I shudder at the thought; I have forgotten how; words mock me, make me feel ashamed.
Even when I have good dreams, I personally am as happily and blessedly silent in them as the
beast of the field. I shudder at the thought of reaching down into my soul and pulling out
old, rusty things and showing them to you—mouldy fruit, slag, junk—showing them to you, you
who knew me when all within me was crystal.”

He fixed his eyes on the clouds and then continued: “But there is probably another means, Friedrich.
Look, friend, look! It was always your affair to look, to behold. Look, but see to it that
you do not make me writhe before you like a worm in the dust! And when you have looked—wisdom
needs only one spoken word for ten that are unspoken. This one word you will surely draw from me.”

Benda, deeply moved, remained silent: “Is it the fault of a woman?” he asked gently, as they
crossed the drawbridge and entered the desolate old door leading to the castle.

“The fault of a woman? No! Not really the fault of a woman. It is rather the fault of a man—my
fault. Many a fate reaches the decisive point in happiness, many not until coloured with guilt.
And guilt is bitter. The fault of a woman!” he repeated, in a voice that threw off a gruesome
echo in the vaulted arch of the gateway to the castle. “There is to be sure a woman there;
and when one has anything to do with her, he finds himself with nothing left but his eyes for
weeping.”

They left the gateway. Benda laid one hand on Daniel’s shoulder, and pointed in silence at
the sky with the other. There were no stars to be seen; nothing but clouds. Benda however had
the stars in mind. Daniel understood his gesture. His eyelids closed; around his mouth there
was an expression of vehement grief.

                                  II

Benda was convinced, not merely that one great misfortune had already taken place, but that
a still greater was in the making.

Whenever he thought of Dorothea, the picture that came to his mind was one that filled him
with fear. And yet, he thought, she must have some remarkable traits, otherwise Daniel would
never have chosen her as his life companion. He wanted to meet her.

He had Daniel invite him in to tea. He called one evening early in the afternoon.

She received him with expressions of ostentatious joy. She said she could hardly wait until
he came, for there was nothing in the world that made such an impression on her as a man who
had really run great risks, who had placed his very life at stake. She could not become tired
of asking him questions. At each of his laconic replies she would shake her head with astonishment.
Then she rested her elbows on her knees, placed her head in her hands, bent over and stared
at him as though he were some kind of prodigy—or monster.

She asked him whether he had been among cannibals, whether he had shot any savages, whether
he had hunted lions, and whether it was really true that every Negro chieftain had hundreds
of wives. When she asked this question she made an insidious face, and remarked that Europeans
would do the same thing if the law allowed.

Thereupon she said that she could not recall having seen him, when still a child, in her father’s
house, and she was surprised at this, for he had such a striking personality. She devoured
him with her eyes; they began to burn as they always did when she wanted to make some kind
of human capture, and blind greed came over her. She unbent; she spoke in her very sweetest
voice; in her laugh and her smile there was, in fact, something irresistible, something like
that trait we notice in good, confiding, but at times obstinate children.

But she noticed that this man studied her, not as if she were a young married woman who were
trying to please him and gain his sympathy, rather as a curious variety of the human species.
There was something in his face that made her tremble with irritation, and all of a sudden
her eyes were filled with hate and distrust.

Benda felt sorry for her. This everlasting attempt to make a seductive gesture, this fishing
for words that would convey a double meaning, this self-betrayal, this excitement about nothing,
made him feel sad. Dorothea did not seem to him a bad woman. Whatever else she might be accused
of, it did not seem to him that she was guilty of downright immoral practices. He felt that
she was merely misguided, poisoned, a phantom and a fool.

His mind went back to certain Ethiopian women in the very heart of Africa; he thought of their
noble walk, the proud restfulness of their features, their chaste nudeness, and their inseparability
from the earth and the air.

He nevertheless understood his friend: the musician could not help but succumb to the charms
of the phantom; the lonely man sought the least lonely of all human beings.

As he was coming to this conclusion, Daniel entered the room. He greeted Benda, and said to
Dorothea: “There is a girl outside who says she has some ostrich feathers for you. Did you
order any feathers?”

“Oh, yes,” replied Dorothea hastily, “it is a present from my friend, Emmy Büttinger.”

“Who’s she?”

“You don’t know her? Why, she is the sister of Frau Feistelmann. You must help me,” she said,
turning to Benda, “for you must know all about this kind of things. There where you have been
ostriches must be as thick as chickens here at home.” Laughing, she went out, and returned
in due time with a big box, from which, cautiously and with evident delight, she took two big
feathers, one white, one black. Holding them by the stem, she laid them across her hair, stepped
up to the mirror, and looked at herself with an intoxicated mien.

In this mien there was something so extraordinary, indeed uncanny, that Benda could not help
but cast a horrified glance at Daniel.

“This is the first time I ever knew what a mirror was,” he said to himself.

                                  III

That evening Daniel visited Benda in his home. Benda showed him some armour and implements
he had brought back with him from Africa. In explaining some of the more unusual objects, he
described at length the customs of the African blacks.

Then he was seized with a headache, sat down in his easy chair, and was silent for a long while.
He suddenly looked like an old man. The ravages his health had suffered while in the tropics
became visible.

“Did you ever see Dorothea’s mother?” he asked, by way of breaking the long silence.

Daniel shook his head: “It is said that she is vegetating, a mere shadow of her former self,
in some kind of an institution in Erlangen,” he replied.

“I have been told that neither Andreas Döderlein nor his daughter has ever, in all these years,
taken the slightest interest in the unfortunate woman,” continued Benda. “Well, as to Andreas
Döderlein, I have always known what to expect of him.”

Daniel looked up. “You hinted once that Döderlein was guilty of reprehensible conduct with
regard to his wife. Do you recall? Is that in any way connected with Dorothea and her life?
Do you care to discuss the matter?”

“I have no objection whatever to throwing such light on the incident as I have,” replied Benda.
“It does have to do with Dorothea, and it explains, perhaps, some things about her. That is,
it is possible that her character is in part due to the kind of father she grew up under and
the kind of mother she lost when a mere child. It is strange the way these things work out:
I am myself, in a way, interwoven with your own fate.”

He was silent for a while; memories were rushing to his mind. Then he began: “If you had ever
known Marguerite Döderlein, she would have been just as unforgettable to you as she is to me.
She and Eleanore—those were the two really musical women I have known in my life. They were
both all nature, all soul. Marguerite’s youth was a prison; her brother Carovius was the jailer.
When she married Döderlein, she somehow fancied she would escape from that prison, but she
merely exchanged one for the other. And yet she hardly knew how it all came about. She accepted
everything just as it came to her with unwavering fidelity and gentleness. Her soul remained
unlacerated, unembittered.”

He rested his head on his hand; his voice became gentler. “We loved one another before we had
ever spoken a word to each other. We met each other a few times on the street, once in a while
in the park; and a number of times she stole up to me in the theatre. I was not reserved: I
offered her my life, but she always insisted that she could not live without her child and
be happy. I respected her feelings and restrained my own. For a while things went on in this
way. We tortured ourselves, practised resignation, but were drawn together again, and then
Döderlein suddenly began to be suspicious. Whether his suspicion was due to whisperings or
to what he himself had at some time seen his wife do—it was impossible for her to play the
hypocrite—I really do not know. At any rate he began to abuse her in the most perfidious manner.
He tried to disturb her conscience. One night he went to her bed with a crucifix in his hand,
and made her swear, swear on the life of her child, that she would never deceive him. He used
all manner of threats and unctuous fustian. She took the oath.”

“Yes, my friend, she took the oath. And this oath seemed to her much more solemn and serious
than the oath she had taken at the altar the day they were married. I knew nothing about it;
she kept out of my sight. I could not endure it. One day she came to me again to say good-bye.
There followed a moment when human strength was no longer of avail, and human deliberation
the emptiest of words. The fatal situation developed. The delicately moulded woman succumbed
to a sense of guilt; her heart grew irresponsive to feelings, her mind dark. She was stricken
with the delusion that her child was slowly dying in her arms, and one day she collapsed completely.
The rest is known.”

Benda got up, went over to the window, and looked out into the darkness.

Daniel felt as if a rope were being tightened about his neck. He too got up, murmured a farewell,
and left.

                                  IV

He had reached the Behaim monument when he began to walk more slowly. A short distance before
him he saw a man and a woman. He recognized Dorothea.

They were speaking very rapidly and in subdued tones. Daniel followed them; and when they reached
the door of his house and turned to go in, he stopped in the shadow of the church.

The man seemed to be angry and excited: Dorothea was trying to quiet him. She was standing
close by him; she held his hand in hers until she unlocked the door. First she whispered, looked
up at the house anxiously, and then said out loud: “Good night, Edmund. Sweet dreams!”

The man went on his way without lifting his hat. Dorothea hastened in.

Daniel was trembling in his whole body. There was something in his eyes that seemed to be beseeching;
and there was something mystic about them. He watched until the light had been lighted upstairs
and the window shade drawn. He was tortured by the stillness of the Square; when the clock
in the tower struck eleven he thought he could hear the blood roaring in his ears.

It was only with difficulty that he dragged himself into the house. Dorothea, already in her
night-gown, was sitting at the table in the living room, sewing a ribbon on the dress she had
just been wearing: it had somehow got loose.

They spoke to each other. Daniel stood behind her, near the stove, and looked over at the back
of her bared neck as if held by a spell. One cold shiver after another was running through
his body.

“Who gave you those ostrich feathers?” he asked, suddenly and rather brusquely. The question
slipped from his lips before he himself was aware of it. He would have liked to say something else.

Dorothea raised her head with a jerk. “I thought I told you,” she replied, and he noticed that
she coloured up.

“I cannot believe that a perfect stranger, and a woman at that, is making you such costly presents,”
said Daniel slowly.

Dorothea got up, and looked at him rather undecidedly. “Very well, if you simply must know,
I bought them myself,” she said with unusual defiance. “But you don’t need to try to browbeat
me like that; I’ll get the money that I paid for them. And you needn’t think for a minute that
I am going to let you draw up a family budget, and expect to make me live by it.”

“You didn’t buy those feathers,” said Daniel, cutting her off in the middle of her harangue.

“I didn’t buy them, and they were not given to me! How did I get them then? Stole them perhaps?”
Dorothea was scornful; but cowardice made it impossible for her to look Daniel in the face.

“I have never in my life talked to any one in this way, nor has any one ever spoken to me like
that,” thought Daniel to himself. He turned deathly pale, went up to her, and placed his hand
like an iron vise about her arm. “I shall permit you to waste my money; I shall not object
if you fritter your time away in the company of good-for-nothing people; if you regard my health
and peace of mind as of no consequence whatever, I shall say nothing; if you let your poor
little child suffer and pine away, I shall keep quiet. I shall submit to all of this. And why
shouldn’t I? Why should I want to have my meals served at regular hours? Why should I insist
that my morning coffee be warm and my rolls fresh from the baker? Why should I be so exacting
as to ask that my clothes be mended, my windows washed, my room swept, and my table in order?
I was not born with a silver spoon in my mouth; I have never known what it was to be comfortable.”

“Oh, listen, Daniel, it’s too bad about you,” said Dorothea in an anxious tone, “but let go
of my arm.”

He loosened his grip on her arm, but did not let it go. “You may associate with whomsoever
you please. Let those people treasure you to whom you are a treasure. So far as money is concerned,
you can have all that I have. Here it is, take it.” He drew from his pocket an embroidered
purse filled with coins, and hurled them on the table. “So that you can wear fine dresses,
I will play the organ on Sundays. So that you can go to masquerade balls and parties of all
kinds, I will try to beat a little music into some twenty-odd unmusical idiots. I will do more
than that: I will promise never to bother myself about your behaviour: I will never ask you
where you have been or where you are going. But listen, Dorothea,” he said, as his face flushed
with anger and anxiety, his voice rising as if by unconscious pressure, “don’t you ever dare
dishonour my name! It is the only thing I have. I owe humanity an irreparable debt for it.
It invests me not simply with what is known as civic honour, it gives me also the honour I
feel and enjoy when I stand in the presence of what I have created. Lie, and you besmirch my
name! Lie, and you sully and debase it! I am probably not as much afraid as you think I am
of being regarded as a cuckold, though I admit that the thought of it makes my blood boil.
But I want to say to you here and now, that when I think of you in the arms of another man
I feel within me a deep desire, a real lust for murder. But you would throw me into the last
pit of hell and damnation, if you were to repay the truths I have told you and given you with
lies, lies, lies. You must not, you dare not, imagine for a minute that I am so selfish and
vulgar as not to be able to understand that a change might come over your heart. But that is
one thing; telling a lie and living a lie is quite another. It is impossible for me to live
side by side with another human being except in absolute truth. A lie, the lie, crushes what
there is in me of the divine. A lie to me is carrion and corruption. Tell me, then, whether
you have been and are true to me! Don’t be afraid, Dorothea, and don’t be ashamed. Everything
may be right yet and work out as it should. But tell me: Have you been deceiving me?”

“I—deceiving you?” breathed Dorothea, and looked into his face as if hypnotised, never so much
as moving an eyelash. “What do you mean? Deceiving you? Do you really think that I would be
capable of such baseness?”

“You have no lover? No other man has touched you since you have been my wife?”

“A lover? Some other man has touched me?” she repeated with that same hypnotic look. In her
child-like face there was the glow of unadulterated honour and undiluted innocence.

“You have been having no secret rendezvous, you have not been receiving treacherous letters,
nor writing them, you have promised no man anything, not even in jest?”

“Ah, well now, Daniel, listen! In jest. That’s another matter. Who knows? You know me, and
you know how one talks and laughs.”

“And you assure me that all this mysterious abuse that is being whispered into my ears and
to which your conduct has given a certain amount of plausibility is nothing in the world but
wickedness on the part of people who know us, nothing but calumny?”

“Yes, Daniel: it is merely wickedness, meanness, and calumny.”

“You are willing that God above should never grant you another minute of peace, if you have
been lying to me? Do you wish that, Dorothea?”

Dorothea balked; she blinked a little. Then she said quite softly: “Those are terrible words,
Daniel. But if you insist upon it, I am willing to abide by the curse you have made a possibility.”

Daniel breathed a breath of relief. He felt that a mighty load had been taken from his heart.
And in grateful emotion he went up to his wife, and pressed her to his bosom.

But at the same time he was repelled by something. He felt that the creature he was pressing
to his heart was without rhythm, or vibration, or law, or order. He began again to be gnawed
at by torture, this time of a new species and coming from another direction.

As he opened the door to the hall, he heard a rustle; and he saw a dark figure hastening over
to the room that opened on the court.

                                   V

Left alone, Dorothea stared for a while into space, as motionless as a statue. Then she took
her violin and bow from the case—she had bought a new bow to take the place of the one that
had been broken—and began to play: a cadence, a trill, a waltz. Her face took on a hardened,
resolute expression.

She soon let the instrument fall from her hands, and began to think. She laid the violin to
one side, took off her slippers, sneaked out of the room in her stocking feet and across the
hall, and listened at the door to Philippina’s room. She opened it cautiously and heard a sound
snoring from Philippina’s bed, which stood next to the door.

The lamp had almost burned down; it gave so little light that the bed clothes could hardly be seen.

She stole up to Philippina’s couch of repose, step by step, without making the slightest noise,
bent down, stretched out her arm, groped around over the body of the inexplicable creature
who was sleeping there, and was on the point of raising the covers and reaching for Philippina’s
breast. Philippina ceased snoring, woke up as if she had been struck in the face by the rays
of a magic lantern, opened her eyes, and looked at Dorothea with a speechless threat. Not a
muscle of her face moved.

Dorothea collected her thoughts instantly. With the expression on her face of one who has just
succeeded in carrying out some good joke, she threw her whole body on Philippina and pressed
her face to her cheek, nauseated though she was by the stench of her breath and the bed clothes.

“Listen, Philippina, the American wants to give you something,” she whispered.

“Jesus, you’re punching my belly in,” replied Philippina, and gasped for breath. When Dorothea
had straightened up, she said: “Well, has he already given you something? That’s the main thing.”

“He gave me the feathers. Isn’t that something?” replied Dorothea, “and he is going to give
me a set of rubies.”

“I wish you already had ’em. It seems to me that your American don’t exactly hail from Givetown.
I’ve been told that he ain’t so damn rich after all. When are you goin’ to meet him again,
your lover?”

“To-morrow evening, between six and seven. Oh, I am so glad, so glad, Philippina. He is so young.”

“Yes, young! That’s a lot, ain’t it?” murmured Philippina contemptuously.

“He has such a pretty mole on his neck, way down on his neck, down there,” she said, pointing
to the same spot on Philippina’s neck. “Right there! Does it tickle you? Does it make you feel
good?”

“Don’t laugh so loud, you’ll waken little Gottfried,” said Philippina in a testy, morose tone.
“And get out of here! I’m sleepy.”

“Good-night, then, you pesky old dormouse,” said Dorothea, in seemingly good-natured banter,
and left the room.

Hardly had she closed the door behind her when Philippina sprang like an enraged demon from
her bed, clenched her fist, and hissed: “Damned thief and whore! She wanted to rob me, that’s
what she did, the dirty wench! You wait! Your days in this place are numbered. Somebody’s going
to squeal, believe me, and when they do, they’ll get you right.”

She drew her red petticoat over her legs, tied it tightly, and went to the door to lock it.
The lock had been out of order for some time; she could not budge it. She carried a chair over
to the door, placed it directly underneath the lock, folded her arms, sat down on it, and remained
sitting there for an hour or so blinking her evil eyes.

When no longer able to keep from going to sleep, she got up, placed the folding table against
the door, and got back into bed, murmuring imprecations such as were second nature to her.

                                  VI

The following day began with a heavy rain storm. Daniel had had a restless night; he went to
his work quite early. But his head was so heavy that he had to stop every now and then, and
rest it on his hand. There was no blood, no swing to his ideas.

Toward eight o’clock the postman came, and asked for Inspector Jordan. The old man had to sign
a receipt in acknowledgment of a solemnly sealed money order.

In the letter the postman gave him were two hundred dollars in bills and a note from Benno.
The letter had been mailed in Galveston. Benno wrote that he had made inquiries and found that
his father was still living. He said he had been quite successful in the New World, and as
a proof of his prosperity he was sending him the enclosed sum, with the best of greetings,
in payment for the trouble he had cost his father.

It was a cold epistle. But the old man was beside himself with joy. He ran to Daniel and then
to Philippina, held the crisp notes in the air, and stammered: “Look, people! He is rich. He
has sent me two hundred dollars! He has become an honest man, he has. He remembers his old
father, he does! Really this is a great day! A great day, Daniel, because of something else
that has just been finished.” He added with a mysterious smile: “A blessed day in the history
of a great cause!”

He dressed and went down town; he wanted to tell his friends the news.

Daniel called down to know if his breakfast was ready; nobody answered. Thereupon he went to
the kitchen, and got himself a bottle of milk and a loaf of bread. Philippina came in a little
later. Her hair looked as though a hurricane had struck it; she was in her worst humour. She
snarled at Daniel, asking him why in the name of God he couldn’t wait till the coffee had been
boiled.

“Leave me in peace, Philippina,” he said, “I need peace.”

“Peace!” she roared, “peace, the same old story: you want peace!” She threw a wild, contemptuous
glance at the open chest containing Daniel’s scores, leaned against the table, put the tips
of her dirty fingers on the score he was then studying, and shrieked: “There is the cause of
the whole malheur! The whole malheur, I say, comes from this damned note-smearing of yours!
The idea of a man settin’ down and dabbing them pot-hooks on good white paper, day after day,
year in and year out! What does it all mean? Tell me! While you’re doin’ it, everything else
is moving—like a crab, backwards. Jesus, you’re a man, and yet you spend your time at that
kind of stuff! I’d be ashamed to admit it.”

Not prepared for this enigmatic outburst of anger and hate, Daniel looked at Philippina utterly
dazed. “Get out of here,” he cried indignantly. “Get out of here, I say,” and pointed to the door.

She got out. “The damned dabbery!” she bellowed with reinforced maliciousness.

From ten to twelve, Daniel had to lecture at the conservatory. His heart beat violently, though
he was unable to explain his excitement. It was more than a foreboding: he felt as if he had
heard a piece of terribly bad news and the real nature of it had slipped his memory.

He did not go home for luncheon; he ate in the café at the Carthusian Gate. Then he took a
long walk out over the fields and meadows. It had stopped raining, and the brisk wind refreshed
him. He stood for a long while on the banks of the canal, and watched some men piling bricks
at a brick-kiln. From time to time he took a piece of paper from his pocket, and wrote something
on it with his pencil: it was notes.

Once he wrote alongside of a motif: “Farewell, my music!” His eyes were filled with dreadful tears.

He returned to the city just as the sun was setting; it looked like a huge ball of fire in
the west. The sky shone out between two great black clouds like the forge of a smithy. He could
not help but think of Eleanore.

He entered his living room, and paced back and forth. Philippina came in, and asked him whether
she should warm up his soup for him. Her unnatural, singing tone attracted his attention; he
looked at her very closely.

“Where is my wife?” he asked.

Philippina’s face betrayed an abysmally mean smile, but she never said a word.

“Where is my wife?” he asked a second time, after a pause.

Philippina’s smile became brighter. “Is it cold out?” she asked, and in a moment she had left
the room. Daniel stared at her as if he feared she had lost her mind. In a few minutes she
came back. In the meantime she had put on a cloak that was much too short for her, and beneath
which the loud, freakish skirt of her checkered dress could be seen.

“Daniel, come along with me,” she said in an anxious voice. To Daniel her voice sounded mysterious
and fearful. “Come along with me, Daniel! I want to show you something.”

He turned pale, put on his hat, and followed her. They crossed the square in silence, went
through Binder Street, Town Hall Street, and across the Market. Daniel stopped. “What are you
up to?” he asked with a hoarse voice.

“Come along! You’ll see,” whispered Philippina.

They walked on, crossed the Meat Bridge, went through Kaiser Street and the White Tower to
St. James’s Place. Some people looked at the odd couple in amazement. When they reached Frau
Hadebusch’s little house, it was dark. “Listen, Philippina, are you ever going to talk?” said
Daniel, gritting his teeth.

“Psh!” Philippina knew what she was doing. She put her mouth to Daniel’s ear, and whispered:
“Go up two flights, quick, you know the house, bang on the door, and if it’s locked, bust it
in. In the meantime I’ll go to Frau Hadebusch so that she can’t interfere.”

Then Daniel understood.

                                  VII

Everything became blood-red before his eyes; he was seized with a feverish chill.

He had followed Philippina with a dejected, limp feeling of disgust, fear and coercion. Now
he knew what it was all about. At the very beginning of the events he saw the middle and the
end. He saw before the bolted door what was going on behind it. His soul was seized with horror,
rage, woe, contempt, and terror. He felt dizzy; he feared lie might lose consciousness.

He sprang up the creaking stairs by leaps and bounds. He stood before the door behind which
he had gone hungry, been cold, and glowed with enthusiasm as a young man. Silence should have
reigned there now, so that the devotion of retrospective spirits might not be molested on the
grave of so many, many hopes.

He jerked at the latch; a scream was heard from within. The door was bolted. He pressed his
body against the fragile wood so violently that both hinges, and the latch, gave way, and the
door fell on to the middle of the floor with a mighty crash.

The scream was repeated, this time in a more piercing tone. Dorothea was lying on a big bed
with nothing on but a flimsy chemise. Frau Hadebusch, pimp always, had rented the bed from
a second-hand dealer; it covered a half of the room. Before Dorothea was a plate of cherries;
she had been amusing herself by shooting the pits at her lover. He likewise was lacking nearly
all the garments ordinarily worn by men when in the presence of women. He was sitting astride
on a chair, smoking a short-stemmed pipe.

When Daniel, with bloody hands—he had scratched himself while breaking in the door—with his
hair flying wild about his face, panting, and pale as death, stepped over the door, Dorothea
again began to scream; she screamed seven or eight times. She was filled with despair and terrible
anxiety.

Daniel rushed at the young man, and seized him by the throat. While he held the American in
a death-like grip, while he saw Dorothea, as if in a roseate haze, with uplifted arms, leave
the bed screaming at the top of her voice, while an extraordinary power of observation, despite
his insane rage, came over him, while he watched the cherries as they rolled across the bed
and saw the green stems, some of which were withered, showing that the cherries were half rotten,
while he felt a taste on his tongue as if he too had eaten cherries—while he saw all these
things and had this sensation, he thought to himself without either doubt or relief: “This
is the downfall; this is chaos.”

The American—it later became known that he was a wandering artist who had, with an equal amount
of nerve and adroitness, worked his way into the private social life of the city—thrust his
antagonist back with all his might, and struck up the position of a professional boxer. Daniel,
however, gave him no time to strike; he fell on him, wrapped his arms tight about him, threw
him to the floor, and was trying to choke him. He groaned, struggled, got his fist loose, struck
Daniel in the face, and cried, “You damned fool!” But it was the cry of a whipped man.

Loud noise broke out downstairs. A crowd of people collected on the sidewalk. “Police, police!”
shrieked the shrill voice of a woman. The people began to make their way up the stairs.

“Oh, oh, oh!” moaned Dorothea. In half a minute she had her dress on. “Out of this place and
away,” she said, as she looked for her gloves and umbrella.

Frau Hadebusch appeared in the hall, wringing her hands. Behind her stood Philippina. Two men
forced their way in, ran up to Daniel and the American, and tried to separate them. But they
had bitten into each other like two mad dogs; and it was necessary to call for help. A soldier
and the milkman gave a hand; and finally two policemen appeared on the scene.

“I must go home,” cried Dorothea, while the other women shrieked and carried on. “I must go
home, and get my things and leave.”

With the face of one possessed and at the same time dumb, Philippina stole out from among the
excited crowd and followed Dorothea. She did not feel that she was walking; she could not feel
the pavement under her feet; she was unconscious of the air. That wild inspiration returned
to her which she had experienced once before in her life—the time she went up in the attic
and saw Gertrude’s lifeless body hanging from a rafter.

Her veins pulsed with a hot lust for destruction. “Swing the torch!” That was the cry she heard
running through her brain. “Swing the torch!” But she wanted to do something much more pretentious
this time than merely start a fire in some rubbish. The farther she went the more rapidly she
walked. Finally she began to run and sing with a loud, coarse voice. Her cloak was not buttoned;
it flew in the air. The people who saw her stopped and looked at her, amazed.

                                 VIII

Herr Carovius and Jordan were sitting in the Paradise Café.

“How things change, and how everything clears up and straightens out!” remarked Jordan.

“Yes, the open graves are gaping again,” said Herr Carovius cynically.

“So far as I am concerned,” continued Jordan, without noticing the aversion his affability
had aroused in Herr Carovius, “I can now face death with perfect peace of mind. My mission
is ended; my work is done.”

“That sounds as if you had discovered the philosopher’s stone,” remarked Herr Carovius sarcastically.

“Perhaps,” replied Jordan gently and bent over the table. “You are after all not entirely wrong,
my honoured friend. Do you wish to be convinced? Will you honour me with a visit?”

Herr Carovius had become curious. They paid their bills and left for Ægydius Place.

Having entered Jordan’s room, the old man lighted a lamp and bolted the door. He then opened
the door of the great cabinet by the wall, and took out a big doll. It was dressed like a Swiss
maid, had on a flowered skirt, a linen waist, and a little pink apron. Its yellow hair was
done up in braids, and on its head was a little felt hat.

“All that is my handiwork,” said Jordan, with much show of pride. “I myself took all the measurements
and made the clothes, including even the shoes. And now watch, my dear friend.”

He placed the doll in the middle of the room. “She will speak,” he continued, his face radiant
with joy, “she will sing. She will sing a song native to her beloved Tyrol. Will you be so
good as to take this chair? I would rather not have you so close to it, if I may, for there
are certain noises which I still have to correct. The illusion is stronger when you are some
distance away.”

He crouched down behind the doll, did something at its back, and the buzzing of wheels became
audible. The old man then stepped out to the front of the doll, and said: “Now, my little girl,
let’s hear what you can do!”

An uncanny, hoarse, somewhat cooing voice rang out from the body of the doll. It sounded like
the vibrations of metallic strings accompanied by the low tones of a water whistle. If you
closed your eyes, you could at least imagine you were hearing a song sung by some one in the
distance. But if you looked at the thing closely with its lifeless, mask-like kindly, waxen
face, and heard the shrill, muffled sounds, without either articulation or rhythm, coming from
within, it took on a ghostly aspect. Herr Carovius in fact felt a cold chill creep down his back.

When the machine ran down, the doll’s eyelids and lips closed. Jordan was looking at Herr Carovius
in great suspense. “Well, what do you think of it?” he asked. “Be quite frank; I can stand
any amount of criticism.”

Herr Carovius had great difficulty to keep from bursting out laughing. His mouth and chin itched.
Suddenly, however, scorn and contempt left him; he fell into a disagreeably serious frame of
mind, and a softness, a mildness such as he had not felt since time immemorial stole over his
heart. He said: “That is a perfectly splendid invention! Perfectly splendid! Though it does
need some improvement.”

Jordan nodded zealously and with joyous approval. He was on the point of going into a detailed
description of the mechanism and its artistic construction, when the two men heard a strange
noise in the adjoining room. They stopped and listened. They could hear some one moving the
furniture; there were steps back and forth; they heard a hammering and pounding as if some
one were trying to open a box. This was followed by a sound that resembled the falling of paper
on the floor; it lasted for some time, bunch apparently following bunch. Listen! Some one is
talking in an abusive voice! What’s that? A gruesome, sing-song voice repeating unintelligible
words: “I-oi! huh, huh! I-oi, huh-huh!” There is a sound as if of crackling fire. The flames
cannot be seen; but they can be heard!

Old Jordan jerked the door open, and cried like a child.

Philippina was standing in the midst of a pile of burning papers. She had forced Daniel’s trunk
open, thrown every one of his scores on the floor, and set them on fire. She was a fearful
object to behold. Her hair hung down loose and straggly over her shoulders, she was swinging
her arms as if she were working a pump-handle, and from her mouth poured forth a volley of
loud, babbling, gurgling tones that bore not the faintest resemblance to anything human. Her
face, lightened by the flames, was coloured with the trace of fearful voluptuousness. Herr
Carovius and old Jordan stood in the doorway as if paralysed. Seeing them, she began to hop
about, and stretched out her upraised arms to the flames, which were leaping higher and higher.

Herr Carovius, awakening from his torpidity, saw that it was high time to make some effort
to escape. Shielding his face with his hands, he fled as fast as his feet could carry him to
the hall door and down the steps. Tears were gushing down Jordan’s cheeks; fear had made it
impossible for him to reflect. He ran back into his room, opened the window, and called out
to the people on the square. Then he chanced to think of his beloved doll. He rushed up to
it and took it under his arm. But when he tried to leave the room, the smoke blew into his
face, benumbing and burning him. He staggered, reached the top of the stairs, made a misstep,
fell headlong down the steps, still holding the doll in convulsive embrace, twitched a few
times, and then lay lifeless on the hall floor.

Heart failure had put an end to his life.

Dorothea, who had been in the house packing her things, hastened, luggage in hand, past the
corpse. Her face was ashen; she never looked at the dead body of Inspector Jordan. She was
soon lost in the crowd of excited people. She had vanished.

                                  IX

The police had at last separated Daniel and the American in Frau Hadebusch’s house. Daniel
fell on a chair, and gazed stupidly into space. Frau Hadebusch brought him some water. The
American put on his clothes, while the spectators looked on and laughed.

The two men were then taken to the police station, where the lieutenant in charge took such
depositions as were necessary for court action. Daniel saw a gas lamp, a quill pen, several
grinning faces, his own bloody hand, and nothing more. The American was held in order to protect
him from further attacks; Daniel was released. He heard the young man tell his story in a mangled
German and with a voice that was nearly choked with rage, but did not absorb anything he said.

He heard a dog bark, a wagon rattle, a bell strike; he heard people talking, murmuring, crying;
he heard the scraping of feet. But it all sounded to him like noises that were reaching his
ears through the walls of a prison. He went on his way; his gait was unsteady.

As he reached the Church of Our Lady, Daniel turned to the right toward the Market Place, and
saw the Goose Man standing before him.

“Go home,” the Goose Man seemed to say with a sad voice. “Go home!”

“Who are you? what do you wish of me?” A voice within him asked. But then it seemed that the
figure had become invisible, and that it could not be seen again until it was far off in the
distance, where it was being shone upon by a bright light.

People were running across Ægydius Place; some of them were crying “Fire!” Daniel turned the
corner; he could see his house. Flames were leaping up behind his window. He pressed his hands
to his temples, and, with eyes wide open and filled with terror, he forced his way through
the crowd up to his house. “For God’s sake, for Heaven’s sake!” he cried, “save my trunk!”

Many looked at him. A figure appeared at the window; many arms were pointed at it. “The woman!
Look, look, the woman!” came a cry from the crowd. And then again: “She has set the house on
fire! She has swung the torch and started the fire!”

Daniel rushed into his house. Firemen overtook him. There he saw in the hall, lighted by the
lanterns being carried back and forth so swiftly, and placed in the corner with no more care
or consideration than was possible under such circumstances, the dead body of old Jordan. His
body, and close beside it, as if in supernatural mockery of all things human, the doll, the
Swiss maid with the machine in her stomach. Sighing and sobbing, he fell down; his forehead
touched the dead hand of the old man.

As if in a dream he heard the hissing of the hoses, the commands, the hurried running back
and forth of the firemen. Then he felt as if a shadow, a figure from the lower world, suddenly
rose before him. A clenched fist, he thought, opened and hurled shreds of paper into his face.
When he looked up he could see nothing but the firemen rushing around him. The shadow, the
figure, had pushed its way in among them, and in the confusion no one had paid any attention to it.

With an absent-minded gesture, Daniel reached out and picked up the paper that was lying nearest
him. It had fallen on the face of the doll. He unfolded it and saw, written in his own hand,
the music to the “Harzreise im Winter.” Under the notes were the words:

    But aside, who is it?
    His path in the bushes is lost,
    Behind him rustle
    The thickets together,
    The grass rises again,
    The desert conceals him.

The melody and rhythm that interpreted the words were of a grandiose gloominess, like a song
of shades pursued in the night, across the sea. Daniel recalled the hour he had written this
music; he recalled the expression on Gertrude’s face the time he played it for her. Eleanore
was there, too, wearing a white dress, with a myrtle wreath in her hair. The tones dissolved
the web of infinite time. “But aside, who is it?” came forth like a great, deep dirge. In the
question there was something prophetically great. He covered his face and wept; he felt as
if his heart would break.

The dead man and the doll were lying there, motionless, lifeless.

In half an hour the fire was under control. The two attic rooms had been burned out completely.
Further than this no damage had been done.

Philippina had vanished without a trace. Since no one had seen her leave the house, the first
theory was that she had been burned to death. But investigation proved this assumption to be
incorrect. The police looked for her everywhere, but in vain; she was not to be found. A few
people who had known her rather intimately insisted that she had been burned up so completely
that there was nothing left of her but a little pile of black ashes.

However this may be, and whatever the truth may be, Philippina never again entered the house.
No one ever again saw or heard a thing of her.

                         BUT ASIDE, WHO IS IT?

                                   I

Late in the evening Benda came. He had been tolerably well informed of everything that had
taken place. In the hall he met Agnes. Though generally quite monosyllabic, Agnes was now inclined
to be extremely communicative, but she could merely confirm what he had already heard.

She went up to the top floor with him, and he stood there for a long while looking at the burnt
rooms. There were two firemen on guard duty. “All of his music has been burnt up,” said Agnes.
Benda thought he would hardly be able to talk with his old friend again after this tragedy.
But he at once felt ashamed of his timidity, and went down to see him.

It was again quiet throughout the entire house.

Daniel had lighted a candle in the living room. Finding it too dark with only one candle, he
lighted another.

He paced back and forth. The room seemed too small for him: he opened the door leading into
Dorothea’s room, and walked back and forth through it too. On entering the dark room, his lips
would move; he would murmur something. When he returned to the lighted room, he would stand
for a second or two and stare at the candles.

His features seemed to show traces of human suffering such as no man had borne before; it could
hardly have been greater. He did not seem to notice Benda when he came in.

“Everything gone? Everything destroyed?” asked Benda, after he had watched Daniel walk back
and forth for nearly a quarter of an hour.

“One grave after the other,” murmured Daniel, in a voice that no longer seemed to be his own.
He raised his head as if surprised at the sound of what he himself had said. He felt that a
stranger had come into the room without letting himself be heard.

“And the last work, the great work of which you told me, the fruit of so many years, has it
also been destroyed?” asked Benda.

“Everything,” replied Daniel distractedly, “everything I have created in the way of music from
the time I first had reason to believe in myself. The sonatas, the songs, the quartette, the
psalm, the ‘Harzreise,’ ‘Wanderers Sturmlied,’ and the symphony, everything down to the last
page and the last note.”

Yes, there was a stranger there; you could hear him laughing quietly to himself. “Why do you
laugh?” asked Daniel sternly, and adjusted his glasses.

Benda, terrified, said: “I did not laugh.”

“The grass rises again, the desert conceals him,” said the stranger. He wore an old-fashioned
suit, a droll sort of cap, and Hessian boots. “I ought to know him,” thought Daniel to himself,
and began to meditate with cloudy mind.

“This is like murder, unheard-of murder,” cried Benda’s soul; “how can he bear it? What will
he do?”

“What is there to do?” asked Daniel, expressing Benda’s silent thought in audible words, and
looking askew, as he walked back and forth, at the stranger who went slowly through the room
over to the window in the corner. “What can human fancy find reasonable or possible after all
that has happened? Nothing! Merely pine away; pine away in insanity.”

“Oho,” said the stranger, “that is a trifle strong.”

“If he would only keep quiet,” thought Daniel, tortured. “I presume you know what has happened
with the woman whom I called my wife,” he continued. “That I threw myself away on this vain,
soulless spirit of a mirror is irrelevant. Greater men than I have walked into such nets and
become entangled, ensnared. I have never cherished the delusion that I was immune to all the
mockery of this earth. I believed, however, that I could scent out truth and falsehood, and
differentiate the one from the other, just as the hand can tell by the feel the wet from the
dry. But the connection of the one with the other, and the horrible necessity of this connection,
I do not understand.”

“You have been served just right,” remarked the intruder with the Hessian boots. He had sat
down on a chair in the corner, and looked quite friendly.

“Why?” roared Daniel, stopping.

Benda, astounded, rose to his feet. “Speak out, Daniel,” he said affectionately, “unburden
your soul!”

“If I only could, Friedrich, if I only could! If my tongue would only move! Or if there were
some one who felt with me and could speak for me!”

“Try it; the first word is often like a spark and starts a flame.”

Daniel was silent. The intruder said deliberatively: “That goes deep down to the recesses of
the heart and up high to the things that are immortal.”

Daniel looked over at him sharply, and saw that it was the Goose Man.

                                  II

All effort to get Daniel to talk was in vain. Along toward midnight, Benda took leave of him.
Agnes unlocked the door for him; he said to her: “Look after him; he has no one else now.”

Daniel lay on the sofa with his hands crossed behind his head, and stared at the ceiling. His
eyes were hot; at times he trembled and shook.

“It isn’t very sociable here,” said the Goose Man, “the air is full of tobacco smoke, and there
is a draft coming in from that dark room.”

Daniel got up, closed the door, and lay down again.

The metallic exterior of the Goose Man seemed to become flexible, somewhat as when a frozen
body thaws out. “You have gone through a great deal,” he continued thoughtfully. “That any
one who wishes to create must also experience is clear. Experience is his mother’s milk, his
realm of roots; it is where the saps flow together, from which his forms and figures are developed.
But there is experience and experience, and between the two there is a world of difference.”

“Superfluous profundity,” murmured Daniel, plainly annoyed. “To live is to have experience.”
He took council with himself in the attempt to devise a means by which he might get rid of
the importunate chatterer.

The Goose Man again struck up his gentle laugh. He replied: “Many live, and yet do not live;
suffer, and yet do not suffer. In what does guilt lie? What does it consist of? In not feeling;
in not doing. The first thing for some men to do is to eradicate completely the false notions
they have of what constitutes greatness. For what is greatness after all? It is nothing in
the world but the fulfilment of an unending circle of petty duties, small obligations.”

“There is a fundamental difference between the creator and all other men,” remarked Daniel,
at once excited and troubled by the conversation and the turn it was taking.

“Do you appeal to, depend on, refer to music in this present case?” asked the Goose Man, his
good-natured look becoming more or less disdainful.

“In music every creation is more closely related to an unconditional exterior than is true
of anything else that man gives to man,” answered Daniel. “The musical genius stands nearer
God than any other genius.”

The Goose Man nodded. “But his fall begins one step from God’s throne, and is a high and deep
one. Do you know what you are? And do you really know what you are not?”

Daniel pressed his hand to his heart: “Have you ever known me to fight for evanescent laurels?
Have I ever tried to feed the human race, which is a race of minors, on surrogates? Have I
ever imitated the flights of Heaven with St. Vitus dance, confusing the one with the other?
Have I not always acted in accord with the best, the inmost knowledge I had, and in obedience
to my conscience? Was I ever a liar?”

“No, no, no!” cried the Goose Man, by way of appeasing Daniel’s unrest. He took off his cap,
and laid it on his knee. “You were always sincere. There can be no doubt about it, your heart
was always in your profession. All life has streamed into your soul, and you have lived in
the ivory tower. Your soul was well protected, well protected from the very beginning. It was
in a position similar to that created by a swimmer who rubs his body with grease before plunging
into the water. You have suffered; the poison of the Nessus shirt you have worn has burned
your skin, and the pain you have thereby suffered has been transformed into sweet sounds. So
they all are, the creators, invulnerable and inaccessible. That is the way you picture them
to yourself. Is it not true? Monsters who take up the cross of the world, and yet, grief-laden
though they be, grow beyond their own fate. Such is your lot; and so do you look to-day in
your forty-second year.”

Daniel was not prepared for this tone of bitterness; he turned his face to the corner where
the Goose Man was sitting. “I do not understand you,” he said slowly. The pitiable crying of
little Gottfried could be heard from the room opening out on the court, and then Agnes’s quieting
lullaby.

“If you only had not lived in the ivory tower!” cried the Goose Man. “If you only had been
more sensitive and not so well protected! If you had only lived, lived, lived, really and truly,
and near to life, like a naked man in a thicket of thorns! Life would have got the best of
you, but your love would have been real, the hate you have experienced real, your misfortunes
real, the lies, ridicule, and betrayal all real, and the shadows of those who have died from
you would have taken on reality. And the poison of the Nessus shirt would not merely have burned
your skin; it would have penetrated to your very blood, it would have found its way to the
deepest, most secret recesses of your heart. Your work would have been carried on and out,
not in a struggle against your darkness and your limited torments of soul, a slave before men
and unblessed of God. Eliminate from your mind now, forever and completely, the delusion that
you have borne the sufferings of the world! You have merely borne your own sufferings, loving-loveless,
altruistic-egoist, monster, man without a country that you are!”

“Who are you? What are you trying to say?” asked Daniel, automatically, falteringly, with pale
lips.

“Oh, don’t you see who I am? I am the Goose Man,” came the reply, spoken with a loyal and devoted
bow. “The Goose Man, lonesome there behind the iron fence, lonesome there on the water at the
fountain, and yet situated in the middle of the Market. An insignificant being, tangible and
intelligible to every one who passes by, though a certain degree of monumentality has been
ascribed to me in all these years. But I pay no attention to this ascription of greatness;
I laugh at it. I give the Market, where the people come and haggle over the price of potatoes
and apples, a certain degree of dignity. That is all. They see me as I stand there, always
upright, under the open sky; and despite my distinguished position, they have all come to look
upon me as a cousin. For a time they gave me a nickname: they called me by your name. But they
had no right to do this; none at all, it seems to me. I have looked out for my geese; no one
can say a thing against me.”

The Goose Man laughed a quiet, inoffensive laugh; and when Daniel turned his face to the corner,
the chair was empty, the strange guest had vanished.

                                  III

But he came back. And when Daniel’s mind and body were both completely broken down and he was
obliged to remain in bed, his visits became regular. He sat next to Benda, for Benda had taken
to calling on Daniel now every day and staying with him until late at night. But Daniel grew
quieter and quieter. Sometimes he would make no reply at all to Benda’s remarks or questions.

The Goose Man came in behind Dr. Dingolfinger and stood on tiptoes, as curious as curious could
be, and looked over his arm when he wrote out his prescriptions. The Goose Man was a little
fellow: he hardly reached up to the doctor’s hips.

He hopped around Agnes when she cooked the soup and expressed his sympathy for her; she looked
so pale. Though only thirteen years old, there was the worried look of a mature woman in her
face; she would cast her eyes around the room as if trying to catch a glance of human love
in the eyes of another person; her looks were timid and stealthy. “Some one should be caring
for her too,” said the Goose Man, shaking his head, “some one should be making a good, warm
soup for her.”

Though it would be unfair to say that the Goose Man was offensively concerned, he seemed to
be interested in everything that was going on in the house. When the officials of the fire
department came to cross-question Daniel about the fire, he became angry and gruff, and did
not wish to let them in. “Give the poor man some rest, some peace, after all these years of
suffering,” he implored, “give him time to collect himself and to meditate on what has taken
place.” And in fact the members of the fire department left as soon as possible; they did not
stay long.

The Goose Man was always in a cheerful humour, always ready for a good joke. At times he would
whistle softly, and smooth out the wrinkles in his doublet. There was a certain amount of rustic
shyness about him, but his affability, his good manners, and his child-like cheerfulness removed
any unpleasant impression this rusticity might otherwise have made. He generally spoke the
dialect of Nuremberg, though when with Daniel he never spoke anything but the most correct
and chosen High German. His natural, acquired culture and the wealth of his vocabulary were
really amazing.

Ten times a day at least he would scamper into the room where little Gottfried was sleeping
and express his admiration for the pretty child. “How you are to be envied to have such a living
creature crawling and sprawling around in your home!” he said to Daniel. And in course of time
Daniel actually came to have a new affection for the child.

As soon as the Goose Man felt perfectly at home in Daniel’s house, he took to bringing his
two geese along with him. He would place them very circumspectly in a corner of the room. One
evening he was sitting playing with them, when the bell rang. Andreas Döderlein stormed in,
and demanded that some one tell him where his daughter was.

“Upon my word and honour! An old acquaintance of mine!” said the Goose Man, laughing and blinking.
“I see him nowadays in the café much more frequently than is good for his health.”

“I must urgently request you to control yourself,” said Benda, turning to Andreas Döderlein,
and pointed to the bed in which Daniel was lying.

“My daughter is not a bad woman. Let people overburdened with credulity believe that she is
bad,” cried Döderlein, with the expression and in the tone and gesture of the royal Lear, and
shook his Olympian locks. “The fact is that violence has been practised on her; she has been
driven into ruin! Men have stolen the sweet love of my dearly beloved daughter through the
use of vile tricks and artifices. Where is she, the unfortunate, betrayed child? With what
is she clothing her nakedness, and how is she finding food and shelter—shelter in a world of
wicked men?”

A strange thing happened: the Goose Man took the gigantic arm of the Olympian, put his mouth
to his beefy ear, and, with a sad and reproachful look on his face, whispered something to
him. Döderlein turned red and then pale, looked down at the floor, and went away with heavy,
rumbling step but silent lips. The Goose Man folded his arms across his breast, and looked
at Döderlein thoughtfully.

“He is said to have taken to drinking,” remarked Benda, “is said to be living a wild, dissipated
life. It seems incredible to me. The Döderleins are generally content to stroll in lust along
the banks of the slimy sea of vice and let other people fall in. The Döderleins are born in
false ermine, and they die in false ermine.”

“And yet he is a human being,” said the Goose Man, so that only Daniel could hear him.

Daniel sighed.

                                  IV

It was late at night. Daniel could not sleep. The Goose Man crouched at his feet on the edge
of the bed, and looked at him as one looks at a dear brother who is suffering intense pain.

“I cannot deny that it is difficult for you to continue your life,” said the Goose Man, trying
to subdue his bright voice. “When we sum up your situation, we see day following day, night
following night, and nothing happening that can be a cause for rejoicing. Everything has been
cut off; the threads have all been broken; the foundation on which you built has been completely
annihilated. You are like the mother of many children who loses them all, all of them, on a
single day by one terrible stroke. The labour of years remains unrewarded; your work has been
in vain; in vain the blood your heart has poured out, the deprivations you have submitted to;
your whole past is like a bad, disordered dream. Oh, I understand full well; I appreciate your
situation. It seems hard, very hard, to go on and not to despair.”

Daniel covered his face with his hands and moaned.

“Have you ever asked yourself how the hand of murder came to strike you? Ah, this Philippina!
This daughter of Jason Philip! I am almost four hundred years old, but such a person I have
never seen or known. But look back over your past! Do it just once! Open your eyes; they are
pure now and capable of beholding. Have you not suffered the Devil to live by your side, to
take part in your life? And were you not at the same time impatient with the angels who spread
their wings about you as my geese spread theirs about me? The Devil has grown fat from you.
The vampire has battened on you, has fed on your blood. All this comes about when one is unwilling
to give, when one merely takes and takes and takes. That makes the Devil fat; the vampire becomes
greedier with each passing sun. Ah, so many good genii have fled from you! Many you have frightened
away, you, bewitched, you, enchanted! Well, what now? What next? Hell has claimed its full
booty; Heaven can now open again to your new-born heart.”

“There is no Heaven,” groaned Daniel, “there is nothing but blackness and darkness.”

“You still breathe, your heart is still beating, you still have five fingers on each hand,”
replied the Goose Man quietly. “He who has paid his debts is a free man: you have paid yours.”

“I am my own debt, my own guilt. If I continue to live, I will sin again. Were I to live over
the past, back into the past, I would contract the same debts.”

“But there is such a thing as a transformation, and through it one receives absolution. Turn
away from your phantom and become a human being—and then you can become a creator. If you once
become human, really human, it may be that you will not need the work, symphony or whatever
else you choose to call it. It may be that power and glory will radiate from you yourself.
For are not all works merely the round-about ways, the detours of the man himself, merely man’s
imperfect attempts to reveal himself? Did you not love a mask of plaster more than the countenances
that shone upon you, the faces that wept about you? Did you not allow another mask, a thing
of the mirror, to get control over you, and so to besmirch your soul and strike your spirit
with paralysis? How can a man be a creator if he deceives, stunts, and abbreviates the humanity
that is in him? It is not a question of ability, Daniel Nothafft, it is a question of being,
living, being.”

Daniel tossed his head back and forth on his pillow, writhing in agony. “Stop!” he gulped,
“stop, stop!”

