Amabel Channice

BY

Anne Douglas Sedgwick

AUTHOR OF "THE RESCUE," "PATHS OF JUDGEMENT," "A FOUNTAIN SEALED," ETC.

NEW YORK The Century Co. 1908

Copyright, 1908, by THE CENTURY CO.

Published October, 1908

THE DE VINNE PRESS

AMABEL CHANNICE

I

Lady Channice was waiting for her son to come in from the garden. The afternoon was growing
late, but she had not sat down to the table, though tea was ready and the kettle sent out a
narrow banner of steam. Walking up and down the long room she paused now and then to look at
the bowls and vases of roses placed about it, now and then to look out of the windows, and
finally at the last window she stopped to watch Augustine advancing over the lawn towards the
house. It was a grey stone house, low and solid, its bareness unalleviated by any grace of
ornament or structure, and its two long rows of windows gazed out resignedly at a tame prospect.
The stretch of lawn sloped to a sunken stone wall; beyond the wall a stream ran sluggishly
in a ditch-like channel; on the left the grounds were shut in by a sycamore wood, and beyond
were flat meadows crossed in the distance by lines of tree-bordered roads. It was a peaceful,
if not a cheering prospect. Lady Channice was fond of it. Cheerfulness was not a thing she
looked for; but she looked for peace, and it was peace she found in the flat green distance,
the far, reticent ripple of hill on the horizon, the dark forms of the sycamores. Her only
regret for the view was that it should miss the sunrise and sunset; in the evenings, beyond
the silhouetted woods, one saw the golden sky; but the house faced north, and it was for this
that the green of the lawn was so dank, and the grey of the walls so cold, and the light in
the drawing-room where Lady Channice stood so white and so monotonous.

She was fond of the drawing-room, also, unbeautiful and grave to sadness though it was. The
walls were wainscotted to the ceiling with ancient oak, so that though the north light entered
at four high windows the room seemed dark. The furniture was ugly, miscellaneous and inappropriate.
The room had been dismantled, and in place of the former drawing-room suite were gathered together
incongruous waifs and strays from dining- and smoking-room and boudoir. A number of heavy chairs
predominated covered in a maroon leather which had cracked in places; and there were three
lugubrious sofas to match.

By degrees, during her long and lonely years at Charlock House, Lady Channice had, at first
tentatively, then with a growing assurance in her limited sphere of action, moved away all
the ugliest, most trivial things: tattered brocade and gilt footstools, faded antimacassars,
dismal groups of birds and butterflies under glass cases. When she sat alone in the evening,
after Augustine, as child or boy, had gone to bed, the ghostly glimmer of the birds, the furtive
glitter of a glass eye here and there, had seemed to her quite dreadful. The removal of the
cases (they were large and heavy, and Mrs. Bray, the housekeeper, had looked grimly disapproving)--was
her crowning act of courage, and ever since their departure she had breathed more freely. It
had been easier to dispose of all the little colonies of faded photographs that stood on cabinets
and tables; they were photographs of her husband's family and of his family's friends, people
most of whom were quite unknown to her, and their continued presence in the abandoned house
was due to indifference, not affection: no one had cared enough about them to put them away,
far less to look at them. After looking at them for some years,--these girls in court dress
of a bygone fashion, huntsmen holding crops, sashed babies and matrons in caps or tiaras,--Lady
Channice had cared enough to put them away. She had not, either, to ask for Mrs. Bray's assistance
or advice for this, a fact which was a relief, for Mrs. Bray was a rather dismal being and
reminded her, indeed, of the stuffed birds in the removed glass cases. With her own hands she
incarcerated the photographs in the drawers of a heavily carved bureau and turned the keys
upon them.

The only ornaments now, were the pale roses, the books, and, above her writing-desk, a little
picture that she had brought with her, a water-colour sketch of her old home painted by her
mother many years ago.

So the room looked very bare. It almost looked like the parlour of a convent; with a little
more austerity, whitened walls and a few thick velvet and gilt lives of the saints on the tables,
the likeness would have been complete. The house itself was conventual in aspect, and Lady
Channice, as she stood there in the quiet light at the window, looked not unlike a nun, were
it not for her crown of pale gold hair that shone in the dark room and seemed, like the roses,
to bring into it the brightness of an outer, happier world.

She was a tall woman of forty, her ample form, her wide bosom, the falling folds of her black
dress, her loosely girdled waist, suggesting, with the cloistral analogies, the mournful benignity
of a bereaved Madonna. Seen as she stood there, leaning her head to watch her son's approach,
she was an almost intimidating presence, black, still, and stately. But when the door opened
and the young man came in, when, not moving to meet him, she turned her head with a slight
smile of welcome, all intimidating impressions passed away. Her face, rather, as it turned,
under its crown of gold, was the intimidated face. It was curiously young, pure, flawless,
as though its youth and innocence had been preserved in some crystal medium of prayer and silence;
and if the nun-like analogies failed in their awe-inspiring associations, they remained in
the associations of unconscious pathos and unconscious appeal. Amabel Channice's face, like
her form, was long and delicately ample; its pallor that of a flower grown in shadow; the mask
a little over-large for the features. Her eyes were small, beautifully shaped, slightly slanting
upwards, their light grey darkened under golden lashes, the brows definitely though palely
marked. Her mouth was pale coral-colour, and the small upper lip, lifting when she smiled as
she was smiling now, showed teeth of an infantile, milky whiteness. The smile was charming,
timid, tentative, ingratiating, like a young girl's, and her eyes were timid, too, and a little
wild.

"Have you had a good read?" she asked her son. He had a book in his hand.

"Very, thanks. But it is getting chilly, down there in the meadow. And what a lot of frogs
there are in the ditch," said Augustine smiling, "they were jumping all over the place."

"Oh, as long as they weren't toads!" said Lady Channice, her smile lighting in response. "When
I came here first to live there were so many toads, in the stone areas, you know, under the
gratings in front of the cellar windows. You can't imagine how many! It used quite to terrify
me to look at them and I went to the front of the house as seldom as possible. I had them all
taken away, finally, in baskets,--not killed, you know, poor things,--but just taken and put
down in a field a mile off. I hope they didn't starve;--but toads are very intelligent, aren't
they; one always associates them with fairy-tales and princes."

She had gone to the tea-table while she spoke and was pouring the boiling water into the teapot.
Her voice had pretty, flute-like ups and downs in it and a questioning, upward cadence at the
end of sentences. Her upper lip, her smile, the run of her speech, all would have made one
think her humorous, were it not for the strain of nervousness that one felt in her very volubility.

Her son lent her a kindly but rather vague attention while she talked to him about the toads,
and his eye as he stood watching her make the tea was also vague. He sat down presently, as
if suddenly remembering why he had come in, and it was only after a little interval of silence,
in which he took his cup from his mother's hands, that something else seemed to occur to him
as suddenly, a late arriving suggestion from her speech. 

This day was the wind for the N tough, and being otherwise could not leave the brig to the bar.

DAY
23.

This day was the same under the wind, and contrary to the ESE, and raining.

DAY 24.

In the same manner it has been raining and the wind in the first quadrant tough.

DAY 25.

Dawned cloudy and the wind at the SSO, which time I became a sail. At half past eight vare next
to the first mark, and started the task of removing the boat, having to tighten the S. At noon
I observed the sun in 40 ° 14 'latitude.

At two in the afternoon he left the vessel, and I did set sail, and
returned immediately to beach: two spies to lay out, and having placed
at the three afloat, I made sail and went to beach at three and a
half, at which time I returned to the task of removal.

At five I got to the brig in the channel, and I tied to spend the night.

DAY 26.

Dawned clear, and the O mighty wind. At six and three quarters, I made sail, and to the half past
seven Vare, and although much work was done was not possible to draw the boat. At ten was the
pot, and put markers in the channel 9. At noon I observed 40 ° 14 '.

At four thirty in the afternoon we took the boat where he was stranded,
having worked all day on this task, at which time I made sail, and
I pick up the beacon.

At five I was out bar. In the evening I gave back in 5 fathoms water, we spent the night with
the fourth wind quadrant is strong, and while I was obliged to put the boat on board.

DAY 27.

Wind woke tough fourth quadrant, at twelve was called OS.

At one, having something abonanzado, I made sail, and I dropped the
Relox water, running out of even a light bulb to the government, and
no one aboard Relox any kind.

I went ahead, judging the N 1 / 4 NO. At three gave background, and recognizing that it was
a good place, I sailed the anchor and I did sail, and sailed for 3-1/2, 4-1/2, 5 and 6 fathoms
of water, and gave background on 2-1/2, at a distance than a mile from the Isle of Bordas, delaying
this for their mediocrity to N 1 / 4 NO.

DAY 28.

WSW wind dawned cool, and I went to the island to observe the latitude Bordas, which is 40 °
3 '.

At 0:30 I sent half the people on board, having greatly Arredondo
wind, and was therefore not able to return the boat in search of mine,
nor the other people.

Was always the storm, and stayed on the island tonight, having been required to give back to the
board hope.

DAY 29.

SW dawned mighty wind. At nine o'clock, having declined a little wine the boat, and went on
board.

At ten I sent the boat to carry supplies to the boat, which was anchored
to the N of the island, and he could not come on board.

At four of the Then came the boat, on board, went to sleep with the wind at SSE fresh.

DAY 30.

Dawned with the wind for the N cool, and at eight on board the boat docked, and made him board eight
days of food. At four o'clock I made sail for improving anchorage and as the narrow channel headwind,
Varea twice, and a night time background gave in 4 fathoms of water.

DAY 31.

This day was the wind by NO hard, so I stayed at anchor, and put him
Bailee new boat to the other for being useless.

DAY 1. JUNE.

At eight o'clock I got wind sail SO cool, and I ruled the N 1 / 4 NE to I found 5 fathoms of
water in the northeastern part of the Isle of Bordas, which have been popping the sea and
low everywhere, gave background on that site to recognize them. At one of the later commanded
the sloop with the pilot at the Punta de los Lobos, to record low
and saw if there was nowhere to put the horse on land, in order to
recognize the mouth of the Colorado for considering me as very close
to its drain.

At sunset the anchor lay large, have since the horizon of evil countenance.

At nightfall came the wind gusts to strong SO with hail, and ordered to hoist a lantern at the
top more, that guides you to the boat. At six o'clock the boat came on board, with the news
that he had found near the tip of Wolves 5 fathoms of water.

DAY 2.

At eight o'clock I sailed the anchor, and I did set sail for Punta de los Lobos. A nine thirty
hit the boat and was dragged about two blocks until it fell to 5
fathoms.

At half past ten I gave back in 5 fathoms of water, immediately expressed
to the point, having sailed in return for N 1 / 4 NE. At half past
four p.m. came back to me sail, to improve anchorage, and sailed to
the NW 1 / 4 or a mile, and at five Fund gave in 4 fathoms mud, and
secured the boat with the best cables.

Night fell a bad face, and at three of achuvascó the morning time, and unloaded by the OSO a wind
that seemed turbunada hurricane, and lasted until five o'clock, which is called SO something more
benign.

DAY 3.

SW dawned mighty wind, at which time I sent 3 men to recognize the land, and to continue NNW possible
for there feel the drain of Colorado. At eight checked the wash, and seen the little I had by
that which had been drained by the uselessness vacijeria of rotten, I close the boiler mate,
and gave orders to be given to drink once half rations to animals, and people drank a rifle barrels,
and sent the boat to a stream of salt water for their safety as the brig's immediate exposed
to founder. All day the wind remained SO hard, and went to sleep
in the same compliance, but the three who were to have seemed to recognize.

DAY

4.

I sailed on the boat tomorrow, and I came to recognize the creek: I went for a throw and followed
two leagues, until finding no water to the pot, spread this in different streams very swampy
mud, I turned and I could ship, even with mud to the knee. I went to a hill, which I found grass
and celery straw, and from there I saw, though confused, two trees, which I included two willows,
beside which I had drunk water year past, the journey that I made
to the Colorado land, and though they were like 4 miles away I told
the counter-master who was with me to accompany me, and we followed
towards the said trees.

After traveling about a league, and always pure swamp, we are surrounded
stream without being able to pass on: I turned and came to the creek
where he was a refugee the boat, and found myself stranded, without
it being possible in the flood discharge to the water.

Here I found the three men who were the recognition, which in no way could move this area, full
of swamp mud, streams and brush, in the evening I went on board.

DAY 5.

Dawned raining with the wind did not last. At twelve o'clock, having abated somewhat, I sent 18
men in the boat that they sever the boat to the fleet, and with them the anti-master, for that
would open wells in the Celery Cerrito, to see if fresh water was drawn. At three of the Then
came the boat with 10 men, and those remaining were open wells: re Recio the wind so much that
it was not possible to send the boat people seeking to land which I was obliged to put him on
board because they went under. The storm continued all night.

DAY 6.

At eight o'clock I took the boat into the water, and sent him in search of people to land, and
all anti-single master and a sailor were able to pass the dam to embark in it, and the other, fearing
being drowned in the mud, it was determined to spend the swamp that lay between them and the
boat: the two sailors, Eusebio Gonzalez and Manuel Alcain, at dawn returned to undertake the
discovery of the Rio Colorado, whom I had given the signal to the two trees mentioned above.
A quarter past eleven boat came on board, and I did sail, come closer to Colorado, although
wind on the bow. At two I gave back in 3 fathoms of water, 3 miles W of where it was anchored,
and at this time was the boat came on board and brought the two who had gone to the recognition,
which could not reach trees specified by the endless streams of salt water and swamps. In the
evening I to put the boat on board, by the high winds and storm surge.

DAY 7.

At daybreak secured the boat with the best moorings had.

At eight I sent the boat it was in the back of E to recognize, and
I boarded the boat and left the back of Or five days of food supplies,
while more Bonanca time, in order to find where to camp site land
on the mainland, because I believe that Colorado is very close, and
can reach shore, just find him, or at least will know the quality
of the field at that distance I am of him, having already walked.

At ten o'clock I arrived at the mouth of a channel that is NW, walked through it and kept forever,
and had more flow, because of the countless emerging channels. At noon I came to where was divided
into two equal, and seeing that followed the NE a Tominas they were by it and therefore, as to
follow better course than the other, determined to follow it. At two p.m. landed on the ground,
but the inside there was a muddy stream: this was spent on anti-Master
with 3 sailors, and moving trees.

I was hoping to go down the water to pass, I tried in the intervening
water and found it almost sweet, and not the slightest doubt that
the Colorado flowed there, or at least some portion of it, threw some
shots calling the anti-master and seamen, those who returned, having
drunk fresh water in the said river.

We embarked, and continued water up until the night we camped on the shore, drank fresh water
with a mixture of salt, like sea.

DAY 8.

At dawn I returned to find the brigantine, which I had to have it pretty carefully anchor out,
leaving the recognition of the main river after having it secured in.

At noon I came on board, and I made a sign to the boat that came
on board, who had gone to cut wood, which arrived at one o'clock in
the afternoon.

We spent here the rest of the day and night for being contrary wind.

DAY 9.

E dawned Bonanca wind and raining, and I began the task of bringing the anchors. At half past
seven I made sail for the Colorado. At eleven o'clock the day I arrived at the fork of the
Tominas, and for being here otherwise the wind, gave back to await a favorable wind. We spent
the rest of the day and night with the wind for the fresh E raining.

DAY 10.

This day was kept raining and the wind at ENE tough, so it was not possible to leave this site.

DAY
11.

Dawned with the wind at S Bonanca, and I had to wait for the tide to make me sailing and navigation,
flood tide because this place is not possible.

At half past ten I sailed, and got in defeat for the Colorado.

At 0:30 I was stuck on the inside of the Punta de los Zaramagullones, and sent the boat mark
out the entrance, which had at this time very little water. At five p.m. put the boat and boat
to tow the bow, and full sail, being almost calm, tried to enter. At six in the evening I returned
to beach, by what was necessary to build a spy to get the boat, and egecutado, I had it lanterns
in the beacon, that as the dark night did not look, and I again I got tempted entry at eight
o'clock at night, which gave background site, leave tomorrow to know what the main Colorado,
because I know I'm in your driveway.

Day 12.

This day I sent the boat with the pilot locate the main river, and I also went to boat because
there are so many channels, it is not easy to find the principal. At two p.m. I was satisfied
that was the main river, and followed upstream to the Isla de Lobos. At half past four p.m. turned
around and came on board at seven o'clock in the evening, and did not appear the boat.

DAY 13.

At dawn I made a sign to the boat to come on board.

At half past seven I sailed the anchor and the boat to the trailer
and went on with the brig CISG the river upstream and twelve were
left stranded.

At this time I sent people to set fire to the grassland soil and reed This river has its banks,
as if time still somewhat dry fire the Indians ran peg or whatever,
while the tufted in the state today, just would burn the boats that
were anchored in it: so be the one between, be careful that burn clean
and tufted.

At ten p.m. put the boat in the fleet.

DAY 14.

This day I was happy to put the brig in the main arm of the Colorado,
and to where there is no salt water, and went ashore with the sailors
to set fire to the tufted, and for the reason mentioned above, and
for that, seeing the Indians, where I come to through them to the
Lord Part D. Francisco de Viedma of my entry into this river, because
I have rather carefully, that the Lord will take this news as well
as being the station I left this recognition to the most rigid of
the year, because this sailing to now unknown to all, and know for
sure for my daily report and, I presented my arrival I made the journey
by land, sea skirting the river, by May of next year past, this coast
is full of infinite low, whose circumstances, together with 42 days
ha I went to Black River, will cause quite indisplicencia n.

DAY 15.

Lower ground with people set fire, according to surveys of soil quality,
and at night I came on board.

DAY 16.

At dawn I boarded the boat, and continued recognition of the river upstream, leaving orders the pilot
to the brig mudase also a league above, provided that the wind had favorable, as this best
camp site; sailed all day, repeatedly falling earth, recognize the
quality of it.

At night I camped on an island in the river, having set fire across
its border.

DAY 17.

Followed the river up, doing the same actions that the day yesterday, until I got a Willow Island,
where I had camped last year: there I did tonight.

DAY 18.

This day at sunrise I set sail to board the brigantine, with care if it came Indians. At four
of the afternoon came on board, and found a letter from Mr D. Francis Viedma, who had given the pilot
an Indian who had arrived with 4 other board on the day of yesterday, and although the pilot
gave them enough and entertained, they would not stay for not having found, but agreed to return
to lead the response to that letter, dated May 14; and the brig and found him in the place that
he had warned the pilot.

DAY 19.

This day I took the vacijeria ground, the horse (which so far had found no place for offloading),
and all supplies on board, to clean the boat, and shrink water, and also threw on the ground
anchors and cables, and mounted artillery and ground down to make sure good quality, which certainly
exceeds what I have seen on the Patagonian coast, and I think competes with the best spot, whose
trial I did last year, and explained in the paper cited above: but
where that is not my profession, stop what you might say in the matter,
not err in letting the intelligent farming (although I am not completely
unknown).

Then I came aboard, which was very close to night, came a hill, on
the part of N, 50 60 as Indians immediately sent the boat and the
boat that would lead to some and brought 5, and a linguist mulatta:
among them was the one who had brought the letter from Super-Mayor,
who entertained and gave cordial, (half water from Colorado) poleadas
and cake, and although I wanted to send to the Black River, accounting
for half of them the Lord, d foward account of my arrival to this
river, I could not get it, because they said they want spend the day
here tomorrow, to rest their horses.

At eight o'clock in the evening, I took ground.

DAY 20.

This day they were fed the Indians and gave them liquor, snuff, and
cake for the night.

DAY 21.

This morning they were fed the Indians, and handed him the letter
which brought others to leading to the river to Mr D. Black Francisco
de Viedma, d foward news of my arrival, so for them to do this diligently
as good harmony, were all gifted with brandy beans, biscuits, flour
and beads, and twelve o'clock they set off to their tents, and that
the letter had said that straight Black River will deliver.

DAY 22.

This day we worked on cleaning the boat and the vacijeria, and fill
it with water.

DAY 23.

I came to recognize the ground off the coast of the sea.

At four in the afternoon I got on board, and same time the chief
came Calpisquis 3 Indians, those who stayed the night: they gave food
and liquor.

DAY 24.

At eight o'clock in the morning, the Indians were expressed,
and five in the evening they returned three Chinese, who say they
had left the shelter of the horses that they brought to sell: were
present from the same fate as yesterday.

DAY 25.

At eight o'clock
the Indians came to them to buy the horses, so excuse me, strove foward
to it were to sell the establishment of the Black River, but it was
not possible they say the horses are tired, and who is away, which
is why they wanted to become. In this assumption were presented with
brandy, flour, biscuits, beans and beads. At four p.m. left.

DAY
26.

This day, a little horse restored what had been thinned in navigation,
I went in the sea along the coast about six miles. At two p.m. turned
around, and I Evening board.

DAY 27.

This day I was on board, by
writing a few things belonging to his rig.

DAY 28.
There was only a vague radiance about the chimney piece, the little candle-flames doubled in
the mirror, and the bright circle where Lady Channice and her son sat on either side of the
large, round table. The lamp had a green shade, and their faces were in shadow. Augustine had
turned away his eyes.

And now a strange and painful thing happened, stranger and more painful than he could have
foreseen; for his mother did not answer him. The silence grew long and she did not speak. Augustine
looked at her at last and saw that she was gazing at him, and, it seemed to him, with helpless
fear. His own eyes did not echo it; anger, rather, rose in them, cold fierceness, against himself,
it was apparent, as well as against the world that he suspected. He was not impulsive; he was
not demonstrative; but he got up and put his hand on her shoulder. "I don't mean to torment
you, like the rest of them," he said. "I don't mean to ask--and be refused. Forget what I said.
It's only--only--that it infuriates me.--To see them all.--And you!--cut off, wasted, in prison
here. I've been seeing it for a long time; I won't speak of it again. I know that there are
sad things in your life. All I want to say, all I wanted to say was--that I'm with you, and
against them."

She sat, her face in shadow beneath him, her hands tightly clasped together and pressed down
upon her lap. And, in a faltering voice that strove in vain for firmness, she said: "Dear Augustine--thank
you. I know you wouldn't want to hurt me. You see, when I came here to live, I had parted--from
your father, and I wanted to be quite alone; I wanted to see no one. And they felt that: they
felt that I wouldn't lead the usual life. So it grew most naturally. Don't be angry with people,
or with the world. That would warp you, from the beginning. It's a good world, Augustine. I've
found it so. It is sad, but there is such beauty.--I'm not cut off, or wasted;--I'm not in
prison.--How can you say it, dear, of me, who have you--and him."

Augustine's hand rested on her shoulder for some moments more. Lifting it he stood looking
before him. "I'm not going to quarrel with the world," he then said. "I know what I like in it."

"Dear--thanks--" she murmured.

Augustine picked up his book again. "I'll study for a bit, now, in my room," he said. "Will
you rest before dinner? Do; I shall feel more easy in my conscience if I inflict Hegel on you
afterwards."

III

Lady Channice did not go and rest. She sat on in the shadowy room gazing before her, her hands
still clasped, her face wearing still its look of fear. For twenty years she had not known
what it was to be without fear. It had become as much a part of her life as the air she breathed
and any peace or gladness had blossomed for her only in that air: sometimes she was almost
unconscious of it. This afternoon she had become conscious. It was as if the air were heavy
and oppressive and as if she breathed with difficulty. And sitting there she asked herself
if the time was coming when she must tell Augustine.

What she might have to tell was a story that seemed strangely disproportionate: it was the
story of her life; but all of it that mattered, all of it that made the story, was pressed
into one year long ago. Before that year was sunny, uneventful girlhood, after it grey, uneventful
womanhood; the incident, the drama, was all knotted into one year, and it seemed to belong
to herself no longer; she seemed a spectator, looking back in wonder at the disaster of another
woman's life. A long flat road stretched out behind her; she had journeyed over it for years;
and on the far horizon she saw, if she looked back, the smoke and flames of a burning city--miles
and miles away.

Amabel Freer was the daughter of a rural Dean, a scholarly, sceptical man. The forms of religion
were his without its heart; its heart was her mother's, who was saintly and whose orthodoxy
was the vaguest symbolic system. From her father Amabel had the scholar's love of beauty in
thought, from her mother the love of beauty in life; but her loves had been dreamy: she had
thought and lived little. Happy compliance, happy confidence, a dawn-like sense of sweetness
and purity, had filled her girlhood.

When she was sixteen her father had died, and her mother in the following year. Amabel and
her brother Bertram were well dowered. Bertram was in the Foreign Office, neither saintly nor
scholarly, like his parents, nor undeveloped like his young sister. He was a capable, conventional
man of the world, sure of himself and rather suspicious of others. Amabel imagined him a model
of all that was good and lovely. The sudden bereavement of her youth bewildered and overwhelmed
her; her capacity for dependent, self-devoting love sought for an object and lavished itself
upon her brother. She went to live with an aunt, her father's sister, and when she was eighteen
her aunt brought her to London, a tall, heavy and rather clumsy country girl, arrested rather
than developed by grief. Her aunt was a world-worn, harassed woman; she had married off her
four daughters with difficulty and felt the need of a change of occupation; but she accepted
as a matter of course the duty of marrying off Amabel. That task accomplished she would go
to bed every night at half past ten and devote her days to collecting coins and enamels. Her
respite came far more quickly than she could have imagined possible. Amabel had promise of
great beauty, but two or three years were needed to fulfill it; Mrs. Compton could but be surprised
when Sir Hugh Channice, an older colleague of Bertram's, a fashionable and charming man, asked
for the hand of her unformed young charge. Sir Hugh was fourteen years Amabel's senior and
her very guilelessness no doubt attracted him; then there was the money; he was not well off
and he lived a life rather hazardously full. Still, Mrs. Compton could hardly believe in her
good-fortune. Amabel accepted her own very simply; her compliance and confidence were even
deeper than before. Sir Hugh was the most graceful of lovers. His quizzical tenderness reminded
her of her father, his quasi-paternal courtship emphasized her instinctive trust in the beauty
and goodness of life.

So at eighteen she was married at St. George's Hanover Square and wore a wonderful long satin
train and her mothers lace veil and her mother's pearls around her neck and hair. A bridesmaid
had said that pearls were unlucky, but Mrs. Compton tersely answered:--"Not if they are such
good ones as these." Amabel had bowed her head to the pearls, seeing them, with the train,
and the veil, and her own snowy figure, vaguely, still in the dreamlike haze. Memories of her
father and mother, and of the dear deanery among its meadows, floating fragments of the poetry
her father had loved, of the prayers her mother had taught her in childhood, hovered in her
mind. She seemed to see the primrose woods where she had wandered, and to hear the sound of
brooks and birds in Spring. A vague smile was on her lips. She thought of Sir Hugh as of a
radiance lighting all. She was the happiest of girls.

Shortly after her marriage, all the radiance, all the haze was gone. It had been difficult
then to know why. Now, as she looked back, she thought that she could understand.

She had been curiously young, curiously inexperienced. She had expected life to go on as dawn
for ever. Everyday light had filled her with bleakness and disillusion. She had had childish
fancies; that her husband did not really love her; that she counted for nothing in his life.
Yet Sir Hugh had never changed, except that he very seldom made love to her and that she saw
less of him than during their engagement. Sir Hugh was still quizzically tender, still all
grace, all deference, when he was there. And what wonder that he was little there; he had a
wide life; he was a brilliant man; she was a stupid young girl; in looking back, no longer
young, no longer stupid, Lady Channice thought that she could see it all quite clearly. She
had seemed to him a sweet, good girl, and he cared for her and wanted a wife. He had hoped
that by degrees she would grow into a wise and capable woman, fit to help and ornament his
life. But she had not been wise or capable. She had been lonely and unhappy, and that wide
life of his had wearied and confused her; the silence, the watching attitude of the girl were
inadequate to her married state, and yet she had nothing else to meet it with. She had never
before felt her youth and inexperience as oppressive, but they oppressed her now. She had nothing
to ask of the world and nothing to give to it. What she did ask of life was not given to her,
what she had to give was not wanted. She was very unhappy.

Yet people were kind. In especial Lady Elliston was kind, the loveliest, most sheltering, most
understanding of all her guests or hostesses. Lady Elliston and her cheerful, jocose husband,
were Sir Hugh's nearest friends and they took her in and made much of her. And one day when,
in a fit of silly wretchedness, Lady Elliston found her crying, she had put her arms around
her and kissed her and begged to know her grief and to comfort it. Even thus taken by surprise,
and even to one so kind, Amabel could not tell that grief: deep in her was a reticence, a sense
of values austere and immaculate: she could not discuss her husband, even with the kindest
of friends. And she had nothing to tell, really, but of herself, her own helplessness and deficiency.
Yet, without her telling, for all her wish that no one should guess, Lady Elliston did guess.
Her comfort had such wise meaning in it. She was ten years older than Amabel. She knew all
about the world; she knew all about girls and their husbands. Amabel was only a girl, and that
was the trouble, she seemed to say. When she grew older she would see that it would come right;
husbands were always so; the wider life reached by marriage would atone in many ways. And Lady
Elliston, all with sweetest discretion, had asked gentle questions. Some of them Amabel had
not understood; some she had. She remembered now that her own silence or dull negation might
have seemed very rude and ungrateful; yet Lady Elliston had taken no offence. All her memories
of Lady Elliston were of this tact and sweetness, this penetrating, tentative tact and sweetness
that sought to understand and help and that drew back, unflurried and unprotesting before rebuff,
ready to emerge again at any hint of need,--of these, and of her great beauty, the light of
her large clear eyes, the whiteness of her throat, the glitter of diamonds about and above:
for it was always in her most festal aspect, at night, under chandeliers and in ball-rooms,
that she best remembered her. Amabel knew, with the deep, instinctive sense of values which
was part of her inheritance and hardly, at that time, part of her thought, that her mother
would not have liked Lady Elliston, would have thought her worldly; yet, and this showed that
Amabel was developing, she had already learned that worldliness was compatible with many things
that her mother would have excluded from it; she could see Lady Elliston with her own and with
her mother's eyes, and it was puzzling, part of the pain of growth, to feel that her own was
already the wider vision.

Soon after that the real story came. The city began to burn and smoke and flames to blind and
scorch her.

It was at Lady Elliston's country house that Amabel first met Paul Quentin. He was a daring
young novelist who was being made much of during those years; for at that still somewhat guileless
time to be daring had been to be original. His books had power and beauty, and he had power
and beauty, fierce, dreaming eyes and an intuitive, sudden smile. Under his aspect of careless
artist, his head was a little turned by his worldly success, by great country-houses and flattering
great ladies; he did not take the world as indifferently as he seemed to. Success edged his
self-confidence with a reckless assurance. He was an ardent student of Nietzsche, at a time
when that, too, was to be original. Amabel met this young man constantly at the dances and
country parties of a season. And, suddenly, the world changed. It was not dawn and it was not
daylight; it was a wild and beautiful illumination like torches at night. She knew herself
loved and her own being became precious and enchanting to her. The presence of the man who
loved her filled her with rapture and fear. Their recognition was swift. He told her things
about herself that she had never dreamed of and as he told them she felt them to be true.

To other people Paul Quentin did not speak much of Lady Channice. He early saw that he would
need to be discreet. One day at Lady Elliston's her beauty was in question and someone said
that she was too pale and too impassive; and at that Quentin, smiling a little fiercely, remarked
that she was as pale as a cowslip and as impassive as a young Madonna; the words pictured her;
her fresh Spring-like quality, and the peace, as of some noble power not yet roused.

In looking back, it was strange and terrible to Lady Channice to see how little she had really
known this man. Their meetings, their talks together, were like the torchlight that flashed
and wavered and only fitfully revealed. From the first she had listened, had assented, to everything
he said, hanging upon his words and his looks and living afterward in the memory of them. And
in memory their significance seemed so to grow that when they next met they found themselves
far nearer than the words had left them.

All her young reserves and dignities had been penetrated and dissolved. It was always themselves
he talked of, but, from that centre, he waved the torch about a transformed earth and showed
her a world of thought and of art that she had never seen before. No murmur of it had reached
the deanery; to her husband and the people he lived among it was a mere spectacle; Quentin
made that bright, ardent world real to her, and serious. He gave her books to read; he took
her to hear music; he showed her the pictures, the statues, the gems and porcelains that she
had before accepted as part of the background of life hardly seeing them. From being the background
of life they became, in a sense, suddenly its object. But not their object--not his and hers,--though
they talked of them, looked, listened and understood. To Quentin and Amabel this beauty was
still background, and in the centre, at the core of things, were their two selves and the ecstasy
of feeling that exalted and terrified. All else in life became shackles. It was hardly shock,
it was more like some immense relief, when, in each other's arms, the words of love, so long
implied, were spoken. He said that she must come with him; that she must leave it all and come.
She fought against herself and against him in refusing, grasping at pale memories of duty,
honour, self-sacrifice; he knew too well the inner treachery that denied her words. But, looking
back, trying not to flinch before the scorching memory, she did not know how he had won her.
The dreadful jostle of opportune circumstance; her husband's absence, her brother's;--the chance
pause in the empty London house between country visits;--Paul Quentin following, finding her
there; the hot, dusty, enervating July day, all seemed to have pushed her to the act of madness
and made of it a willess yielding rather than a decision. For she had yielded; she had left
her husband's house and gone with him.

They went abroad at once, to France, to the forest of Fontainebleau. How she hated ever after
the sound of the lovely syllables, hated the memory of the rocks and woods, the green shadows
and the golden lights where she had walked with him and known horror and despair deepening
in her heart with every day. She judged herself, not him, in looking back; even then it had
been herself she had judged. Though unwilling, she had been as much tempted by herself as by
him; he had had to break down barriers, but though they were the barriers of her very soul,
her longing heart had pressed, had beaten against them, crying out for deliverance. She did
not judge him, but, alone with him in the forest, alone with him in the bland, sunny hotel,
alone with him through the long nights when she lay awake and wondered, in a stupor of despair,
she saw that he was different. So different; there was the horror. She was the sinner; not
he. He belonged to the bright, ardent life, the life without social bond or scruple, the life
of sunny, tolerant hotels and pagan forests; but she did not belong to it. The things that
had seemed external things, barriers and shackles, were the realest things, were in fact the
inner things, were her very self. In yielding to her heart she had destroyed herself, there
was no life to be lived henceforth with this man, for there was no self left to live it with.
She saw that she had cut herself off from her future as well as from her past. The sacred past
judged her and the future was dead. Years of experience concentrated themselves into that lawless
week. She saw that laws were not outside things; that they were one's very self at its wisest.
She saw that if laws were to be broken it could only be by a self wiser than the self that
had made the law. And the self that had fled with Paul Quentin was only a passionate, blinded
fragment, a heart without a brain, a fragment judged and rejected by the whole.

To both lovers the week was one of bitter disillusion, though for Quentin no such despair was
possible. For him it was an attempt at joy and beauty that had failed. This dulled, drugged
looking girl was not the radiant woman he had hoped to find. Vain and sensitive as he was,
he felt, almost immediately, that he had lost his charm for her; that she had ceased to love
him. That was the ugly, the humiliating side of the truth, the side that so filled Amabel Channice's
soul with sickness as she looked back at it. She had ceased to love him, almost at once.

And it was not guilt only, and fear, that had risen between them and separated them; there
were other, smaller, subtler reasons, little snakes that hissed in her memory. He was different
from her in other ways.

She hardly saw that one of the ways was that of breeding; but she felt that he jarred upon
her constantly, in their intimacy, their helpless, dreadful intimacy. In contrast, the thought
of her husband had been with her, burningly. She did not say to herself, for she did not know
it, her experience of life was too narrow to give her the knowledge,--that her husband was
a gentleman and her lover, a man of genius though he were, was not; but she compared them,
incessantly, when Quentin's words and actions, his instinctive judgments of men and things,
made her shrink and flush. He was so clever, cleverer far than Hugh; but he did not know, as
Sir Hugh would have known, what the slight things were that would make her shrink. He took
little liberties when he should have been reticent and he was humble when he should have been
assured. For he was often humble; he was, oddly, pathetically--and the pity for him added to
the sickness--afraid of her and then, because he was afraid, he grew angry with her.

He was clever; but there are some things cleverness cannot reach. What he failed to feel by
instinct, he tried to scorn. It was not the patrician scorn, stupid yet not ignoble, for something
hardly seen, hardly judged, merely felt as dull and insignificant; it was the corroding plebeian
scorn for a suspected superiority.

He quarrelled with her, and she sat silent, knowing that her silence, her passivity, was an
affront the more, but helpless, having no word to say. What could she say?--I do love you:
I am wretched: utterly wretched and utterly destroyed.--That was all there was to say. So she
sat, dully listening, as if drugged. And she only winced when he so far forgot himself as to
cry out that it was her silly pride of blood, the aristocratic illusion, that had infected
her; she belonged to the caste that could not think and that picked up the artist and thinker
to amuse and fill its vacancy.--"We may be lovers, or we may be performing poodles, but we
are never equals," he had cried. It was for him Amabel had winced, knowing, without raising
her eyes to see it, how his face would burn with humiliation for having so betrayed his consciousness
of difference. Nothing that he could say could hurt her for herself.

But there was worse to bear: after the violence of his anger came the violence of his love.
She had borne at first, dully, like the slave she felt herself; for she had sold herself to
him, given herself over bound hand and foot. But now it became intolerable. She could not protest,--what
was there to protest against, or to appeal to?--but she could fly. The thought of flight rose
in her after the torpor of despair and, with its sense of wings, it felt almost like a joy.
She could fly back, back, to be scourged and purified, and then--oh far away she saw it now--was
something beyond despair; life once more; life hidden, crippled, but life. A prayer rose like
a sob with the thought.

So one night in London her brother Bertram, coming back late to his rooms, found her sitting there.

Bertram was hard, but not unkind. The sight of her white, fixed face touched him. He did not
upbraid her, though for the past week he had rehearsed the bitterest of upbraidings. He even
spoke soothingly to her when, speechless, she broke into wild sobs. "There, Amabel, there.--Yes,
it's a frightful mess you've made of things.--When I think of mother!--Well, I'll say nothing
now. You have come back; that is something. You have left him, Amabel?"

She nodded, her face hidden.

"The brute, the scoundrel," said Bertram, at which she moaned a negation.--"You don't still
care about him?--Well, I won't question you now.--Perhaps it's not so desperate. Hugh has been
very good about it; he's helped me to keep the thing hushed up until we could make sure. I
hope we've succeeded; I hope so indeed. Hugh will see you soon, I know; and it can be patched
up, no doubt, after a fashion."

But at this Amabel cried:--"I can't.--I can't.--Oh--take me away.--Let me hide until he divorces
me. I can't see him."

"Divorces you?" Bertram's voice was sharp. "Have you disgraced publicly--you and us? It's not
you I'm thinking of so much as the family name, father and mother. Hugh won't divorce you;
he can't; he shan't. After all you're a mere child and he didn't look after you." But this
was said rather in threat to Hugh than in leniency to Amabel.

She lay back in the chair, helpless, almost lifeless: let them do with her what they would.

Bertram said that she should spend the night there and that he would see Hugh in the morning.
And:--"No; you needn't see him yet, if you feel you can't. It may be arranged without that.
Hugh will understand." And this was the first ray of the light that was to grow and grow. Hugh
would understand.

She did not see him for two years.

All that had happened after her return to Bertram was a blur now. There were hasty talks, Bertram
defining for her her future position, one of dignity it must be--he insisted on that; Hugh
perfectly understood her wish for the present, quite fell in with it; but, eventually, she
must take her place in her husband's home again. Even Bertram, intent as he was on the family
honour, could not force the unwilling wife upon the merely magnanimous husband.

Her husband's magnanimity was the radiance that grew for Amabel during these black days, the
days of hasty talks and of her journey down to Charlock House.

She had never seen Charlock House before; Sir Hugh had spoken of the family seat as "a dismal
hole," but, on that hot July evening of her arrival, it looked peaceful to her, a dark haven
of refuge, like the promise of sleep after nightmare.

Mrs. Bray stood in the door, a grim but not a hostile warder: Amabel felt anyone who was not
hostile to be almost kind.

The house had been hastily prepared for her, dining-room and drawing-room and the large bedroom
upstairs, having the same outlook over the lawn, the sycamores, the flat meadows. She could
see herself standing there now, looking about her at the bedroom where gaiety and gauntness
were oddly mingled in the faded carnations and birds of paradise on the chintzes and in the
vastness of the four-poster, the towering wardrobes, the capacious, creaking chairs and sofas.
Everything was very clean and old; the dressing-table was stiffly skirted in darned muslins
and near the pin-cushion stood a small, tight nosegay, Mrs. Bray's cautious welcome to this
ambiguous mistress.

"A comfortable old place, isn't it," Bertram had said, looking about, too; "You'll soon get
well and strong here, Amabel." This, Amabel knew, was said for the benefit of Mrs. Bray who
stood, non-committal and observant just inside the door. She knew, too, that Bertram was depressed
by the gauntness and gaiety of the bedroom and even more depressed by the maroon leather furniture
and the cases of stuffed birds below, and that he was at once glad to get away from Charlock
House and sorry for her that she should have to be left there, alone with Mrs. Bray. But to
Amabel it was a dream after a nightmare. A strange, desolate dream, all through those sultry
summer days; but a dream shot through with radiance in the thought of the magnanimity that
had spared and saved her.

And with the coming of the final horror, came the final revelation of this radiance. She had
been at Charlock House for many weeks, and it was mid-Autumn, when that horror came. She knew
that she was to have a child and that it could not be her husband's child.

With the knowledge her mind seemed unmoored at last; it wavered and swung in a nightmare blackness
deeper than any she had known. In her physical prostration and mental disarray the thought
of suicide was with her. How face Bertram now,--Bertram with his tenacious hopes? How face
her husband--ever--ever--in the far future? Her disgrace lived and she was to see it. But,
in the swinging chaos, it was that thought that kept her from frenzy; the thought that it did
live; that its life claimed her; that to it she must atone. She did not love this child that
was to come; she dreaded it; yet the dread was sacred, a burden that she must bear for its
unhappy sake. What did she not owe to it--unfortunate one--of atonement and devotion?

She gathered all her courage, armed her physical weakness, her wandering mind, to summon Bertram
and to tell him.

She told him in the long drawing-room on a sultry September day, leaning her arms on the table
by which she sat and covering her face.

Bertram said nothing for a long time. He was still boyish enough to feel any such announcement
as embarrassing; and that it should be told him now, in such circumstances, by his sister,
by Amabel, was nearly incredible. How associate such savage natural facts, lawless and unappeasable,
with that young figure, dressed in its trousseau white muslin and with its crown of innocent
gold. It made her suddenly seem older than himself and at once more piteous and more sinister.
For a moment, after the sheer stupor, he was horribly angry with her; then came dismay at his
own cruelty.

"This does change things, Amabel," he said at last.

"Yes," she answered from behind her hands.

"I don't know how Hugh will take it," said Bertram.

"He must divorce me now," she said. "It can be done very quietly, can't it. And I have money.
I can go away, somewhere, out of England--I've thought of America--or New Zealand--some distant
country where I shall never be heard of; I can bring up the child there."

Bertram stared at her. She sat at the table, her hands before her face, in the light, girlish
dress that hung loosely about her. She was fragile and wasted. Her voice seemed dead. And he
wondered at the unhappy creature's courage.

"Divorce!" he then said violently; "No; he can't do that;--and he had forgiven already; I don't
know how the law stands; but of course you won't go away. What an idea; you might as well kill
yourself outright. It's only--. I don't know how the law stands. I don't know what Hugh will say."

Bertram walked up and down biting his nails. He stopped presently before a window, his back
turned to his sister, and, flushing over the words, he said: "You are sure--you are quite sure,
Amabel, that it isn't Hugh's child. You are such a girl. You can know nothing.--I mean--it
may be a mistake."

"I am quite sure," the unmoved voice answered him. "I do know."

Bertram again stood silent. "Well," he said at last, turning to her though he did not look
at her, "all I can do is to see how Hugh takes it. You know, Amabel, that you can count on
me. I'll see after you, and after the child. Hugh may, of course, insist on your parting from
it; that will probably be the condition he'll make;--naturally. In that case I'll take you
abroad soon. It can be got through, I suppose, without anybody knowing; assumed names; some
Swiss or Italian village--" Bertram muttered, rather to himself than to her. "Good God, what
an odious business!--But, as you say, we have money; that simplifies everything. You mustn't
worry about the child. I will see that it is put into safe hands and I'll keep an eye on its
future--." He stopped, for his sister's hands had fallen. She was gazing at him, still dully--for
it seemed that nothing could strike any excitement from her--but with a curious look, a look
that again made him feel as if she were much older than he.

"Never," she said.

"Never what?" Bertram asked. "You mean you won't part from the child?"

"Never; never," she repeated.

"But Amabel," with cold patience he urged; "if Hugh insists.--My poor girl, you have made your
bed and you must lie on it. You can't expect your husband to give this child--this illegitimate
child--his name. You can't expect him to accept it as his child."

"No; I don't expect it," she said.

"Well, what then? What's your alternative?"

"I must go away with the child."

"I tell you, Amabel, it's impossible," Bertram in his painful anxiety spoke with irritation.
"You've got to consider our name--my name, my position, and your husband's. Heaven knows I
want to be kind to you--do all I can for you; I've not once reproached you, have I? But you
must be reasonable. Some things you must accept as your punishment. Unless Hugh is the most
fantastically generous of men you'll have to part from the child."

She sat silent.

"You do consent to that?" Bertram insisted.

She looked before her with that dull, that stupid look. "No," she replied.

Bertram's patience gave way, "You are mad," he said. "Have you no consideration for me--for
us? You behave like this--incredibly, in my mother's daughter--never a girl better brought
up; you go off with that--that bounder;--you stay with him for a week--good heavens!--there'd
have been more dignity if you'd stuck to him;--you chuck him, in one week, and then you come
back and expect us to do as you think fit, to let you disappear and everyone know that you've
betrayed your husband and had a child by another man. It's mad, I tell you, and it's impossible,
and you've got to submit. Do you hear? Will you answer me, I say? Will you promise that if
Hugh won't consent to fathering the child--won't consent to giving it his name--won't consent
to having it, as his heir, disinherit the lawful children he may have by you--good heavens,
I wonder if you realize what you are asking!--will you promise, I say, if he doesn't consent,
to part from the child?"

She did look rather mad, her brother thought, and he remembered, with discomfort, that women,
at such times, did sometimes lose their reason. Her eyes with their dead gaze nearly frightened
him, when, after all his violence, his entreaty, his abuse of her, she only, in an unchanged
voice, said "No."

He felt then the uselessness of protestation or threat; she must be treated as if she were
mad; humored, cajoled. He was silent for a little while, walking up and down. "Well, I'll say
no more, then. Forgive me for my harshness," he said. "You give me a great deal to bear, Amabel;
but I'll say nothing now. I have your word, at all events," he looked sharply at her as the
sudden suspicion crossed him, "I have your word that you'll stay quietly here--until you hear
from me what Hugh says? You promise me that?"

"Yes," his sister answered. He gave a sigh for the sorry relief.

That night Amabel's mind wandered wildly. She heard herself, in the lonely room where she lay,
calling out meaningless things. She tried to control the horror of fear that rose in her and
peopled the room with phantoms; but the fear ran curdling in her veins and flowed about her,
shaping itself in forms of misery and disaster. "No--no--poor child.--Oh--don't--don't.--I
will come to you. I am your mother.--They can't take you from me."--this was the most frequent cry.

The poor child hovered, wailing, delivered over to vague, unseen sorrow, and, though a tiny
infant, it seemed to be Paul Quentin, too, in some dreadful plight, appealing to her in the
name of their dead love to save him. She did not love him; she did not love the child; but
her heart seemed broken with impotent pity.

In the intervals of nightmare she could look, furtively, fixedly, about the room. The moon
was bright outside, and through the curtains a pallid light showed the menacing forms of the
two great wardrobes. The four posts of her bed seemed like the pillars of some vast, alien
temple, and the canopy, far above her, floated like a threatening cloud. Opposite her bed,
above the chimney-piece, was a deeply glimmering mirror: if she were to raise herself she would
see her own white reflection, rising, ghastly.--She hid her face on her pillows and sank again
into the abyss.

Next morning she could not get up. Her pulses were beating at fever speed; but, with the daylight,
her mind was clearer. She could summon her quiet look when Mrs. Bray came in to ask her mournfully
how she was. And a little later a telegram came, from Bertram.

Her trembling hands could hardly open it. She read the words. "All is well." Mrs. Bray stood
beside her bed. She meant to keep that quiet look for Mrs. Bray; but she fainted. Mrs. Bray,
while she lay tumbled among the pillows, and before lifting her, read the message hastily.

From the night of torment and the shock of joy, Amabel brought an extreme susceptibility to
emotion that showed itself through all her life in a trembling of her hands and frame when
any stress of feeling was laid upon her.

After that torment and that shock she saw Bertram once, and only once, again;--ah, strange
and sad in her memory that final meeting of their lives, though this miraculous news was the
theme of it. She was still in bed when he came, the bed she did not leave for months, and,
though so weak and dizzy, she understood all that he told her, knew the one supreme fact of
her husband's goodness. He sent her word that she was to be troubled about nothing; she was
to take everything easily and naturally. She should always have her child with her and it should
bear his name. He would see after it like a father; it should never know that he was not its
father. And, as soon as she would let him, he would come and see her--and it. Amabel, lying
on her pillows, gazed and gazed: her eyes, in their shadowy hollows, were two dark wells of
sacred wonder. Even Bertram felt something of the wonder of them. In his new gladness and relief,
he was very kind to her. He came and kissed her. She seemed, once more, a person whom one could
kiss. "Poor dear," he said, "you have had a lot to bear. You do look dreadfully ill. You must
get well and strong, now, Amabel, and not worry any more, about anything. Everything is all
right. We will call the child Augustine, if it's a boy, after mother's father you know, and
Katherine, if it's a girl, after her mother: I feel, don't you, that we have no right to use
their own names. But the further away ones seem right, now. Hugh is a trump, isn't he? And,
I'm sure of it, Amabel, when time has passed a little, and you feel you can, he'll have you
back; I do really believe it may be managed. This can all be explained. I'm saying that you
are ill, a nervous breakdown, and are having a complete rest."

She heard him dimly, feeling these words irrelevant. She knew that Hugh must never have her
back; that she could never go back to Hugh; that her life henceforth was dedicated. And yet
Bertram was kind, she felt that, though dimly feeling, too, that her old image of him had grown
tarnished. But her mind was far from Bertram and the mitigations he offered. She was fixed
on that radiant figure, her husband, her knight, who had stooped to her in her abasement, her
agony, and had lifted her from dust and darkness to the air where she could breathe,--and bless
him.

"Tell him--I bless him,"--she said to Bertram. She could say nothing more. There were other
memories of that day, too, but even more dim, more irrelevant. Bertram had brought papers for
her to sign, saying: "I know you'll want to be very generous with Hugh now," and she had raised
herself on her elbow to trace with the fingers that trembled the words he dictated to her.

There was sorrow, indeed, to look back on after that. Poor Bertram died only a month later,
struck down by an infectious illness. He was not to see or supervise the rebuilding of his
sister's shattered life, and the anguish in her sorrow was the thought of all the pain that
she had brought to his last months of life: but this sorrow, after the phantoms, the nightmares,
was like the weeping of tears after a dreadful weeping of blood. Her tears fell as she lay
there, propped on her pillows--for she was very ill--and looking out over the Autumn fields;
she wept for poor Bertram and all the pain; life was sad. But life was good and beautiful.
After the flames, the suffocation, it had brought her here, and it showed her that radiant
figure, that goodness and beauty embodied in human form. And she had more to help her, for
he wrote to her, a few delicately chosen words, hardly touching on their own case, his and
hers, but about her brother's death and of how he felt for her in her bereavement, and of what
a friend dear Bertram had been to himself. "Some day, dear Amabel, you must let me come and
see you" it ended; and "Your affectionate husband."

It was almost too wonderful to be borne. She had to close her eyes in thinking of it and to
lie very still, holding the blessed letter in her hand and smiling faintly while she drew long
soft breaths. He was always in her thoughts, her husband; more, far more, than her coming child.
It was her husband who had made that coming a thing possible to look forward to with resignation;
it was no longer the nightmare of desolate flights and hidings.

And even after the child was born, after she had seen its strange little face, even then, though
it was all her life, all her future, it held the second place in her heart. It was her life,
but it was from her husband that the gift of life had come to her.

She was a gentle, a solicitous, a devoted mother. She never looked at her baby without a sense
of tears. Unfortunate one, was her thought, and the pulse of her life was the yearning to atone.

She must be strong and wise for her child and out of her knowledge of sin and weakness in herself
must guide and guard it. But in her yearning, in her brooding thought, was none of the mother's
rapturous folly and gladness. She never kissed her baby. Some dark association made the thought
of kisses an unholy thing and when, forgetting, she leaned to it sometimes, thoughtless, and
delighting in littleness and sweetness, the dark memory of guilt would rise between its lips
and hers, so that she would grow pale and draw back.

When first she saw her husband, Augustine was over a year old. Sir Hugh had written and asked
if he might not come down one day and spend an hour with her. "And let all the old fogies see
that we are friends," he said, in his remembered playful vein.

It was in the long dark drawing-room that she had seen him for the first time since her flight
into the wilderness.

He had come in, grave, yet with something blithe and unperturbed in his bearing that, as she
stood waiting for what he might say to her, seemed the very nimbus of chivalry. He was splendid
to look at, too, tall and strong with clear kind eyes and clear kind smile.

She could not speak, not even when he came and took her hand, and said: "Well Amabel." And
then, seeing how white she was and how she trembled, he had bent his head and kissed her hand.
And at that she had broken into tears; but they were tears of joy.

He stood beside her while she wept, her hands before her face, just touching her shoulder with
a paternal hand, and she heard him saying: "Poor little Amabel: poor little girl."

She took her chair beside the table and for a long time she kept her face hidden: "Thank you;
thank you;" was all that she could say.

"My dear, what for?--There, don't cry.--You have stopped crying? There, poor child. I've been
awfully sorry for you."

He would not let her try to say how good he was, and this was a relief, for she knew that she
could not put it into words and that, without words, he understood. He even laughed a little,
with a graceful embarrassment, at her speechless gratitude. And presently, when they talked,
she could put down her hand, could look round at him, while she answered that, yes, she was
very comfortable at Charlock House; yes, no place could suit her more perfectly; yes, Mrs.
Bray was very kind.

And he talked a little about business with her, explaining that Bertram's death had left him
with a great deal of management on his hands; he must have her signature to papers, and all
this was done with the easiest tact so that naturalness and simplicity should grow between
them; so that, in finding pen and papers in her desk, in asking where she was to sign, in obeying
the pointing of his finger here and there, she should recover something of her quiet, and be
able to smile, even, a little answering smile, when he said that he should make a business
woman of her. And--"Rather a shame that I should take your money like this, Amabel, but, with
all Bertram's money, you are quite a bloated capitalist. I'm rather hard up, and you don't
grudge it, I know."

She flushed all over at the idea, even said in jest:--"All that I have is yours."

"Ah, well, not all," said Sir Hugh. "You must remember--other claims." And he, too, flushed
a little now in saying, gently, tentatively;--"May I see the little boy?"

"I will bring him," said Amabel.

How she remembered, all her life long, that meeting of her husband and her son. It was the
late afternoon of a bright June day and the warm smell of flowers floated in at the open windows
of the drawing-room. She did not let the nurse bring Augustine, she carried him down herself.
He was a large, robust baby with thick, corn-coloured hair and a solemn, beautiful little face.
Amabel came in with him and stood before her husband holding him and looking down. Confusion
was in her mind, a mingling of pride and shame.

Sir Hugh and the baby eyed each other, with some intentness. And, as the silence grew a little
long, Sir Hugh touched the child's cheek with his finger and said: "Nice little fellow: splendid
little fellow. How old is he, Amabel? Isn't he very big?"

"A year and two months. Yes, he is very big."

"He looks like you, doesn't he?"

"Does he?" she said faintly.

"Just your colour," Sir Hugh assured her. "As grave as a little king, isn't he. How firmly
he looks at me."

"He is grave, but he never cries; he is very cheerful, too, and well and strong."

"He looks it. He does you credit. Well, my little man, shall we be friends?" Sir Hugh held
out his hand. Augustine continued to gaze at him, unmoving. "He won't shake hands," said Sir Hugh.

Amabel took the child's hand and placed it in her husband's; her own fingers shook. But Augustine
drew back sharply, doubling his arm against his breast, though not wavering in his gaze at
the stranger.

Sir Hugh laughed at the decisive rejection. "Friendship's on one side, till later," he said.

       *     *     *     *     *

When her husband had gone Amabel went out into the sycamore wood. It was a pale, cool evening.
The sun had set and the sky beyond the sycamores was golden. Above, in a sky of liquid green,
the evening star shone softly.

A joy, sweet, cold, pure, like the evening, was in her heart. She stopped in the midst of the
little wood among the trees, and stood still, closing her eyes.

Something old was coming back to her; something new was being given. The memory of her mother's
eyes was in it, of the simple prayers taught her by her mother in childhood, and the few words,
rare and simple, of the presence of God in the soul. But her girlish prayer, her girlish thought
of God, had been like a thread-like, singing brook. What came to her now grew from the brook-like
running of trust and innocence to a widening river, to a sea that filled her, over-flowed her,
encompassed her, in whose power she was weak, through whose power her weakness was uplifted
and made strong.

It was as if a dark curtain of fear and pain lifted from her soul, showing vastness, and deep
upon deep of stars. Yet, though this that came to her was so vast, it made itself small and
tender, too, like the flowers glimmering about her feet, the breeze fanning her hair and garments,
the birds asleep in the branches above her. She held out her hands, for it seemed to fall like
dew, and she smiled, her face uplifted.

       *     *     *     *     *

She did not often see her husband in the quiet years that followed. She did not feel that she
needed to see him. It was enough to know that he was there, good and beautiful.

She knew that she idealised him, that in ordinary aspects he was a happy, easy man-of-the-world;
but that was not the essential; the essential in him was the pity, the tenderness, the comprehension
that had responded to her great need. He was very unconscious of aims or ideals; but when the
time for greatness came he showed it as naturally and simply as a flower expands to light.
The thought of him henceforth was bound up with the thought of her religion; nothing of rapture
or ecstasy was in it; it was quiet and grave, a revelation of holiness.

It was as if she had been kneeling to pray, alone, in a dark, devastated church, trembling,
and fearing the darkness, not daring to approach the unseen altar; and that then her husband's
hand had lighted all the high tapers one by one, so that the church was filled with radiance
and the divine made manifest to her again.

Light and quietness were to go with her, but they were not to banish fear. They could only
help her to live with fear and to find life beautiful in spite of it.

For if her husband stood for the joy of life, her child stood for its sorrow. He was the dark
past and the unknown future. What she should find in him was unrevealed; and though she steadied
her soul to the acceptance of whatever the future might bring of pain for her, the sense of
trembling was with her always in the thought of what it might bring of pain for Augustine.

IV

Lady Channice woke on the morning after her long retrospect bringing from her dreams a heavy heart.

She lay for some moments after the maid had drawn her curtains, looking out at the fields as
she had so often looked, and wondering why her heart was heavy. Throb by throb, like a leaden
shuttle, it seemed to weave together the old and new memories, so that she saw the pattern
of yesterday and of today, Lady Elliston's coming, the pain that Augustine had given her in
his strange questionings, the meeting of her husband and her son. And the ominous rhythm of
the shuttle was like the footfall of the past creeping upon her.

It was more difficult than it had been for years, this morning, to quiet the throb, to stay
her thoughts on strength. She could not pray, for her thoughts, like her heart, were leaden;
the whispered words carried no message as they left her lips; she could not lift her thought
to follow them. It was upon a lesser, a merely human strength, that she found herself dwelling.
She was too weak, too troubled, to find the swiftness of soul that could soar with its appeal,
the stillness of soul where the divine response could enter; and weakness turned to human help.
The thought of her husband's coming was like a glow of firelight seen at evening on a misty
moor. She could hasten towards it, quelling fear. There she would be safe. By his mere presence
he would help and sustain her. He would be kind and tactful with Augustine, as he had always
been; he would make a shield between her and Lady Elliston. She could see no sky above, and
the misty moor loomed with uncertain shapes; but she could look before her and feel that she
went towards security and brightness.

Augustine and his mother both studied during the day, the same studies, for Lady Channice,
to a great extent, shared her son's scholarly pursuits. From his boyhood--a studious, grave,
yet violent little boy he had been, his fits of passionate outbreak quelled, as he grew older,
by the mere example of her imperturbability beside him--she had thus shared everything. She
had made herself his tutor as well as his guardian angel. She was more tutor, more guardian
angel, than mother.

Their mental comradeship was full of mutual respect. And though Augustine was not of the religious
temperament, though his mother's instinct told her that in her lighted church he would be a
respectful looker-on rather than a fellow-worshipper, though they never spoke of religion,
just as they seldom kissed, Augustine's growing absorption in metaphysics tinged their friendship
with a religious gravity and comprehension.

On three mornings in the week Lady Channice had a class for the older village girls; she sewed,
read and talked with them, and was fond of them all. These girls, their placing in life, their
marriages and babies, were her most real interest in the outer world. During the rest of the
day she gardened, and read whatever books Augustine might be reading. It was the mother and
son's habit thus to work apart and to discuss work in the evenings.

Today, when her girls were gone, she found herself very lonely. Augustine was out riding and
in her room she tried to occupy herself, fearing her own thoughts. It was past twelve when
she heard the sound of his horse's hoofs on the gravel before the door and, throwing a scarf
over her hair, she ran down to meet him.

The hall door at Charlock House, under a heavy portico, looked out upon a circular gravel drive
bordered by shrubberies and enclosed by high walls; beyond the walls and gates was the high-road.
An interval of sunlight had broken into the chill Autumn day: Augustine had ridden bareheaded
and his gold hair shone as the sun fell upon it. He looked, in his stately grace, like an equestrian
youth on a Greek frieze. And, as was usual with his mother, her appreciation of Augustine's
nobility and fineness passed at once into a pang: so beautiful; so noble; and so shadowed.
She stood, her black scarf about her face and shoulders, and smiled at him while he threw the
reins to the old groom and dismounted.

"Nice to find you waiting for me," he said. "I'm late this morning. Too late for any work before
lunch. Don't you want a little walk? You look pale."

"I should like it very much. I may miss my afternoon walk--your father may have business to
talk over."

They went through the broad stone hall-way that traversed the house and stepped out on the
gravel walk at the back. This path, running below the drawing-room and dining-room windows,
led down on one side to the woods, on the other to Lady Channice's garden, and was a favourite
place of theirs for quiet saunterings. Today the sunlight fell mildly on it. A rift of pale
blue showed in the still grey sky.

"I met Marjory," said Augustine, "and we had a gallop over Pangley Common. She rides well,
that child. We jumped the hedge and ditch at the foot of the common, you know--the high hedge--for
practice. She goes over like a bird."

Amabel's mind was dwelling on the thought of shadowed brightness and Marjory, fresh, young,
deeply rooted in respectability, seemed suddenly more significant than she had ever been before.
In no way Augustine's equal, of course, except in that impersonal, yet so important matter
of roots; Amabel had known a little irritation over Mrs. Grey's open manoeuvreings; but on
this morning of rudderless tossing, Marjory appeared in a new aspect. How sound; how safe.
It was of Augustine's insecurity rather than of Augustine himself that she was thinking as
she said: "She is such a nice girl."

"Yes, she is," said Augustine.

"What did you talk about?"

"Oh, the things we saw; birds and trees and clouds.--I pour information upon her."

"She likes that, one can see it."

"Yes, she is so nice and guileless that she doesn't resent my pedantry. I love giving information,
you know," Augustine smiled. He looked about him as he spoke, at birds and trees and clouds,
happy, humorous, clasping his riding crop behind his back so that his mother heard it make
a pleasant little click against his gaiter as he walked.

"It's delightful for both of you, such a comradeship."

"Yes; a comradeship after a fashion; Marjory is just like a nice little boy."

"Ah, well, she is growing up; she is seventeen, you know. She is more than a little boy."

"Not much; she never will be much more."

"She will make a very nice woman."

Augustine continued to smile, partly at the thought of Marjory, and partly at another thought.
"You mustn't make plans, for me and Marjory, like Mrs. Grey," he said presently. "It's mothers
like Mrs. Grey who spoil comradeships. You know, I'll never marry Marjory. She is a nice little
boy, and we are friends; but she doesn't interest me."

"She may grow more interesting: she is so young. I don't make plans, dear,--yet I think that
it might be a happy thing for you."

"She'll never interest me," said Augustine.

"Must you have a very interesting wife?"

"Of course I must:--she must be as interesting as you are!" he turned his head to smile at her.

"You are not exacting, dear!"

"Yes, I am, though. She must be as interesting as you--and as good; else why should I leave
you and go and live with someone else.--Though for that matter, I shouldn't leave you. You'd
have to live with us, you know, if I ever married."

"Ah, my dear boy," Lady Channice murmured. She managed a smile presently and added: "You might
fall in love with someone not so interesting. You can't be sure of your feelings and your mind
going together."

"My feelings will have to submit themselves to my mind. I don't know about 'falling'; I rather
dislike the expression: one might 'fall' in love with lots of people one would never dream
of marrying. It would have to be real love. I'd have to love a woman very deeply before I wanted
her to share my life, to be a part of me; to be the mother of my children." He spoke with his
cheerful gravity.

"You have an old head on very young shoulders, Augustine."

"I really believe I have!" he accepted her somewhat sadly humorous statement; "and that's why
I don't believe I'll ever make a mistake. I'd rather never marry than make a mistake. I know
I sound priggish; but I've thought a good deal about it: I've had to." He paused for a moment,
and then, in the tone of quiet, unconfused confidence that always filled her with a sense of
mingled pride and humility, he added:--"I have strong passions, and I've already seen what
happens to people who allow feeling to govern them."

Amabel was suddenly afraid. "I know that you would always be--good Augustine; I can trust you
for that." She spoke faintly.

They had now walked down to the little garden with its box borders and were wandering vaguely
among the late roses. She paused to look at the roses, stooping to breathe in the fragrance
of a tall white cluster: it was an instinctive impulse of hiding: she hoped in another moment
to find an escape in some casual gardening remark. But Augustine, unsuspecting, was interested
in their theme.

"Good? I don't know," he said. "I don't think it's goodness, exactly. It's that I so loathe
the other thing, so loathe the animal I know in myself, so loathe the idea of life at the mercy
of emotion."

She had to leave the roses and walk on again beside him, steeling herself to bear whatever
might be coming. And, feeling that unconscious accusation loomed, she tried, as unconsciously,
to mollify and evade it.

"It isn't always the animal, exactly, is it?--or emotion only? It is romance and blind love
for a person that leads people astray."

"Isn't that the animal?" Augustine inquired. "I don't think the animal base, you know, or shameful,
if he is properly harnessed and kept in his place. It's only when I see him dominating that
I hate and fear him so. And," he went on after a little pause of reflection, "I especially
hate him in that form;--romance and blind love: because what is that, really, but the animal
at its craftiest and most dangerous? what is romance--I mean romance of the kind that jeopardizes
'goodness'--what is it but the most subtle self-deception? You don't love the person in the
true sense of love; you don't want their good; you don't want to see them put in the right
relation to their life as a whole:--what you want is sensation through them; what you want
is yourself in them, and their absorption in you. I don't think that wicked, you know--I'm
not a monk or even a puritan--if it's the mere result of the right sort of love, a happy glamour
that accompanies, the right sort; it's in its place, then, and can endanger nothing. But people
are so extraordinarily blind about love; they don't seem able to distinguish between the real
and the false. People usually, though they don't know it, mean only desire when they talk of love."

There was another pause in which she wondered that he did not hear the heavy throbbing of her
heart. But now there was no retreat; she must go on; she must understand her son. "Desire must
enter in," she said.

"In its place, yes; it's all a question of that;" Augustine replied, smiling a little at her,
aware of the dogmatic flavour of his own utterances, the humorous aspect of their announcement,
to her, by him;--"You love a woman enough and respect her enough to wish her to be the mother
of your children--assuming, of course, that you consider yourself worthy to carry on the race;
and to think of a woman in such a way is to feel a rightful emotion and a rightful desire;
anything else makes emotion the end instead of the result and is corrupting, I'm sure of it."

"You have thought it all out, haven't you"; Lady Channice steadied her voice to say. There
was panic rising in her, and a strange anger made part of it.

"I've had to, as I said," he replied. "I'm anything but self-controlled by nature; already,"
and Augustine looked calmly at his mother, "I'd have let myself go and been very dissolute
unless I'd had this ideal of my own honour to help me. I'm of anything but a saintly disposition."

"My dear Augustine!" His mother had coloured faintly. Absurd as it was, when the reality of
her own life was there mocking her, the bald words were strange to her.

"Do I shock you?" he asked. "You know I always feel that you are a saint, who can hear and
understand everything."

She blushed deeply, painfully, now. "No, you don't shock me;--I am only a little startled."

"To hear that I'm sensual? The whole human race is far too sensual in my opinion. They think
a great deal too much about their sexual appetites;--only they don't think about them in those
terms unfortunately; they think about them veiled and wreathed; that's why we are sunk in such
a bog of sentimentality and sin."

Lady Channice was silent for a long time. They had left the garden, and walked along the little
path near the sunken wall at the foot of the lawn, and, skirting the wood of sycamores, had
come back to the broad gravel terrace. A turmoil was in her mind; a longing to know and see;
a terror of what he would show her.

"Do you call it sin, that blinded love? Do you think that the famous lovers of romance were
sinners?" she asked at last; "Tristan and Iseult?--Abélard and Héloise?--Paolo and Francesca?"

"Of course they were sinners," said Augustine cheerfully. "What did they want?--a present joy:
purely and simply that: they sacrificed everything to it--their own and other people's futures:
what's that but sin? There is so much mawkish rubbish talked and written about such persons.
They were pathetic, of course, most sinners are; that particular sin, of course, may be so
associated and bound up with beautiful things;--fidelity, and real love may make such a part
of it, that people get confused about it."

"Fidelity and real love?" Lady Channice repeated: "you think that they atone--if they make
part of an illicit passion?"

"I don't think that they atone; but they may redeem it, mayn't they? Why do you ask me?" Augustine
smiled;--"You know far more about these things than I do."

She could not look at him. His words in their beautiful unconsciousness appalled her. Yet she
had to go on, to profit by her own trance-like strength. She was walking on the verge of a
precipice but she knew that with steady footsteps she could go towards her appointed place.
She must see just where Augustine put her, just how he judged her.

"You seem to know more than I do, Augustine," she said: "I've not thought it out as you have.
And it seems to me that any great emotion is more of an end in itself than you would grant.
But if the illicit passion thinks itself real and thinks itself enduring, and proves neither,
what of it then? What do you think of lovers to whom that happens? It so often happens, you know."

Augustine had his cheerful answer ready. "Then they are stupid as well as sinful. Of course
it is sinful to be stupid. We've learned that from Plato and Hegel, haven't we?"

The parlour-maid came out to announce lunch. Lady Channice was spared an answer. She went to
her room feeling shattered, as if great stones had been hurled upon her.

Yes, she thought, gazing at herself in the mirror, while she untied her scarf and smoothed
her hair, yes, she had never yet, with all her agonies of penitence, seen so clearly what she
had been: a sinner: a stupid sinner. Augustine's rigorous young theories might set too inhuman
an ideal, but that aspect of them stood out clear: he had put, in bald, ugly words, what, in
essence, her love for Paul Quentin had been: he had stripped all the veils and wreaths away.
It had been self; self, blind in desire, cruel when blindness left it: there had been no real
love and no fidelity to redeem the baseness. A stupid sinner; that, her son had told her, was
what she had been. The horror of it smote back upon her from her widened, mirrored eyes, and
she sat for a moment thinking that she must faint.

Then she remembered that Augustine was waiting for her downstairs and that in little more than
an hour her husband would be with her. And suddenly the agony lightened. A giddiness of relief
came over her. He was kind: he did not judge her: he knew all, yet he respected her. Augustine
was like the bleak, stony moor; she must shut her eyes and stumble on towards the firelight.
And as she thought of that nearing brightness, of her husband's eyes, that never judged, never
grew hard or fierce or remote from human tolerance, a strange repulsion from her son rose in
her. Cold, fierce, righteous boy; cold, heartless theories that one throb of human emotion
would rightly shatter;--the thought was almost like an echo of Paul Quentin speaking in her
heart to comfort her. She sprang up: that was indeed the last turn of horror. If she was not
to faint she must not think. Action alone could dispel the whirling mist where she did not
know herself.

She went down to the dining-room. Augustine stood looking out of the window. "Do come and see
this delightful swallow," he said: "he's skimming over and over the lawn."

She felt that she could not look at the swallow. She could only walk to her chair and sink
down on it. Augustine repelled her with his cheerfulness, his trivial satisfactions. How could
he not know that she was in torment and that he had plunged her there. This involuntary injustice
to him was, she saw again, veritably crazed.

She poured herself out water and said in a voice that surprised herself:--"Very delightful,
I am sure; but come and have your lunch. I am hungry."

"And how pale you are," said Augustine, going to his place. "We stayed out too long. You got
chilled." He looked at her with the solicitude that was like a brother's--or a doctor's. That
jarred upon her racked nerves, too.

"Yes; I am cold," she said.

She took food upon her plate and pretended to eat. Augustine, she guessed, must already feel
the change in her. He must see that she only pretended. But he said nothing more. His tact
was a further turn to the knot of her sudden misery.

       *     *     *     *     *

Augustine was with her in the drawing-room when she heard the wheels of the station-fly grinding
on the gravel drive; they sounded very faintly in the drawing-room, but, from years of listening,
her hearing had grown very acute.

She could never meet her husband without an emotion that betrayed itself in pallor and trembling
and today the emotion was so marked that Augustine's presence was at once a safeguard and an
anxiety; before Augustine she could be sure of not breaking down, not bursting into tears of
mingled gladness and wretchedness, but though he would keep her from betraying too much to
Sir Hugh, would she not betray too much to him? He was reading a review and laid it down as
the door opened: she could only hope that he noticed nothing.

Sir Hugh came in quickly. At fifty-four he was still a very handsome man of a chivalrous and
soldierly bearing. He had long limbs, broad shoulders and a not yet expanded waist. His nose
and chin were clearly and strongly cut, his eyes brightly blue; his moustache ran to decisive
little points twisted up from the lip and was as decorative as an epaulette upon a martial
shoulder. Pleasantness radiated from him, and though, with years, this pleasantness was significant
rather of his general attitude than of his individual interest, though his movements had become
a little indolent and his features a little heavy, these changes, to affectionate eyes, were
merely towards a more pronounced geniality and contentedness.

Today, however, geniality and contentment were less apparent. He looked slightly nipped and
hardened, and, seeming pleased to find a fire, he stood before it, after he had shaken hands
with his wife and with Augustine, and said that it had been awfully cold in the train.

"We will have tea at half past four instead of five today, then," said Amabel.

But no, he replied, he couldn't stop for tea: he must catch the four-four back to town: he
had a dinner and should only just make it.

His eye wandered a little vaguely about the room, but he brought it back to Amabel to say with
a smile that the fire made up for the loss of tea. There was then a little silence during which
it might have been inferred that Sir Hugh expected Augustine to leave the room. Amabel, too,
expected it; but Augustine had taken up his review and was reading again. She felt her fear
of him, her anger against him, grow.

Very pleasantly, Sir Hugh at last suggested that he had a little business to talk over. "I
think I'll ask Augustine to let us have a half hour's talk."

"Oh, I'll not interfere with business," said Augustine, not lifting his eyes.

The silence, now, was more than uncomfortable; to Amabel it was suffocating. She could guess
too well that some latent enmity was expressed in Augustine's assumed unconsciousness. That
Sir Hugh was surprised, displeased, was evident; but, when he spoke again, after a little pause,
it was still pleasantly:--"Not with business, but with talk you will interfere. I'm afraid
I must ask you.--I don't often have a chance to talk with your mother.--I'll see you later, eh?"

Augustine made no reply. He rose and walked out of the room.

Sir Hugh still stood before the fire, lifting first the sole of one boot and then the other
to the blaze. "Hasn't always quite nice manners, has he, the boy"; he observed. "I didn't want
to have to send him out, you know."

"He didn't realize that you wanted to talk to me alone." Amabel felt herself offering the excuse
from a heart turned to stone.

"Didn't he, do you think? Perhaps not. We always do talk alone, you know. He's just a trifle
tactless, shows a bit of temper sometimes. I've noticed it. I hope he doesn't bother you with it."

"No. I never saw him like that, before," said Amabel, looking down as she sat in her chair.

"Well, that's all that matters," said Sir Hugh, as if satisfied.

His boots were quite hot now and he went to the writing-desk drawing a case of papers from
his breast-pocket.

"Here are some of your securities, Amabel," he said: "I want a few more signatures. Things
haven't been going very well with me lately. I'd be awfully obliged if you'd help me out."

"Oh--gladly--" she murmured. She rose and came to the desk. She hardly saw the papers through
a blur of miserable tears while she wrote her name here and there. She was shut out in the
mist and dark; he wasn't thinking of her at all; he was chill, preoccupied; something was displeasing
him; decisively, almost sharply, he told her where to write. "You mustn't be worried, you know,"
he observed as he pointed out the last place; "I'm arranging here, you see, to pass Charlock
House over to you for good. That is a little return for all you've done. It's not a valueless
property. And then Bertram tied up a good sum for the child, you know."

His speaking of "the child," made her heart stop beating, it brought the past so near.--And
was Charlock House to be her very own? "Oh," she murmured, "that is too good of you.--You mustn't
do that.--Apart from Augustine's share, all that I have is yours; I want no return."

"Ah, but I want you to have it"; said Sir Hugh; "it will ease my conscience a little. And you
really do care for the grim old place, don't you."

"I love it."

"Well, sign here, and here, and it's yours. There. Now you are mistress in your own home. You
don't know how good you've been to me, Amabel."

The voice was the old, kind voice, touched even, it seemed, with an unwonted feeling, and,
suddenly, the tears ran down her cheeks as, looking at the papers that gave her her home, she
said, faltering:--"You are not displeased with me?--Nothing is the matter?"

He looked at her, startled, a little confused. "Why my dear girl,--displeased with you?--How
could I be?--No. It's only these confounded affairs of mine that are in a bit of a mess just now."

"And can't I be of even more help--without any returns? I can be so economical for myself,
here. I need almost nothing in my quiet life."

Sir Hugh flushed. "Oh, you've not much more to give, my dear. I've taken you at your word."

"Take me completely at my word. Take everything."

"You dear little saint," he said. He patted her shoulder. The door was wide; the fire shone
upon her. She felt herself falling on her knees before it, with happy tears. He, who knew all,
could say that to her, with sincerity. The day of lowering fear and bewilderment opened to
sudden joy. His hand was on her shoulder; she lifted it and kissed it.

"Oh! Don't!"--said Sir Hugh. He drew his hand sharply away. There was confusion, irritation,
in his little laugh.

Amabel's tears stood on scarlet cheeks. Did he not understand?--Did he think?--And was he right
in thinking?--Shame flooded her. What girlish impulse had mingled incredibly with her gratitude,
her devotion?

Sir Hugh had turned away, and as she sat there, amazed with her sudden suspicion, the door
opened and Augustine came in saying:--"Here is Lady Elliston, Mother."

V

Lady Elliston helped her. How that, too, brought back the past to Amabel as she rose and moved
forward, before her husband and her son, to greet the friend of twenty years ago.

Lady Elliston, at difficult moments, had always helped her, and this was one of the most difficult
that she had ever known. Amabel forgot her tears, forgot her shame, in her intense desire that
Augustine should guess nothing.

"My very dear Amabel," said Lady Elliston. She swept forward and took both Lady Channice's
hands, holding them firmly, looking at her intently, intently smiling, as if, with her own
mastery of the situation, to give her old friend strength. "My dear, dear Amabel," she repeated:
"How good it is to see you again.--And how lovely you are."

She was silken, she was scarfed, she was soft and steady; as in the past, sweetness and strength
breathed from her. She was competent to deal with most calamitous situations and to make them
bearable, to make them even graceful. She could do what she would with situations: Amabel felt
that of her now as she had felt it years ago.

Her eyes continued to gaze for a long moment into Amabel's eyes before, as softly and as steadily,
they passed to Sir Hugh who was again standing before the fire behind his wife. "How do you
do," she then said with a little nod.

"How d'ye do," Sir Hugh replied. His voice was neither soft nor steady; the sharpness, the
irritation was in it. "I didn't know you were down here," he said.

Over Amabel's shoulder, while she still held Amabel's hands, Lady Elliston looked at him, all
sweetness. "Yes: I arrived this morning. I am staying with the Greys."

"The Greys? How in the dickens did you run across them?" Sir Hugh asked with a slight laugh.

"I met them at Jack's cousin's--the nice old bishop, you know. They are tiresome people; but
kind. And there is a Grey fils--the oldest--whom Peggy took rather a fancy to last winter,--they
were hunting together in Yorkshire;--and I wanted to look at him--and at the place!--"--Lady
Elliston's smile was all candour. "They are very solid; it's not a bad place. If the young
people are really serious Jack and I might consider it; with three girls still to marry, one
must be very wise and reasonable. But, of course, I came really to see you, Amabel."

She had released Amabel's hands at last with a final soft pressure, and, as Amabel took her
accustomed chair near the table, she sat down near her and loosened her cloak and unwound her
scarf, and threw back her laces.

"And I've been making friends with your boy," she went on, looking up at Augustine:--"he's
been walking me about the garden, saying that you mustn't be disturbed. Why haven't I been
able to make friends before? Why hasn't he been to see me in London?"

"I'll bring him someday," said Sir Hugh. "He is only just grown up, you see."

"I see: do bring him soon. He is charming," said Lady Elliston, smiling at Augustine.

Amabel remembered her pretty, assured manner of saying any pleasantness--or unpleasantness
for that matter--that she chose to say; but it struck her, from this remark, that the gift
had grown a little mechanical. Augustine received it without embarrassment. Augustine already
seemed to know that this smiling guest was in the habit of saying that young men were charming
before their faces when she wanted to be pleasant to them. Amabel seemed to see her son from
across the wide chasm that had opened between them; but, looking at his figure, suddenly grown
strange, she felt that Augustine's manners were 'nice.' The fact of their niceness, of his
competence--really it matched Lady Elliston's--made him the more mature; and this moment of
motherly appreciation led her back to the stony wilderness where her son judged her, with a
man's, not a boy's judgment. There was no uncertainty in Augustine; his theories might be young;
his character was formed; his judgments would not change. She forced herself not to think;
but to look and listen.

Lady Elliston continued to talk: indeed it was she and Augustine who did most of the talking.
Sir Hugh only interjected a remark now and then from his place before the fire. Amabel was
able to feel a further change in him; he was displeased today, and displeased in particular,
now, with Lady Elliston. She thought that she could understand the vexation for him of this
irruption of his real life into the sad little corner of kindness and duty that Charlock House
and its occupants must represent to him. He had seldom spoken to her about Lady Elliston; he
had seldom spoken to her about any of the life that she had abandoned in abandoning him: but
she knew that Lord and Lady Elliston were near friends still, and with this knowledge she could
imagine how on edge her husband must be when to the near friend of the real life he could allow
an even sharper note to alter all his voice. Amabel heard it sadly, with a sense of confused
values: nothing today was as she had expected it to be: and if she heard she was sure that
Lady Elliston must hear it too, and perhaps the symptom of Lady Elliston's displeasure was
that she talked rather pointedly to Augustine and talked hardly at all to Sir Hugh: her eyes,
in speaking, passed sometimes over his figure, rested sometimes, with a bland courtesy, on
his face when he spoke; but Augustine was their object: on him they dwelt and smiled.

The years had wrought few changes in Lady Elliston. Silken, soft, smiling, these were, still,
as in the past, the words that described her. She had triumphantly kept her lovely figure:
the bright brown hair, too, had been kept, but at some little sacrifice of sincerity: Lady
Elliston must be nearly fifty and her shining locks showed no sign of fading. Perhaps, in the
perfection of her appearance and manner, there was a hint of some sacrifice everywhere. How
much she has kept, was the first thought; but the second came:--How much she has given up.
Yes; there was the only real change: Amabel, gazing at her, somewhat as a nun gazes from behind
convent gratings at some bright denizen of the outer world, felt it more and more. She was
sweet, but was she not too skilful? She was strong, but was not her strength unscrupulous?
As she listened to her, Amabel remembered old wonders, old glimpses of motives that stole forth
reconnoitring and then retreated at the hint of rebuff, graceful and unconfused.

There were motives now, behind that smile, that softness; motives behind the flattery of Augustine,
the blandness towards Sir Hugh, the visit to herself. Some of the motives were, perhaps, all
kindness: Lady Elliston had always been kind; she had always been a binder of wounds, a dispenser
of punctual sunlight; she was one of the world's powerfully benignant great ladies; committees
clustered round her; her words of assured wisdom sustained and guided ecclesiastical and political
organisations; one must be benignant, in an altruistic modern world, if one wanted to rule.
It was not a cynical nun who gazed; Lady Elliston was kind and Lady Elliston loved power; simply,
without a sense of blame, Amabel drew her conclusions.

There were now lapses in Lady Elliston's fluency. Her eyes rested contemplatively on Amabel;
it was evident that she wanted to see Amabel alone. This motive was so natural a one that,
although Sir Hugh seemed determined, at the risk of losing his train, to stay till the last
minute, he, too, felt, at last, its pressure.

His wife saw him go with a sense of closing mists. Augustine, now more considerate, followed
him. She was left facing her guest.

Only Lady Elliston could have kept the moment from being openly painful and even Lady Elliston
could not pretend to find it an easy one; but she did not err on the side of too much tact.
It was so sweetly, so gravely that her eyes rested for a long moment of silence on her old
friend, so quietly that they turned away from her rising flush, that Amabel felt old gratitudes
mingling with old distrusts.

"What a sad room this is," said Lady Elliston, looking about it. "Is it just as you found it,
Amabel?"

"Yes, almost. I have taken away some things."

"I wish you would take them all away and put in new ones. It might be made into a very nice
room; the panelling is good. What it needs is Jacobean furniture, fine old hangings, and some
bits of glass and porcelain here and there."

"I suppose so." Amabel's eyes followed Lady Elliston's. "I never thought of changing anything."

Lady Elliston's eyes turned on hers again. "No: I suppose not," she said.

She seemed to find further meanings in the speech and took it up again with: "I suppose not.
It's strange that we should never have met in all these years, isn't it."

"Is it strange?"

"I've often felt it so: if you haven't, that is just part of your acceptance. You have accepted
everything. It has often made me indignant to think of it."

Amabel sat in her high-backed chair near the table. Her hands were tightly clasped together
in her lap and her face, with the light from the windows falling upon it, was very pale. But
she knew that she was calm; that she could meet Lady Elliston's kindness with an answering
kindness; that she was ready, even, to hear Lady Elliston's questions. This, however, was not
a question, and she hesitated for a moment before saying: "I don't understand you."

"How well I remember that voice," Lady Elliston smiled a little sadly: "It's the girl's voice
of twenty years ago--holding me away. Can't we be frank together, now, Amabel, when we are
both middle-aged women?--at least I am middle-aged.--How it has kept you young, this strange
life you've led."

"But, really, I do not understand," Amabel murmured, confused; "I didn't understand you then,
sometimes."

"Then I may be frank?"

"Yes; be frank, of course."

"It is only that indignation that I want to express," said Lady Elliston, tentative no longer
and firmly advancing. "Why are you here, in this dismal room, this dismal house? Why have you
let yourself be cloistered like this? Why haven't you come out and claimed things?"

Amabel's grey eyes, even in their serenity always a little wild, widened with astonishment.
"Claimed?" she repeated. "What do you mean? What could I have claimed? I have been given everything."

"My dear Amabel, you speak as if you had deserved this imprisonment."

There was another and a longer silence in which Amabel seemed slowly to find meanings incredible
to her before. And her reception of them was expressed in the changed, the hardened voice with
which she said: "You know everything. I've always been sure you knew. How can you say such
things to me?"

"Do not be angry with me, dear Amabel. I do not mean to offend."

"You spoke as though you were sorry for me, as though I had been injured.--It touches him."

"But," Lady Elliston had flushed very slightly, "it does touch him. I blame Hugh for this.
He ought not to have allowed it. He ought not to have accepted such misplaced penitence. You
were a mere child, and Hugh neglected you shamefully."

"I was not a mere child," said Amabel. "I was a sinful woman."

Lady Elliston sat still, as if arrested and spell-bound by the unexpected words. She seemed
to find no answer. And as the silence grew long, Amabel went on, slowly, with difficulty, yet
determinedly opposing and exposing the folly of the implied accusation. "You don't seem to
remember the facts. I betrayed my husband. He might have cast me off. He might have disgraced
me and my child. And he lifted me up; he sheltered me; he gave his name to the child. He has
given me everything I have. You see--you must not speak of him like that to me."

Lady Elliston had gathered herself together though still, it was evident, bewildered. "I don't
mean to blame Hugh so much. It was your fault, too, I suppose. You asked for the cloister, I know."

"No; I didn't ask for it. I asked to be allowed to go away and hide myself. The cloister, too,
was a gift,--like my name, my undishonoured child."

"Dear, dear Amabel," said Lady Elliston, gazing at her, "how beautiful of you to be able to
feel like that."

"It isn't I who am beautiful"; Amabel's lips trembled a little now and her eyes filled suddenly
with tears. Tears and trembling seemed to bring hardness rather than softening to her face;
they were like a chill breeze, like an icy veil, and the face, with its sorrow, was like a
winter's landscape.

"He is so beautiful that he would never let anyone know or understand what I owe him: he would
never know it himself: there is something simple and innocent about such men: they do beautiful
things unconsciously. You know him well: you are far nearer him than I am: but you can't know
what the beauty is, for you have never been helpless and disgraced and desperate nor needed
anyone to lift you up. No one can know as I do the angel in my husband."

Lady Elliston sat silent. She received Amabel's statements steadily yet with a little wincing,
as though they had been bullets whistling past her head; they would not pierce, if one did
not move; yet an involuntary compression of the lips and flutter of the eyelids revealed a
rather rigid self-mastery. Only after the silence had grown long did she slightly stir, move
her hand, turn her head with a deep, careful breath, and then say, almost timidly; "Then, he
has lifted you up, Amabel?--You are happy, really happy, in your strange life?"

Amabel looked down. The force of her vindicating ardour had passed from her. With the question
the hunted, haunted present flooded in. Happy? Yesterday she might have answered "yes," so
far away had the past seemed, so forgotten the fear in which she had learned to breathe. Today
the past was with her and the fear pressed heavily upon her heart. She answered in a sombre
voice: "With my past what woman could be happy. It blights everything."

"Oh--but Amabel--" Lady Elliston breathed forth. She leaned forward, then moved back, withdrawing
the hand impulsively put out.--"Why?--Why?--" she gently urged. "It is all over: all passed:
all forgotten. Don't--ah don't let it blight anything."

"Oh no," said Amabel, shaking her head. "It isn't over; it isn't forgotten; it never will be.
Hugh cannot forget--though he has forgiven. And someday, I feel it, Augustine will know. Then
I shall drink the cup of shame to the last drop."

"Oh!--" said Lady Elliston, as if with impatience. She checked herself. "What can I say?--if
you will think of yourself in this preposterous way.--As for Augustine, he does not know and
how should he ever know? How could he, when no one in the world knows but you and I and Hugh."

She paused at that, looking at Amabel's downcast face. "You notice what I say, Amabel?"

"Yes; that isn't it. He will guess."

"You are morbid, my poor child.--But do you notice nothing when I say that only we three know?"

Amabel looked up. Lady Elliston met her eyes. "I came today to tell you, Amabel. I felt sure
you did not know. There is no reason at all, now, why you should dread coming out into the
world--with Augustine. You need fear no meetings. You did not know that he was dead."

"He?"

"Yes. He. Paul Quentin."

Amabel, gazing at her, said nothing.

"He died in Italy, last week. He was married, you know, quite happily; an ordinary sort of
person; she had money; he rather let his work go. But they were happy; a large family; a villa
on a hill somewhere; pictures, bric-à-brac and bohemian intellectualism. You knew of his marriage?"

"Yes; I knew."

The tears had risen to Lady Elliston's eyes before that stricken, ashen face; she looked away,
murmuring: "I wanted to tell you, when we were alone. It might have come as such an ugly shock,
if you were unprepared. But, now, there is no danger anymore. And you will come out, Amabel?"

"No;--never.--It was never that."

"But what was it then?"

Amabel had risen and was looking around her blindly.

"It was.--I have no place but here.--Forgive me--I must go. I can't talk any more."

"Yes; go; do go and lie down." Lady Elliston, rising too, put an arm around her shoulders and
took her hand. "I'll come again and see you. I am going up to town for a night or so on Tuesday,
but I bring Peggy down here for the next week-end. I'll see you then.--Ah, here is Augustine,
and tea. He will give me my tea and you must sleep off your headache. Your poor mother has
a very bad headache, Augustine. I have tried her. Goodbye, dear, go and rest." At
six of the evening was the Indian who went to the Black River to bring the news of my post
in Colorado, the Lord D. Francisco de Viedma, with the desired response receipt the Lord, and
everyone in general were given food and liquor.

DAY 8.

We continued the show until three in the afternoon, having bought 17 horses, 5 cows and 4 bulls,
also bought ties, cufflinks and Maneas, and launched the expressed Calpisquis Indians, leaving the
one who brought the letter with his companions. At dusk reached 4 Indians, 2 and 2 Colorado
's the place where Black Cacique, which brought me part of this rack of cow gift, and said that
after they return to their tents, the chief wanted to come here, he commanded them to feed
and liquor: it tied the cattle and horses were housed.

At two in the morning were 4 cattle, which broke ties with which
they were tied.

DAY 9.

Control the boat at dawn to cut sticks to make a corral and saddled horse to excel cows, I
found the trail, and followed him in camp, until I realized the horse
something heavy: Dej Ndolo got out cool, and I went on board three
in the afternoon.

At this time I sent all Indians, when they had given her brandy.
cake, flour and beans.

At four came a pawn of those who accompanied the Super-intendant, with the news that was already more
halfway to the Colorado River that Lord Black.

DAY 10.

Before dawn I sent the boat to bring the wood that had cut the boat,
and ordered the pattern of this, which navigate the river, upstream
to an island that I pointed out, and that there remained until other
provision.

At the same time horseback riding, and with the expressed peon, tenacity
to gallop, I went to meet with the Super-intendant of nine or ten
leagues where we started: it would be noon, we got up and came to
spend the night at the edge of Colorado.

DAY 11.

This morning we coasted the Colorado downstream, on the part of S. until that island to where
the boat, in which capacity he determined that Mr. Super-intendant leave all The expedition
in charge of Ensign D. Dragon Francisco Piera, and helped the boat,
happened to the part of N accompanied by engineer D. Jose Perez Brito,
a father and two Mercedario soldiers, and we set off along the river
to board the brig.

Having come aboard, I found the novelty of having stolen cows Indians,
and the sailor the pastor had gone in search of them and had not returned.

Day

12.

Remuda was the boat to drive the boat for supplies.

DAY 13.

This day I left on horseback, accompanied by Mr D. Francisco de Viedma which came to recognize
the field.

At three in the afternoon came to board the boat with provisions.

At nine in the night there was news that the missing sailor had what the Indians in tents.

DAY
14.

At three o'clock in the evening came the missing sailor, whom the
Indians had captured in tents, and had longer as a slave.

DAY 15.

After noon I was on the boat, the Super-intendant, and the Engineer, to recognize mouth of this
river, at which time the chief Uzel came with some Indians, and at
four evening back on board.

DAY 16.

After noon you launched the Super-intendant, with those who accompanied
him to Black River, leaving the order for me to return to that river,
with all the expedition that came after it came to board the boat.

DAY 17.

This portion of the day I sent people on board to dig soil to plant some seeds and began to
enlist the vasijería, and to do the watering.

DAY 18.

Sent to people who would follow in the seed, others to make fuel for the journey, and others
from continuing with the watering. At two in the afternoon came the Cacique Black with his Indians,
was given to eat and spirits: the night he came to board the boat.

DAY 19.

It's over to the watering, firewood and crops: I sent the Black with Indian Cacique, having given
brandy, flour, biscuits and beans, ready for the morning launch my
trip to the Black River.

In the evening came to board the Black Cacique, trying to strong request
a letter the Excellent.

Viceroy Lord, so that would lead to Buenos Aires 4 Indians with Chanchuelo,
says, is sending this city, so that they could pass by the guards
frankly and the cacique with Guchulap, Calpisquis, Toro, Guchan, Canopey
and Alcaú together, passing When turning to take baguala, whose place
I wanted to send those expressed Buenos chasques Aires.

And though I know by that chief, that those laborers who had letter land to Buenos Aires, called
a Juan José, and other Martinez, the detainees would have on the
roofs of Calpisquis until the return of Chief Black to them, because
they said there Indians who marched with us a lot of people and weapons
to kill them, reasoned Super-intendant coming to Colorado, I said
that these Indians would go any way but insurance, with the expressed
pawns, they carried cards and passports.

As I expressed could this assurance to the end that did not stop,
and achieved the journey that attempts by earth, and I gave everything
I could to this chief, and his Indians, charging for the safety Godoy's
pawn, making many offers I returned to Colorado.

The Chanchuelo told me that the path worn by two laborers who go to
Buenos Aires, the worst and the best way was for about the coast to
the volcano, and from the Colorado until there were five days Quenquen
good way.

DAY 20.

In the morning I went to the Black River, and at the same time were the Indians came to Paso
Lanterns, and I was obliged to fund abalizarle there.

DAY 21.

This day I came to recognize the main drain of Colorado, and abalizé step with 40 markers to the
Point of Zaramagullones, and I did set sail, and trailer up the night, gave substance to the point
expressed in two arms of water.

DAY 22.

This morning, when the wind WSW Bonanca, I sailed the anchor, and boat and canoe by the bow
to the trailer followed the canal, and I arrived at ten to eleven to the fork of the Dolphins,
in whose place long all sail, and there siéndome the favorable wind. And would twelve o'clock,
was landed, and ruled the SE 1 / 4 E until two in the afternoon I
gave back in 5 fathoms, to leave the sea grow to stay low and abalizarlo.

When they had abalizado and recognized, I made sail, and continued
my voyage, judging the S 1 / 4 SE, till dusk I gave back in 41 / 2
fathoms of water.

DAY 23.

Dawned with the wind SW strong, which abonanzó to noon, and ordered the pilot on the boat Arroyo
to bar the Baradero, that abalizase channel. At half past four, having NNE wind called lazy,
I made sail, and sailed into the night I gave back in 3 fathoms of water.

DAY 24.

Dawned clear with the wind by the O, and contrary to my voyage, the
boat arrived at noon board, leaving the channel abalizada expressed
above.

At two o'clock I made sail ONO windy and Bordejé I arrived at the
first mark, and then a trailer and spies, I arrived in the evening
to anchor in the stream.

At eight o'clock at night came the wind by e loose, with which I made sail, and at ten o'clock
the wind hauled to the bow, I gave it back.

DAY 25.

Remained the strong wind, and the trailer went on until three scholarships, which can not happen,
I gave back at two o'clock in the afternoon, with very light wind at E: Mild, dizzy full sail,
and sailed until the evening, I gave back in two fathoms to exit the creek.

DAY 26.

At dawn I made sail with the wind NNW Bonanca, judging the ß0. At half past nine I was stuck on
a low, of the infinite that is in these places: as a lay spy, and with it at three in the afternoon
he left the vessel, at which time I did sail, And ruled the SSE until
the evening, which found 10 fathoms of water, say fund.

DAY 27.

As the sun made me sail with NO Bonanca, and at half past nine on
the lower vare large compared to the streams.

At three in the afternoon with two spies went to the canal, and gave background in 7 fathoms,
being quiet, and be the reverse flow.

DAY 28.

This morning I did sail with the wind not cool, and gave background
on the narrowness that between Island and Peninsula ranges of feral
pigs, and in this place, at the water's edge over a ditch, got five
pipes and two freshwater Cuarterolo, to serve as relief the boat to
go there with commission or above, and also those who go by land.

DAY 29.

At dawn I made sail with a fresh wind ONO, and went immediately to fund Punta Rubia, abalizar
to the channel that between this and low outside, to whose diligence
sent the pilot for I find myself sick and could not put more than
4 markers along the shore on land firm, being in very hard soil banks.

DAY 30.

This day I left, although with difficulty, to the Punta Rubia to recognize it, and put a mark
on a hill, which is known by when in the channel between the low and the mainland, and sent
some sailors to hunt, because we are short of meat, those who were given some rifle bullets.
In the evening the hunters returned to board, having brought 24 wild
boars; and the wind was very bad countenance.

DAY 31.

WSW wind dawned very strong, and then called the SE in the same manner: midday abonanzó, and
ordered the boatswain in the pot to recognize the low outside, she found channel that goes to
the SE: the evening I went on board, and the horizon was a bad face.

DAY 1. ° AUGUST.

Dawned with the wind strong and contrary OSO to navigate the Black River: eight sent to Point the boat
to the Blonde, with a Cuarterolo to fill with oil the wolf, there are plenty. All day the wind
remained the same line, and went to sleep bad face. At two in the evening called ONO that seemed
hurricane, so it was fund must be given to hope.

DAY 2.

All day the wind remained very strong, from the WSW WNW, until the night he was quiet, which
time I sailed hope.

DAY 3.

Dawned chilly wind SW, and closed horizons.

At ten o'clock SSE was called loudly, and having little shelter in
this place, I made sail for inside, with higher and reefed foresail.

After noon immediately gave substance to the two streams: all day kept the wind from the SSE to the
SSO strong with hail, and so dark.

DAY 4.

SO loud dawn wind, of which remained so all day, until night abonanzó.

DAY 5.

Dawned with the wind fairly fresh: At nine o'clock the boat came on board, I gave food to return
to the stream where he was a refugee.

In the evening they called NNO chilly wind, and I made a sign to the boat to come aboard: at twelve
o'clock I gave him food, and order for that to put an hour sail, advancing to Punta Blonde ship
the oil Cuarterolo Wolf, previously had not been for the hardness of time.

DAY 6.

Would be two in the evening when the boat got on board, and I did set sail for the Black River.
At four o'clock I arrived at Punta Rubia, to where I found the sea
very heavy, and I went through the surf to the boat by the bow and
keel touched in the head N of banks with another heavy sea we went,
and continued ruling the S 1 / 4 SE for between the rompidero the
sea, and the low, with 50 fathoms of latitude.

At sunrise had already mounted low, and continued strong N wind sailing and fresh for achieving
high tide day by the Black River, and to get into it, being the heavy sea and wind contrary to
venture to charge your bar. Twelve o'clock at night I was breaking the bar end to end, and
I charged by the channel N by between Reventazon. The less water found was two fathoms, and
yet such was the tidal wave hit the boat sometimes, not catching on is more than 71 / 2 spans, passed
the bar and sailed for 3 to fathom N tip of the river, which gave me the strong wind, and by
dint of many levees managed to give back inside river.

At two in the afternoon and insurance matched by God, not being able to follow having more
power in discover.

The boat was not possible to charge the bar where we, for the great sea that could dip, and turned
low, and from outside to rowing came to be strapped to our side hard work, and to not have such
good people would not have made, nor enter Black River.

At eleven o'clock that night I did set sail, and I was increased to fund more in, and better place.

DAY
7.

As the sun sent sailors to land that would make fire, in order that he should come in establishing
the attention of my entry into this river, and at ten I levé, making diligently to reach the
establishment.

Warnings to mariners to these destinations.

1. ° Anyone who comes by Black River voyages to the Bay of All Saints, should be undertaken
with winds from the third quarter, taking into account the time of high tide at Punta Rubia,
for bend at that hour without losing minutes of time in this intelligence,
and that is the high tide in the Black River two hours before (with
a difference of few minutes) than in Punta Rubia, in which it is impossible
to make this voyage.

Black River must leave at half tide growing, and precisely because of the N channel of your
rod, and in this case is five hours to navigate this distance, a cool Pampero, straining,
sailing, it's time enough to be at that point to the point of the tide, should not break when
bent more than 18 steps from the mark than it is stuck, as the extremely narrow channel, and accurate
information to pass it, for no other recognition is made more verbose,
which know if there is another site that provides entry into this
bay more easily.

2. ª If the winds that they be out Bonanca Black River, and the term mentioned above he sees
that he can not reach Punta Rubia, shall remain immediately to sail Punta Rasa, or given back,
with just 14 hours has to be outside: for running the coast from
this point suffice Blonde NS needle and from there to the Black River
NE SO also the needle, if you get some time, never can be entirely
voyage because it makes the most wicked surfing 10 / 4, and so is,
being in this place, in terms of continuing his journey, or go back
to the Black River, San Jose or San Antonio for shelter; which will
not happen if you shall find downwind or upwind of the expressed Punta
Rasa.

3. ª If being then to the north of Punta Rasa, it's time to enter some S SSE SE, and more if it is at
night, try to hold up QAE considered to be time to move to charge à Punta Rubia when sea without
thinking tie, because at latitude 40 ° 45 'touched already the keel of the boat that I have
today to my office when I came to the recognition of Rio Black at the beginning of the expedition,
and 12 inches of water is not land, and if the horizon closed, the sea that burst above the
low, which also can serve as warning those who travel to Buenos Aires, to give them the appropriate
shelter.

4. ª If you Blonde bending Punta shall give a little wind, can give
back, it was already on the the inside, not much swell, because this
failure in the basement of the outside, but with the caveat that it
is the best anchor you have, by the strong currents there.

This is in case of being down or stop the tide, if we grow up, you can, even if the wind entirely
bow, tack, because with the help of the current, which runs at least the Moon squares is 4 miles,
very short O is at the Isle of ranges, and immediate to Arrojo Hondo,
in which site can give back without any of you can temporary inconvenience.

But in no way shall remain anchored in Punta Rubia longer than until the tide begins to grow because,
in addition to the strong current, the tenazon is terrible, and very deep, so which must be
sailed before the tide take much force, otherwise it will cost lot of work. The levees that
giveth can render them on the ground, it's all clean and hondable to the male, but have carefully
with low outside, not to give much background suddenly upon him.

5. ª When they were inside the narrowness that makes the Isle of the mainland ranges can be to anchor
in the bay without care, having it not be just about any bass, and
attending to that if it gave back at the flood, water will be sufficient
when it floats down to fit in: on the understanding that the waxing
and waning in this place in the ordinary tides, and wind from the
fourth quadrant, is Bruza and a half, and the winds grow out much
more, and according to the strength of storms that impel.

6. ª Turning to the Bahia de Todos Santos to Bahia Anegada, you must attend to the difference
is in the tides from one to another, which is 3 ° 27 '(as seen from
the observations expressed in the paper), for navigation and anchor
with the possible security, not remain on some low, of the infinite
that is: in understanding that, with a short difference waxes and
wanes so much in one as in the other.

7. ª No one should sail at night in any of these two bays not risk being stranded, and in any
place for them to give back, you can be sure your tenazon.

8. Th By day you must navigate two-thirds of the tide, growing forward, in order to take water on low
to pass, and beached at the same time if you can easily remove the
vessel, increasing the water.

9. ª The site is marked with 4 anchors
to O Isja of the Wolves, 4 and 5 fathoms of water, entering the Canal
de Villarino, is extremely strong tenazon, and if it goes wide to
sea without low that hinder the entry into it, larger boats, as I
believe with some probability, could well serve to shelter them, and
get water, because the place is absolutely certain, and from there
to secure any color will canoe from which sailed for making Colorado
to the Point of Zaramagullones must navigate day and low tide because
when the flood covered the entire Desplayado and not known the said
channel, and on the contrary, all is dry low tide, except for her.
And to sail continuously abalizarla required, provided, that the whole
distance from the Point of Wolves to Colorado, is a safe port, and
went in the expressed channel, with all can safely navigate, even
with canoes.

10. Nd From the Point of Zaramagullones to enter the
Colorado, you must navigate tidal flood, and at any time, snuggling
on the side of the boat to the buoys, there let me put them out, leaving
the port side. 

11. ª To come from the Colorado River Black is necessary,
immediately to the Arroyo Hondo, expected wind the purpose to make
this voyage, especially if the winter when days are short, many temporary
and painful night, long and risky in these patients. The best winds
are from NE to NW. This attention should come to Punta Rubia high
tide and enough strength to sail to reach the Black River on the same
day flood tide, and enter the N channel of your bar. After the passing
through the expressed channel, to luff get close to the tip of the
N that forms the mouth of the river, and to take on board the same
anchor, as to give shelter to a little boy who is under the lee.

12.
ª Whenever the winds are strong second or third quadrant, and has
a high sea Cam, by no means enter the expressed channel N of the bar,
because in this case is much safer to enter the S, which did not alter
both the sea and on the N, to break out in low and winds are expressed
in that favorable.

13. Second cam Having a lot of tide (this is a
temporary waste) should bear in mind that N channel in the sea altea
much, because it does not slip any of the outside, and he that cometh
to enter it, must have 9 inches of height, which did experience in
this journey, which ensured the water that had, by repeated observations
that I have made, and just had at least two fathoms, I charged the
rod tip broke to tip, swells so deformed that I've never seen it,
and found two fathoms above: but I played many times, sending the
boat only 7 inches of water. The recognition came with a sinking pang. Reluctantly,
unwillingly, her mind was forced back to contemplate the catastrophe that had befallen her.
He was her judge, her enemy: yet, on this dismal day, how she missed him. She leaned her head
against the window-frame and the tears fell and fell.

If he were there, could she not go to him and take his hand and say that, whatever the deep
wounds they had dealt each other, they needed each other too much to be apart. Could she not
ask him to take her back, to forgive her, to love her? Ah--there full memory rushed in. Her
heart seemed to pant and gasp in the sudden coil. Take him back? When it was her steady fear
as well as her sudden anger that had banished him, he thought he loved her, but that was because
he did not know and it was the anger rather than the love of Augustine's last words that came
to her. He loved her because he believed her good, and that imaginary goodness cast a shadow
on her husband. To believe her good Augustine had been forced to believe evil of the man she
loved and to whom they both owed everything.

He had said that he was shut out from her heart, and it was true, and her heart broke in seeing
it. But it was by more than the sacred love for her husband that her child was shut out. Her
past, her guilt, was with her and stood as a barrier between them. She was separated from him
for ever. And, looking round the room, suddenly terrified, it seemed to her that Augustine
was dead and that she was utterly alone.

VIII

She did not write to Augustine for some days. There seemed nothing that she could say. To say
that she forgave him might seem to put aside too easily the deep wrong he had done her and
her husband; to say that she longed to see him and that, in spite of all, her heart was his,
seemed to make deeper the chasm of falseness between them.

The rain fell during all these days. Sometimes a pale evening sunset would light the western
horizon under lifted clouds and she could walk out and up and down the paths, among her sodden
rose-trees, or down into the wet, dark woods. Sometimes at night she saw a melancholy star
shining here and there in the vaporous sky. But in the morning the grey sheet dropped once
more between her and the outer world, and the sound of the steady drip and beat was like an
outer echo to her inner wretchedness.

It was on the fourth day that wretchedness turned to bitter restlessness, and that to a sudden
resolve. Not to write, not even to say she forgave, might make him think that her heart was
still hardened against him. Her fear had blunted her imagination. Clearly now she saw, and
with an anguish in the vision, that Augustine must be suffering too. Clearly she heard the
love in his parting words. And she longed so to see, to hear that love again, that the longing,
as if with sudden impatience of the hampering sense of sin, rushed into words that might bring him.

She wrote:--"My dear Augustine. I miss you very much. Isn't this dismal weather. I am feeling
better. I need not tell you that I do forgive you for the mistake that hurts us both." Then
she paused, for her heart cried out "Oh--come back soon"; but she did not dare yield to that
cry. She hardly knew that, with uncertain fingers, she only repeated again:--"I miss you very
much. Your affectionate mother."

This was on the fourth day.

On the afternoon of the fifth she stood, as she so often stood, looking out at the drawing-room
window. She was looking and listening, detached from what she saw, yet absorbed, too, for,
as with her son, this watchfulness of natural things was habitual to her.

It was still raining, but more fitfully: a wind had risen and against a scudding sky the sycamores
tossed their foliage, dark or pale by turns as the wind passed over them. A broad pool of water,
dappling incessantly with rain-drops, had formed along the farther edge of the walk where it
slanted to the lawn: it was this pool that Amabel was watching and the bobbin-like dance of
drops that looked like little glass thimbles. The old leaden pipes, curiously moulded, that
ran down the house beside the windows, splashed and gurgled loudly. The noise of the rushing,
falling water shut out other sounds. Gazing at the dancing thimbles she was unaware that someone
had entered the room behind her.

Suddenly two hands were laid upon her shoulders.

The shock, going through her, was like a violent electric discharge. She tingled from head
to foot, and almost with terror. "Augustine!" she gasped. But the shock was to change, yet
grow, as if some alien force had penetrated her and were disintegrating every atom of her blood.

"No, not Augustine," said her husband's voice: "But you can be glad to see me, can't you, Amabel?"

He had taken off his hands now and she could turn to him, could see his bright, smiling face
looking at her, could feel him as something wonderful and radiant filling the dismal day, filling
her dismal heart, with its presence. But the shock still so trembled in her that she did not
move from her place or speak, leaning back upon the window as she looked at him,--for he was
very near,--and putting her hands upon the window-sill on either side. "You didn't expect to
see me, did you," Sir Hugh said.

She shook her head. Never, never, in all these years, had he come again, so soon. Months, always,
sometimes years, had elapsed between his visits.

"The last time didn't count, did it," he went on, in speech vague and desultory yet, at the
same time, intent and bright in look. "I was so bothered; I behaved like a selfish brute; I'm
sure you felt it. And you were so particularly kind and good--and dear to me, Amabel."

She felt herself flushing. He stood so near that she could not move forward and he must read
the face, amazed, perplexed, incredulous of its joy, yet all lighted from his presence, that
she kept fixed on him. For ah, what joy to see him, to feel that here, here alone of all the
world, was she safe, consoled, known yet cared for. He who understood all as no one else in
the world understood, could stand and smile at her like that.

"You look thin, and pale, and tired," were his next words. "What have you been doing to yourself?
Isn't Augustine here? You're not alone?"

"Yes; I am alone. Augustine is staying with the Wallace boy."

With the mention of Augustine the dark memory came, but it was now of something dangerous and
hostile shut away, yes, safely shut away, by this encompassing brightness, this sweetness of
intent solicitude. She no longer yearned to see Augustine.

Sir Hugh looked at her for some moments, when, she said that she was alone, without speaking.
"That is nice for me," he then said. "But how miserable,--for you,--it must have been. What
a shame that you should have been left alone in this dull place,--and this wretched weather,
too!--Did you ever see such weather." He looked past her at the rain.

"It has been wretched," said Amabel; but she spoke, as she felt, in the past: nothing seemed
wretched now.

"And you were staring out so hard, that you never heard me," He came beside her now, as if
to look out, too, and, making room for him, she also turned and they looked out at the rain
together.

"A filthy day," said Sir Hugh, "I can't bear to think that this is what you have been doing,
all alone."

"I don't mind it, I have the girls, on three mornings, you know."

"You mean that you don't mind it because you are so used to it?"

She had regained some of her composure:--for one thing he was beside her, no longer blocking
her way back into the room. "I like solitude, you know," she was able to smile.

"Really like it?"

"Sometimes."

"Better than the company of some people, you mean?"

"Yes."

"But not better than mine," he smiled back. "Come, do encourage me, and say that you are glad
to see me."

In her joy the bewilderment was growing, but she said that, of course, she was glad to see him.

"I've been so bored, so badgered," said Sir Hugh, stretching himself a little as though to
throw off the incubus of tiresome memories; "and this morning when I left a dull country house,
I said to myself: Why not go down and see Amabel?--I don't believe she will mind.--I believe
that, perhaps, she'll be pleased.--I know that I want to go very much.--So here I am:--very
glad to be here--with dear Amabel."

She looked out, silent, blissful, and perplexed.

He was not hard; he was not irritated; all trace of vexed preoccupation was gone; but he was
not the Sir Hugh that she had seen for all these twenty years. He was new, and yet he reminded
her of something, and the memory moved towards her through a thick mist of years, moved like
a light through mist. Far, sweet, early things came to her as its heralds; the sound of brooks
running; the primrose woods where she had wandered as a girl; the singing of prophetic birds
in Spring. The past had never come so near as now when Sir Hugh--yes, there it was, the fair,
far light--was making her remember their long past courtship. And a shudder of sweetness went
through her as she remembered, of sweetness yet of unutterable sadness, as though something
beautiful and dead had been shown to her. She seemed to lean, trembling, to kiss the lips of
a beautiful dead face, before drawing over it the shroud that must cover it for ever.

Sir Hugh was silent also. Her silence, perhaps, made him conscious of memories. Presently,
looking behind them, he said:--"I'm keeping you standing. Shall we go to the fire?"

She followed him, bending a little to the fire, her arm on the mantel-shelf, a hand held out
to the blaze. Sir Hugh stood on the other side. She was not thinking of herself, hardly of
him. Suddenly he took the dreaming hand, stooped to it, and kissed it. He had released it before
she had time to know her own astonishment.

"You did kiss mine, you know," he smiled, leaning his arm, too, on the mantel-shelf and looking
at her with gaily supplicating eyes. "Don't be angry."

The shroud had dropped: the past was gone: she was once more in the present of oppressive,
of painful joy.

She would have liked to move away and take her chair at some distance; but that would have
looked like flight; foolish indeed. She summoned her common-sense, her maturity, her sorrow,
to smile back, to say in a voice she strove to make merely light: "Unusual circumstances excused
me."

"Unusual circumstances?"

"You had been very kind. I was very grateful."

Sir Hugh for a moment was silent, looking at her with his intent, interrogatory gaze. "You
are always kind to me," he then said. "I am always grateful. So may I always kiss your hand?"

Her eyes fell before his. "If you wish to," she answered gravely.

"You frighten me a little, do you know," said Sir Hugh. "Please don't frighten me.--Are you
really angry?--I don't frighten you?"

"You bewilder me a little," Amabel murmured. She looked into the fire, near tears, indeed,
in her bewilderment; and Sir Hugh looked at her, looked hard and carefully, at her noble figure,
her white hands, the gold and white of her leaning head. He looked, as if measuring the degree
of his own good fortune.

"You are so lovely," he then said quietly.

She blushed like a girl.

"You are the most beautiful woman I know," said Sir Hugh. "There is no one like you," He put
his hand out to hers, and, helplessly, she yielded it. "Amabel, do you know, I have fallen
in love with you."

She stood looking at him, stupefied; her eyes ecstatic and appalled.

"Do I displease you?" asked Sir Hugh.

She did not answer.

"Do I please you?" Still she gazed at him, speechless.

"Do you care at all for me?" he asked, and, though grave, he smiled a little at her in asking
the question. How could he not know that, for years, she had cared for him more than for anything,
anyone?

And when he asked her this last question, the oppression was too great. She drew her hand from
his, and laid her arms upon the mantel-shelf and hid her face upon them. It was a helpless
confession. It was a helpless appeal.

But the appeal was not understood, or was disregarded. In a moment her husband's arms were
about her.

This was new. This was not like their courtship.--Yet, it reminded her,--of what did it remind
her as he murmured words of victory, clasped her and kissed her? It reminded her of Paul Quentin.
In the midst of the amazing joy she knew that the horror was as great.

"Ah don't!--how can you!--how can you!" she said.

She drew away from him but he would not let her go.

"How can I? How can I do anything else?" he laughed, in easy yet excited triumph. "You do love
me--you darling nun!"

She had freed her hands and covered her face: "I beg of you," she prayed.

The agony of her sincerity was too apparent. Sir Hugh unclasped his arms. She went to her chair,
sat down, leaned on the table, still covering her eyes. So she had leaned, years ago, with
hidden face, in telling Bertram of the coming of the child. It seemed to her now that her shame
was more complete, more overwhelming. And, though it overwhelmed her, her bliss was there;
the golden and the black streams ran together.

"Dearest,--should I have been less sudden?" Sir Hugh was beside her, leaning over her, reasoning,
questioning, only just not caressing her. "It's not as if we didn't know each other, Amabel:
we have been strangers, in a sense;--yet, through it all--all these years--haven't we felt
near?--Ah darling, you can't deny it;--you can't deny you love me." His arm was pressing her.

"Please--" she prayed again, and he moved his hand further away, beyond her crouching shoulder.

"You are such a little nun that you can't bear to be loved?--Is that it? But you'll have to
learn again. You are more than a nun: you are a beautiful woman: young; wonderfully young.
It's astonishing how like a girl you are."--Sir Hugh seemed to muse over a fact that allured.
"And however like a nun you've lived--you can't deny that you love me."

"You haven't loved me," Amabel at last could say.

He paused, but only for a moment. "Perhaps not: but," his voice had now the delicate aptness
that she remembered, "how could I believe that there was a chance for me? How could I think
you could ever come to care, like this, when you had left me--you know--Amabel."

She was silent, her mind whirling. And his nearness, as he leaned over her, was less ecstasy
than terror. It was as if she only knew her love, her sacred love again, when he was not near.

"It's quite of late that I've begun to wonder," said Sir Hugh. "Stupid ass of course, not to
have seen the jewel I held in my hand. But you've only showed me the nun, you darling. I knew
you cared, but I never knew how much.--I ought to have had more self-conceit, oughtn't I?"

"I have cared. You have been all that is beautiful.--I have cared more than for anything.--But--oh,
it could not have been this.--This would have killed me with shame," said Amabel.

"With shame? Why, you strange angel?"

"Can you ask?" she said in a trembling voice.

His hand caressed her hair, slipped around her neck. "You nun; you saint.--Does that girlish
peccadillo still haunt you?"

"Don't--oh don't--call it that--call me that!--"

"Call you a saint? But what else are you?--a beautiful saint. What other woman could have lived
the life you've lived? It's wonderful."

"Don't. I cannot bear it."

"Can't bear to be called a saint? Ah, but, you see, that's just why you are one."

She could not speak. She could not even say the only answering word: a sinner. Her hands were
like leaden weights upon her brows. In the darkness she heard her heart beating heavily, and
tried and tried to catch some fragment of meaning from her whirling thoughts.

And as if her self-condemnation were a further enchantment, her husband murmured: "It makes
you all the lovelier that you should feel like that. It makes me more in love with you than
ever: but forget it now. Let me make you forget it. I can.--Darling, your beautiful hair. I
remember it;--it is as beautiful as ever.--I remember it;--it fell to your knees.--Let me see
your face, Amabel."

She was shuddering, shrinking from him.--"Oh--no--no.--Do you not see--not feel--that it is
impossible--"

"Impossible! Why?--My darling, you are my wife;--and if you love me?--"

They were whirling impossibilities; she could see none clearly but one that flashed out for
her now in her extremity of need, bright, ominous, accusing. She seized it:--"Augustine."

"Augustine? What of him?" Sir Hugh's voice had an edge to it.

"He could not bear it. It would break his heart."

"What has he to do with it? He isn't all your life:--you've given him most of it already."

"He is, he must be, all my life, except that beautiful part that you were:--that you are:--oh
you will stay my friend!"--

"I'll stay your lover, your determined lover and husband, Amabel. Darling, you are ridiculous,
enchanting--with your barriers, your scruples." The fear, the austerity, he felt in her fanned
his ardour to flame. His arms once more went round her; he murmured words of lover-like pleading,
rapturous, wild and foolish. And, though her love, her sacred love for him was there, his love
for her was a nightmare to her now. She had lost herself, and it was as though she lost him,
while he pleaded thus. And again and again she answered, resolute and tormented:--"No: no:
never--never. Do not speak so to me.--Do not--I beg of you."

Suddenly he released her. He straightened himself, and moved away from her a little. Someone
had entered.

Amabel dropped her hands and raised her eyes at last. Augustine stood before them.

Augustine had on still his long travelling coat; his cap, beaded with raindrops, was in his
hand; his yellow hair was ruffled. He had entered hastily. He stood there looking at them,
transfixed, yet not astonished. He was very pale.

For some moments no one of them spoke. Sir Hugh did not move further from his wife's side:
he was neither anxious nor confused; but his face wore an involuntary scowl.

The deep confusion was Amabel's. But her husband had released her; no longer pleaded; and with
the lifting of that dire oppression the realities of her life flooded her almost with relief.
It was impossible, this gay, this facile, this unseemly love, but, as she rejected and put
it from her, the old love was the stronger, cherished the more closely, in atonement and solicitude,
the man shrunk from and repulsed. And in all the deep confusion, before her son,--that he should
find her so, almost in her husband's arms,--a flash of clarity went through her mind as she
saw them thus confronted. Deeper than ever between her and Augustine was the challenge of her
love and his hatred; but it was that sacred love that now needed safeguards; she could not
feel it when her husband was near and pleading; Augustine was her refuge from oppression.

She rose and went to him and timidly clasped his arm. "Dear Augustine, I am so glad you have
come back. I have missed you so."

He stood still, not responding to her touch: but, as she held him, he looked across the room
at Sir Hugh. "You wrote you missed me. That's why I came."

Sir Hugh now strolled to the fire and stood before it, turning to face Augustine's gaze; unperturbed;
quite at ease.

"How wet you are dear," said Amabel. "Take off this coat."

Augustine stripped it off and flung it on a chair. She could hear his quick breathing: he did
not look at her. And still it seemed to her that it was his anger rather than his love that
protected her.

"He will want to change, dearest," said Sir Hugh from before the fire. "And,--I want to finish
my talk with you."

Augustine now looked at his mother, at the blush that overwhelmed her as that possessive word
was spoken. "Do you want me to go?"

"No, dear, no.--It is only the coat that is wet, isn't it. Don't go: I want to see you, of
course, after your absence.--Hugh, you will excuse us; it seems such a long time since I saw
him. You and I will finish our talk on another day.--Or I will write to you."

She knew what it must look like to her husband, this weak recourse to the protection of Augustine's
presence; it looked like bashfulness, a further feminine wile, made up of self-deception and
allurement, a putting off of final surrender for the greater sweetness of delay. And as the
reading of him flashed through her it brought a strange pang of shame, for him; of regret,
for something spoiled.

Sir Hugh took out his watch and looked at it. "Five o'clock. I told the station fly to come
back for me at five fifteen. You'll give me some tea, dearest?"

"Of course;--it is time now.--Augustine, will you ring?"

The miserable blush covered her again.

The tea came and they were silent while the maid set it out. Augustine had thrown himself into
a chair and stared before him. Sir Hugh, very much in possession, kept his place before the
fire. Catching Amabel's eye he smiled at her. He was completely assured. How should he not
be? What, for his seeing, could stand between them now?

When the maid was gone and Amabel was making tea, he came and stood over her, his hands in
his pockets, his handsome head bent to her, talking lightly, slightly jesting, his voice pitched
intimately for her ear, yet not so intimately that any unkindness of exclusion should appear.
Augustine could hear all he said and gauge how deep was an intimacy that could wear such lightness,
such slightness, as its mask.

Augustine, meanwhile, looked at neither his mother nor Sir Hugh. Turned from them in his chair
he put out his hand for his tea and stared before him, as if unseeing and unhearing, while
he drank it.

It was for her sake, Amabel knew, that Sir Hugh, raising his voice presently, as though aware
of the sullen presence, made a little effort to lift the gloom. "What sort of a time have you
had, Augustine?" he asked. "Was the weather at Haversham as bad as everywhere else?"

Augustine did not turn his head in replying:--"Quite as bad, I fancy."

"You and young Wallace hammered at metaphysics, I suppose."

"We did."

"Nice lad."

To this Augustine said nothing.

"They're such a solemn lot, the youths of this generation," said Sir Hugh, addressing Amabel
as well as Augustine: "In my day we never bothered ourselves much about things: at least the
ones I knew didn't. Awfully empty and frivolous. Augustine and his friends would have thought
us. Where we used to talk about race horses they talk about the Absolute,--eh, Augustine? We
used to go and hear comic-operas and they go and hear Brahms. I suppose you do go and hear
Brahms, Augustine?"

Augustine maintained his silence as though not conceiving that the sportive question required
an answer and Amabel said for him that he was very fond of Brahms.

"Well, I must be off," said Sir Hugh. "I hope your heart will ache ever so little for me, Amabel,
when you think of the night you've turned me out into."

"Oh--but--I don't turn, you out,"--she stammered, rising, as, in a gay farewell, he looked at her.

"No? Well, I'm only teasing. I could hardly have managed to stay this time--though,--I might
have managed, Amabel--. I'll come again soon, very soon," said Sir Hugh.

"No," her hand was in his and she knew that Augustine had turned his head and was looking at
them:--"No, dear Hugh. Not soon, please. I will write." Sir Hugh looked at her smiling. He
glanced at Augustine; then back at her, rallying her, affectionately, threateningly, determinedly,
for her foolish feints. He raised her hand to his lips and kissed it. "Write, if you want to;
but I'm coming," he said. He nodded to Augustine and left the room.

IX

It was, curiously enough, a crippling awkwardness and embarrassment that Amabel felt rather
than fear or antagonism, during that evening and the morning that followed. Augustine had left
the room directly after Sir Hugh's departure. When she saw him again he showed her a face resolutely
mute. It was impossible to speak to him; to explain. The main facts he must see; that her husband
was making love to her and that, however deep her love for him, she rejected him.

Augustine might believe that rejection to be for his own sake, might believe that she renounced
love and sacrificed herself from a maternal sense of duty; and, indeed, the impossibility of
bringing that love into her life with Augustine had been the clear impossibility that had flashed
for her in her need; she had seized upon it and it had armed her in her reiterated refusal.
But how tell Augustine that there had been more than the clear impossibility; how tell him
that deeper than renouncement was recoil? To tell that would be a disloyalty to her husband;
it would be almost to accuse him; it would be to show Augustine that something in her life
was spoiled and that her husband had spoiled it. So perplexed, so jaded, was she, so tossed
by the conflicting currents of her lesser plight, that the deeper fears were forgotten: she
was not conscious of being afraid of Augustine.

The rain had ceased next morning. The sky was crystalline; the wet earth glittered in Autumnal
sunshine.

Augustine went out for his ride and Amabel had her girls to read with. There was a sense of
peace for her in finding these threads of her life unknotted, smooth and simple, lying ready
to her hand.

When she saw Augustine at lunch he said that he had met Lady Elliston.

"She was riding with Marjory and her girl."

"Oh, she is back, then." Amabel was grateful to him for his everyday tone.

"What is Lady Elliston's girl like?"

"Pretty; very; foolish manners I thought; Marjory looked bewildered by her."

"The manners of girls have changed, I fancy, since my day; and she isn't a boy-girl, like our
nice Marjory, either?"

"No; she is a girl-girl; a pretty, forward, conceited girl-girl," said the ruthless Augustine.
"Lady Elliston is coming to see you this afternoon; she asked me to tell you; she says she
wants a long talk."

Amabel's weary heart sank at the news.

"She is coming soon after lunch," said Augustine.

"Oh--dear--"--. She could not conceal her dismay.

"But you knew that you were to see her again;--do you mind so much?" said Augustine.

"I don't mind.--It is only;--I have got so out of the way of seeing people that it is something
of a strain."

"Would you like me to come in and interrupt your talk?" asked Augustine after a moment.

She looked across the table at him. Still, in her memory, preoccupied with the cruelty of his
accusation, it was the anger rather than the love of his parting words the other day that was
the more real. He had been hard in kindness, relentless in judgment, only not accusing her,
not condemning her, because his condemnation had fixed on the innocent and not on the guilty--the
horror of that, as well as the other horror, was between them now, and her guilt was deepened
by it. But, as she looked, his eyes reminded her of something; was it of that fancied cry within
the church, imprisoned and supplicating? They were like that cry of pain, those eyes, the dark
rims of the iris strangely expanding, and her heart answered them, ignorant of what they said.

"You are thoughtful for me, dear; but no," she replied, "it isn't necessary for you to interrupt."

He looked away from her: "I don't know that it's not necessary," he said. After lunch they
went into the garden and walked for a little in the sunlight, in almost perfect silence. Once
or twice, as though from the very pressure of his absorption in her he created some intention
of speech and fancied that her lips had parted with the words, Augustine turned his head quickly
towards her, and at this, their eyes meeting, as it were over emptiness, both he and she would
flush and look away again. The stress between them was painful. She was glad when he said that
he had work to do and left her alone.

Amabel went to the drawing-room and took her chair near the table. A sense of solitude deeper
than she had known for years pressed upon her. She closed her eyes and leaned back her head,
thinking, dimly, that now, in such solitude as this, she must find her way to prayer again.
But still the door was closed. It was as if she could not enter without a human hand in hers.
Augustine's hand had never led her in; and she could not take her husband's now.

But her longing itself became almost a prayer as she sat with closed eyes. This would pass,
this cloud of her husband's lesser love. When he knew her so unalterably firm, when he saw
how inflexibly the old love shut out the new, he would, once more, be her friend. Then, feeling
him near again, she might find peace. The thought of it was almost peace. Even in the midst
of yesterday's bewildered pain she had caught glimpses of the old beauty; his kindly speech
to Augustine, his making of ease for her; gratitude welled up in her and she sighed with the
relief of her deep hope. To feel this gratitude was to see still further beyond the cloud.
It was even beautiful for him to be able to "fall in love" with her--as he had put it: that
the manifestations of his love should have made her shrink was not his fault but hers; she
was a nun; because she had been a sinner. She almost smiled now, in seeing so clearly that
it was on her the shadow rested. She could not be at peace, she could not pray, she could not
live, it seemed to her, if he were really shadowed. And after the smile it was almost with
the sense of dew falling upon her soul that she remembered the kindness, the chivalrous protection
that had encompassed her through the long years. He was her friend, her knight; she would forget,
and he, too, would forget that he had thought himself her lover.

She did not know how tired she was, but her exhaustion must have been great, for the thoughts
faded into a vague sweetness, then were gone, and, suddenly opening her eyes, she knew that
she had fallen asleep, sitting straightly in her chair, and that Lady Elliston was looking at her.

She started up, smiling and confused. "How absurd of me:--I have been sleeping.--Have you just
come?"

Lady Elliston did not smile and was silent. She took Amabel's hand and looked at her; she had
to recover herself from something; it may have been the sleeping face, wasted and innocent,
that had touched her too deeply. And her gravity, as of repressed tears, frightened Amabel.
She had never seen Lady Elliston look so grave. "Is anything the matter?" she asked. For a
moment longer Lady Elliston was silent, as though reflecting. Then releasing Amabel's hand,
she said: "Yes: I think something is the matter."

"You have come to tell me?"

"I didn't come for that. Sit down, Amabel. You are very tired, more tired than the other day.
I have been looking at you for a long time.--I didn't come to tell you anything; but now, perhaps,
I shall have something to tell. I must think."

She took a chair beside the table and leaned her head on her hand shading her eyes. Amabel
had obeyed her and sat looking at her guest.

"Tell me," Lady Elliston said abruptly, and Amabel today, more than of sweetness and softness,
was conscious of her strength, "have you been having a bad time since I saw you? Has anything
happened? Has anything come between you and Augustine? I saw him this morning, and he's been
suffering, too: I guessed it. You must be frank with me, Amabel; you must trust me: perhaps
I am going to be franker with you, to trust you more, than you can dream."

She inspired the confidence her words laid claim to; for the first time in their lives Amabel
trusted her unreservedly.

"I have had a very bad time," she said: "And Augustine has had a bad time. Yes; something has
come between Augustine and me,--many things."

"He hates Hugh," said Lady Elliston.

"How can you know that?"

"I guessed it. He is a clever boy: he sees you absorbed; he sees your devotion robbing him;
perhaps he sees even more, Amabel; I heard this morning, from Mrs. Grey, that Hugh had been
with you, again, yesterday. Amabel, is it possible; has Hugh been making love to you?"

Amabel had become very pale. Looking down, she said in a hardly audible voice; "It is a mistake.--He
will see that it is impossible."

Lady Elliston for a moment was silent: the confirming of her own suspicion seemed to have stupefied
her. "Is it impossible?" she then asked.

"Quite, quite impossible."

"Does Hugh know that it is impossible?"

"He will.--Yesterday, Augustine came in while he was here;--I could not say any more."

"I see: I see"; said Lady Elliston. Her hand fell to the table now and she slightly tapped
her finger-tips upon it. There was an ominous rhythm in the little raps. "And this adds to
Augustine's hatred," she said.

"I am afraid it is true. I am afraid he does hate him, and how terrible that is," said Amabel,
"for he believes him to be his father."

"By instinct he must feel the tie unreal."

"Yet he has had a father's kindness, almost, from Hugh."

"Almost. It isn't enough you know. He suspects nothing, you think?"

"It is that that is so terrible. He doesn't suspect me: he suspects him. He couldn't suspect
evil of me. It is my guilt, and his ignorant hatred that is parting us." Amabel was trembling;
she leaned forward and covered her face with her hands.

The very air about her seemed to tremble; so strange, so incredibly strange was it to hear
her own words of helpless avowal; so strange to feel that she must tell Lady Elliston all she
wished to know.

"Parting you? What do you mean? What folly!--what impossible folly! A mother and a son, loving
each other as you and Augustine love, parted for that. Oh, no," said Lady Elliston, and her
own voice shook a little: "that can't be. I won't have that."

"He would not love me, if he knew."

"Knew? What is there for him to know? And how should he know? You won't be so mad as to tell him?"

"It's my punishment not to dare to tell him--and to see my cowardice cast a shadow on Hugh."

"Punishment? haven't you been punished enough, good heavens! Cowardice? it is reason, maturity;
the child has no right to your secret--it is yours and only yours, Amabel. And if he did know
all, he could not judge you as you judge yourself."

"Ah, you don't understand," Amabel murmured: "I had forgotten to judge myself; I had forgotten
my sin; it was Augustine who made me remember; I know now what he feels about people like me."

Again Lady Elliston controlled herself to a momentary silence and again her fingers sharply
beat out her uncontrollable impatience. "I live in a world, Amabel," she said at last, "where
people when they use the word 'sin,' in that connection, know that it's obsolete, a mere decorative
symbol for unconventionality. In my world we don't have your cloistered black and white view
of life nor see sin where only youth and trust and impulse were. If one takes risks, one may
have to pay for them, of course; one plays the game, if one is in the ring, and, of course,
you may be put out of the ring if you break the rules; but the rules are those of wisdom, not
of morality, and the rule that heads the list is: Don't be found out. To imagine that the rules
are anything more than matters of social convenience is to dignify the foolish game. It is
a foolish game, Amabel, this of life: but one or two things in it are worth having; power to
direct the game; freedom to break its rules; and love, passionate love, between a man and woman:
and if one is strong enough one can have them all."

Lady Elliston had again put her hand to her brow, shielding her eyes and leaning her elbow
on the table, and Amabel had raised her head and sat still, gazing at her.

"You weren't strong enough," Lady Elliston went on after a little pause: "You made frightful
mistakes: the greatest, of course, was in running away with Paul Quentin: that was foolish,
and it was, if you like to call foolishness by its obsolete name, a sin. You shouldn't have
gone: you should have stayed: you should have kept your lover--as long as you wanted to."

Again she paused. "Do I horrify you?"

"No: you don't horrify me," Amabel replied. Her voice was gentle, almost musing; she was absorbed
in her contemplation.

"You see," said Lady Elliston, "you didn't play the game: you made a mess of things and put
the other players out. If you had stayed, and kept your lover, you would have been, in my eyes,
a less loveable but a wiser woman. I believe in the game being kept up; I believe in the social
structure: I am one of its accredited upholders"; in the shadow of her hand, Lady Elliston
slightly smiled. "I believe in the family, the group of shared interests, shared responsibilities,
shared opportunities it means: I don't care how many lovers a woman has if she doesn't break
up the family, if she plays the game. Marriage is a social compact and it's the woman's part
to keep the home together. If she seeks love outside marriage she must play fair, she mustn't
be an embezzling partner; she mustn't give her husband another man's children to support and
so take away from his own children;--that's thieving. The social structure, the family, are
unharmed, if one is brave and wise. Love and marriage can rarely be combined and to renounce
love is to cripple one's life, to miss the best thing it has to give. You, at all events, Amabel,
may be glad that you haven't missed it. What, after all, does our life mean but just that,--the
power and feeling that one gets into it. Be glad that you've had something."

Amabel, answering nothing, contemplated her guest.

"So, as these are my views, imagine what I feel when I find you here, like this"; Lady Elliston
dropped her hand at last and looked about her, not at Amabel: "when I find you, in prison,
locked up for life, by yourself, because you were lovably unwise. It's abominable, it's shameful,
your position, isolated here, and tolerated, looked askance at by these nobodies.--Ah--I don't
say that other women haven't paid even more heavily than you've done; I own that, to a certain
extent, you've escaped the rigours that the game exacts from its victims. But there was no
reason why you should pay anything: it wasn't known, never really known--your brother and Hugh
saw to that;--you could have escaped scot-free."

Amabel spoke at last: "How, scot-free?" she asked.

Lady Elliston looked hard at her: "Your husband would have taken you back, had you insisted.--You
shouldn't have fallen in with his plans."

"His plans? They were mine; my brother's."

"And his. Hugh was glad to be rid of the young wife he didn't love."

Again Amabel was trembling. "He might have been rid of her, altogether rid of her, if he had
cared more for power and freedom than for pity."

"Power? With not nearly enough money? He was glad to keep her money and be rid of her. If you
had pulled the purse-strings tight you might have made your own conditions." 

Varied or later. Before arriving at Bottomless Bay, where the expedition was to saturate, discord
erupted between the Superintendent and D. Francisco de Viedma, which has since aspired to
supplant him: in a secret correspondence that the latter had with the Viceroy, induced him to
disprove the first establishment, as instructed, Stone had founded on the peninsula of San
Jose, and with the same injustice that had impeached Villarino returned to Buenos Aires to account
for their recognition. He was accused of disloyalty, without more foundation than to have known
that the slave of a silversmith, busy out in the clean drafts of the pilot, had shown to D.
SA José Custodio Faria, Portuguese brigadier, seeking to enter the service of Spain.

However, the journey that began in 1779 when Colorado was Villarino classified discovery because nobody
really had hitherto visited that river: the withdrawal situation, in bottom of a bay strewn
all banks and reefs, which had been subtracted from the observations of sailors, who, after having
recognized the Cape San Antonio, turned away from the coast in vain endeavor to avoid a painful
journey.

It appears that the Superintendent Viedma was not satisfied with this recognition, since Villarino
forced to return to Colorado three more times: first in 1780, the second in 1781, and the last
in 1785. The newspaper that published for the second of these new journeys, and we have preferred to
be the most complete, without being neglected some notes of contents
in the unpublished.

"This river (the Colorado) the author says in one of them [1], will be the fourth part of the flow Black
River, or less. I horseback ride, and was more deeply where I got the rough water the tenderloin.
In its drain is not reventazon, but I think it is very shallow, so very Desplayado, and the
many low they are discovered at low tide.

The tide is one hour later than at the mouth of Black River. These crops are low, and the
inside of the islands that form, which seemed the port to the boat. "

"The river will have 60 to 70 yards wide. The water is slightly thick, and very inferior to
that of Rio Black: This comes from a stream of salt water, as I said an Indian gets too high
your drain [2].

The gaps in their margins are salty, and so they are in the space between these two rivers, whose
distance, prudently calculated is 24 leagues: this is the first well
of Colorado, 8 miles, from first to second, 10; and the second at
Fort del Carmen, 6.

    "
    
    In another contemporary document, there is unprecedented in our power
    [3], we find the following details on the Colorado: the Superintendent
    Viedma the speaker -
    
    July 17, 1781 .-- "At 8 am I began my march the recognition accorded
to the Indian linguist Matias.

    Were me special engineer D. Jose Perez Brito, D. Pedro Indart Fermin,
    Fr Sanchez, with three dragons, even after Bores, and three infantry
    soldiers. Matias came from vaqueano and for having said that
    the river was far away, we each one two horses move.
    
    "Our march was across the road at a gallop. At 11-1/2 of day we arrived
    at the place where the road goes away for Sauce: There will be away
    from the island [4] this site, about eleven leagues, more or
    less.

    All the land is fertile, well abundance of pasture, particularly clover,
    which is grown as lozano, which in parts has over half a yard
    high. The wood is scarce, although the site is a hill with some chañares,
    Matias endonde it says it can be strong: in field inside the island
    which is so completely them.
    
    "The river has little grove of willows, and shoddy, useless entirely
for buildings, and only good for burning, with these, and can chañares
for a few years supply of firewood a population.

    These trees cover at intervals along the banks of adams in a thick,
    clear in others, and sometimes none, so often spending four or six
    blocks, and up to half a league without find a willow tree.
    
    "The path leading from the banks of the Colorado address the Sauce,
    continues to Buenos Aires, according to Matias told me, and to eight
    leagues is the fountain, or well he cites John peon Jose Gonzalez
in their relationship: from this place to the salt, that They mention
in my instructions, there will be a day's journey: Salinas said he
says the same Indian and others that I have examined, are very abundant,
and excellent salt.

    
    
    "All the land that is discovered from the said hill, is sandy
    and sterile, both the north and the east, and the Indian Matias As
I said above, was much more naked field, with only some trees but
on the banks of river.

    
    
    "That in the interior there are no Indians, except for those
    are in the mountains of Casuhatí [5], Tandil, Vulcan, in Salinas,
    and those belonging to the tolderías of Calpilquís [6] and Guchuláp
    [7], all others have their permanent residence in the near Black
    River, from where as swarm stock of mares and horses. Several
    tribes, namely, the Chulilaquihets [8], the chief of Quilmes, and
    others, whose names I could not understand. I spoke also of a
    chief powerful appeal Sanquel [9], which was expected within a few
moons in the sheets of Chief Black.

    
    
    "When these pigs were set off to the borders of Buenos
    Aires, have to go just for a camp site of Rio Black, who called
    Chuelechet, since no other is passable. From this site out two
    paths, one for Colorado, the other for Salinas, who left two days
    up, and where there is plenty of water. From this point follows
    the way to the Willow and the mountains, and some pieces of Indian
pass it without stopping in Colorado.

    
    
    "That the Chief Black, after marrying an Araucana and having killed
    some Indians closely related to the Use it cacique [10] has been
separated from him, and has established close of tolderías of Chulilaquin.

"To

    recognize the other side of Colorado tried vadearle, to whose purpose
    I did so much for a young Indian who was to about half a league,
    a few horses grazing tolderías to use it. But seeing that little
    he needed to swim with horse, I determined to pass, considering
    that it was not This requires diligence, as they saw that those
    lands were equal to this: Bores me out and said that he had traveled
    when he came with his departure to the extent of the deserters, and
    to seemed more fertile.
    

    "On this side are two small salt: we saw one of them, to the other
    is not, being more distant, and informed me the Indian Matias,
    salt is only in the summer. The fertility of these land, so
    I walked, extending to about four miles wide on both banks, which
    together add up to eight, and I think that is the effect of flooding
    of the river of time Large avenues, which the Indians say they are
    regular in summers, and covering two or three miles on each
    side. The plain terrain favors these natural hazards, which will
    over time a source of wealth for those who come to exploit.
    
    "These Parages abundance of partridges, pigeons, geese, ducks, Lievre,
deer, etc.. "

    
    

The Court took no advantage of Madrid of these awards: the apathy was his usual state, and only when
suspicious a break with some European power, awoke from its slumber to order that the exploration
of the coasts of the south, not in order of population but for foreigners to leave. In the
government of Viceroy Melo, care of the struggle in which Spain was committed to the French
Republic, were recorded twice Bahia of All Saints, Anegada, and the mouth of the Rio Colorado,
which was suspected to be hidden subjects of that nation. One of these expeditions left the Black
River in the summer of 1794, under the command of Commander D. Juan Gutierrez de la Concha, who,
after having accompanied the illustrious and unfortunate Malespina, stopped in Montevideo
to make a more verbose recognition of the Patagonian coast ports: the other was assigned to D. Joseph
la Peña, the most experienced driver in the hydrography of that coast. Concha's Diary has
been subtracted so far to our inquiries, and fears that the disastrous end [11] this officer
has led to the loss of his papers: the Journal of Peña forward to nothing what we know of
the Rio Colorado, having occupied more especially to recognize the bays adjacent.

In 1822 all these Parages were explored, by order of government, by
Colonel Cramer in which we find the following news report from Colorado.

"De la Bahia de Todos los Santos I went to that of the Union. The channels leading from one to
another with little background, and only the boats can be crossed: recognized by passing the Long
Island and Borda, but over and over offer very few resources.

"La Bahia de la Union, in addition to promising the same benefits
as that of All Saints fisheries is also best anchorages, the channel
is wide enough to enter, with five fathoms at low tide.

"The Colorado River empties into the Bay via two channels: one girl,
and one large.

A high tide the boats can pass through the first and the second has three fathoms of water
near throughout the extension, so that ships can anchor in the arm with the highest security.

"I
think on the whole coast there is a point that offers the advantages
of this bay, because besides being very warm, in spite of its great
extent, is also the only step Directions to Colorado, being outside
the mouth of this river almost always impractical, even for small
boats.

"I went into the canal Colorado girl: this river is divided into a portion of the arms, are so
many islands, but all-lying and swampy.

The current very low strength, and brings so much sand that the channels are blocked. On leaving
this river to follow north coast, we found so little water with a canoe varamos girl. As to
nine Colorado leagues found Brightman Bay, etc.. "

Since then no more was heard of Colorado, until the year 1833, in
which Mr. General Rosas, whose headquarters occupied the banks of
this river, he ordered that undertake their recognition.

While the schooner San Martin entered through the mouth of the river, two boats were built near the
camp, were to follow the movements of the division Ramos, to rise to where they could do it.
The San Martin heavily loaded, and penetrating nine quarters, he passed the bar, and on July
27, anchored to two blocks from the camp, which according to the astronomer's observations of the
army, was at 39 ° 37 '58 "5"' N, and at 64 ° 53 '55' 30 "east longitude, west of Paris.

The mouth of the Colorado, which Villarino placed in 39 ° 57 'and Captain Morell [12] at 39 ° 49 ',
according to Captain Bathurst, lies at 39 ° 55'.

Other comments are in inserted after part of this discourse.

"The Colorado River, as inferred from the journal of the Army [13]
running on sand, and has one hundred to two hundred yards wide.

    Leads only in winter as in summer is always full and very deep:
    the Indians go on rafts of willow. Its coasts are little ravines,
    usually populated willow tree red and white. When grown in summer
    floods part Great Plains is open at its margins. Pastures these
    are the best fattening, and the high is strong and excellent for grazing.
    "
    
    The name given to this river, one of the largest rivers in the plains,
    is the literal translation Coli-Leufu that give the Indians.

In some maps published in England and France is also given the title of First Desaguadero, and
the Second Black River that follows immediately to the south: this denomination, which originated
not know, is accurate, because in fact these two rivers drain into the sea, the endless rapids
that descend from the Cordillera, and that form in the plains, extending between the shores of the
ocean and peaks of the Andes, for the space of about 12 degrees latitude. But nothing else
wrong that the course of both rivers, according to the account of modern geographers, nor is
it strange that the unknown, with so few notions that are generally of the topography within this
country. It is felt that last season in the desert, the division Ramos had not continued their
march in the direction of its course, to solve practically the problem of the origin of Colorado.
If they were certain the news transmitted by an observer Modern [14], we should find its sources
in the same mountain range, between 36 and 37 degrees latitude, and run its course in the vicinity
of Muinlin [15], and south of Payen [16]: in what is certain is, that no river in the province
of Mendoza empties into the Colorado, at least not apparent. The Desaguadero, flowing Huanacache
gaps, the Tunuyan [17] Diamond, after having poured water into the marshes that are, are lost
in a large lagoon that forms to the foot of Limena-Mahuida [18], and it is likely that this
huge accumulation of water underground passes meatus to increase the flow of the Colorado, which is the
only river that runs through that neighborhood, which leads us to believe are the major bogs
covering its banks, and involving a heavy and constant infiltration.

Falkner, whose description of Patagonia contains important news, talk in a very Colorado inaccurate,
perhaps the most defective part of his work.

Imbued as he was that the river "was near San Juan and Mendoza Tunuyan waters, to lose after
Huanacache in gaps, "said this kind of error with a Spanish vessel that sank in Bahia Anegada
[19], whose crew came up the Colorado to the second of these cities from which implied that there
was any doubt about the course of this river, as it he had described: (the course of this river is
ESTABLISHED THEREFORE past all Doubt [20]). We quote his own words to make you feel the need
to distrust what they read been reported so far on the topography of these provinces. You can
refine it is the work of Mr. Fitz-Roy and King [21], recently announced in England, on the Coast
Patagonia and the Straits of Magellan, being the product of many years of diligent and illustrated
research. We regret not being able to learn of their plans authors sent to Buenos Aires, and have
helped us to complete these reports.

The shores of the Colorado, so barren in the day, entertained at one time numerous tribes. The
"Diuihets" and "Chechehets," [22] to whom the Spanish called Pampas:
the "Puelches" and "Tehuelches," better known by the name of Serranos
or Patagones, inhabited these vast loneliness [23], where wild animals
were being cast as on our rural facilities.

When was launched for the first time recognition of Colorado, the chief of most followers of
these bias was the famous Chanel, or Cacique Black, who was for years the terror of our Province:
Villarino shook intimate with him, not realizing that was to be his executioner. We reserve the
details of this tragedy for our introductory speech to the navigation of Black Rio.

PEDRO DE ANGELIS # #.

Buenos Aires, March 12, 1839.

                                         Navy Command of the Left Division.

                          

Rio Colorado, 31 of May, 1833. 24, Liberty and Independence 18.

Mr. Commander in Chief of the San Martin Goleta war.

Mr. General in Chief of this division has ordered me to communicate
V. knowledge I have taken this river port on the recognition that
I have practiced it lately in the Commission that this order gave
me the Lord.

Arrived at latitude 39 ° 55 'S will have the mouth of the river to S. 67 ° 30 'W. In that latitude,
at the distance of two to three miles from the mouth, is the depth of four fathoms and observed
some dunes, hillocks of sand or N. 78 ° 45 'W, marked with letter
B in the plane accompanied [24], and only the most notable tree, point
D, in the same direction of entrance of the mouth, which is S. 67
° 30 'W.

The channel mouth is characterized by the red stream that
is noticed in the midst of broken water over the banks.

Upon entering the mouth have one and half a fathom without flow, and this one arm, and, having entered
as a half mile in, there are two arms without that, and three with him, where sand is moored
near the big right hand signal two anchors, then delaying the N. 45 ° W the dunes first observed
in B, and the tree that have been referred to D, the direction of S 67 ° 30 'W., also delaying
some small dunes, letter C, S 40 ° W.

Although this mooring up currents are very fast, at the time of flow
can be advanced about two miles farther, leaning always to the right
coast, to E face the first island on the left, endonde are three sticks
on the coast fixed F, and the highest crossed a planchette, which
is recorded FEDERATION, and vestiges of my camp in 20 and 21 hereof.

 Do you hear.
Let me go." His voice was the voice of the lion-tamer, hushed before danger to a quelling depth
of quiet.

And like the young lion, drawing long breaths through dilated-nostrils, Augustine growled back:--"I
will not--I will not.--You shall not go to her. I would rather kill you."

"Kill me?" Sir Hugh smiled. "It would be a fight first, you know."

"Then let it be a fight. You shall not go to her."

"And what if she wants me to go to her.--Will you kill her first, too--"--The words broke.
Augustine's hand was on his throat. Sir Hugh seized him. They writhed together against the
door. "You mad-man!--You damned mad-man!--Your mother is in love with me.--I'll put you out
of her life--"--Sir Hugh grated forth from the strangling clutch.

Suddenly, as they writhed, panting, glaring their hatred at each other, the door they leaned
on pushed against them. Someone outside was turning the handle, was forcing it open. And, as
if through the shocks and flashes of a blinding, deafening tempest, Augustine heard his mother's
voice, very still, saying: "Let me come in."

XI

They fell apart and moved back into the room. Amabel entered. She wore a long white dressing-gown
that, to her son's eyes, made her more than ever look her sainted self; she had dressed hastily,
and, on hearing the crash below, she had wrapped a white scarf about her head and shoulders,
covering her unbound hair. So framed and narrowed her face was that of a shrouded corpse: the
same strange patience stamped it; her eyes, only, seemed to live, and they, too, were patient
and ready for any doom.

Quietly she had closed the door, and standing near it now she looked at them; her eyes fell
for a moment upon Sir Hugh; then they rested on Augustine and did not leave him.

Sir Hugh spoke first. He laughed a little, adjusting his collar and tie.

"My dear,--you've saved my life. Augustine was going to batter my brains out on the door, I fancy."

She did not look at him, but at Augustine.

"He's really dangerous, your son, you know. Please don't leave me alone with him again," Sir
Hugh smiled and pleaded; it was with almost his own lightness, but his face still twitched
with anger.

"What have you said to him?" Amabel asked.

Augustine's eyes were drawing her down into their torment.--Unfortunate one.--That presage
of her maternity echoed in her now. His stern young face seemed to have been framed, destined
from the first for this foreseen misery.

Sir Hugh had pulled himself together. He looked at the mother and son. And he understood her fear.

He went to her, leaned over her, a hand above her shoulder on the door. He reassured and protected
her; and, truly, in all their story, it had never been with such sincerity and grace.

"Dearest, it's nothing. I've merely had to defend my rights. Will you assure this young firebrand
that my misdemeanours didn't force you to leave me. That there were misdemeanours I don't deny;
and of course you are too good for the likes of me; but your coming away wasn't my fault, was
it.--That's what I've said.--And that saints forgive sinners, sometimes.--That's all I want
you to tell him."

Amabel still gazed into her son's eyes. It seemed to her, now that she must shut herself out
from it for ever, that for the first time in all her life she saw his love.

It broke over her; it threatened and commanded her; it implored and supplicated--ah the supplication
beyond words or tears!--Selflessness made it stern. It was for her it threatened; for her it
prayed.

All these years the true treasure had been there beside her, while she worshipped at the spurious
shrine. Only her sorrow, her solicitude had gone out to her son; the answering love that should
have cherished and encompassed him flowed towards its true goal only when it was too late.
He could not love her when he knew.

And he was to know. That had come to her clearly and unalterably while she had leaned, half
fallen, half kneeling, against her bed, dying, it seemed to her, to all that she had known
of life or hope.

But all was not death within her. In the long, the deadly stupor, her power to love still lived.
It had been thrown back from its deep channel and, wave upon wave, it seemed heaped upon itself
in some narrow abyss, tormented and shuddering; and at last by its own strength, rather than
by thought or prayer of hers, it had forced an outlet.

It was then as if she found herself once more within the church. Darkness, utter darkness was
about her; but she was prostrated before the unseen altar. She knew herself once more, and
with herself she knew her power to love.

Her life and all its illusions passed before her; by the truth that irradiated the illusions,
she judged them and herself and saw what must be the atonement. All that she had believed to
be the treasure of her life had been taken from her; but there was one thing left to her that
she could give:--her truth to her son. When that price was paid, he would be hers to love;
he was no longer hers to live for. He should found his life on no illusions, as she had founded
hers. She must set him free to turn away from her; but when he turned away it would not be
to leave her in the loneliness and the terror of heart that she had known; it would be to leave
her in the church where she could pray for him.

She answered her husband after her long silence, looking at her son.

"It is true, Augustine," she said. "You have been mistaken. I did not leave him for that."

Sir Hugh drew a breath of satisfaction. He glanced round at Augustine. It was not a venomous
glance, but, with its dart of steely intention, it paid a debt of vengeance. "So,--we needn't
say anything more about it," he said. "And--dearest--perhaps now you'll tell Augustine that
he may go and leave us together."

Amabel left her husband's side and went to her chair near the table. A strange calmness breathed
from her. She sat with folded hands and downcast eyes.

"Augustine, come here," she said.

The young man came and stood before her.

"Give me your hand."

He gave it to her. She did not look at him but kept her eyes fixed on the ground while she
clasped it.

"Augustine," she said, "I want you to leave me with my husband. I must talk with him. He is
going away soon. Tomorrow--tomorrow morning early, I will see you, here. I will have a great
deal to say to you, my dear son."

But Augustine, clutching her hand and trembling, looked down at her so that she raised her
eyes to his.

"I can't go, till you say something, now, Mother;"--his voice shook as it had shaken on that
day of their parting, his face was livid and convulsed, as then;--"I will go away tonight--I
don't know that I can ever return--unless you tell me that you are not going to take him back."
He gazed down into his mother's eyes.

She did not answer him; she did not speak. But, as he looked into them, he, too, for the first
time, saw in them what she had seen in his.

They dwelt on him; they widened; they almost smiled; they deeply promised him all--all--that
he most longed for. She was his, her son's; she was not her husband's. What he had feared had
never threatened him or her. This was a gift she had won the right to give. The depth of her
repudiation yesterday gave her her warrant.

And to Amabel, while they looked into each other's eyes, it was as if, in the darkness, some
arching loveliness of dawn vaguely shaped itself above the altar.

"Kiss me, dear Augustine," she said. She held up her forehead, closing her eyes, for the kiss
that was her own.

Augustine was gone. And now, before her, was the ugly breaking. But must it be so ugly? Opening
her eyes, she looked at her husband as he stood before the fire, his wondering eyes upon her.
Must it be ugly? Why could it not be quiet and even kind?

Strangely there had gathered in her, during the long hours, the garnered strength of her life
of discipline and submission. It had sustained her through the shudder that glanced back at
yesterday--at the corruption that had come so near; it had given sanity to see with eyes of
compassion the forsaken woman who had come with her courageous, revengeful story; it gave sanity
now, as she looked over at her husband, to see him also, with those eyes of compassionate understanding;
he was not blackened, to her vision, by the shadowing corruption, but, in his way, pitiful,
too; all the worth of life lost to him.

And it seemed swiftest, simplest, and kindest, as she looked over at him, to say:--"You see--Lady
Elliston came this afternoon, and told me everything."

Sir Hugh kept his face remarkably unmoved. He continued to gaze at his wife with an unabashed,
unstartled steadiness. "I might have guessed that," he said after a short silence. "Confound her."

Amabel made no reply.

"So I suppose," Sir Hugh went on, "you feel you can't forgive me."

She hesitated, not quite understanding. "You mean--for having married me--when you loved her?"

"Well, yes; but more for not having, long ago, in all these years, found out that you were
the woman that any man with eyes to see, any man not blinded and fatuous, ought to have been
in love with from the beginning."

Amabel flushed. Her vision was untroubled; but the shadow hovered. She was ashamed for him.

"No"; she said, "I did not think of that. I don't know that I have anything to forgive you.
It is Lady Elliston, I think, who must try and forgive you, if she can."

Sir Hugh was again silent for a moment; then he laughed. "You dear innocent!--Well--I won't
defend myself at her expense."

"Don't," said Amabel, looking now away from him.

Sir Hugh eyed her and seemed to weigh the meaning of her voice.

He crossed the room suddenly and leaned over her:--"Amabel darling,--what must I do to atone?
I'll be patient. Don't be cruel and punish me for too long a time."

"Sit there--will you please." She pointed to the chair at the other side of the table.

He hesitated, still leaning above her; then obeyed; folding his arms; frowning.

"You don't understand," said Amabel. "I loved you for what you never were. I do not love you
now. And I would never have loved you as you asked me to do yesterday."

He gazed at her, trying to read the difficult riddle of a woman's perversity. "You were in
love with me yesterday," he said at last.

She answered nothing.

"I'll make you love me again."

"No: never," she answered, looking quietly at him. "What is there in you to love?"

Sir Hugh flushed. "I say! You are hard on me!"

"I see nothing loveable in you," said Amabel with her inflexible gentleness. "I loved you because
I thought you noble and magnanimous; but you were neither. You only did not cast me off, as
I deserved, because you could not; and you were kind partly because you are kind by nature,
but partly because my money was convenient to you. I do not say that you were ignoble; you
were in a very false position. And I had wronged you; I had committed the greater social crime;
but there was nothing noble; you must see that; and it was for that I loved you."

Sir Hugh now got up and paced up and down near her.

"So you are going to cast me off because I had no opportunity for showing nobility. How do
you know I couldn't have behaved as you believed I did behave, if only I'd had the chance?
You know--you are hard on me."

"I see no sign of nobility--towards anyone--in your life," Amabel answered as dispassionately
as before.

Sir Hugh walked up and down.

"I did feel like a brute about the money sometimes," he remarked;--"especially that last time;
I wanted you to have the house as a sort of salve to my conscience; I've taken almost all your
money, you know; it's quite true. As to the rest--what Augustine calls my dissoluteness--I
can't pretend to take your view; a nun's view." He looked at her. "How beautiful you are with
that white round your face," he said. "You are like a woman of snow."

She looked back at him as though, from the unhesitating steadiness of her gaze, to lend him
some of her own clearness.

"Don't you see that it's not real? Don't you see that it's because you suddenly find me beautiful,
and because, as a woman of snow, I allure you, that you think you love me? Do you really deceive
yourself?"

He stared at her; but the ray only illumined the bewilderment of his dispossession. "I don't
pretend to be an idealist," he said, stopping still before her; "I don't pretend that it's
not because I suddenly find you beautiful; that's one reason; and a very essential one, I think;
but there are other reasons, lots of them. Amabel--you must see that my love for you is an
entirely different sort of thing from what my love for her ever was."

She said nothing. She could not argue with him, nor ask, as if for a cheap triumph, if it were
different from his love for the later mistress. She saw, indeed, that it was different now,
whatever it had been yesterday. Clearly she saw, glancing at herself as at an object in the
drama, that she offered quite other interests and charms, that her attractions, indeed, might
be of a quality to elicit quite new sentiments from Sir Hugh, sentiments less shadowing than
those of yesterday had been. And so she accepted his interpretation in silence, unmoved by
it though doing it full justice, and for a little while Sir Hugh said nothing either. He still
stood before her and she no longer looked at him, but down at her folded hands that did not
tremble at all tonight, and she wondered if now, perhaps, he would understand her silence and
leave her. But when, in an altered voice, he said: "Amabel;" she looked at him.

She seemed to see everything tonight as a disembodied spirit might see it, aware of what the
impeding flesh could only dimly manifest; and she saw now that her husband's face had never
been so near beauty.

It did not attain it; it was, rather, as if the shadow, lifting entirely for a flickering moment,
revealed something unconscious, something almost innocent, almost pitiful: it was as if, liberated,
he saw beauty for a moment and put out his hands to it, like a child putting out its hands
to touch the moon, believing that it was as near to him, and as easily to be attained, as pleasure
always had been.

"Try to forgive me," he said, and his voice had the broken note of a sad child's voice, the
note of ultimate appeal from man to woman. "I'm a poor creature; I know that. It's always made
me ashamed--to see how you idealise me.--The other day, you know,--when you kissed my hand--I
was horribly ashamed.--But, upon my honour Amabel, I'm not a bad fellow at bottom,--not the
devil incarnate your son seems to think me. Something could be made of me, you know;--and,
if you'll forgive me, and let me try to win your love again;--ah Amabel--"--he pleaded, almost
with tears, before her unchangingly gentle face. And, the longing to touch her, hold her, receive
comfort and love, mingling with the new reverential fear, he knelt beside her, putting his
head on her knees and murmuring: "I do so desperately love you."

Amabel sat looking down upon him. Her face was unchanged, but in her heart was a trembling
of astonished sadness.

It was too late. It had been too late--from the very first;--yet, if they could have met before
each was spoiled for each;--before life had set them unalterably apart--? The great love of
her life was perhaps not all illusion.

And she seemed to sit for a moment in the dark church, dreaming of the distant Spring-time,
of brooks and primroses and prophetic birds, and of love, young, untried and beautiful. But
she did not lay her hand on Sir Hugh's head nor move at all towards him. She sat quite still,
looking down at him, like a Madonna above a passionate supplicant, pitiful but serene.

And as he knelt, with his face hidden, and did not hear her voice nor feel her touch, with
an unaccustomed awe the realisation of her remoteness from him stole upon Sir Hugh.

Passion faded from his heart, even self-pity and longing faded. He entered her visionary retrospect
and knew, like her, that it was too late; that everything was too late; that everything was
really over. And, as he realised it, a chill went over him. He felt like a strayed reveller
waking suddenly from long slumber and finding himself alone in darkness.

He lifted his face and looked at her, needing the reassurance of her human eyes; and they met
his with their remote gentleness. For a long moment they gazed at each other.

Then Sir Hugh, stumbling a little, got upon his feet and stood, half turned from her, looking
away into the room.

When he spoke it was in quite a different voice, it was almost the old, usual voice, the familiar
voice of their friendly encounters.

"And what are you going to do with yourself, now, Amabel?"

"I am going to tell Augustine," she said.

"Tell him!" Sir Hugh looked round at her. "Why?"

"I must."

He seemed, after a long silence, to accept her sense of necessity as sufficient reason. "Will
it cut him up very much, do you think?" he asked.

"It will change everything very much, I think," said Amabel.

"Do you mean--that he will blame you?--"

"I don't think that he can love me any longer."

There was no hint of self-pity in her calm tones and Sir Hugh could only formulate his resentment
and his protest--and they were bitter,--by a muttered--"Oh--I say!--I say!--"

He went on presently; "And will you go on living here, perhaps alone?"

"Alone, I think; yes, I shall live here; I do not find it dismal, you know."

Sir Hugh felt himself again looking reluctantly into darkness. "But--how will you manage it,
Amabel?" he asked.

And her voice seemed to come, in all serenity, from the darkness; "I shall manage it."

Yes, the awe hovered near him as he realised that what, to him, meant darkness, to her meant
life. She would manage it. She had managed to live through everything.

A painful analogy came to increase his sadness;--it was like having before one a martyr who
had been bound to rack after rack and still maintained that strange air of keeping something
it was worth while being racked for. Glancing at her it seemed to him, still more painfully,
that in spite of her beauty she was very like a martyr; that queer touch of wildness in her
eyes; they were serene, they were even sweet, yet they seemed to have looked on horrid torments;
and those white wrappings might have concealed dreadful scars.

He took out his watch, nervously and automatically, and looked at it. He would have to walk
to the station; he could catch a train.

"And may I come, sometimes, and see you?" he asked. "I'll not bother you, you know. I understand,
at last. I see what a blunder--an ugly blunder--this has been on my part. But perhaps you'll
let me be your friend--more really your friend than I have ever been."

And now, as he glanced at her again, he saw that the gentleness was remote no longer. It had
come near like a light that, in approaching, diffused itself and made a sudden comfort and
sweetness. She was too weary to smile, but her eyes, dwelling gently on him, promised him something,
as, when they had dwelt with their passion of exiled love on her son, they had promised something
to Augustine. She held out her hand. "We are friends," she said.

Sir Hugh flushed darkly. He stood holding her hand, looking at it and not at her. He could
not tell what were the confused emotions that struggled within him; shame and changed love;
awe, and broken memories of prayers that called down blessings. It was "God bless you," that
he felt, yet he did not feel that it was for him to say these words to her. And no words came;
but tears were in his eyes as, in farewell, he bent over her hand and kissed it.

XII

When Amabel waked next morning a bright dawn filled her room. She remembered, finding it so
light, that before lying down to sleep she had drawn all her curtains so that, through the
open windows, she might see, until she fell asleep, a wonderful sky of stars. She had not looked
at them for long. She had gone to sleep quickly and quietly, lying on her side, her face turned
to the sky, her arms cast out before her, just as she had first lain down; and so she found
herself lying when she waked.

It was very early. The sun gilded the dark summits of the sycamores that she could see from
her window. The sky was very high and clear, and long, thin strips of cloud curved in lessening
bars across it. The confused chirpings of the waking birds filled the air. And before any thought
had come to her she smiled as she lay there, looking at and listening to the wakening life.

Then the remembrance of the dark ordeal that lay before her came. It was like waking to the
morning that was to see one on the scaffold: but, with something of the light detachment that
a condemned prisoner might feel--nothing being left to hope for and the only strength demanded
being the passive strength to endure--she found that she was thinking more of the sky and of
the birds than of the ordeal. Some hours lay between her and that; bright, beautiful hours.

She put out her hand and took her watch which lay near. Only six. Augustine would not expect
to see her until ten. Four long hours: she must get up and spend them out of doors.

It was too early for hot water or maids; she enjoyed the flowing shocks of the cold and her
own rapidity and skill in dressing and coiling up her hair. She put on her black dress and
took her black scarf as a covering for her head. Slipping out noiselessly, like a truant school-girl,
she made her way to the pantry, found milk and bread, and ate and drank standing, then, cautiously
pushing bolts and bars, stepped from the door into the dew, the sunlight, the keen young air.

She took the path to the left that led through the sycamore wood, and crossing the narrow brook
by a little plank and hand rail, passed into the meadows where, in Spring, she and Augustine
used to pick cowslips.

She thought of Augustine, but only in that distant past, as a little child, and her mind dwelt
on sweet, trivial memories, on the toys he had played with and the pair of baby-shoes, bright
red shoes, square-toed, with rosettes on them, that she had loved to see him wear with his
little white frocks. 

Day 12.

This day the wind remained NO, but so strong that not allowed to perform any operations.

DAY 13.

Dawned clear and loud wind NW: 6 seamen sent barefoot to recognize
the island in the NE part of which, being swampy shoes can not walk.

Then they walked as 2 miles, had to return because of the great swamp
and streams clogged them to follow forward: they arrived on board
two in the evening: the wind was very strong all day, and so dark.

DAY 14.

This day continued the NNW wind so strong, that even I could leave him on board, whose mode dark.

DAY
15.

Time followed the same line.

DAY 16.

Dawned clear and chilly wind to N, at which time the boat sailed on
food for eight days, and went with it, leaving the brig anchored in
the said place.

I followed the Arroyo the Baradero, and having come to his bar had no water to pass, so I gave
the background and I spent the night there.

DAY 17.

At half past seven I left the bar expressed, and sailed until midnight NNE day, that having
known the wind to the bow, to row until three in the afternoon, that landed on the island of Bordas,
and since she noticed that the sea was breaking on the side of out from the NE to SE.

On this island we did not find anything other than plovers, gulls and sea lions, and immediately
to her anchored the boat, and we stayed overnight.

DAY 18

At seven
in the morning I left, turning the NNO NO and SO, provided by the
fund from 3 spans to 7, except for some wells, or very narrow fairways,
until I got to 3 fathoms of water, and 2 and a half leaning against
the Urristi Island, whose site is a good anchorage tenazon warm and
good. From this site I went along the canal, but at a distance of
half we on low miles, after having stranded countless times: leaning
against the island wait for low tide to see if she discovered some
bayou which way to go, watched the high tide at one-fifth of the afternoon,
it follows that the day of the conjunction be to five and one-fifth.
She stood still, thinking of it, and wondered intently, looking down.

It was gone, that radiant human image, gone for ever. The son, to whom her heart now clung,
was stern. She was alone. Every prop, every symbol of the divine love had been taken from her.
But, so bereft, it was not, after the long pause of wonder, in weakness and abandonment that
she stood still in the darkness and closed her eyes.

It was suffering, but it was not fear; it was longing, but it was not loneliness. And as, in
her wrecked girlhood, she had held out her hands, blessed and receiving, she held them out
now, blessed, though sacrificing all she had. But her uplifted face, white and rapt, was now
without a smile.

Suddenly she knew that someone was near her.

She opened her eyes and saw Augustine standing at some little distance looking at her. It seemed
natural to see him there, waiting to lead her into the ordeal. She went towards him at once.

"Is it time?" she said. "Am I late?"

Augustine was looking intently at her. "It isn't half-past nine yet," he said. "I've had my
breakfast. I didn't know you had gone out till just now when I went to your room and found
it empty."

She saw then in his eyes that he had been frightened. He took her hand and she yielded it to
him and they went up towards the house.

"I have had such a long walk," she said. "Isn't it a beautiful morning."

"Yes; I suppose so," said Augustine. As they walked he did not take his eyes off his mother's face.

"Aren't you tired?" he asked.

"Not at all. I slept well."

"Your shoes are quite wet," said Augustine, looking down at them.

"Yes; the meadows were thick with dew."

"You didn't keep to the path?"

"Yes;--no, I remember."--she looked down at her shoes, trying, obediently, to satisfy him,
"I turned aside to look at the cows."

"Will you please change your shoes at once?"

"I'll go up now and change them. And will you wait for me in the drawing-room, Augustine."

"Yes." She saw that he was still frightened, and remembering how strange she must have looked
to him, standing still, with upturned face and outstretched hands, in the sycamore wood, she
smiled at him:--"I am well, dear, don't be troubled," she said.

In her room, before she went downstairs, she looked at herself in the glass. The pale, calm
face was strange to her, or was it the story, now on her lips, that was the strange thing,
looking at that face. She saw them both with Augustine's eyes; how could he believe it of that
face. She did not see the mirrored holiness, but the innocent eyes looked back at her marvelling
at what she was to tell of them.

In the drawing-room Augustine was walking up and down. The fire was burning cheerfully and
all the windows were wide open. The room looked its lightest. Augustine's intent eyes were
on her as she entered. "You won't find the air too much?" he questioned; his voice trembled.

She murmured that she liked it. But the agitation that she saw controlled in him affected her
so that she, too, began to tremble.

She went to her chair at one side of the large round table. "Will you sit there, Augustine,"
she said.

He sat down, opposite to her, where Sir Hugh had sat the night before. Amabel put her elbows
on the table and covered her face with her hands. She could not look at her child; she could
not see his pain.

"Augustine," she said, "I am going to tell you a long story; it is about myself, and about
you. And you will be brave, for my sake, and try to help me to tell it as quickly as I can."

His silence promised what she asked.

"Before the story," she said, "I will tell you the central thing, the thing you must be brave
to hear.--You are an illegitimate child, Augustine." At that she stopped. 

This morning I made sail, continuing my navigation and recognition. At nine three Desplayado vare
quarts in a large, that between the mainland and the many who are low planted all over this bag.
At 0:30 I could take the boat, and came back to me sail: The quarter past two p.m. I went to
beach, and firmly so that it was not possible to Take the brig.

DAY 11.

Always followed with the task of taking the brig (which would work neatly refer here and maneuvers
that were made in this), I could put afloat to three-thirty in the
afternoon, at which time I sail me back from the ENE at 5 º E. At
four gave back in 2 fathoms water near the island of Vaqueriza. They looked at each other.

"I am your mother," said Amabel.

He gazed at her. He gazed and gazed; and she offered herself to the crucifixion of his transfixing
eyes.

The silence grew long. It had done its work. Once more she put her hands before her face. "Listen,"
she said. "I will tell you."

He did not stir nor move his eyes from her hidden face while she spoke. Swiftly, clearly, monotonously,
she told him all. She paused at nothing; she slurred nothing. She read him the story of the
stupid sinner from the long closed book of the past. There was no hesitation for a word; no
uncertainty for an interpretation. Everything was written clearly and she had only to read
it out. And while she spoke, of her girlhood, her marriage, of the man with the unknown name--his
father--of her flight with him, her flight from him, here, to this house, Augustine sat motionless.
His eyes considered her, fixed in their contemplation.

She told him of his own coming, of her brother's anger and dismay, of Sir Hugh's magnanimity,
and of how he had been born to her, her child, the unfortunate one, whom she had felt unworthy
to love as a child should be loved. She told him how her sin had shut him away and made strangeness
grow between them.

And when all this was told Amabel put down her hands. His stillness had grown uncanny: he might
not have been there; she might have been talking in an empty room. But he was there, sitting
opposite her, as she had last seen him, half turned in his seat, fallen together a little as
though his breathing were very slight and shallow; and his dilated eyes, strange, deep, fierce,
were fixed on her. She shut the sight out with her hands.

She stumbled a little now in speaking on, and spoke more slowly. She knew herself condemned
and the rest seemed unnecessary. It only remained to tell him how her mistaken love had also
shut him out; to tell, slightly, not touching Lady Elliston's name, of how the mistake had
come to pass; to say, finally, on long, failing breaths, that her sin had always been between
them but that, until the other day, when he had told her of his ideals, she had not seen how
impassable was the division. "And now," she said, and the convulsive trembling shook her as
she spoke, "now you must say what you will do. I am a different woman from the mother you have
loved and reverenced. You will not care to be with the stranger you must feel me to be. 

DAY 8.

At eight and three quarters of the morning I did at the turn of the ONO sailing with the wind SO
cool. At half past nine I veered back and forward with the SSO, having given up a low: the nine
thirty-two turned around because of another: to the nine fifty I again turn for the same reason,
are almost on top of another, at ten o'clock I again turn for the same thing turned around
on lap eleven of SE, to find only a fathom of water: at eleven I
again turn to fetch more water, and gave substance to the twelve in
7 fathoms, and watched the sun at 40 º 25 'latitude, and to download
the wind for the OS drive, I held back because the rest of the day.

DAY 9.

Dawned clear, the wind by the O cool. He had fallen on his knees before her; he had put his arms
around her; he was pressing his head against her breast while, trembling as she trembled, he
said:--"Mother--Mother--Mother."

All barriers had fallen at the cry. It was the cry of the exile, the banished thing, returning
to its home. He pressed against the heart to which she had never herself dared to draw him.

But, incredulous, she parted her hands and looked down at him; and still she did not dare enfold
him.

"Augustine--do you understand?--Do you still love me?--"

"Oh Mother," he gasped,--"what have I been to you that you can ask me!"

"You can forgive me?" Amabel said, weeping, and hiding her face against his hair.

They were locked in each other's arms.

And, his head upon her breast, as if it were her own heart that spoke to her, he said:--"I
will atone to you.--I will make up to you--for everything.--You shall be glad that I was born."

