'We went from the country of the Tartars into the country of those who curse the Moon.  We
saw the Gryphons guarding their gold on the white rocks, and the scaled Dragons sleeping in
their caves.  As we passed over the mountains we held our breath lest the snows might fall
on us, and each man tied a veil of gauze before his eyes.  As we passed through the valleys
the Pygmies shot arrows at us from the hollows of the trees, and at night-time we heard the
wild men beating on their drums.  When we came to the Tower of Apes we set fruits before them,
and they did not harm us.  When we came to the Tower of Serpents we gave them warm milk in
howls of brass, and they let us go by.  Three times in our journey we came to the banks of
the Oxus.  We crossed it on rafts of wood with great bladders of blown hide.  The river-horses
raged against us and sought to slay us.  When the camels saw them they trembled.

'"The god is hunting," said the priest, looking strangely at me with his small slanting eyes.

'"Tell me in what forest, and I will ride with him," I answered.

'He combed out the soft fringes of his tunic with his long pointed nails.  "The god is asleep,"
he murmured.

'"Tell me on what couch, and I will watch by him," I answered.

'"The god is at the feast," he cried.

'"If the wine be sweet I will drink it with him, and if it be bitter I will drink it with him
also," was my answer.

'He bowed his head in wonder, and, taking me by the hand, he raised me up, and led me into
the temple.

'And in the first chamber I saw an idol seated on a throne of jasper bordered with great orient
pearls.  It was carved out of ebony, and in stature was of the stature of a man.  On its forehead
was a ruby, and thick oil dripped from its hair on to its thighs. Its feet were red with the
blood of a newly-slain kid, and its loins girt with a copper belt that was studded with seven
beryls.

'And I said to the priest, "Is this the god?"  And he answered me, "This is the god."

'"Show me the god," I cried, "or I will surely slay thee."  And I touched his hand, and it
became withered.

'And the priest besought me, saying, "Let my lord heal his servant, and I will show him the god."

'So I breathed with my breath upon his hand, and it became whole again, and he trembled and
led me into the second chamber, and I saw an idol standing on a lotus of jade hung with great
emeralds. It was carved out of ivory, and in stature was twice the stature of a man.  On its
forehead was a chrysolite, and its breasts were smeared with myrrh and cinnamon.  In one hand
it held a crooked sceptre of jade, and in the other a round crystal.  It ware buskins of brass,
and its thick neck was circled with a circle of selenites.

'And I said to the priest, "Where is the god?"

'And he answered me:  "There is no god but this mirror that thou seest, for this is the Mirror
of Wisdom.  And it reflecteth all things that are in heaven and on earth, save only the face
of him who looketh into it.  This it reflecteth not, so that he who looketh into it may be
wise.  Many other mirrors are there, but they are mirrors of Opinion.  This only is the Mirror
of Wisdom. And they who possess this mirror know everything, nor is there anything hidden from
them.  And they who possess it not have not Wisdom.  Therefore is it the god, and we worship
it."  And I looked into the mirror, and it was even as he had said to me.

'And I did a strange thing, but what I did matters not, for in a valley that is but a day's
journey from this place have I hidden the Mirror of Wisdom.  Do but suffer me to enter into
thee again and be thy servant, and thou shalt be wiser than all the wise men, and Wisdom shall
be thine.  Suffer me to enter into thee, and none will be as wise as thou.'

But the young Fisherman laughed.  'Love is better than Wisdom,' he cried, 'and the little Mermaid
loves me.'

'Nay, but there is nothing better than Wisdom,' said the Soul.  From the South cometh everything
that is precious.  Six days I journeyed along the highways that lead to the city of Ashter,
along the dusty red-dyed highways by which the pilgrims are wont to go did I journey, and on
the morning of the seventh day I lifted up my eyes, and lo! the city lay at my feet, for it
is in a valley.

'There are nine gates to this city, and in front of each gate stands a bronze horse that neighs
when the Bedouins come down from the mountains.  The walls are cased with copper, and the watch-
towers on the walls are roofed with brass.  In every tower stands an archer with a bow in his
hand.  At sunrise he strikes with an arrow on a gong, and at sunset he blows through a horn
of horn.

'When I sought to enter, the guards stopped me and asked of me who I was.  I made answer that
I was a Dervish and on my way to the city of Mecca, where there was a green veil on which the
Koran was embroidered in silver letters by the hands of the angels.  They were filled with
wonder, and entreated me to pass in.

'Inside it is even as a bazaar. That was on the seventh day before the ides of December.

A.D. 1123. In this year was the King Henry, at Christmastide at Dunstable, and there came to him
the ambassadors of the Earl of Anjou. And thence he went to Woodstock;
and his bishops and his whole court with him.  They have straight black beards, and their turbans are covered with golden
sequins, and long strings of amber and carved peach-stones glide through their cool fingers.
Some of them sell galbanum and nard, and curious perfumes from the islands of the Indian Sea,
and the thick oil of red roses, and myrrh and little nail-shaped cloves.  When one stops to
speak to them, they throw pinches of frankincense upon a charcoal brazier and make the air
sweet.  I saw a Syrian who held in his hands a thin rod like a reed.  Grey threads of smoke
came from it, and its odour as it burned was as the odour of the pink almond in spring. Others
sell silver bracelets embossed all over with creamy blue turquoise stones, and anklets of brass
wire fringed with little pearls, and tigers' claws set in gold, and the claws of that gilt
cat, the leopard, set in gold also, and earrings of pierced emerald, and finger-rings of hollowed
jade.  From the tea-houses comes the sound of the guitar, and the opium-smokers with their
white smiling faces look out at the passers-by.

'Of a truth thou shouldst have been with me.  The wine-sellers elbow their way through the
crowd with great black skins on their shoulders.  Most of them sell the wine of Schiraz, which
is as sweet as honey.  They serve it in little metal cups and strew rose leaves upon it.  In
the market-place stand the fruitsellers, who sell all kinds of fruit:  ripe figs, with their
bruised purple flesh, melons, smelling of musk and yellow as topazes, citrons and rose-apples
and clusters of white grapes, round red-gold oranges, and oval lemons of green gold.  Once
I saw an elephant go by.  Its trunk was painted with vermilion and turmeric, and over its ears
it had a net of crimson silk cord.  It stopped opposite one of the booths and began eating
the oranges, and the man only laughed. Thou canst not think how strange a people they are.
When they are glad they go to the bird-sellers and buy of them a caged bird, and set it free
that their joy may be greater, and when they are sad they scourge themselves with thorns that
their sorrow may not grow less.

'One evening I met some negroes carrying a heavy palanquin through the bazaar.  It was made
of gilded bamboo, and the poles were of vermilion lacquer studded with brass peacocks.  Across
the windows hung thin curtains of muslin embroidered with beetles' wings and with tiny seed-pearls,
and as it passed by a pale-faced Circassian looked out and smiled at me.  I followed behind,
and the negroes hurried their steps and scowled.  But I did not care.  I felt a great curiosity
come over me.

'At last they stopped at a square white house.  There were no windows to it, only a little
door like the door of a tomb.  They set down the palanquin and knocked three times with a copper
hammer.  An Armenian in a caftan of green leather peered through the wicket, and when he saw
them he opened, and spread a carpet on the ground, and the woman stepped out.  As she went
in, she turned round and smiled at me again.  I had never seen any one so pale.

'When the moon rose I returned to the same place and sought for the house, but it was no longer
there.  When I saw that, I knew who the woman was, and wherefore she had smiled at me.

'Certainly thou shouldst have been with me.  On the feast of the New Moon the young Emperor
came forth from his palace and went into the mosque to pray.  His hair and beard were dyed
with rose-leaves, and his cheeks were powdered with a fine gold dust.  The palms of his feet
and hands were yellow with saffron.

'At sunrise he went forth from his palace in a robe of silver, and at sunset he returned to
it again in a robe of gold.  The people flung themselves on the ground and hid their faces,
but I would not do so.  I stood by the stall of a seller of dates and waited.  When the Emperor
saw me, he raised his painted eyebrows and stopped.  I stood quite still, and made him no obeisance.
The people marvelled at my boldness, and counselled me to flee from the city.  I paid no heed
to them, but went and sat with the sellers of strange gods, who by reason of their craft are
abominated.  When I told them what I had done, each of them gave me a god and prayed me to
leave them.

'That night, as I lay on a cushion in the tea-house that is in the Street of Pomegranates,
the guards of the Emperor entered and led me to the palace.  As I went in they closed each
door behind me, and put a chain across it.  Inside was a great court with an arcade running
all round.  The walls were of white alabaster, set here and there with blue and green tiles.
The pillars were of green marble, and the pavement of a kind of peach-blossom marble.  I had
never seen anything like it before.

'As I passed across the court two veiled women looked down from a balcony and cursed me.  The
guards hastened on, and the butts of the lances rang upon the polished floor.  They opened
a gate of wrought ivory, and I found myself in a watered garden of seven terraces.  It was
planted with tulip-cups and moonflowers, and silver-studded aloes.  Like a slim reed of crystal
a fountain hung in the dusky air.  The cypress-trees were like burnt-out torches. From one
of them a nightingale was singing.

'At the end of the garden stood a little pavilion.  As we approached it two eunuchs came out
to meet us.  Their fat bodies swayed as they walked, and they glanced curiously at me with
their yellow-lidded eyes.  One of them drew aside the captain of the guard, and in a low voice
whispered to him.  The other kept munching scented pastilles, which he took with an affected
gesture out of an oval box of lilac enamel.

'After a few moments the captain of the guard dismissed the soldiers.  They went back to the
palace, the eunuchs following slowly behind and plucking the sweet mulberries from the trees
as they passed.  Once the elder of the two turned round, and smiled at me with an evil smile.

'Then the captain of the guard motioned me towards the entrance of the pavilion.  I walked
on without trembling, and drawing the heavy curtain aside I entered in.

