CHAPTER CXIII

Few events of importance had taken place during my absence in Spain. Shortly after my return,
however, a circumstance occurred which may fairly claim description from me.  Let me, therefore,
at once relate it.

Cardinal Dubois, every day more and more firmly established in the favour of M. le Duc d'Orleans,
pined for nothing less than to be declared prime minister.  He was already virtually in that
position, but was not publicly or officially recognised as being so.  He wished, therefore,
to be declared.

One great obstacle in his path was the Marechal de Villeroy, with whom he was on very bad terms,
and whom he was afraid of transforming into an open and declared enemy, owing to the influence
the Marechal exerted over others.  Tormented with agitating thoughts, every day that delayed
his nomination seemed to him a year.  Dubois became doubly ill-tempered and capricious, more
and more inaccessible, and accordingly the most pressing and most important business was utterly
neglected.  At last he resolved to make a last effort at reconciliation with the Marechal,
but mistrusting his own powers, decided upon asking Cardinal Bissy to be the mediator between them.

Bissy with great willingness undertook the peaceful commission; spoke to Villeroy, who appeared
quite ready to make friends with Dubois, and even consented to go and see him.  As chance would
have it, he went, accompanied by Bissy, on Tuesday morning.  I at the same time went, as was
my custom, to Versailles to speak to M. le Duc d'Orleans upon some subject, I forget now what.

It was the day on which the foreign ministers had their audience of Cardinal Dubois, and when
Bissy and Villeroy arrived, they found these ministers waiting in the chamber adjoining the
Cardinal's cabinet.

The established usage is that they have their audience according to the order in which they
arrive, so as to avoid all disputes among them as to rank and precedence.  Thus Bissy and Villeroy
found Dubois closeted with the Russian minister.  It was proposed to inform the Cardinal at
once, of a this, so rare as a visit from the Marechal de Villeroy; but the Marechal would not
permit it, and sat down upon a sofa with Bissy to wait like the rest.

The audience being over, Dubois came from his cabinet, conducting the Russian minister, and
immediately saw his sofa so well ornamented.  He saw nothing but that in fact; on the instant
he ran there, paid a thousand compliments to the Marechal for anticipating him, when he was
only waiting for permission to call upon him, and begged him and Bissy to step into the cabinet.
While they were going there, Dubois made his excuses to the ambassadors for attending to Villeroy
before them, saying that his functions and his assiduity as governor of the King did not permit
him to be long absent from the presence of his Majesty; and with this compliment he quitted
them and returned into his cabinet.

At first nothing passed but reciprocal compliments and observations from Cardinal Bissy, appropriate
to the subject.  Then followed protestations from Dubois and replies from the Marechal.  Thus
far, the sea was very smooth.  But absorbed in his song, the Marechal began to forget its tune;
then to plume himself upon his frankness and upon his plain speaking; then by degrees, growing
hot in his honours, he gave utterance to divers naked truths, closely akin to insults.

Dubois, much astonished, pretended not to feel the force of these observations, but as they
increased every moment, Bissy tried to call back the Marechal, explain things to him, and give
a more pleasant tone to the conversation.  But the mental tide had begun to rise, and now it
was entirely carrying away the brains of Villeroy.  From bad to worse was easy.  The Marechal
began now to utter unmistakable insults and the most bitter reproaches.  In vain Bissy tried
to silence him; representing to him how far he was wandering from the subject they came to
talk upon; how indecent it was to insult a man in his own house, especially, after arriving
on purpose to conclude a reconciliation with him.  All Bissy could say simply had the effect
of exasperating the Marechal, and of making him vomit forth the most extravagant insults that
insolence and disdain could suggest.

Dubois, stupefied and beside himself, was deprived of his tongue, could not utter a word; while
Bissy, justly inflamed with anger, uselessly tried to interrupt his friend.  In the midst of
the sudden fire which had seized the Marechal, he had placed himself in such a manner that
he barred the passage to the door, and he continued his invectives without restraint.  Tired
of insults, he passed to menaces and derision, saying to Dubois that since he had now thrown
off all disguise, they no longer were on terms to pardon each other, and then he assured Dubois
that, sooner or later, he would do him all the injury possible, and gave him what he called
good counsel.

"You are all powerful," said he; "everybody bends before you; nobody resists you; what are
the greatest people in the land compared with you? Believe me, you have only one thing to do;
employ all your power, put yourself at ease, and arrest me, if you dare.  Who can hinder you?
Arrest me, I say, you have only that course open."

Thereupon, he redoubled his challenges and his insults, like a man who is thoroughly persuaded
that between arresting him and scaling Heaven there is no difference.  As may well be imagined,
such astounding remarks were not uttered without interruption, and warm altercations from the
Cardinal de Bissy, who, nevertheless, could not stop the torrent.  At last, carried away by
anger and vexation, Bissy seized the Marechal by the arm and the shoulder, and hurried him
to the door, which he opened, and then pushed him out, and followed at his heels.  Dubois,
more dead than alive, followed also, as well as he could--he was obliged to be on his guard
against the foreign ministers who were waiting.  But the three disputants vainly tried to appear
composed; there was not one of the ministers who did not perceive that some violent scene must
have passed in the cabinet, and forthwith Versailles was filled with this news; which was soon
explained by the bragging, the explanations, the challenges, and the derisive speeches of the
Marechal de Villeroy.

I had worked and chatted for a long time with M. le Duc d'Orleans.  He had passed into his
wardrobe, and I was standing behind his bureau arranging his papers when I saw Cardinal Dubois
enter like a whirlwind, his eyes starting out of his head.  Seeing me alone, he screamed rather
than asked, "Where is M. le Duc d'Orleans?" I replied that he had gone into his wardrobe, and
seeing him so overturned, I asked him what was the matter.

"I am lost, I am lost!" he replied, running to the wardrobe.  His reply was so loud and so
sharp that M. le Duc d'Orleans, who heard it, also ran forward, so that they met each other
in the doorway.  They returned towards me, and the Regent asked what was the matter.

Dubois, who always stammered, could scarcely speak, so great was his rage and fear; but he
succeeded at last in acquainting us with the details I have just given, although at greater
length.  He concluded by saying that after the insults he had received so treacherously, and
in a manner so basely premeditated, the Regent must choose between him and the Marechal de
Villeroy, for that after what had passed he could not transact any business or remain at the
Court in safety and honour, while the Marechal de Villeroy remained there!

I cannot express the astonishment into which M. le Duc d'Orleans and I were thrown.  We could
not believe what we had heard, but fancied we were dreaming.  M. le Duc d'Orleans put several
questions to Dubois, I took the liberty to do the same, in order to sift the affair to the
bottom. But there was no variation in the replies of the Cardinal, furious as he was.  Every
moment he presented the same option to the Regent; every moment he proposed that the Cardinal
de Bissy should be sent for as having witnessed everything.  It may be imagined that this second
scene, which I would gladly have escaped, was tolerably exciting.

The Cardinal still insisting that the Regent must choose which of the two be sent away, M.
le Duc d'Orleans asked me what I thought.  I replied that I was so bewildered and so moved
by this astounding occurrence that I must collect myself before speaking.  The Cardinal, without
addressing himself to me but to M. le Duc d'Orleans, who he saw was plunged Memoirs in embarrassment,
strongly insisted that he must come to some resolution. Upon this M. le Duc d'Orleans beckoned
me over, and I said to him that hitherto I had always regarded the dismissal of the Marechal
de Villeroy as a very dangerous enterprise, for reasons I had several times alleged to his
Royal Highness: but that now whatever peril there might be in undertaking it, the frightful
scene that had just been enacted persuaded me that it would be much more dangerous to leave
him near the King than to get rid of him altogether.  I added that this was my opinion, since
his Royal Highness wished to know it without giving me the time to reflect upon it with more
coolness; but as for the execution, that must be well discussed before being attempted.

Whilst I spoke, the Cardinal pricked up his ears, turned his eyes upon me, sucked in all my
words, and changed colour like a man who hears his doom pronounced.  My opinion relieved him
as much as the rage with which he was filled permitted.  M. le Duc d'Orleans approved what
I had just said, and the Cardinal, casting a glance upon me as of thanks, said he was the master,
and must choose, but that he must choose at once, because things could not remain as they were.
Finally, it was agreed that the rest of the day (it was now about twelve) and the following
morning should be given to reflection upon the matter, and that the next day, at three o'clock
in the afternoon, I should meet M. le Duc d'Orleans.

The next day accordingly I went to M. le Prince, whom I found with the Cardinal Dubois.  M.
le Duc entered a moment after, quite full of the adventure.  Cardinal Dubois did not fail,
though, to give him an abridged recital of it, loaded with comments and reflections.  He was
more his own master than on the preceding day, having had time to recover himself, we cherishing
hopes that the Marechal would be sent to the right about.  It was here that I heard of the
brag of the Marechal de Villeroy concerning the struggle he had had with Dubois, and of the
challenges and insults he had uttered with a confidence which rendered his arrest more and
more necessary.

After we had chatted awhile, standing, Dubois went away.  M. le Duc d'Orleans sat down at his
bureau, and M. le Duc and I sat in front of him.  There we deliberated upon what ought to be
done.  After a few words of explanation from the Regent, he called upon me to give my opinion.
I did so as briefly as possible, repeating what I had said on the previous day.  M. le Duc
d'Orleans, during my short speech, was very attentive, but with the countenance of a man much
embarrassed.

As soon as I had finished, he asked M. le Duc what he thought.  M. le Duc said his opinion
was mine, and that if the Marechal de Villeroy remained in his office there was nothing for
it but to put the key outside the door; that was his expression.  He reproduced some of the
principal reasons I had alleged, supported them, and concluded by saying there was not a moment
to lose.  M. le Duc d'Orleans summed up a part of what had been said, and agreed that the Marechal
de Villeroy must be got rid of. M. le Duc again remarked that it must be done at once. With this
small beginning he undertook, and in spite of an incessant war waged
against him by malignity and misrepresentation, the withholding in
some measure of the encouragements ordered by the liberality of his
majesty's ministry, and endless other disappointments and vexations
that would have damped any ordinary resolution, his efforts have been
crowned with the most complete success, and he has at present not
less than five thousand sheep, of which the wool from continual crosses
with Spanish tups, the progeny of the few sheep purchased by him at
the sale of the king's flocks, has become as fine as the best imported
from Saxony, and has been found to surpass it in elasticity, a quality
highly conducive to the firmness and durability of the cloth.

Many gentlemen also of the colony who have large flocks, sensible of the folly of breeding sheep
for the mere sake of the carcases, which in consequence of the limited population, and unlimited
extent of grazing country, have already become of inferior value, and in a short time more
will be worth little or nothing, entered some years back on this gentleman's system; and there
may, perhaps, be among all the rest of the sheep holders, the same number of fine woolled sheep
which he alone possesses. Here then is an exportable article of immense consequence to the colony,
and of the highest political importance to this country; an article indispensable to the support
of her staple manufacture, and for which she has hitherto been altogether dependent on foreign
nations; yet has no attempt but the one I have just alluded to, been made, either by the government
of this country, or of the colony, to direct the attention of the sheep-holders to its production; on
the contrary, the greatest obstacles have been thrown in the way of this gentleman's success,
obstacles which none but the most enthusiastic spirit could have surmounted.
  I counselled M. le Duc
d'Orleans to make use of this circumstance, and by its means to lay a trap for the Marechal
into which there was not the slightest doubt he would fall.  The trap was to be thus arranged.
M. le Duc d'Orleans was to insist upon his right to speak to the King in private, and upon
the refusal of the Marechal to recognise it, was to adopt a new tone and make Villeroy feel
he was the master.  I added, in conclusion, that this snare must not be laid until everything
was ready to secure its success.

When I had ceased speaking, "You have robbed me," said the Regent; "I was going to propose
the same thing if you had not.  What do you think of it, Monsieur?" regarding M. le Duc.  That
Prince strongly approved the proposition I had just made, briefly praised every part of it,
and added that he saw nothing better to be done than to execute this plan very punctually.

It was agreed afterwards that no other plan could be adopted than that of arresting the Marechal
and sending him right off at once to Villeroy, and then, after having allowed him to repose
there a day or two, on account of his age, but well watched, to see if he should be sent on
to Lyons or elsewhere.  The manner in which he was to be arrested was to be decided at Cardinal
Dubois' apartments, where the Regent begged me to go at once. I rose accordingly, and went there.

I found Dubois with one or two friends, all of whom were in the secret of this affair, as he,
at once told me, to put me at my ease.  We soon therefore entered upon business, but it would
be superfluous to relate here all that passed in this little assembly.  What we resolved on
was very well executed, as will be seen.  I arranged with Le Blanc, who was one of the conclave,
that the instant the arrest had taken place, he should send to Meudon, and simply inquire after
me; nothing more, and that by this apparently meaningless compliment, I should know that the
Marechal had been packed off.

I returned towards evening to Meudon, where several friends of Madame de Saint-Simon and of
myself often slept, and where others, following the fashion established at Versailles and Paris,
came to dine or sup, so that the company was always very numerous.  The scene between Dubois
and Villeroy was much talked about, and the latter universally blamed. Neither then nor during
the ten days which elapsed before his arrest, did it enter into the head of anybody to suppose
that anything worse would happen to him than general blame for his unmeasured violence, so
accustomed were people to his freaks, and to the feebleness of M. le Duc d'Orleans.  I was
now delighted, however, to find such general confidence, which augmented that of the Marechal,
and rendered more easy the execution of our project against him; punishment he more and more
deserved by the indecency and affectation of his discourses, and the audacity of his continual
challenges.

Three or four days after, I went to Versailles, to see M. le Duc d'Orleans.  He said that,
for want of a better, and in consequence of what I had said to him on more than one occasion
of the Duc de Charost, it was to him he intended to give the office of governor of the King:
that he had secretly seen him that Charost had accepted with willingness the post, and was
now safely shut up in his apartment at Versailles, seeing no one, and seen by no one, ready
to be led to the King the moment the time should arrive.  The Regent went over with me all
the measures to be taken, and I returned to Meudon, resolved not to budge from it until they
were executed, there being nothing more to arrange.

On Sunday, the 12th of August, 1722, M. le Duc d'Orleans went, towards the end of the afternoon,
to work with the King, as he was accustomed to do several times each week; and as it was summer
time now, he went after his airing, which he always took early.  This work was to show the
King by whom were to be filled up vacant places in the church, among the magistrates and intendants,
&c., and to briefly explain to him the reasons which suggested the selection, and sometimes
the distribution of the finances.  The Regent informed him, too, of the foreign news, which
was within his comprehension, before it was made public.  At the conclusion of this labour,
at which the Marechal de Villeroy was always present, and sometimes M. de Frejus (when he made
bold to stop), M. le Duc d'Orleans begged the King to step into a little back cabinet, where
he would say a word to him alone.

The Marechal de Villeroy at once opposed.  M. le Duc d'Orleans, who had laid this snare far
him, saw him fall into it with satisfaction.  He represented to the Marechal that the King
was approaching the age when he would govern by himself, that it was time for him, who was
meanwhile the depository of all his authority, to inform him of things which he could understand,
and which could only be explained to him alone, whatever confidence might merit any third person.
The Regent concluded by begging the Marechal to cease to place any obstacles in the way of
a thing so necessary and so important, saying that he had, perhaps, to reproach himself for,--solely
out of complaisance to him, not having coerced before.

The Marechal, arising and stroking his wig, replied that he knew the respect he owed, him,
and knew also quite as well the respect he owed to the King, and to his place, charged as he
was with the person of his Majesty, and being responsible for it.  But he said he would not
suffer his Royal Highness to speak to the King in private (because he ought to know everything
said to his Majesty), still less would he suffer him to lead the King into a cabinet, out of
his sight, for 'twas his (the Marechal's) duty never to lose sight of his charge, and in everything
to answer for it.

