The families of Nassau and Croi (to the latter belonged the Duke of Arschot) had for several
reigns been competitors for influence and honor, and their rivalry had kept up an old feud
between their families, which religious differences finally made irreconcilable.  The house
of Croi from time immemorial had been renowned for its devout and strict observance of papistic
rites and ceremonies; the Counts of Nassau had gone over to the new sect--sufficient reasons
why Philip of Croi, Duke of Arschot, should prefer a party which placed him the most decidedly
in opposition to the Prince of Orange.  The court did not fail to take advantage of this private
feud, and to oppose so important an enemy to the increasing influence of the house of Nassau
in the republic.  The Counts Mansfeld and Megen had till lately been the confidential friends
of Count Egmont.  In common with him they had raised their voice against the minister, had
joined him in resisting the Inquisition and the edicts, and had hitherto held with him as far
as honor and duty would permit.  But at these limits the three friends now separated.  Egmont's
unsuspecting virtue incessantly hurried him forwards on the road to ruin; Mansfeld and Megen,
admonished of the danger, began in good time to think of a safe retreat.  There still exist
letters which were interchanged between the Counts Egmont and Mansfeld, and which, although
written at a later period, give us a true picture of their former friendship.  "If," replied
Count Mansfeld to his friend, who in an amicable manner had reproved him for his defection
to the king, "if formerly I was of opinion that the general good made the abolition of the
Inquisition, the mitigation of the edicts, and the removal of the Cardinal Granvella necessary,
the king has now acquiesced in this wish and removed the cause of complaint.  We have already
done too much against the majesty of the sovereign and the authority of the church; it is high
time for us to turn, if we would wish to meet the king, when he comes, with open brow and without
anxiety.  As regards my own person, I do not dread his vengeance; with confident courage I
would at his first summons present myself in Spain, and boldly abide my sentence from his justice
and goodness.  I do not say this as if I doubted whether Count Egrnont can assert the same,
but he will act prudently in looking more to his own safety, and in removing suspicion from
his actions.  If I hear," he says, in conclusion, "that he has allowed my admonitions to have
their due weight, our friendship continues; if not, I feel myself in that case strong enough
to sacrifice all human ties to my duty and to honor."

The enlarged power of the nobility exposed the republic to almost a greater evil than that
which it had just escaped by the removal of the minister.  Impoverished by long habits of luxury,
which at the same time had relaxed their morals, and to which they were now too much addicted
to be able to renounce them, they yielded to the perilous opportunity of indulging their ruling
inclination, and of again repairing the expiring lustre of their fortunes.  Extravagance brought
on the thirst for gain, and this introduced bribery.  Secular and ecclesiastical offices were
publicly put up to sale; posts of honor, privileges, and patents were sold to the highest bidder;
even justice was made a trade.  Whom the privy council had condemned was acquitted by the council
of state, and what the former refused to grant was to be purchased from the latter. The council
of state, indeed, subsequently retorted the charge on the two other councils, but it forgot
that it was its own example that corrupted them.  The shrewdness of rapacity opened new sources
of gain. Life, liberty, and religion were insured for a certain sum, like landed estates; for
gold, murderers and malefactors were free, and the nation was plundered by a lottery.  The
servants and creatures of the state, counsellors and governors of provinces, were, without
regard to rank or merit, pushed into the most important posts; whoever had a petition to present
at court had to make his way through the governors of provinces and their inferior servants.
No artifice of seduction was spared to implicate in these excesses the private secretary of
the duchess, Thomas Armenteros, a man up to this time of irreproachable character.  By pretended
professions of attachment and friendship a successful attempt was made to gain his confidence,
and by luxurious entertainments to undermine his principles; the seductive example infected
his morals, and new wants overcame his hitherto incorruptible integrity.  He was now blind
to abuses in which he was an accomplice, and drew a veil over the crimes of others in order
at the same time to cloak his own.  With his knowledge the royal exchequer was robbed, and
the objects of the government were defeated through a corrupt administration of its revenues.
Meanwhile the regent wandered on in a fond dream of power and activity, which the flattery
of the nobles artfully knew how to foster. The ambition of the factious played with the foibles
of a woman, and with empty signs and an humble show of submission purchased real power from
her.  She soon belonged entirely to the faction, and had imperceptibly changed her principles.
Diametrically opposing all her former proceedings, even in direct violation of her duty, she
now brought before the council of state, which was swayed by the faction, not only questions
which belonged to the other councils, but also the suggestions which Viglius had made to her
in private, in the same way as formerly, under Granvella's administration, she had improperly
neglected to consult it at all.  Nearly all business and all influence were now diverted to
the governors of provinces.  All petitions were directed to them, by them all lucrative appointments
were bestowed.  Their usurpations were indeed carried so far that law proceedings were withdrawn
from the municipal authorities of the towns and brought before their own tribunals.  The respectability
of the provincial courts decreased as theirs extended, and with the respectability of the municipal
functionaries the administration of justice and civil order declined.  The smaller courts soon
followed the example of the government of the country.  The spirit which ruled the council
of state at Brussels soon diffused itself through the provinces.  Bribery, indulgences, robbery,
venality of justice, were universal in the courts of judicature of the country; morals degenerated,
and the new sects availed themselves of this all-pervading licentiousness to propagate their
opinions.  The religious indifference or toleration of the nobles, who, either themselves inclined
to the side of the innovators, or, at least, detested the Inquisition as an instrument of despotism,
had mitigated the rigor of the religious edicts, and through the letters of indemnity, which
were bestowed on many Protestants, the holy office was deprived of its best victims.  In no
way could the nobility more agreeably announce to the nation its present share in the government
of the country than by sacrificing to it the hated tribunal of the Inquisition--and to this
inclination impelled them still more than the dictates of policy.  The nation passed in a moment
from the most oppressive constraint of intolerance into a state of freedom, to which, however,
it had already become too unaccustomed to support it with moderation.  The inquisitors, deprived
of the support of the municipal authorities, found themselves an object of derision rather
than of fear. In Bruges the town council caused even some of their own servants to be placed
in confinement, and kept on bread and water, for attempting to lay hands upon a supposed heretic.
About this very time the mob in Antwerp, having made a futile, attempt to rescue a person charged
with heresy from the holy office, there was placarded in the public market- place an inscription,
written in blood, to the effect that a number of persons had bound themselves by oath to avenge
the death of that innocent person.

From the corruption which pervaded the whole council of state, the privy council, and the chamber
of finance, in which Viglius and Barlaimont were presidents, had as yet, for the most part,
kept themselves pure.

As the faction could not succeed in insinuating their adherents into those two councils the
only course open to them was, if possible, to render both inefficient, and to transfer their
business to the council of state.  To carry out this design the Prince of Orange sought to
secure the co-operation of the other state counsellors.  "They were called, indeed, senators,"
he frequently declared to his adherents, "but others possessed the power. He wore no sword. He
was confident that his soldiers were murdered, and that the English were about to disembark.
He saw himself dishonored if he lived, summoned before a council of war to explain his want
of vigilance; then he measured with his eye the depths of the descent, and was springing towards
it when Clara's hand seized his.

"Fly!" she said; "my brothers are following me to kill you. Your soldiers are killed. Escape yourself.
At the foot of the rock, over there, see! you will find Juanito's barb--Go, go!"

She pushed him; but the stupefied young man looked at her, motionless, for a moment. Then, obeying
the instinct of self-preservation which never abandons any man, even the strongest, he sprang through
the park in the direction indicated, running among the rocks where goats alone had hitherto
made their way. He heard Clara calling to her brothers to pursue him; he heard the steps of his
murderers; he heard the balls of several muskets whistling about his ears; but he reached
the valley, found the horse, mounted him, and disappeared with the rapidity of an arrow.

A few hours later the young officer reached the headquarters of General G--t--r, whom he found
at dinner with his staff.

"I bring you my head!" cried the commander of the lost battalion as he entered, pale and overcome.

He
sat down and related the horrible occurrence. An awful silence followed his tale.

"I think you were more unfortunate than criminal," replied the terrible general, when at last
he spoke. "You are not responsible for the crime of those Spaniards;
and, unless the marshal should think otherwise, I absolve you."

These
words gave but a feeble consolation to the unhappy officer.

"But
when the emperor hears of it!" he cried.

"He will want to have you
shot," said the general; "but we will see about that. Now," he added
in a stern tone, "not another word of this, except to turn it into
a vengeance which shall impress with salutary terror a people who
make war like savages."  The majority was in favor of sending an extraordinary ambassador to Spain,
who by a circumstantial and vivid delineation should make the king acquainted with the true
position of affairs, and if possible prevail on him to adopt efficient measures of reform.
This proposition was opposed by Viglius, who, however, had not the slighest suspicion of the
secret designs of the faction.  "The evil complained of," he said, "is undoubtedly great, and
one which can no longer be neglected with impunity, but it is not irremediable by ourselves.
The administration of justice is certainly crippled, but the blame of this lies with the nobles
themselves; by their contemptuous treatment they have thrown discredit on the municipal authorities,
who, moreover, are very inadequately supported by the governors of provinces.  If heresy is
on the increase it is because the secular arm has deserted the spiritual judges, and because
the lower orders, following the example of the nobles, have thrown off all respect for those
in authority.  The provinces are undoubtedly oppressed by a heavy debt, but it has not been
accumulated, as alleged, by any malversation of the revenues, but by the expenses of former
wars and the king's present exigences; still wise and prudent measures of finance might in
a short time remove the burden.  If the council of state would not be so profuse of its indulgences,
its charters of immunity, and its exemptions; if it would commence the reformation of morals
with itself, show greater respect to the laws, and do what lies in its power to restore to
the municipal functionaries their former consideration; in short, if the councils and the governors
of provinces would only fulfil their own duties the present grounds of complaint would soon
be removed.  Why, then, send an ambassador to Spain, when as yet nothing has occurred to justify
so extraordinary an expedient?  If, however, the council thinks otherwise, he would not oppose
the general voice; only he must make it a condition of his concurrence that the principal instruction
of the envoy should be to entreat the king to make them a speedy visit."

There was but one voice as to the choice of an envoy.  Of all the Flemish nobles Count Egmont
was the only one whose appointment would give equal satisfaction to both parties.  His hatred
of the Inquisition, his patriotic and liberal sentiments, and the unblemished integrity of
his character, gave to the republic sufficient surety for his conduct, while for the reasons
already mentioned he could not fail to be welcome to the king.  Moreover, Egmont's personal
figure and demeanor were calculated on his first appearance to make that favorable impression
which goes co far towards winning the hearts of princes; and his engaging carriage would come
to the aid of his eloquence, and enforce his petition with those persuasive arts which are
indispensable to the success of even the most trifling suits to royalty.  Egmont himself, too,
wished for the embassy, as it would afford him the opportunity of adjusting, personally, matters
with his sovereign.

About this time the Council, or rather synod, of Trent closed its sittings, and published its
decrees to the whole of Christendom.  But these canons, far from accomplishing the object for
which the synod was originally convened, and satisfying the expectation of religious parties,
had rather widened the breach between them, and made the schism irremediable and eternal.

The labors of the synod instead of purifying the Romish Church from its corruptions had only
reduced the latter to greater definiteness and precision, and invested them with the sanction
of authority.  All the subtilties of its teaching, all the arts and usurpations of the Roman
See, which had hitherto rested more on arbitrary usage, were now passed into laws and raised
into a system.  The uses and abuses which during the barbarous times of ignorance and superstition
had crept into Christianity were now declared essential parts of its worship, and anathemas
were denounced upon all who should dare to contradict the dogmas or neglect the observances
of the Romish communion.  All were anathematized who should either presume to doubt the miraculous
power of relics, and refuse to honor the bones of martyrs, or should be so bold as to doubt
the availing efficacy of the intercession of saints.  The power of granting indulgences, the
first source of the defection from the See of Rome, was now propounded in an irrefragable article
of faith; and the principle of monasticism sanctioned by an express decree of the synod, which
allowed males to take the vows at sixteen and females at twelve.  And while all the opinions
of the Protestants were, without exception, condemned, no indulgence was shown to their errors
or weaknesses, nor a single step taken to win them back by mildness to the bosom of the mother
church.  Amongst the Protestants the wearisome records of the subtle deliberations of the synod,
and the absurdity of its decisions, increased, if possible, the hearty contempt which they
had long entertained for popery, and laid open to their controversialists new and hitherto
unnoticed points of attack.  It was an ill-judged step to bring the mysteries of the church
too close to the glaring torch of reason, and to fight with syllogisms for the tenets of a
blind belief.

Moreover, the decrees of the Council of Trent were not satisfactory even to all the powers
in communion with Rome.  France rejected them entirely, both because she did not wish to displease
the Huguenots, and also because she was offended by the supremacy which the pope arrogated
to himself over the council; some of the Roman Catholic princes of Germany likewise declared
against it. Think! I should be spared the odious touch of an executioner. You would save me from all
the woes that await me--and, oh! dear Juanito! you would not have me belong to any one--therefore--"

Her
velvet eyes cast gleams of fire at Victor, as if to rouse in the heart of Juanito his hatred of
the French.

"Have courage," said his brother Felipe; "otherwise our race, our almost royal race, must die
extinct."

Suddenly Clara rose, the group that had formed about Juanito separated, and the son, rebellious
with good reason, saw before him his old father standing erect, who said in solemn tones,--

"Juanito, I command you to obey."

The young count remained immovable. Then his father knelt at his feet. Involuntarily Clara,
Felipe, and Manuelo imitated his action. They all stretched out their hands to him, who was to save
the family from extinction, and each seemed to echo the words of the father.

"My son, can it be that you would fail in Spanish energy and true feeling? Will you leave me
longer on my knees? Why do you consider your life, your sufferings only? Is this my son?" he
added, turning to his wife.

"He consents!" cried the mother, in despair, seeing a motion of Juanito's
eyelids, the meaning of which was known to her alone.

Mariquita,
the second daughter, was on her knees pressing her mother in her feeble
arms, and as she wept hot tears her little brother scolded her.

At
this moment the chaplain of the chateau entered the hall; the family
instantly surrounded him and led him to Juanito. Victor, unable to
endure the scene any longer, made a sign to Clara, and went away,
determined to make one more attempt upon the general.

He found him
in fine good-humour, in the midst of a banquet, drinking with his
officers, who were growing hilarious.

* * * * *

An hour later, one
hundred of the leading inhabitants of Menda assembled on the terrace,
according to the orders of the general, to witness the execution of
the Leganes family.  This proposition
was resisted by Viglius, who insisted on a strict and literal obedience to the royal commands.
"The church," he said, "had in all ages maintained the purity of its doctrines and the strictness
of its discipline by means of such general councils.  No more efficacious remedy could be opposed
to the errors of opinion which had so long distracted their country than these very decrees,
the rejection of which is now urged by the council of state.  Even if they are occasionally
at variance with the constitutional rights of the citizens this is an evil which can easily
be met by a judicious and temperate application of them.  For the rest it redounds to the honor
of our sovereign, the King of Spain, that he alone, of all the princes of his time, refuses
to yield his better judgment to necessity, and will not, for any fear of consequences, reject
measures which the welfare of the church demands, and which the happiness of his subjects makes
a duty."

But the decrees also contained several matters which affected the rights of the crown itself.
Occasion was therefore taken of this fact to propose that these sections at least should be
omitted from the proclimation.  By this means the king might, it was argued, be relieved from
these obnoxious and degrading articles by a happy expedient; the national liberties of the
Netherlands might be advanced as the pretext for the omission, and the name of the republic
lent to cover this encroachment on the authority of the synod.  But the king had caused the
decrees to be received and enforced in his other dominions unconditionally; and it was not
to be expected that he would give the other Roman Catholic powers such an example of opposition,
and himself undermine the edifice whose foundation he had been so assiduous in laying.

                          COUNT EGMONT IN SPAIN.

Count Egmont was despatched to Spain to make a forcible representation to the king on the subject
of these decrees; to persuade him, if possible, to adopt a milder policy towards his Protestant
subjects, and to propose to him the incorporation of the three councils, was the commission
he received from the malcontents.  By the regent he was charged to apprise the monarch of the
refractory spirit of the people; to convince him of the impossibility of enforcing these edicts
of religion in their full severity; and lastly to acquaint him with the bad state of the military
defences and the exhausted condition of the exchequer.

The count's public instructions were drawn up by the President Viglius. They contained heavy
complaints of the decay of justice, the growth of heresy, and the exhaustion of the treasury.
He was also to press urgently a personal visit from the king to the Netherlands.  The rest
was left to the eloquence of the envoy, who received a hint from the regent not to let so fair
an opportunity escape of establishing himself in the favor of his sovereign.

The terms in which the count's instructions and the representations which he was to make to
the king were drawn up appeared to the Prince of Orange far too vague and general.  "The president's
statement," he said, "of our grievances comes very far short of the truth.  How can the king
apply the suitable remedies if we conceal from him the full extent of the evil?  Let us not
represent the numbers of the heretics inferior to what it is in reality.  Let us candidly acknowledge
that they swarm in every province and in every hamlet, however small.  Neither let us disguise
from him the truth that they despise the penal statutes and entertain but little reverence
for the government.  What good can come of this concealment?  Let us rather openly avow to
the king that the republic cannot long continue in its present condition.  The privy council
indeed will perhaps pronounce differently, for to them the existing disorders are welcome.
For what else is the source of the abuse of justice and the universal corruption of the courts
of law but its insatiable rapacity?  How otherwise can the pomp and scandalous luxury of its
members, whom we have seen rise from the dust, be supported if not by bribery?  Do not the
people daily complain that no other key but gold can open an access to them; and do not even
their quarrels prove how little they are swayed by a care for the common weal? Are they likely
to consult the public good who are the slaves of their private passions?  Do they think forsooth
that we, the governors of the provinces are, with our soldiers, to stand ready at the beck
and call of an infamous lictor?  Let them set bounds to their indulgences and free pardons
which they so lavishly bestow on the very persons to whom we think it just and expedient to
deny them.  No one can remit the punishment of a crime without sinning against the society
and contributing to the increase of the general evil.  To my mind, and I have no hesitation
to avow it, the distribution amongst so many councils of the state secrets and the affairs
of government has always appeared highly objectionable.  The council of state is sufficient
for all the duties of the administration; several patriots have already felt this in silence,
and I now openly declare it.  It is my decided conviction that the only sufficient remedy for
all the evils complained of is to merge the other two chambers in the council of state.  This
is the point which we must endeavor to obtain from the king, or the present embassy, like all
others, will be entirely useless and ineffectual."  The prince now laid before the assembled
senate the plan which we have already described.  Viglius, against whom this new proposition
was individually and mainly directed, and whose eyes were now suddenly opened, was overcome
by the violence of his vexation.  The agitation of his feelings was too much for his feeble
body, and he was found, on the following morning, paralyzed by apoplexy, and in danger of his life.

His place was supplied by Jaachim Hopper, a member of the privy council at Brussels, a man
of old-fashioned morals and unblemished integrity, the president's most trusted and worthiest
friend.

     [Vita Vigl. 89.  The person from whose memoirs I have already drawn
     so many illustrations of the times of this epoch.  His subsequent
     journey to Spain gave rise to the correspondence between him and
     the president, which is one of the most valuable documents for our
     history.]

To meet the wishes of the Orange party he made some additions to the instructions of the ambassador,
relating chiefly to the abolition of the Inquisition and the incorporation of the three councils,
not so much with the consent of the regent as in the absence of her prohibition. Upon Count
Egmont taking leave of the president, who had recovered from his attack, the latter requested
him to procure in Spain permission to resign his appointment.  His day, he declared, was past;
like the example of his friend and predecessor, Granvella, he wished to retire into the quiet
of private life, and to anticipate the uncertainty of fortune.  His genius warned him of impending
storm, by which he could have no desire to be overtaken.

Count Egmont embarked on his journey to Spain in January, 1565, and was received there with
a kindness and respect which none of his rank had ever before experienced.  The nobles of Castile,
taught by the king's example to conquer their feelings, or rather, true to his policy, seemed
to have laid aside their ancient grudge against the Flemish nobility, and vied with one another
in winning his heart by their affability.  All his private matters were immediately settled
to his wishes by the king, nay, even his expectations exceeded; and during the whole period
of his stay he had ample cause to boast of the hospitality of the monarch.  The latter assured
him in the strongest terms of his love for his Belgian subjects, and held out hopes of his
acceding eventually to the general wish, and remitting somewhat of the severity of the religious
edicts. At the same time, however, he appointed in Madrid a commission of theologians to whom
he propounded the question, "Is it necessary to grant to the provinces the religious toleration
they demand?"  As the majority of them were of opinion that the peculiar constitution of the
Netherlands, and the fear of a rebellion might well excuse a degree of forbearance in their
case, the question was repeated more pointedly. "He did not seek to know," he said, "if he
might do so, but if he must." When the latter question was answered in the negative, he rose
from his seat, and kneeling down before a crucifix prayed in these words: "Almighty Majesty,
suffer me not at any time to fall so low as to consent to reign over those who reject thee!"
In perfect accordance with the spirit of this prayer were the measures which he resolved to
adopt in the Netherlands.  On the article of religion this monarch had taken his resolution
once forever; urgent necessity might, perhaps, have constrained him temporarily to suspend
the execution of the penal statutes, but never, formally, to repeal them entirely, or even
to modify them.  In vain did Egmont represent to him that the public execution of the heretics
daily augmented the number of their followers, while the courage and even joy with which they
met their death filled the spectators with the deepest admiration, and awakened in them high
opinions of a doctrine which could make such heroes of its disciples. This representation was
not indeed lost upon the king, but it had a very different effect from what it was intended
to produce.  In order to prevent these seductive scenes, without, however, compromising the
severity of the edicts, he fell upon an expedient, and ordered that in future the executions
should take place in private.  The answer of the king on the subject of the embassy was given
to the count in writing, and addressed to the regent.  The king, when he granted him an audience
to take leave, did not omit to call him to account for his behavior to Granvella, and alluded
particularly to the livery invented in derision of the cardinal.  Egmmont protested that the
whole affair had originated in a convivial joke, and nothing was further from their meaning
than to derogate in the least from the respect that was due to royalty.  "If he knew," he said,
"that any individual among them had entertained such disloyal thoughts be himself would challenge
him to answer for it with his life."

At his departure the monarch made him a present of fifty thousand florins, and engaged, moreover,
to furnish a portion for his daughter on her marriage.  He also consigned to his care the young
Farnese of Parma, whom, to gratify the regent, his mother, he was sending to Brussels. The
king's pretended mildness, and his professions of regard for the Belgian nation, deceived the
open-hearted Fleming.  Happy in the idea of being the bearer of so much felicity to his native
country, when in fact it was more remote than ever, he quitted Madrid satisfied beyond measure
to think of the joy with which the provinces would welcome the message of their good king;
but the opening of the royal answer in the council of state at Brussels disappointed all these
pleasing hopes.  "Although in regard to the religious edicts," this was its tenor, "his resolve
was firm and immovable, and he would rather lose a thousand lives than consent to alter a single
letter of it, still, moved by the representations of Count Egmont, he was, on the other hand,
equally determined not to leave any gentle means untried to guard the people against the delusions
of heresy, and so to avert from them that punishment which must otherwise infallibly overtake
them.  As he had now learned from the count that the principal source of the existing errors
in the faith was in the moral depravity of the clergy, the bad instruction and the neglected
education of the young, he hereby empowered the regent to appoint a special commission of three
bishops, and a convenient number of learned theologians, whose business it should be to consult
about the necessary reforms, in order that the people might no longer be led astray through
scandal, nor plunge into error through ignorance.  As, moreover, he had been informed that
the public executions of the heretics did but afford them an opportunity of boastfully displaying
a foolhardy courage, and of deluding the common herd by an affectation of the glory of martyrdom,
the commission was to devise means for putting in force the final sentence of the Inquisition
with greater privacy, and thereby depriving condemned heretics of the honor of their obduracy." Of
course the Virgin has operated all the usual standard miracles, including one which may be suspected
to be rather a work of supererogation, that of restoring speech to a matron who had lost her tongue,
which had been cut out by her jealous husband. Miracles of every kind are very frequently performed,
yet, if the truth must be told, they are worked, as it were, by deputy, for the real original
Virgin suffered so much during the revolution, that it has been thought advisable to keep her
in the sacristy, and the statue now seen is a restoration of recent workmanship. In order to
conciliate the sailors and fishermen of the coast, the Virgin has entered into partnership
with St. Nicholas, whose image is impressed on the reverse of the medal representing her, and
which is sold to the pilgrims.  To meet her most pressing
wants he sent her a small supply in money.  He also gave her hopes of a visit from himself;
first, however, it was necessary that the war with the Turks, who were then expected in hostile
force before Malta, should be terminated.  As to the proposed augmentation of the council of
state, and its union with the privy council and chamber of finance, it was passed over in perfect
silence.  The Duke of Arschot, however, who is already known to us as a zealous royalist, obtained
a voice and seat in the latter.  Viglius, indeed, was allowed to retire from the presidency
of the privy council, but he was obliged, nevertheless, to continue to discharge its duties
for four more years, because his successor, Carl Tyssenaque, of the council for Netherlandish
affairs in Madrid, could not sooner be spared.

      SEVERER RELIGIOUS EDICTS--UNIVERSAL OPPOSITION OF THE NATION.

Scarcely was Egmont returned when severer edicts against heretics, which, as it were, pursued
him from Spain, contradicted the joyful tidings which he had brought of a happy change in the
sentiments of the monarch.  They were at the same time accompanied with a transcript of the
decrees of Trent, as they were acknowledged in Spain, and were now to be proclaimed in the
Netherlands also; with it came likewise the death warrants of some Anabaptists and other kinds
of heretics. "The count has been beguiled," William the Silent was now heard to say, "and deluded
by Spanish cunning.  Self-love and vanity have blinded his penetration; for his own advantage
he has forgotten the general welfare."  The treachery of the Spanish ministry was now exposed,
and this dishonest proceeding roused the indignation of the noblest in the land.  But no one
felt it more acutely than Count Egmont, who now perceived himself to have been the tool of
Spanish duplicity, and to have become unwittingly the betrayer of his own country.  "These
specious favors then," he exclaimed, loudly and bitterly, "were nothing but an artifice to
expose me to the ridicule of my fellow-citizens, and to destroy my good name.  If this is the
fashion after which the king purposes to keep the promises which he made to me in Spain, let
who will take Flanders; for my part, I will prove by my retirement from public business that
I have no share in this breach of faith."  In fact, the Spanish ministry could not have adopted
a surer method of breaking the credit of so important a man--than by exhibiting him to his
fellow citizens, who adored him, as one whom they had succeeded in deluding.

Meanwhile the commission had been appointed, and had unanimously come to the following decision:
"Whether for the moral reformation of the clergy, or for the religious instruction of the people,
or for the education of youth, such abundant provision had already been made in the decrees
of Trent that nothing now was requisite but to put these decrees in force as speedily as possible.
The imperial edicts against the heretics already ought on no account to be recalled or modified;
the courts of justice, however, might be secretly instructed to punish with death none but
obstinate heretics or preachers, to make a difference between the different sects, and to show
consideration to the age, rank, sex, or disposition of the accused. A pediment between them
rests on the archivolt on either side. This is frequently seen in buildings in the circular style.
The other stories of the tower, and the west front of the church are Norman; the east end is
in ruins.  As to the delinquencies which might have arisen out of mere levity,
curiosity, and thoughtlessness it would perhaps be sufficient to punish them by fines, exile,
or even corporal chastisement."

