"Young man," he said, "it would take me all day to answer your question. We do whatever is
necessary to the welfare of the forest and its inhabitants. We take out wolf trees, make improvement
cuttings, plant little trees, keep our telephone-line in shape, and do a million other things,
as we find them necessary. If I had time just now, I'd go down this run and pile some stones
in the pools for the trout to hide under. I was through here the other day and I noticed that
the coons are playing hob with the fish."

"And does the state pay you for doing this work?"

"Certainly. Pays me well, too."

"Tell me how I could-----" began Charley.

But the ranger interrupted him. "I can't tell you another thing now," he said. "I must be moving.
You never can tell when some careless fisherman will set the forest on fire. The fact is I
ought to be at headquarters with the other rangers. The chief keeps us pretty close to the
office during the fire season, so as to have a fire crew at hand to respond instantly to an
alarm. But we have had such difficulty in securing fire patrols this spring that some of us
rangers have to do patrol duty. This piece of timber you are in is the most valuable part of
this entire forest. It is virgin pine. It would cut close to 100,000 feet to the acre. There
is very little timber left in all Pennsylvania as fine as this. A good part of it has already
been burned. We are keeping close watch on what is left. You never can tell when or where fires
will start and we want to grab them at the first possible minute. So I must shake a leg."

"How do you grab a fire?" demanded Charley. "Please tell us. Maybe we could help put one out
some day if we knew how."

The ranger laughed. "You're a persistent Indian," he said, "and I'm glad you like the forest."

"Like it!" exclaimed Charley. "I love it."

He poured a cup of hot coffee and handed it to the ranger. "Tell us how you put out a fire,"
he pleaded.

The ranger chuckled. "You're a diplomat as well as a forest lover, I see," he said. "Well,
I shall keep moving through this tract of timber all day long. If I see a fire I shall hurry
to it, the way I came down to your big smoke. I'll put it out, if possible. And if I can't
get it out, I'll summon help. Then we'll fight it until we do get it out."

"How could you get help, when you're alone in the deep forest?"

"I'd make my way out to the highway where our wire runs and connect up this portable telephone,"
and the ranger pointed to a little leather case, like a kodak box, that hung from his shoulder
by a leather strap. "In a minute's time a fire crew would be on the way to my assistance in
a motor-truck."

The ranger handed Charley the empty cup and thanked him.

"Have some more coffee?" urged Charley.

"'Get thee behind me, Satan,'" quoted the ranger. Her heart stood still. A death spasm twisted her
face. For a while they knelt rigid and stony. Then the transfigured face Judges, and a shower of
the purity she bathed from head to toe.

"Palma," she said tenderly, and this warm sound, lifted the lids of the child, "Palma, which do
you think? I invite the emperor to Malmort.

We come before him hand in hand, we confess and it is directed.

"rejoiced the eyes of Palmas, and beat her pulse.

"Take the bite," said the judge, and fed and watered her child.

She led the re-launched in the yard back. In the middle of it stood Rudio, still panting of progress.
"Salvation and glory to you, lady!" he exulted. "I announce the Emperor! The Maximum haunts
you! He is coming! He draws on and conversant with all Raetien him! "

"For that he be praised!" replied the judge. "Come, child, we want to adorn ourselves!"

Since Charles had ascended to the castle path to all the people, he
was called before servants and retinue the back doors left and entered
the courtyard of Malmort alone.

Stemma and Palma were in white robes. The judge went towards the ruler and bent the knee. Palma
behind her did the same. Karl picked up from the earth and the judge
said, "You are the woman of Malmort.

I received your message and am here to restore order as you requested have. This freedom has degenerated
into crime and power in arbitrariness. I want these mountains a count set. You know me man?
"

"I know him," replied the judge.

"It is Wulfrin, Wulf's son, your Hoefling, a loyal and brave man, still gullible and inexperienced,
but the mature years. "

"I run it with me," said the Emperor, "but as one who accuses itself
and your Court sought to accuse such great sin, that I may not believe
it.

Woman Today I met with this shining mountain sky a sign. Against your castle my horse shied at a dead,
was lying in the path. I let them pick. It is your own. She waits at the threshold. "

He lowered his voice: "Woman, what does Malmort If you were another,
as you seem to? and you stood over a buried crime, then your balance
would be wrong and your court an injustice. Many years have you here
gloriously prevailed. Give yourself into my hands. My grace is. Or
you Darest up to judge Wulfrin? "

"Sir," she replied, "I shall judge
between him and me your eyes for justice." Karl looked at her in astonishment.
They shone with truth. "To Rule Your Office," he said.

Then he went
up to the kneeling girl. Then he stowed the
coffee-pot in his pack and in a few moments the two boys were once more afoot.

They struck directly for the top of the knob, as the ranger had told them to do. The slope
of the ground alone guided them. So dense was the stand of timber that the huge trunks shut
off the view in all directions. It was almost as though they were encircled by palisades. And
so thick was the shade that rarely did a sunbeam reach the earth. They were in the forest primeval,
a land of perpetual gloom. There was no underbrush and they could travel rapidly. In a very
short time they came to the top of the knob.

The summit had been entirely cleared of timber. On the very highest point one lone tree remained.
A long pole had been planted near its trunk, with its top fastened to a branch of the tree.
Crossbars between the tree and the pole made a sort of rude ladder of the affair. And well
up the tree a rough staging had been constructed of small limbs. The boys saw at once that
this was a rude sort of watch-tower, and they suspected that the ranger had been in the tree
when he discovered the smoke from their fire.

They climbed up the tree and surveyed the scene before them in silence. Indeed, it was too
sublime for words. On every side stretched the forest. Mile upon mile, league after league,
east, west, north, south, far as the eye could reach, spread the leafy roof of the forest,
seemingly illimitable, boundless, vast as the ocean, a sea of trees. And like a sea the forest
rose and fell in huge billows. On either hand great mountains reared their huge bulk heavenward.
Beyond them other ranges heaved their rugged crests aloft. And still other ranges lay beyond
these. Over all was a cover of living green, the canopy of the forest. Sublime, majestic, awesome,
almost overpowering was the spectacle. And neither lad could find words to express the emotion
that arose within him. So they stood and looked in silent wonder. Finally Charley spoke.

"It's worth all we've been through, Lew, just to see this," he said. "I shall be well paid
for the trip, even if we never get a fish."

Presently Lew looked up at the sun. Then he examined the mountains a little to the left of the sun.

"There's where we go," he said, pointing over the nearest ridge to a gap in the mountain beyond
it. "The trout-stream will be in the third valley. We've got to travel due east. And it will
be some hike, too--over a mountain and through a high gap. Let's pick out our landmarks and
get under way. It will take us a good many hours to make it, but we ought to be there in time
to have trout for supper."

For a few moments the boys examined the way in silence.

"See that bunch of rocks on the summit?" asked Lew. "They look like chimney-rocks from here.
Anyway, they stick up higher than any other part of the mountain. And there's three tall pines
right beside them. That's a good landmark. It's exactly in a straight line for the gap. We
can find that mark if we can find anything. But you can't see very clearly through this timber.
Was there ever anything like it?"

"Finest timber I ever set eyes on, Lew. Isn't it wonderful? and to think that the whole state
was once covered with timber like that!"

They climbed down the rude ladder, slipped their packs over their shoulders, and set off down
the mountainside at a fast pace. And they could go fast in such timber. No underbrush tripped
them or caught in their sacks. No low limbs impeded their progress. Indeed there was hardly
a limb nearer the ground than fifty feet. Their only care was for the rocks and the roughness
underfoot. From time to time they paused as they came to some mammoth pine, and gazed in awed
wonder at its huge bulk.

As they got down into the bottom the timber seemed to be even larger than it was on the slope.
The forest floor was soft and springy. Their feet sank into it as into a soft, thick rug. The
top of this leafy covering was dry enough; but a few inches under the surface, the forest mold
was as moist as though a shower had just fallen. Yet there had been almost no rain for months.
Not only did the leaves hold the moisture, but the very shade itself conserved it by preventing
evaporation.

In the very centre of the valley ran a little stream. Long before they could see it, they heard
the brook talking to itself. The forest was filled with a gentle murmur, which grew to a distinct
rushing sound as they approached the stream.

"Can't you just hear it speak?" said Lew. "What do you suppose it is saying?"

"Those really are voices," insisted Charley.

"Now who's getting dippy?" laughed Lew. "You'll be as bad as I am if you keep on."

"But I do hear voices," protested Charley. "I plainly heard the word 'six.' Listen. Somebody
said 'eight,' just as plain as could be."

Lew looked puzzled. "Of course there might be some fishermen in here besides ourselves," he said.

They looked carefully about them, but at first saw nothing. Then a voice distinctly said, "Hemlock--five."
There could no longer be any doubt. Some one besides themselves was in the forest.

They made their way in the direction of the sound. Presently they saw three men. Two of them
carried calipers and walked in advance. The third came behind and held a pencil and note-book.

"Wonder who they are and what they are doing," Charley said quietly.

"Let's watch and see."

But in a moment the approaching party caught sight of them. "Good-morning, boys," said the
man with the note-book. "Out for trout?"

"Surest thing you know," replied Lew. "But we've had hard luck. We intended to fish in the
valley back of us. It used to be a fine place for trout. But it's been burned over and there
are no trout left."

"I know," said the man. "I've seen it. Be careful with your fires, boys. We don't want any
more of this fine timber burned."

"Are you a forest-ranger, too?" asked Charley eagerly.

"No; I'm the forester. I have charge of this forest."

"Why, I thought you were at headquarters with your fire crew," cried Charley, hardly realizing
what he was saying.

The man looked at him sharply. "I ought to be and I wish I were," he said. "I don't like this
a bit. But I was ordered by the Commissioner to send in an immediate estimate on the amount
of timber in this stand. There's a big sale on and they have to know how much there is to sell."
He paused and then added: "How in the world did you know I was supposed to be at headquarters
with the fire crew?"

"A ranger told us so. We met him over in the other valley. He said he wished he was with you."

"Oh! That would be Morton," said the forester. "I sent him out on patrol because we were short
of fire patrols."

"Could you use me as a fire patrol?" said Charley quickly.

The forester looked at him searchingly. "Why do you want to be a fire patrol?" he asked.

"I've got to go to work at something," said Charley, "and I'd love to help care for the forest.
You see, I'm almost through high school and I've got to go to work and help Dad the minute
I've graduated. He wants me to go into the factory with him. I hate factories. But I love the
woods. You'd never be sorry, if you hired me, sir."

"Are you sure it isn't work rather than the factory you dislike?" demanded the forester bluntly.

"No, no!" protested Charley. "I'd work day and night gladly if I could do what I want to do.
And there's nothing I can think of I'd rather do than help take care of the forest."

"Very good," said the forester, "but I need patrols now, not after school closes in June."

"Maybe I could get excused for the rest of the term," pleaded Charley.

"And throw away your chance to graduate? I don't think I want that kind of a boy for a fire
patrol," said the forester with a frown. "You might decide to quit this job, too, about the
time we stacked up against a hot fire."

Lew spoke up. "You don't understand what Charley means, sir," he explained. "Charley is away
ahead of most of us in his school work. He's done enough now to give him his diploma."

"Indeed!" replied the forester.

Then he turned to Charley in apology. "I beg your pardon, young man. I misjudged you. I should
like to have such an exemplary young man for a patrol, but you are too young. We practically
never employ a man not yet of age as a fire patrol. A boy would have to have very unusual qualifications
if we did take him. I'm sorry, my lad. I believe you are a fine boy, and I'd like to hire you.
But you are too young."

Charley turned his head away to hide the tears that he could not keep back as he saw the opportunity
slipping away from him. Then he dashed his hand across his eyes and again faced the forester.

"You do not understand who we are," he said with determination, "nor what our qualifications
are. I am accustomed to the woods, sir. I know something of woodcraft. I have fought fire in
the forest. I have spent weeks in the mountains. And I am a wireless operator, sir. Are any
of your patrols better qualified?"

The forester looked at him with renewed interest. "As a patrol," he remarked, "you would have
to deal with grown men. You would find yourself in many situations that you could not handle.
Grown men do not like to take orders from boys."

"I have handled men, sir; that is, I have helped to handle them. I helped to capture the German
dynamiters at Elk City, sir, when the Camp Brady Wireless Patrol saved that place from destruction."

"Are you a member of that organization?" asked the forester with increasing interest. "I remember
reading about that."

"We both are," said Charley. "And I could help you so much with my wireless, sir. Your ranger
told us this morning that if he found a fire he couldn't handle, he would have to go clear
out to the highway before he could summon help. With the wireless, help could be summoned almost
instantly."

The forester smiled indulgently. "It sounds good," he commented. "But you forget that we have
no wireless and that none of us knows anything about radio-telegraphy. No; I am afraid I can't
use you, though I'd like to. If you still want a job when you are of age, come to me. I can
use you as a patrol and I might even have a place for you as a ranger. We have mighty few rangers
as well educated and equipped as you will be. Or you might even decide to go to Mont Alto and
take a degree in forestry and become a forester like myself. I would like to see you in the
service, but I can't take you in now. I must get on with my work and hurry back to my office.
Good-bye and good luck to you. And don't forget about your fires."

Turning to the elder of his two companions, he said, "All right, Finnegan. Go ahead."

The man stepped to the nearest tree, slipped his calipers on it breast-high, then glanced aloft.
"White pine, forty-three, five," he called.

The forester put down the figures in his cruising book.

"Hemlock, twenty-eight, four," called the other man.

The men were experienced timber cruisers. They were measuring the amount of wood in the forest.
The first man meant that the white pine tree he was measuring was forty-three inches in diameter
breast-high and would make five standard logs, each sixteen feet long. The second scaler had
measured a hemlock twenty-eight inches in diameter and long enough for four logs. They were
measuring the timber on a few acres, so as to form an estimate of the amount for sale.

The work interested Lew greatly, but Charley had no heart for anything. He had fought hard
and apparently his last chance had slipped away from him.

He was very quiet as they made their way through the valley. Even the run in the bottom failed
to stir him, though he loved the little mountain streams passionately. Yet he did notice that
here, beneath the lofty pines, where the forest mold lay deep and spongy, the brook flowed
strongly. It sang as it rushed along between its rugged banks. But there was no music in its
song for Charley. So alluring was the stream that Lew wanted to fish, but Charley had no heart
even to try for a trout; though it was practically a certainty that there were trout aplenty
to be had. Time heals all wounds. It would heal Charley's: but not enough time had yet elapsed
for the healing process to begin. At present he could think of nothing but his dismal prospects. Only for a moment I saw the delicate contours of her face in front of a jet love the mild light
illuminated, but then something happened and happened so quickly over, that my Memory has not
been able to preserve it. A board of the floor in the proposed height; I saw the glow of the
white robe, then I heard it rushing beneath me in the water. I opened his eyes, the moon shone
through the empty room. I wanted to see Anne Lene; but I did not see them. I felt as'm running
in my head something like this, I at all costs would have to catch up again if I did not want
to be mad. But while my thoughts chased this chimera, I suddenly heard from the house the dance
music. This gave me to his senses, and I let out a piercing scream and jumped down into the pavilion
next to the Water. The graft was deep, but I was not an inexperienced swimmer, and I dived,
and My hands groped around among the slippery herb that proliferated on the bottom. I opened
my eyes and tried to see, but I just felt like me about a cloudy Lights. My clothes, none
of which I dropped, forced me to return back to the surface. Here I was looking to regain breath,
and then repeated once again my attempt .-- It was in vain. Soon I was back on the edge of a steep bank and
looked over at a loss along the graft. Then I felt a hand lay heavily on my shoulder, and a
Voice called: "Marx, Marx does, why do you Where is the child?" I realized that it was Wieb. "There,
there!" I cried and held his hands to the trench. The old man took me under his arm and pulled
me violently down on the edge of the graft. Finally I took it out, and we ran to the water's edge
up to the gazebo in the garden corner, where the old Erlen hinabhaengen their branches are
in the flood. We have finally found it; his eyes were closed, and the little hand was closed.

I
gave the old Wieb some arrangements to what drew so now, had to, I the brown horse from the barn
and drove to town to fetch a doctor, because I could not believe my young art is not in this
case.

We were soon back, but the shadow of mortality, which had already fallen so early in this
young life, they left now hooked.

When we few hours later to the city returned, the march was so solemn
and silent, and the cries of the birds that fly at night by the sea
sounded like immeasurable distance, that my inexperienced heart despaired
of ever regain the trail of those who had now lost in this vast space.

The current owner of the state court, Claus Peters. He has pulled down the old Heuberg and have
set a modern house on the site.

The Wirtschaftsgebaeude are separated next .-- He was right, it goes well, he delivers the largest
bullocks to transport to England, and in its rooms are the most costly furniture, and he and his
Juliane gleaming the health and well-being. But I've never been back there.
 "I believe that we have enough wire to hang
'em up pretty high and still have a long lead-in wire. If there is, then we can camp back here
under the trees close to the run. We have no tent and the dense tops will protect us from dew.
It'll be much warmer back among the trees, too."

Speedily they found a place that suited them. They put their packs on the ground and got out
their wireless instruments. Then they made some rude spreaders from branches that Lew cut in
the windrow. When the aerial was ready to hang up, Charley took a length of wire and made his
way across the windrow and up a slender tree that stood on the farther edge of the opening.
He fastened one end of the wire to the spreader and the other end he attached to the tree.
Lew was duplicating his movements on the other side of the opening. In no time the aerial was
swinging above the windrow, and the lead-in wire had been brought back through the trees to
the camp site. Here the instruments were connected and the wire coupled to them. The dry cells
were next wired and the outfit was then ready. Lew sat down beside the spark-gap and pressed
the key. Bright flashes leaped from point to point. He adjusted the gap, so as to get the best
spark, then laid the pack bags over the instruments.

"We missed out on listening to Roy this time," he said, "but I'll bet we can raise the rest
of the bunch. She works fine. We've got a dandy spark."

"Good!" cried Charley. "It won't be long before it is dark. It's already twilight under these
trees. Now for the trout."

Chapter VI

Trout Fishing in the Wilderness

"Shall we go up-stream or down?" asked Lew, as he jointed his little rod and fastened a hook
to his line.

"Let's go down. We can't fish very long, and we know there is no brush along the stream below
us. We can try it up-stream to-morrow."

"To-morrow we'll fish on opposite sides of the run," said Lew as they buckled on their bait
boxes and started. "I don't see any way to cross now and there's no time to hunt for a way."

"It's full of 'em. I'll bet on that," smiled Charley. "We'll catch a mess in no time. Here
goes with a worm."

He threaded one on his hook, crouched down, and cautiously drew near the bank. A dexterous
flick of his rod landed the worm fairly in the middle of the run. Hardly had it hit the water
before something grabbed it, and Charley drew forth a flopping fish. But it proved to be only
a fingerling. In disgust Charley wet his hand and carefully unhooked the little fish.

"Shows they're here, anyway," he said, as he tossed the little trout back into the stream.

But if they were there, they were strangely shy in making their presence known. Rod after rod
the hoys advanced, careful not to show themselves, making their casts with greatest caution,
and keeping as quiet as possible. But no fish so much as smelled their bait. Again and again
they let their hooks float down into promising pools, but never a strike resulted.

They took the worms from their hooks and tried flies. But though their gaudy lures landed lightly
on the water and danced in the rapids like real insects struggling for their lives, never a
fish rose to grasp one.

"They won't touch worms and they don't want flies. I wonder what they do like," grumbled Lew
in disgust. "I wish we had some grasshoppers or crickets. Bet we'd get 'em then."

They continued their efforts until it was almost dark. "We'll have to be getting back to camp,"
said Charley. "We can't see much longer. We don't want to be caught here in the dark. The flash-light
is back at camp."

"Here's a fat grub," said Lew, picking up a whiteworm out of a rotting log. "I'm going to make
one more try. Maybe they want grubs."

He slipped the worm on his hook and flicked it toward the brook. A second after it struck the
water there was a splash, and Lew's reel sang shrilly.

"Oh boy!" cried Lew, as he struck up his rod smartly. "I've got him."

He had. The fish leaped clear of the water, but failed to loosen the line. Then it darted away
like a shot, the line cutting through the water with a sharp, swishing sound.

"Hold him," called Charley. "He's heading for that snag."

Lew put his thumb on the line and raised the tip of his rod higher. Under the tension the supple
steel bent almost double. The fish stopped his rush, turned, and darted down-stream before
Lew could reel in a foot of line.

Charley forgot all about his own fishing in his desire to help land the trout. "Don't let him
get under that rock," he warned, coming close to the brook. "He'll cut the line."

Lew increased the tension on the line and the fish stopped short of the rock. For an instant
the trout sulked and Lew reeled in rapidly.

"Guess I got him," he cried triumphantly, as the fish was drawn near to the bank. But as he
bent to grasp his prize there was a tremendous splash. The trout leaped high out of water,
then darted off again like a flash. Lew had to give him line or lose him.

"He's a whopper, Charley," he cried. "Gee! I hope I don't lose him!"

"Here's a shallow place," cried Charley. "Work him into it and we can grab him."

Lew maneuvered the trout toward the shoal. Again and again the fish broke for the deeper water
and Lew had to give him line. But each time he stopped the rush and patiently worked the fish
back toward the shoal. At last the trout was fairly on the edge of it. Lew began to pull steadily
on his line and slid the tired fish into shallow water. It flopped helplessly on the stones.
Lew drew it to the bank and thrust a finger into its gills. In another second the fish was
dangling in air.

"Great Cæsar!" cried Charley excitedly. "Ain't he a beaut! He's the biggest trout I ever saw."

"He's the biggest one I ever caught," answered Lew. "He'll make a meal himself."

"He'll have to," returned Charley. "We can't fish another minute. It's almost dark now."

Lew slipped his finger down the throat of the gasping fish, and bent the creature's head sharply
back. The trout hung limp in his hand. Then the two fishermen made their way through the dusky
forest to their camp, where Charley lighted a fire.

"I'll just see what this fellow has been eating," said Lew. "Maybe we can find out what sort
of bait to use." He opened his knife and slit the fish's belly. "Crabs!" he cried, as his knife
blade turned up the remains of a crayfish. "Now we know what they want."

Soon Charley had a good bed of coals. Lew, meantime, cleaned the fish. Quickly it was cooked
and eaten and the dishes washed. By this time it was altogether dark.

"Now we'll get some crabs for to-morrow," said Lew.

"Wonder how we can catch them?" queried Charley.

"What we need is a little dip-net. With that and the flash-light we could get a peck of them.
These little streams are full of them."

"Let's try scooping them with a coffee-pot. The lid comes off. If we are careful, I believe
it will answer."

They took the lid off of the pot, and stepping to the brook turned the beam from their flash-light
on the bottom of the run. The scene was fascinating. Feeling secure in the darkness, the living
creatures in the brook had ventured abroad freely. Where the bright light of the sun would
have disclosed only stones and sand, the little beam from the search-light revealed a myriad
of moving shapes. Little minnows moved about in schools. Salamanders, large and small, crawled
about among the rocks. Occasional trout were visible, lurking in the deeper holes, lying as
motionless as sticks, or moving their tails slowly. Eels lay on the sandy spots. And lying
still or crawling slowly among the stones were many crayfish. The water seemed to be filled
with living objects.

"Gee whiz!" whispered Charley. "It's like going to an aquarium and looking at the fish in glass
cages. I never dreamed a brook could be so interesting."

With the utmost caution they moved along the bank of the run, looking for crayfish of suitable
size. Whenever they found one, Charley focused the flash-light on it, moving the beam so as
to dazzle the creature and keep the space behind it in darkness. And Lew would slip the coffee-pot
into the water and move it cautiously up to the crayfish, ready for a final, quick scoop. Sometimes
he was successful and sometimes the intended victim escaped. Always the click of the metal
pot against the stony bottom sent the little creatures in the water scurrying for cover. A
second after Lew tried for the crayfish not a living thing was visible. So it was necessary
to move on along the stream. From spot to spot the two boys proceeded, now getting a good bait,
now missing one, but ever keenly enjoying the wonderful glimpses of the life in the brook.
So they continued until they had a goodly number of crayfish.

"I believe that's enough," said Lew. "Let's get back to camp. The fellows will be at their
instruments at nine, ready to talk to us." He glanced at his watch. "I had no idea," he cried,
"that it was so late. It's almost nine now. We'll have to hurry."

So fascinating had been the glimpses of life in the brook that time had sped much faster than
either boy realized.

They hurried back to their camp. They had taken the precaution to sling their grub high above
ground on a piece of wire, but apparently nothing had tried to molest anything. Lew rekindled
the fire in the little stone fireplace they had built and Charley uncovered the wireless instruments
and sat down on one pack bag. The other he flung to Lew. Then he slipped the receivers on his
head, threw over his switch, and sent the bright sparks flashing between the points of his
spark-gap.

"CBWC--CBWC--CBWC--CBC," he rapped out. (Camp Brady Wireless Club, Charley Russell calling.)

Then he sat in silence, waiting for an answer. It came promptly.

"CBC--CBC--CBC--I--I--I--GA." (Charley Russell--We're here. Go ahead.)

"Got 'em," he cried. He answered and got a reply. "They want to know why we didn't call up
last night," Charley said to Lew.

The fire in the little fireplace burned clear and bright, making a circle of light in the dark
forest. Lew sat near the fire, cross-legged on his pack bag, thrusting an occasional stick
into the flames. Charley sat by his instrument. Rapidly he pressed the key, and the sparks
flew between the points of his gap like tiny flashes of horizontal lightning.

"Hello! Is that you, Willie?" rapped out Charley.

"Sure," came the answer. "But we're all here. Why didn't you call up last night?"

"Couldn't," answered Charley. "Didn't reach Old Ironsides camp site until long after dark.
Forest fires have burned up all the timber there. Spring dried up, too. Had terrible time.
Awful thirsty and no water to drink. Too tired to put up aerial."

"Where are you now?"

"In the third valley east of Old Ironsides. Never been so far in the mountains before. Grand
stand of timber here. Great trout stream. Full of big ones. Won't touch worms or flies. Just
been catching crabs to try to-morrow."

"Get any yet?"

"One big one."

"Have any adventures?"

"Not unless you call our experience in the burned timber an adventure. Toughest thing I've
stacked up against in a long time. Timber burned for miles. No fish. Raccoons catching 'em
out of the little pools. Had to come here to get any. What are you doing?"

"Everybody hard at work. I got a new job yesterday helping a fellow make a wireless outfit."

"Where?"

"Right here. We're making it in my shop."

"Will you be there to-morrow?"

"Sure. All day."

"We'll call you."

"Good! I'll listen in every hour on the hour. Then you can get me almost any time."

"Bully for you. We're going to fish to-morrow, but we may catch so many in the morning that
we won't want to fish after dinner. I'll let you know how we make out. Good luck to you all.
Wish you were here. We'll bring you a nice mess of fish, anyway. Good-night."

"Good-night and good luck."

"I wish they were here," said Lew, as Charley covered the instruments to protect them from
dampness, and moved over near his chum. "It doesn't seem right to be in the forest without
the whole crowd. This makes me think of our camp in the forest near the Elk City reservoir,
when we were hot on the trail of the dynamiters. I'd hate to camp out at this time of year
without any fire."

"Well, let's turn in. We want to get up early to-morrow and try those crabs. I'll bet we get
a bunch of trout."

"Bet we do, too," replied Charley.

Little did he dream that on the morrow he would be engaged in matters far more serious than
catching trout.

Chapter VII

The Forest Afire

The earliest rays of light had hardly penetrated beneath the giant pines the next morning before
the two boys were astir. Their breakfast was quickly cooked and eaten. Then they buckled on
their bait boxes, now bulging with worms and crayfish. They carried as well their books of
flies. And Charley slipped the little axe into his belt, to have something to chop with in
case they wanted to hunt for whiteworms.

"Let's go back where we caught that big fellow last night," said Lew. "There may be some more
like him in those deep pools."

"All right. Come on."

With nothing but their little rods to carry, they made fast time through the forest, and had
already reached the pool in which the big trout was taken, before the first ray of sunlight
came flashing among the tree trunks.

"We're going to have a fine day," said Charley. "It's my turn to catch a fish. Here goes for
a try."

He baited his hook with a crayfish, and cautiously made his way toward the brink of the brook.
Half-way he paused and straightened up, sniffing the air. Then he turned and looked at Lew.

"Smell anything?" he asked.

Lew had also detected a taint in the fresh morning air. "Smells like smoke," he said. "Probably
some fisherman cooking his breakfast."

Charley turned toward the brook again, then once more faced his companion.

"People don't cook with leaves," he said soberly. "That isn't wood smoke, that's burning leaves."

For a moment the two boys looked at each other in silence.

"You don't suppose----" began Lew, but Charley cut him short.

"Let's make sure. Which way is that smoke coming from?" He stepped to the brook and dipped
a finger in the cold water. Then he held his hand aloft.

"There's so little wind stirring I can't tell which way it's blowing," he said. "One side of
my finger feels as cold as the other."

Again he tried it. There was just a suggestion of an air current. "Seems to be blowing straight
up the valley," he said.

"I'll try a match," said Lew. He took his waterproof match box from his pocket and drew forth
a match, which he lighted on his heel. "You're right," he said. "The flame blows up-stream
a little. What shall we do?"

"It doesn't seem possible that the woods can be afire," answered Charley. "But let's make sure.
If the forest is afire and we can put it out, it would be a crime if we don't. The memory of
it would haunt me the rest of my life."

"All right. We'll go down-stream. If there is a fire, we'll do our best to put it out. If there
isn't any fire, there's no harm done. We can probably find as many fish down-stream as there
are here. We'll save time if we unjoint our rods."

Quickly the lines were reeled up and the rods packed in their cloth cases. Then, with nothing
to hamper them, the two boys hurried down the valley.

Gradually the odor of burning leaves grew stronger. A very little breeze arose, blowing straight
in their faces. It was heavy with the smell of fire. Ahead of them the forest began to look
gray and misty, as though a heavy night fog still covered the earth. But both boys knew that
the gray blanket was no night mist. It was smoke. They quickened their pace. The smoke cloud
grew denser. Then a dull, reddish glow appeared. There could no longer be any doubt. The forest
was afire.

"Come on," cried Charley. "We've got to grab it quick."

As they started to run, Lew protested: "Not too fast. We'll tire ourselves out before we get
there. We may have a long fight before we put the fire out."

The smoke now rolled past them in dense clouds. The red glow grew brighter. In a few moments
they reached the fire itself. It was in an opening where the timber had been cut and little
but brush remained. It was a ground fire that crept slowly along among the leaves. Yet it had
already spread until it seemed to stretch across half the valley.

"If we can only put it out before the wind comes up," said Charley, "we can save the forest."

He looked about for a low tree, discovered a thick, young pine, rapidly chopped off some bushy
branches, and again sheathed his axe. Each boy seized a branch.

"Our rods--what shall we do with them?" asked Lew.

"Throw 'em in the run. Fire can't hurt 'em there and we can get 'em at any time."

Lew rushed over to the brook and put the rods in the water. He set a flat stone on them to
keep the current from moving them. Then he dipped his pine bough in the brook and began to
beat out the flames, working straight out from the bank. Charley joined him. Rapidly they rained
blows upon the fire. Rod after rod they advanced. The heat from even so small a fire was great.
The smoke was blinding and stifling. Heat and smoke and their own exertions tired them rapidly.

"We've got to take it easier," said Lew, after a little, "or we'll be all in before we get
the fire half out."

Of necessity they slackened their efforts. As they wore out their weapons, they cut new ones.
Every little while they rested. They were tiring fast. At the same tune, the wind was beginning
to freshen. Here in the open there was nothing to break its force. The flames leaped higher
under its breath and began to run over the ground instead of crawling. The fire itself created
a draft. The greater the draft, the hotter the flame became, and the hotter the fire grew,
the stronger blew the draft.

"We're never going to do it," panted Charley, after a while. "The wind is blowing harder all
the time. We must call help."

He looked at his watch. "Twenty minutes of seven!" he ejaculated. "How far do you think we
are from camp?"

"Two miles, anyway," answered Lew.

"If I can make it by seven, I may be able to get Willie. He said he would listen in every hour."

"Hurry," said Lew sharply. "I'll keep at work here."

"If it gets too hot for you," said Charley, "go right back to the brook, and come up along
it to camp. That's the way I'm going back, and I'll return that way after I get Willie. Good-bye."

He started off at a fast pace. But his exertions and the heat and smoke had so weakened him
that he quickly saw he could not maintain such a gait. He dropped to a steady jog. Even that
taxed his strength. But he gritted his teeth and clenched his hands and kept on.

The forest was now full of smoke. The dense cloud completely hid the sun. Among the great pines
it was almost like twilight. Charley pushed on as fast as his weary legs could carry him. More
than once he tripped and fell. He could no longer see distinctly. Fatigue and the smoke in
his eyes blurred his vision. He was scratched and torn and his hands were a mass of little
burns. Charley scarcely noticed them. His mind was wholly intent on getting help and saving
the forest. Nothing else mattered. So he staggered on through the dusky woods. He glanced at
his watch. Ten minutes had passed. He felt sure he had been running an hour and that his watch
had stopped. He held it to his ear. The steady ticking somewhat reassured him. After what seemed
like another long interval he ventured to look at it again. Five minutes more had elapsed.
Five minutes remained before Willie would be at his post waiting for a possible message. Charley
crowded on all the speed that was left in him. But his feet seemed to be made of lead. His
heart pounded painfully against his ribs. His lungs seemed nigh to bursting.

"Five minutes more," he kept muttering to himself. "Only five minutes more. I've got to make
it. Only five minutes more."

Suddenly he came to their camp. In his weariness he had not recognized any landmarks. He could
hardly believe it was their camp. But there were the grub bag hanging on a wire, the dishes
piled by the fire, and the wireless instruments protected by the pack bags.

"Thank God for the wireless!" gasped Charley, as he threw himself on the ground beside his
key. He tried to flash a call, but his hand trembled so he could not form the letters correctly.
He dropped flat on his back to rest for a moment, glancing at his watch as he lay there. It
lacked one minute of seven.

For sixty seconds Charley lay prostrate, looking at the second-hand on his watch as it went
round. Then he sat up. The minute's rest had steadied him wonderfully. He moved his switch,
pressed his finger on the key, and sent the bright sparks flashing between his gap points.

"CBWC--CBWC--CBWC--CBC," he called, then paused to listen.

There was no response. An anxious look crept into his eyes. "CBWC--CBWC--CBWC--CBC," again
he called.

No answering signal sounded in his ear. His face went white. "CBWC--CBWC--CBWC--CBC," he rapped
out anxiously. And without listening for a reply, he repeated the message frantically half
a dozen times. Then a buzzing sounded in his ears. A look of relief came on his face. He sighed.
Willie was acknowledging his call signal.

"Good-morning," continued Willie. "Caught any trout yet?"

"The forest is afire!" flashed back Charley. "Get the district forester on the telephone instantly.
His headquarters are at Oakdale. Tell him the fire is in the third valley east of Old Ironsides;
that the message is from the two boys he met yesterday; that we are trying to hold it. Ask
what we shall do. I'll wait for his answer."

For what seemed an endless period of time, Charley waited. Seconds were like minutes. Minutes
dragged like quarter hours. It seemed as though Willie would never answer. There was nothing
for Charley to do but sit and wait. In his impatience he could hardly keep still. He could
not take his mind from the fire. He could think of nothing but that roaring line of flame consuming
the floor of the forest and destroying the young growths. Would Willie never get the forester?
Must the entire woods burn before the forester knew of the fire? In his excitement Charley
clasped and unclasped his hands and nervously swayed back and forth as he sat on the ground.

Suddenly he sat up as steady as a stone image. The wireless was beginning to speak.

"Forester on wire now," came the message from Willie. "Wants know exactly where fire is."

"A little south of east of where he met us, in the third valley beyond Ironsides," flashed
back Charley.

"How big is the fire?" came a second question, after a brief interval.

"Don't know. Too big for us. Lew still fighting it. I'm going back. What shall we do?"

Again there was a pause. Then Willie answered: "Forester says find header and back-fire. Try
to hold it till fire crew arrives."

"Will do our best. Listen in often. May need call you. Good-bye."

Charley threw over his switch, covered the instruments with the pack bags, and was off down
the valley. He felt much refreshed by his rest. At a steady jog he made his way along the brook.

Now he found it difficult to breathe. Smoke was rolling through the forest in billows. Close
by he heard the cries of terror-stricken animals. He came to the edge of the burned space beside
the brook, where they had beaten out the flames. Here there was practically no smoke. He turned
away from the run and followed the black edge of the burned area. He knew this would bring
him to Lew, and he wanted to make sure that they had extinguished every spark in the distance
they had covered. Only at one point did he find fire smouldering. He beat out the sparks and
went on. He could see almost nothing. The smoke grew thicker and thicker. Through it he began
to distinguish the red glare of the flames. Ever louder sounded the crackle of fire. From a
low, humming sound it grew, as he drew near, into a subdued roar. Then all other sounds were
lost in the greater tumult of the forest fire. Who would walk walk walk in addition to poverty and misery? But you turned pale and
turned pale, for you have a cowardly heart. I loved you, and in my life - wast you a man - trampled
father, home, everything I would have and would have become your own ".

"You've been there," whispered the shadows.

"Never!" Stemma said. "Look at me: I am a sinner same I look like a passion and Frivolous? I'm not
the breeding and virtue?

And I always was. You I am not touched, that you barely grazing test me with timid kisses mouth.
Where would have hergenommen you the courage? "

As the shadows got into trouble. "O Violent both the father and you!

He has me raped and strangled, you, Stemma, lured by the drop of blood! Give the finger sits the
scars!

"

Stemma raised his shoulders. "Once upon a time," she sneered.

Since rocked Peregrinus, calmed himself immediately, the curls and sang with steamed Votes:

"Once upon a time, there was once a prince with his child, it was once a young Pfaff their castle
servants. "

At the banquet sat all three shouted, as the Lord the people, "Mr
Jude on, to Ross to Ross!

In the Valley draws a booty! "

He put on the broad sword and throws a dagger between laughter The House Maid and Pfaff as a sharp
Waechter.

Jude has the rapid Ross suffered in a storm, Two hold still and bang your eyes depressed.

Stemma lifts the finger, it does hurt him, and goes so well up and down over the bare edge.

"A drop of warm blood oozed" -

"Silence, weakling!" The judge was angry. "You did zusammengetraeumt you in your hiding place.
Such shame does not know the sun! Stemma is immaculate! And the Count, he'll only! I will
be speaking to him! "

"Stemma Stemma!" Peregrin pleaded.

"Away, you Nothing!" They drew away from him with a strong gesture, and his features began to
swim.

"My wife, my" - "life" he would say, but the word had vanished from the powerless. "Help, Stemma,"
he whispered, "What it means to the breathing, Blooming? Help!" The judge pressed the lips, and Peregrinus
melted.

Good-night, she stood before the camp of her child. She kissed his closed eyes. "Abide ignorant,
"she murmured. Then she slid next to Palma on the broad stock and put his Arm around the girl,
fought as a victim: "You are my property, I agree with you! not missing with the boy! I siedle
up to the light and circle around you like a huet border lioness!

"The dream had shown her Peregrin not help his image in her had aufgehoert live. Long ago was the
young man to whom she is out of defiance and rebellion more or as secretly married for love, at its
heart mortified niedergeglitten and set, and once sprayed from her fingertip blood drop the
purified appeared as a loose and funny but fairy tales. Even more credible it seemed the other
inhabitants of the Underworld, and as they turned round on the couch
and buried his head in the pillows, without to solve the arm from
the shoulder of her child, saw the Entschlummernde the Comes, as he
murmured to the spear leaning glumly sat in the reeds and some hostility
in his beard.

A smile of scorn slid over her face darkened, for Stemma knew the helplessness of the departed.

In
the first light awoke the two sleepers a sudden surge horn and tore it up from the warehouse. The
violent Tagruf offend the delicate ears of the judge. You guessed whom he reported, and with a
quick decision and a firm step she went to meet Wulfrin. Even before her, quickly taken the cup
in his hand was Wulf, Palma scurried through the door.

Stepping into the open gate of Rudio, Stemma stood before the Hoefling, who with wondering Eyes examined.
The face he commanded respect. He swallowed a unseemly jest about to be rescued by four wives
living.

Dealt with by the calm scrutiny and the sovereignty of the pale features, he said only: "Here
you have me, Madam," to which she replied: "This effort proved to cost to get you to Malmort."

"Where
is the sister that I kiss her?" he continued, and this, in the meantime the cup had filled him
with a beating heart, and hurried to glowing eyes, although they
caution step and could not spill the wine.

She went to her brother and began the spell. But since Stemma the cup of the Comes the slayer,
saw in the hands of her child and the fresh mouth over the edge, she felt a deep disgust and revulsion.
Handles with sure they took possession of the cup, that surprised
the girl without a fight let go and resistance led him to proffer
his own mouth and offered it to the Hoefling with the simple words:
"You and that a blessing!"

Wulfrin emptied the cup without any Fear.

Palma was shocked and ashamed.

Since the mother was called the bell pull, the top high in an open
turret and go far away to the servants called Angelus.

Palma had a Child joy had to let it ring the bell easily movable, and the Office was the Girls
remained. She added hesitantly.

"Woman, why did you spoiled the fun?" asked Wulfrin. Stemma showed him the inscription of the
cup. "See, it's the spell of a wife," she said. "Of this I read anything," he said.

"Rejoice in the wine! Will Come ...!"

The fingers of the judge shows the blurred, out of which be tested for a precise eye three letters
stood out legibly, a i, a K, a l. Wulfrin guessed without difficulty:

"Welcome in the closet!"

"You're right, Madam," he laughed.

She took him by the hand and led him from the tomb. Since he was the father, the left stretched
out on the sword, the rights to the hunting horn, the stone feet. Wulfrin considered the crude
but true-hearted trains without feeling childish. The illustrated bugle beholding, he lifted
in a sudden fit of the real, which he wore at his side, to her mouth
and took a hefty blow.

"Back with a vengeance!" he cried to the in the tomb.

"Stop it!" prohibited the judge, "it sounds ugly."

She sat on the edge of the stone coffin, lying next to her own image, the praying Hands held
against each other, and began: "Since you are now on Malmort, you do not forsake it, Wulfrin
without me - to have charged or released from death - after witnesses heard the man here. "power
of Hoefling a reluctant gesture." joining up, "she said.

"Is it not a thing to you, it is a form that you have entrusted to me, for I am a exact wife.
"

"Kingdom of grace you will have aligned," replied the courtier applied, "that I do never suspect,
neither I nor Arbogast, who described to me the collapsing of the Father added. I am not a skeptic
and I do not live as such.

There is that, in the any chance a plan, and smell in an accident
a liability, but these are deceived or self-deceiving.

Heaven preserve me from the two! If I would have drawn suspicion but and hostility against
you inclined to now that I see your face, I would be disarmed, for indeed you do not look like
a murderer. If you were an evil, how do you avail themselves the right and front to expose the
evil and judge? Outraged objection, the nature! "

A silence followed. "But what is it to a dull roar, the schuettert the ground?"

"This is the electricity," said the judge, "who gnawed the rocks and
under the castle Tale come crashing down.

"

"It is true woman," continued the courtier continued innocently, "that I never liked you suffer,
and I'll tell you why. This old man here, my father was a crude and violent man, I reluctant
to say it: he has done to miss my dear mother, I think he hit it. I like not think about it.
The monastery, he has locked it as soon as it abwelkte.

Since it is not to Wondering how we are people that I wanted to know from you nothing that distinguishes
it from its place offended. "

"Not me. Here you do me wrong. As we sit together so Wulfrin is why I do not you tell? I'm your
mother, no harm done. Colder and lifeless as This stone was my hand because she was pressured into
force of your father. From thereby town of prison, be thrown to him I was from Jude to give
me a trembling and had strangled trembling favorite of low birth. Not every woman you would
such a Entrust Wulfrin. "

"I believe you", he said.

"One of coerced and degraded," she said, "your father was dying for freedom. And I was mistress of
Malmort. You have reason Wulfrin, you like the thing to inspect. It is dark and heavy. Look
at it from all sides! After all, you admit me, I destroyed your father, I am too much or you
are on Earth. "

"Do you mock me?" he went on, "but no, you look serious and sad. See woman eternal interrogations
and directing has made you tormenting and embarrassing and truly
I think "- his eyes pointed to the stone -" a bigot you are!

"He had rings for women's major, the words read: "Orate per magna peccatrice." "This is big enough."

"I
am a religious woman," replied Stemma, "but truly, I am not a bigot, because I only believe
what I have learned to their own hearts. Your servant, the stonemason Arbogast asked me in his
simple-minded way what he might write to me at the head.

In his Swabian homeland is in women make the romanization used: Pray for a sinner. "" Write to me,
"I said, 'Pray for the great sinner,' because, Wulfrin, you're right said what do I do, I grow. "

"Pretty!"
cried the courtier, but not in response to these self-glory, but the main in judging the height
where Palma was and pulled the bell helltoenige. She had long fringed on the spiral staircase
and looked back out the hatch after her brother withheld. cradled
in the wide Bogenoeffnung the gilded by the sun's first rays of the
tower a bright-sounding creatures on the morning sky.

The courtier saw a ringing angel how about him in the delicate initials of a precious Psalter
a color expert Moench maps. An intimacy, that he was ashamed to move, and filled his heart. Had it but
this worshiping child from death.

Meanwhile, the servants gathered in the courtyard of the judge, one hundred strong, well heads, Men
and women, a dark, sinewy, sunburned, gender, the helmeted more curious than hostile eyed. This,
the return to Earth including increased Palma Perceiving themselves made car, and when he wanted
revenge for the volatile devotion, which he perceived to be a creature
of earthly substances, he laid her hand on his shoulder, and the flourishing
oral finding, he kissed him hard.

She trembled with joy and wanted To reply quickly but the judge took her hand with his left hand,
the rights Wulfrin bidder, and led the two in the middle of their people.

"Brother and sister," they proclaimed, and turning to the other side once again: Sister and
brother. "

Less how it had servants and maids always come out on set, because the resemblance Wulfrin Comes with
the stone was obvious that only the Father in the Son, and animated had finished, to say nothing
of the hunting horn at the side Wulfrin, the vivid testimony were of his lineage.

Only the wrinkled, stock deaf mother, the Sibyl, had heard nothing and understood nothing.
She tripped at the giggling girl, plucked, and patted it, grinned
and gushed zutulich from the toothless mouth: "O my dear Herrgoettchen
What kind of gave you because the woman Mother dug!

To re-Jung. From Paris it is prescribed, from the boys, the Great powers are used. Curly hair,
gorgeous item! "

"Shut up, Drud!" cried the mother of Dionysius servant's ear, "it is the brother!" and she replied.
"I say yes, Dionysius: the kingdom of grace is a comforting and building up Lord, but who is
a mighty, warriors storming! O blissful Paelmchen!

" and so unbecoming they talked for a long time, if they are not pushed back and it the sassy mouth
would have behaved. For the morning service began, and distant from one group has already sung
the litany. As by themselves arranged the Fruehdienst, a semi-circle forming in the middle of
the judge in charge of the slow song that, the same rhythms and phrases and more urgent and passionate
repetitive, the sky over Malmort called.

Wulfrin, which he did not like was advised at one end of the devout quality circle saw himself opposite
her sister. Everything was thrown down, he and Judge excluded.

His eyes rested on Palma. Lying on both knees, hands in his lap folded, she sang with the
eager young Raetian maids.

But the celebration, which they celebrated in the full breast with the brother finally obtained, the new
and good fellows, radiated from her eyes and cheered her on the lips,
that the litany was silent about it.

The open back through the air gave the kiss of his brother.

And now, half rising, They also stretched out his arms to him.

Only a volatile gesture, but so much passion and youth outflowing
that Wulfrin involuntarily made a defensive move, as it would force
done.

"The Wild Ling!" he laughed secretly.

"But being the brave kingdom of grace to create ! Make I need him nor tame and train wild Fill
that it is not rash against the pious youth! You just wait! "

And to begin the education, he turned, as the judge pronounced the
Amen and Palma against him sprang from her, stumbled on Stemma who
took his hand, he solemnly led to the center and talk with iron voice
began: "My people Who of you, man! or woman, so old is that he was
here sixteen years ago now, while I Comes the received, of which came
from your Lord slain, to avenge the Jude - who is so old and presently
it was the stay!

Your disciples, let us, you too, Palma! "

They obeyed. Palma retired sulking back in the outermost castle angle, a semicircular Bastion,
a few steps lower than the Court, over the perpendicular precipice towered by which the mountain
flood in tremendous fall fell to the valley. She sat down on the wide plate the parapet, looked,
vorgestuetzt the arm into the snow-white foam, which with its its fine rain cheek cool, and heard in
the tumult of the depth only the cheers again and the impatience of his own heart.

In the yard behind her now, the legal action was their step and an exchange of words followed
to rapidly, yet measured, according to the angle of the judge.

"Here is the son of the Comes. Bring him the truth you owe. Saget them. Habet her the picture
of that hour? "

"As if there are" - "I see the jump from his horse Comes" - "We" -
"steaming and puffing" - "You proffered "-"

Three long trains "-"

With a he emptied the cup "-" He fell "-" Speechless "-" was he ".

"With your share of the cross?" she asked.

"So and not otherwise.

If our share of the cross!" answered the many voices oath.

"Wulfrin, I beg of you, you look distracted! Where are you?" Pull yourself together! "

Hastily and angrily, he raised his hand.

The judge grabbed him by the arm. "No folly!" she warned. "Question investigating, testing, before
you give me free! You commit a serious, an important fact! "
Wulfrin got away from her. "I give the judge free from the death
of Comes and will damned if I ever stir it, "he swore angrily.

The
courtyard began to empty. Wulfrin stared straight ahead, and heard,
so convinced He was the innocence of the judge and so relieved, finished
with an ugly thing to be - yet he heard from his mind as a reproach,
as if the Father through revealed his displeasure and his haste and
insulted. He stood motionless, while the Judge slowly approached him,
taught himself up to his chest and his chain and bugle slightly raised
over his head. "As a pledge of my generosity and our peace," she said
kindly. "I can not suffer his tone." And they walked through the yard
down the steps and out on the bastion, and threw the bugle with an
outstretched right hand in the thunderous bass.

Now Wulfrin came
to his senses and rushed her to recover his father's legacy. He came
too late. In the abyss, looking stunned, who had swallowed the horn,
heard it down an enemy triumph such as tubes and horses neighing.
His ear had been in the Levels of speech are weaned, which lead the
Bergström. When he looked up again, The judge was gone. Only Palma
stood beside him, and embraced him warmly on kissed her mouth.

"Let
me!" he yelled and pushed her away.

Chapter Three

On a window of
Malmort through which the valley with its towers and hamlets as hazy
distance come shining, the judge stood Wulfrin and showed him the
size their property. "I mastered," she said, "Palma and me. But you,
Wulfrin, I have already chosen to ehevor - as it is also your brotherly
duty - the sister, If I should die to protect this vast heritage.
"

"Plan full, but distant lying," he said.

"Distance or near. You
are her natural protector. I can my child no powerful this country
to marry, because they are a breeding-less and self-destructive sex.
I tied to the tail of a horse-whipped! All around, not a castle, not
the Murder stuck! Should I go under my child in a house in a blood
feud or revenge? Yes, If I met them for a good and strong as you are,
then I would be quiet and you could release, you would have no further
obligation to meet her. I do not know her husband as the only kingdom
of grace, and owns the land, according to the promise, as a meek,
but it can not claim against the most violent, their number is legion.
Only his Sons will be powerful men of my blood.

"I guess we might as well get better acquainted," said the forester. "My name is Marlin--James
Marlin."

"And mine," replied Charley, "is Charley Russell. This is Lew Heinsling. As we told you yesterday,
we are from Central City and belong to the Camp Brady Wireless Patrol."

"That is why you are now a fire guard," said the forester. "You don't suppose I would appoint
an unknown boy to such an important post, do you? To be sure, I don't know you personally,
but I know about your organization and some of the things you have done. I know your leader,
Captain Hardy, very well. You see your membership in that organization is recommendation enough
for me."

"But I thought you suspected us of setting fire to the forest," said Charley.

"I never said so," replied Mr. Marlin. "I merely asked you if you had started the fire."

"It's pretty much the same thing," said Charley.

"Not at all, young man. Not at all. I did not really suspect you. But I saw there was a possibility
that you might have done just what I suggested. I wanted to see what you would do when I suggested
that you were the culprit. I could have told if you had lied to me."

"How?" demanded Charley.

"Never mind now," smiled the forester. "But while we are on this subject, I want to say this
to you: when you are trying to solve a crime, you must forget your prejudices. You must look
at the facts and not at the people concerned. You must take the attitude that anybody may be
guilty until he is proved innocent. In short, you must be ready to suspect anybody. You must
not assume, for instance, that because I am the forester I would not set the forest afire,
or because my rangers are connected with the Forest Service they would never start a fire."

Charley looked almost startled. "Why, it would be the worst sort of crime for a forest protector
to set a fire in the woods," he cried.

"Of course it would," replied the forester. "But in this world almost everybody acts according
to his own interests or his own passions. If a man could earn more money by setting fires than
by preventing them, there are many men who would take the chance. Or a man might set fire to
the forest to be revenged on somebody--possibly on me; for a forester can hardly avoid making
some enemies."

The forester paused. "Somebody has three times set this part of the forest afire," he continued
after a moment. "We have no clue as to who did it. So it is our business to suspect anybody
and everybody that circumstances may point to. But that doesn't mean we must condemn a person
merely because circumstances point to him. We must study the facts and either condemn or acquit
him according to the facts. I say this to you because you have probably had little or no experience
in tracing crime and, like most young folks, are prone to trust people too far."

Charley's face was very serious. He had not thought of detective work as a possible part of
his duties.

"Don't take what I say too seriously," laughed the forester, when he noticed Charley's expression.
"You will really have very little of this sort of thing to do. Most fires come through the
carelessness of campers. To warn them to be careful, to try to put out fires as soon as you
discover them and notify me if you fail, will be about all you will ordinarily have to do.
The chief forest fire-warden will attend to investigating fires. But in this case, I especially
want to know how this fire started. Sometimes boys, if they are shrewd enough, make the best
of all agents for watching folks. People don't take boys seriously, and will often do or say
incriminating things before boys that they would not dream of doing in the presence of grown
men. If you keep your eyes and ears open and your mouth shut, you may be very useful. And the
less you appear to know, the more useful you will be."

Charley looked at his watch. "Willie will be at his instrument in three minutes, sure," he
said. "He might even be there now."

He drew the pack bags from the wireless instruments and sat down, watch in hand, beside them.
The forester looked on with keenest interest. He no longer regarded the wireless outfit as
a mere plaything. If the boys could do what they said they could, he saw what a help wireless
communication might be in protecting the forest. He had always considered the telephone as
about the last step that could be made in quick communication in the forest. But his telephone
was miles away and he had to get to it before he could talk with his office. Here was a boy
who could sit down anywhere and instantly talk to a wireless operator anywhere else within
a reasonable distance--that is, he could, if all that Charley said was true. Of course the
forester knew about radio-telegraphy, but he was like many other people who have not actually
seen persons talk by wireless. It seemed as though it could hardly be.

But he was not to remain long in doubt. When the three-minute period had elapsed, Charley threw
over his switch, and sent Willie's call signal flashing abroad. Hardly had he taken his finger
from his key when the answer buzzed in his ear.

"Got him," said Charley.

"Who?" asked the forester in astonishment.

"Willie Brown, at Central City. I'm telling him to get your assistant on the telephone." And
he made the sparks fairly tumble over one another, so rapidly did he manipulate the key.

"Willie's going to get him," he announced, a moment later.

They sat silent for several minutes. Then a signal once more sounded in Charley's ear.

"Willie's got your assistant on the 'phone," said Charley a little later.

"Tell him to tell my assistant that the fire is out, with little damage done; that the fire
crew is on the way home, and that I have decided to remain here to look around a little. Tell
him that if he needs me he shall call your friend at Central City. He'd better arrange with
the telephone people for quick connections if he needs to talk to me. I guess that's about all."

Charley flashed out the message to Willie and soon the assistant forester's message came back.
Everything was O.K. and he would do as directed. Then Charley talked to Willie on his own account,
telling him they were going to move their aerial and asking Willie to listen in often. Willie
said he would sit by the wireless table and keep the receivers on his ears so that Charley
could get him at any time.

While Charley was talking with Willie, Lew had been collecting and packing the camp utensils.
Now the wireless instruments were quickly uncoupled and stowed away in a bag, and the aerial
taken down and loosely rolled around the spreaders so that it could be hoisted in a moment's
time. Then the little party set off swiftly down the valley toward the point at which the fire
started.

Walking rapidly, they arrived at the edge of the burned area in half an hour. Smoke was still
rising from smouldering embers at various points in the burned area; but there was no danger
to be feared, for everything inflammable about these embers had been consumed. Even should
the wind fan them into a flame again they could do no harm, for there was nothing for them
to feed upon. Along the entire edge of the burned area the fire crew had made sure there was
a wide belt of ground in which no spark remained. Thus, though these glowing embers might continue
to smoulder for hours, they could do no harm. The quantity of smoke arising was still considerable,
but it did not shut off the vision as the dense clouds of smoke had done during the fire. So
the onlookers could get a fair idea of the extent of the blaze.

The blackened area on which they looked, they were relieved to find, was not of great width,
though it stretched from the edge of the brook on one side almost to the mountain on the other.
Altogether, the fire had swept over not more than a hundred acres. Had it not been for the
presence of the two boys, it might easily have destroyed thousands of acres. The fire had started
in a cut-over tract just below the edge of the virgin timber. Had the morning proved windy,
instead of calm, the flames would have gone racing into the big timber, with the chances good
for a disastrous crown-fire, when the flames would have gone leaping from tree top to tree
top, utterly consuming the forest, as the previous fires had destroyed the timber on Old Ironsides.
A lucky combination of circumstances alone had prevented a holocaust.

Climbing upon a high rock, the forester searched for the point at which the fire had originated.
Prom his pocket he drew some powerful field-glasses, and again and again swept his vision over
the farther edge of the burned area. Presently he closed his glasses and leaped to the ground.

"Come on," he said, and headed diagonally across the burned tract.

In a few minutes the three stood on the unburned forest floor on the farther side of the strip
of black.

"We must get our aerial up at once, Lew," said Charley. "It's been three-fourths of an hour
since we talked to Willie."

They glanced about, selected two suitable trees, and had the supporting wires attached to them
in no time, with the aerial dangling aloft between the trees. It took only a moment more to
couple up the instruments.

"CBWC--CBWC--CBWC--CBC," rapped out Charley, as soon as the outfit was in readiness.

Almost instantly Willie replied to the signal.

"Any message for us from Oakdale?" inquired Charley.

"Not a word. What are you doing?"

"We are investigating the cause of the fire. Have moved our aerial down past the burned area.
Forester and Lew and I alone. Fire crew on way back to Oakdale."

"Have you found cause of fire?"

"No. Just got here. Haven't investigated yet. Will listen in every quarter hour, beginning
with the hour."

"All right. I'll be here. Good-bye."

The minute Charley finished talking with Willie, the three investigators set about their work.

"We'll walk along the edge of the burned area," said the forester, "and try to find the point
of origin."

He went ahead, the two boys following. They were facing toward the brook. The line was irregular,
like a huge saw-blade, with little jutting, black teeth here and there, where the flames had
crept out in advance of the main line. The wind that had come up when the boys were fighting
the fire had driven the flames back upon the area they had already consumed and the blaze had
died out of itself. It could not eat its way to windward out here in the open, as it could
have done in the dense timber where the wind was broken. From their starting-point they walked
to the brook, finding nothing to enlighten them. They then retraced their steps, walking along
the windward edge of the fire. Yet they found nothing to show them how or where the fire originated.

"Evidently the flames have eaten their way some distance to windward of the point of origin,"
said the forester. "We shall have to look within the burned area."

As he started to cross the black strip, the forester continued: "Perhaps I had better go through
the burned strip alone. I want things disturbed as little as possible, and three will stir
up the ashes a good deal more than one. You keep looking along the edge, and I'll search among
the ashes."

"Is there anything in particular we are to look for?" asked Charley. "Is there any special
way to distinguish the starting-point of the fire?"

"If this blaze started at a camper's fire, there ought to be some trace of that fire discoverable.
If it began with a lighted match, the stem of that match might not be entirely consumed. If
blazing paper created the fire, there may be a scrap of paper left unburned. And even the ashes
might show that paper had been burned. That's why I don't want the leaves disturbed any more
than we can help. We shall quite likely find our clue, if we find it at all, in the ashes themselves."

The forester started slowly across the valley.

"I don't see where he has anything on us as observers," said Lew. "If our drill at Camp Brady
didn't make competent observers of us, I don't know what it did do. Captain Hardy drilled us
and drilled us in noticing even the most minute things. Let's go along the line again and look
more carefully. We've got a better idea now of what we're looking for."

They started once more along the edge of the black belt. The forester was walking well within
the burned area. The two boys centred their attention on the strip between the forester's tracks
and the edge of the black area. This was a strip roughly fifty to seventy-five feet wide. Practically
everything was blackened in this area. A piece of unburned paper would have shown with startling
distinctness. But there were no pieces to show. The forester crossed the black belt from brook
to mountain, and the boys kept pace with him for a little. Then Lew turned back in order to
listen in, while Charley went on with the forester. For a long time the two searched among
the leaves, but found nothing to indicate where or how the fire had started.

"The fact that we can't find where it started," said the forester at last, "is what makes me
suspicious. A fire can generally be traced. I guess we'll have to give up. I'll get back to
headquarters, and you go home and make your arrangements as quickly as possible. Then report
to me."

"We'll go right back with you," said Charley. "That is, we will if Lew is willing. It would
hardly be right to ask him to give up his fishing trip. And, anyway, two of us could guard
the forest better than one."

"That's true, but until you are regularly sworn in you will not have the legal authority you
should have as a fire patrol."

"Then if Lew is willing, we'll go right out with you. We can take the train at Oakdale."

They returned to Lew and explained the situation. "Of course we'll go home," protested Lew.
"This is your chance, Charley. You don't think I'd stand in your way, do you?"

"Thanks, Lew," said Charley, holding out his hand to his chum. "But I hate to cut your trip short."

"That's easily fixed," said the forester. "Go home and make your arrangements and bring Lew
back with you for the rest of the vacation if he wants to come. You can do your patrol work
and still catch some fish. And I'd feel a lot easier to know two of you were here. You've proved
that you are good fire fighters."

Charley called up Willie and told him they were about to leave the forest and would be in Oakdale
in about four hours. Then the wireless was quickly dismantled and packed, and the little party
started across the burned area once more, on their way out to the distant road.

They did not forget to examine the ground as they went. They had gone perhaps a hundred feet
when Charley noticed a heap of burned leaves. They were in the cut-over area, and the floor
of the forest had apparently been carpeted thinly and evenly with leaves. So the little mound
caught his eye. At first he thought nothing of it. But when his glance swept the surrounding
ground and he saw how very thin the ashy coating was, and what a dense pile of ashes was in
this little heap, he wondered why the leaves should have collected in this way. Without as
yet really suspecting anything, he walked over to the heap and began to rake the ashes from
one side of it with a little stick. Many of the burned leaves still retained perfectly their
shape and outline. The serrated edges and the feathery veining were distinct in the ashy residues.
They were interesting to see. Charley continued to level the burned leaves on one side of the
pile. At the touch of his stick they lost their shape and crumbled into formless ashes, even
as fairy crystals of snow turn to water beneath a warm current of air.

Suddenly Charley stopped dead still. Among the ashes turned over by his stick was a long, thin
sheet of ash. Charley looked at it a moment in astonishment. Then he knew that it was pasteboard.
He sank to his knees on the blackened earth and with his fingers carefully worked in the still
warm ashes, raking off the upper layers of leaves gently, so as not to disturb the bottom of
the pile. Carefully he worked, until he had laid bare a long strip of what had been pasteboard.
At his touch this, like the leaves, crumbled. But one end of it did not disintegrate. A tiny
piece was unconsumed. From the ashes Charley drew forth a charred bit of greenish pasteboard.
Swiftly but carefully he raked aside the burned pasteboard. Then he gave a little cry. On the
ground, in the very bottom of the heap, was some candle grease. His startled exclamation brought
Mr. Marlin and Lew running to his side.

"What have you found?" asked the forester sharply.

"A piece of unconsumed pasteboard and some candle grease," said Charley slowly. "They were
under this mound of burned leaves."

"We need look no farther for the starting-place of this fire," said the forester, his face
very sober. "It is just as I suspected. This fire was of incendiary origin. Whoever set it,
placed a lighted candle inside a pasteboard box, partly filled the box with leaves, heaped
some leaves on top of it, and hurried away. The candle probably burned for hours before it
burned low enough to set fire to the leaves. By that time the culprit was far away and could
prove an alibi."

Charley drew from his pocket the little microscope he used in his class in botany in the high
school. Over and over he turned the scorched scrap of pasteboard, studying it intently.

"The fibers are arranged in a peculiar way," he said, "and there's an almost invisible machine
marking of a peculiar pattern. The color of the pasteboard was a dark green."

The forester took the microscope and examined the charred fragment, handing both, when he had
finished, to Lew.

"This is our clue to the incendiary," he said slowly. "We must find where pasteboard like that
comes from and who had some of it. Meantime, do not breathe a word of this to any one. Do not
let a soul know that we have discovered how the fire originated. Let them think we know nothing.
And bear in mind what I told you before: suspect anybody that circumstances point to, no matter
who he is. Now remember! Not a soul outside of the three of us must know about this. We've
got a long trail ahead of us, but we have at last got a clue. Sooner or later, if we keep our
eyes and ears open and our mouths shut, we'll find the man who set this forest afire."

Chapter IX

Charley Becomes a Fire Patrol

Rapidly the three made their way through the forest. The forester led his companions up the
valley a distance to a fire trail. Along this they traveled as rapidly as they could have done
on a village sidewalk. By several of these fire trails they made their way through valleys
and over hills, finally reaching the road. The forester's car was there, and an hour's run
brought them to the forester's office at Oakdale.

Charley was intensely interested in everything he saw in this office. On the wall were huge
maps of the forest areas under Mr. Marlin's control. These maps showed the mountains, big springs,
streams, roads, fire trails, etc., and little tacks with heads of different colors were stuck
here and there in the maps to show where rangers, fire-wardens and game protectors lived. The
telephone was also shown.

Charley was interested to learn that he and Lew had been fully twelve miles distant from the
telephone. It had taken the fire crew, hardy men experienced in mountain travel, three hours
to cover those twelve miles, even when they had fire trails most of the way. He wondered how
much longer it would have taken them if they had had to travel through the rough forest. Many
hours longer, he was certain. And that meant that it would have taken one equally as long to
get out to the telephone to notify the forester of the fire. He felt sure there must be many
places where one might be more than twelve miles distant from the telephone; and he realized
more keenly than ever what a big part the wireless could play in saving the forest. He resolved
that he would keep his wireless outfit with him when he went back into the forest as a fire patrol.

But the maps on the wall were not all that interested Charley. There were fire-fighting tools
of various sorts. There were double-bitted axes and axes with short handles to be used in one
hand. These were of the finest steel, very sharp, and well balanced. There were implements
that were really potato-hooks, though in the forest they were used for clearing away brush
and leaves rather than for digging potatoes. Then there were short-handled, four-toothed rakes,
for use in back-firing. Also there were lanterns, and finally a small compressed air sprayer,
for wetting the ground when back-firing. All these tools were painted a bright red. The forester
explained that the sprayer wasn't often used, but that sometimes it came in very handy. The
implements were red so that they could be found easily. Otherwise many would be lost in almost
every fight with a fire.

Particularly was Charley interested in the portable telephone. It was like the one the ranger
had had in the burned valley. Mr. Marlin handed the instrument to Charley and let him examine
it. The battery was contained in a small box, and the mouthpiece and the receiver were in one
piece, which was held alternately to the ear and the mouth. Then there were considerable lengths
of wire to be attached to the telephone-lines. If a ranger could not climb a pole and attach
his wires to the telephone-lines, Mr. Marlin explained, he could tie stones to his wires and
throw them over the lines. All that was needed was to have the two wires touch the two wires
of the telephone system. Then a connection would be made and one could talk with the portable
instrument. The battery, the mouthpiece and receiver, and the connecting wires all could be
packed snugly into a little leather case and slung over the shoulder. It was an excellent outfit.

At one time Charley would have been wild to try it. Now he could not help seeing how really
inferior it was to the wireless as a means of communication. In order to talk with it, it must
be connected with the telephone-lines, and they must be in working order. Charley's quick mind
instantly saw that falling limbs or trees, heavy snows or ice-storms in winter, or a pair of
nippers in the hands of a miscreant, could put the forest telephone out of commission for hours
at a time. He rejoiced to think that no one could tamper with the air and that he could always
get a connection with his wireless. More and more he saw the possibilities of usefulness for
the wireless in protecting the forest.

But the two boys had little time to examine the many interesting things in the forester's office
because their train was due within a short time after they reached Oakdale. They made the acquaintance
of the forester's assistant, Mr. Franklin Conover, and soon started for the railroad station,
leaving their duffel at the forester's office.

Before they left, Charley called the forester aside. "How much pay am I to receive as a fire
patrol?" he asked.

The forester frowned.

"You mustn't think," said Charley hastily, "that the pay is all that I care about. I want to
be a fire patrol because I love the woods. But I don't know whether Dad will let me be a fire
patrol unless I can make as much here as I could in the factory with him."

"How much could you earn there?"

"Dad says I ought to get two dollars and a half a day."

"Then you needn't worry. I have some leeway in the matter of pay. You have already shown your
worth, and I am going to pay you the highest rate within my power. You will go on the payroll
at eighty-five dollars a month, which is as much as many of our rangers get."

Charley was so astonished at this unexpected good fortune that he was hardly able to answer
Mr. Marlin. He did not know how to express his thoughts. All he could do was to thank the forester
warmly and assure him he would earn every cent he got. Then he and Lew hurried away to their train.

For some time after the two boys boarded the train Charley was silent. He sat watching the
forest through which they were rushing so fast. Never had it appeared to him quite as it did
now. Always he had known the forest was an animate growth, but now he realized more vividly
than ever before how truly the forest was alive. Now he thought of the great growths of trees
more as one would think of a flock of animals that must be tended and cared for. Many, many
times he had seen the forest under happy conditions. But never before this trip had he seen
it in agony. Never before had he heard the cries of fear and pain from the forest animals.
Never had he seen the charred remains of those that had been burned. Never had he beheld the
awful skeletons, not merely of burned trees, but of a burned forest. He was deeply impressed.
A tree had suddenly become in his consciousness far more than a piece of timber. And a forest
had taken on new meaning. With all his mind he loved the forest and the innumerable things
of life and beauty within it. Beyond expression was his joy at the thought that he could have
a part in protecting and caring for the forest.

And when he thought of all the forest meant to mankind--more than any other single gift of
nature excepting food and water--he saw the forester, the forest-ranger, and the fire patrol
in their true light. He saw them as real servants of the people, as real promoters and builders
of civilization, which could not have come into existence without wood. He realized that the
man in the forest as truly helps mankind forward and upward as the statesman in the legislative
halls, the chemist at his test-tube, the physician at his operating-table, the engineer building
his bridges and roads, or any other of the constructive workers who make civilization what
it is; for the forester's work is the foundation for the work of all the other builders of
civilization. When he realized this, his heart sang with pride to think that he was to have
a part in saving and perpetuating the forests for the countless generations of people who would
follow him in the world.

He tried to tell Lew something of what was in his heart, but words failed him, and he sat silent
until the train was far beyond the limits of the forest. Then his thoughts drifted into other
channels. Before he knew it, the conductor shouted "Central City," and the two chums left the
train.

When Charley told his father that he was to get eighty-five dollars a month, he had no difficulty
in winning his father's consent to the plan he had in mind. Nor was it much more difficult
to secure his release from further work at school. Charley was a great favorite with his teachers.
Always cheerful and polite, a faithful worker, mentally quick, and liking his instructors,
he had their entire good-will. They wanted to help him get on in the world as much as they
had wanted to see him advance in his studies. When they understood Charley's position at home,
and his need of earning money to help his father, and especially when they realized what the
present opportunity meant to Charley in the way of personal happiness, they were more than
willing to release him from further school duties.

So it came about that on the following day Charley and Lew took the train back to Oakdale.
The entire Wireless Patrol accompanied them to the station, each boy carrying some part of
the luggage. Thus divided, the equipment did not seem large; but when it was all assembled,
it appeared entirely adequate. There was a good waterproof tent, a strong tick to be stuffed
with leaves, blankets, a coil of rope, additional cooking utensils, and generous supplies of
food. Charley took a light, high-powered rifle and his revolver with plenty of ammunition.
Their comrades piled this luggage in a corner of the car, then hustled back to the station
platform and gave the Camp Brady yell, in honor of their departing friends. In a moment more
the train was speeding toward Oakdale, where they found the forester in his office.

Mr. Marlin expressed his pleasure at the successful outcome of Charley's effort to secure his
release from high school.

"I don't believe much in talk," said the forester who himself was distinctly a man of deeds,
"but I am going to say this to you, Charley: the fact that you have worked your studies off
ahead of your class makes you twice as valuable to me as another boy would be who was merely
keeping abreast of his class."

Charley looked his surprise. "Why?" he asked. "I don't know any more than the others know or
soon will know."

"What you know has nothing to do with it, young man. It's what you do. It's your habits. Habit
is the strongest force in the world. The mere fact that you are ahead of your class tells me
that it is your habit to be forehanded, to be prepared. It tells me that you will keep your
tools and your records in their places and in good condition, and that you will be prepared
for almost any emergency that will arise."

"I don't understand," expostulated Charley, "how you can figure that out from the mere fact
that I kept a little ahead of my class."

"Of course you don't," smiled the forester. "They teach you about the laws of gravity in school,
but they don't bother to teach you about the laws of life. But life has its laws, and one of
the strongest is the law of habit. A good habit is worth a million good resolutions. A man
may possibly keep a good resolution, but he can hardly fail to keep a good habit. Your good
habits are worth just about fifteen dollars a month to you now; for I wouldn't be paying you
the top rate if you were a lad of bad habits. Just bear that in mind and be careful of the
habits you form in future."

Charley was too much astonished for words. He had never thought of his habits as having any
bearing on his possible earning capacity.

But the forester gave him no opportunity to consider the matter just then. "I want you to hurry
back into the forest," he went on. "Get acquainted with as much of the forest as possible."

He reached in a drawer and pulled out a map, which he gave to Charley. "This is exactly like
the big map on the wall," he said, "excepting that it is on a smaller scale. Here is where
you had your camp."

As he laid his finger on the map, he continued, "That was a good location for a fisherman's
camp, but a poor one for a fire guard. High up on this hill," and again he laid a finger on
the map, "there is a fine spring. A dense rhododendron thicket surrounds it, and tall hemlocks
grow above it. Make your camp in that thicket. It is so dense that I think nobody could possibly
see a tent there. But make sure. If necessary, put hemlock boughs or rhododendron branches
around it. Nobody but Mr. Morton and I must know that you are in camp in the forest or that
you have any connection with the forestry department. I will tell him where your camp is and
he will inspect it and give you more detailed instructions. But remember that yours is a secret
patrol. I would rather that nobody should learn of your presence in the forest. But if you
do meet any one, pose as a fisherman. Don't, under any circumstances, let anybody suspect your
real purpose."

The forester paused a moment, in deep thought. "Smoke," he said at last, "would betray the
location of your camp--at least in the daytime. Don't make any fires unless it be at night.
Then be sure they are small, well concealed, and as smokeless as possible. Do your cooking
with this."

He stepped to a closet and returned with an alcohol stove and a can of fuel, and continued:
"From your spring to the summit of the mountain it is only a short distance. You can get a
wide outlook there. Examine the forest carefully in every direction as often as possible. But
leave no telltale marks to indicate that the place is a lookout point. And be sure you don't
do anything to draw attention to your camp."

The forester then swore Charley in as a fire patrol and gave him his badge, with instructions
to keep it out of sight.

"You'll need this, too," he said with a smile, handing Charley a portable telephone. "Your
friends can't be at the other end of the wireless all the time, you know."

"Can we fish at all?" asked Charley. "I want Lew to have some fun on this trip. He's going
to help me a lot with the work."

"Fish as much as you like, as long as it does not interfere with your duty. But remember that
your business is to protect the forest. That comes first. You will have to decide how to do
it, according to circumstances."

The boys carried their duffel to the forester's car. Mr. Marlin telephoned his assistant to
look after things during his absence, and in another minute Mr. Marlin and Lew and Charley
were whirling along the highway. They reached the point at which they were to enter the forest,
jumped to the ground and unloaded their duffel. Mr. Marlin said good-bye, turned his car, and
sped back to his office, leaving the two young fire guards alone in the heart of the wilderness.

Chapter X

An Encounter with a Bear

Rapidly the duffel was made into two packs. These were both heavy and bulky.

"Gee!" said Lew, as he surveyed the packs, "I hope we don't meet any state cops. They would
arrest us for peddling without licenses."

There was small chance, however, of their meeting any one, unless it might be some lone fisherman.
On every hand the forest stretched, seemingly interminable.

"I guess we'd better get our bearings," said Charley.

He drew the map from his pocket and spread it on a flat rock. The two boys pored over it for
some minutes.

"We have to cross these two mountains," said Lew, "and camp just the other side of the summit
of the third. That's about the same as climbing over three mountains. There are two valleys
that we'll have to get across. I judge we'll be just about as far from the road as our old
camp was. That's twelve miles or so."

"Gee!" laughed Charley. "That means I've got to hike twelve miles over these mountains every
time I want to talk to anybody on the telephone. I'm glad Mr. Marlin doesn't care much for
talk. The telephone is all right, but compared to the wireless it's like a candle beside an
electric light. Mr. Marlin was right when he said the fellows couldn't be listening in for
me all the time, but you just bet I'm going to figure out some way to use my wireless. Why,
I've got to, if I'm going to make good. This whole neck of the woods could burn up while I'm
hiking twelve miles to call help and twelve more to get back to the blaze. And I reckon I'd
feel like putting up a stiff fight after hiking twenty-four miles over these mountains. Mr.
Marlin is all right, but he isn't quite up to date. He still thinks the wireless is a sort
of plaything."

"What you need, Charley, is a battery powerful enough to carry a message to some regular wireless
station, where an operator is on duty all the time."

"I've been thinking of that, too, Lew. It wouldn't take so very much more power to carry to
the government station at Frankfort. I'm sure the operators there would be glad to help us
out. You remember how Henry Harper helped Mr. Axton, the day operator over there, when he had
appendicitis. The operators have been mighty nice to us fellows of the Wireless Patrol ever
since. The difficulty would be to get the battery. Things cost so much now that I don't see
how I could ever save enough to pay for it. You know I'll have to give Dad about all I earn."

"I'm going to talk to the boys about it, Charley," said Lew. "Maybe somebody can think of a
way out. Gee! We ought to be able to do something, with Roy a regular steamship operator and
Henry almost as good as a substitute government wireless man."

By this time they were well into the forest. They were climbing through a notch over the first
range of mountains. When they reached the valley beyond, they had to turn to their left and
go up the valley two or three miles, until they struck a fire trail. This trail led straight
over the second mountain, which was really the knob at the head of the burned valley. It was
on this knob that they had found the rude watch-tower after their meeting with the ranger,
Mr. Morton. Beyond this knob they had still to traverse a wide valley and climb a third mountain
before they reached their camp site. But there was a good fire trail almost the entire distance.

Traveling with such heavy packs on their backs, the two lads made but slow progress. Every
little while they had to stop to rest. During one of these pauses they heard a low, whining sound.

"Listen! What is that?" asked Charley, who loved animals and was keenly sensitive to their
sufferings. "It sounds like a dog."

They stood motionless. Faint but distinct came the unmistakable cry of a dog in distress.

Charley dropped his pack instantly. "There's a dog in trouble," he said, "and we've got to
help him."

He began to whistle. Then he called, "Here, boy! Here, boy!"

From somewhere ahead of them came a joyous bark, followed by a painful whine.

Charley picked up his pack. "Come on," he said, and hastened toward the sound. But he did not
go far. Soon he caught sight of a dog, painfully limping toward him. Charley ran up to the
animal, which wagged its tail violently and barked with joy.

"He's only a half grown pup," said Charley, noticing the big paws. "Isn't he a fine young fellow?"

The animal leaped up against Charley and licked his hand. "Come here, boy," said Charley, taking
the dog in his arms. "Let's see what's wrong."

Charley began to examine the animal's paws. The dog submitted patiently. "Nothing wrong with
that one," commented Charley, dropping a fore paw.

But when he began to feel the other front foot the dog whined with pain. "No wonder," said
Charley with sympathy. "Look here, Lew," and he pointed to an enormous thorn that had embedded
itself in the paw.

"Hold him tight while I take it out," said Charley as he drew forth his knife, opened the small
blade, slit the skin slightly, and carefully dug the thorn out. The foot was festered and swollen.
Charley squeezed out the pus.

"Don't let him get that paw in the dirt," he said, and ran to his pack. He fished out the first-aid
kit and got some absorbent cotton and a disinfectant. He wrapped a tiny bit of cotton around
the end of a twig, wet it with water from the canteen and swabbed out the little wound. Then
he soaked another bit of cotton with the disinfectant and stuffed it into the foot.

"We'll let that stay there a while," he said.

"The dog is probably lost. We'll keep him until we find his owner."

Relieved of the thorn, the little animal frisked about, limping but slightly. He fawned upon
Charley and seemed to be trying to express his gratitude.

The two boys shouldered their packs again and started on. Charley whistled to the pup, but
the call was unnecessary. The pup stuck to their heels as close as a sticking-plaster.

"They say two's a company, but three's a crowd," laughed Charley, "but I guess it doesn't apply
to dogs."

"You never can tell," replied Lew. "A pup of that age may get you into all sorts of difficulty."

"I'll take a chance on it," smiled Charley, as he bent and patted the dog.

They went on. For a long time they traveled in silence, the little dog trotting and frisking
at their heels. From time to time they stopped to rest. Their packs were growing heavy and
neither felt like talking. They settled to their tasks and plodded on. When they came to the
fire trail, they turned to their right and went straight over the first mountain. The way was
smooth enough, but the grade was very steep and it tested their endurance to the utmost. Every
few minutes they were compelled to rest. Finally they topped the ridge and went down into the
next valley.

The bottom here was very wide, for the mountains had drawn far apart. Apparently the valley
soil was rich. It seemed to be deep and black, and the trees grew to massive size. Ordinarily
the two boys would have taken keen enjoyment in the sight of such fine timber, but by this
time they were too tired to care much about anything except reaching their destination.

At the foot of the last ridge they took a long rest. They were just starting on when Lew heard
a peculiar little sound behind some bushes just off the fire trail. Curious to know what might
have made the sound, he dropped his pack and went to investigate. Behind the bush he found
a cunning, little black animal that did not seem to be at all afraid of him. He picked it up
and rejoined his comrade.

"Charley," he said. "See what I have found. What is it?"

"It's a bear cub," said Charley. "You had better leave it alone. If its mother came along,
she might make it hot for us."

"I'm going to keep it for a pet," said Lew. "I knew a fellow who had a pet bear cub once and----"

Lew never finished the sentence. A savage growl sounded close at hand and a great black animal
came rushing through the bushes. Lew dropped the cub and took to his heels. The bear followed
in hot pursuit. She was a great, clumsy, lumbering beast, and yet she got over the ground with
astonishing speed. Lew ran as fast as he could, but the bear gained on him at every stride.

"Climb a tree, Lew," cried Charley, slipping off his pack and starting to his chum's assistance.
"Be quick about it."

Lew headed for the first tree he saw that was small enough to climb. It was a little pole,
a foot in diameter. The lowest branch was seven or eight feet above the ground. Lew raced toward
it, gathered himself for a leap and sprang upward. He caught the limb and swung himself up
with all possible speed. He was not a second too soon. As Lew's body shot upward, the bear
rose on her hind feet, and the vicious swipe of her paw barely missed Lew's body. Lew drew
himself erect and climbed upward a few feet, where he paused to look down at the bear.

Meantime, Charley was following the animal. He hadn't the slightest idea of what he should
do. The law protected the bear at that season of the year and he did not know whether he would
be justified in shooting her under the circumstances or not. And anyway, his rifle was back
with his pack. He had his little axe on his hip, however, and he drew it from its sheath so
that he would have it ready in case he had to use it.

The problem was settled for him, however, in a very unexpected manner. The little dog, which
had been playing with a stick at some distance from the two boys, noticed Charley running and
came tearing after him. Then he saw the bear and went after her at full speed. The instant
the bear heard the dog, she turned to face him; then as quickly faced about again and started
to climb the very tree in which Lew had taken refuge.

"Get that dog away from here," yelled Lew in consternation, as he began to climb frantically
toward the top of the tree.

Despite the seriousness of the situation, Charley burst into a roar of laughter. But a second
appeal from his chum stifled his laughter. He grabbed the dog and started to carry it away.
But he had not gone two rods before Lew called frantically for him to bring the dog back. Charley
turned around and saw the bear climbing after Lew. As long as the dog was under the tree, the
bear had paid no attention to Lew. But when Charley started away with the pup, the angry bear
continued her pursuit. Charley returned the dog to the base of the tree.

"Sick 'em," he cried. "Catch 'em."

The little pup made a terrific clamor and the bear paid no further attention to Lew, who immediately
began to look for a way out of his predicament. Within two or three feet of the base of the
tree which he had climbed, a second tree had sprung up. But the two had grown away from each
other, much like the sloping sides of the letter V. At first Lew thought he could cross over
to the other tree, but a careful inspection showed him that this would be impossible. Down
where the bear was he could have swung himself from one tree to the other; but the farther
up the tree he was the farther he was from the other tree and the smaller the limbs were. And
Lew was now as near the top of the tree as he dared to go. To try to leap from his present
position to the other tree was not to be thought of. It would certainly mean a fall of thirty
feet or more. And Lew did not dare come down nearer the bear, lest the animal should again
try to claw him. There was no apparent way to get the bear out of the tree, and Lew knew that
he could not stay up where he was indefinitely.

Charley tried to divert the bear's attention to himself by reaching up the tree with his axe
and striking the trunk. The bear growled but made no attempt to reach Charley. Her attention
was centred wholly on the dog. With her hair erect, her lips drawn back, her ears laid flat,
and her massive claws ready to tear and rend, the beast presented such a fearful front that
Charley did not dare take the dog away. One swipe of those paws, or one crunch of the great
jaws might cripple Lew for life, or even kill him outright.

"Keep perfectly quiet, Lew," said Charley, "and maybe the bear will forget about you. She's
terribly enraged at this pup."

Charley felt in his pocket and found a piece of strong cord. He knotted it around the pup's
neck and tied the animal to the tree.

"I hope that bear won't come down and kill him while I'm gone," he muttered to himself. To
Lew he said, "I've got an idea. I'm going to get the rope and see if I can lasso the bear from
the other tree."

"Sick 'em, pup," he cried, urging the little dog to make another frenzied outburst. And while
the dog was making the valley ring with his clamor, Charley raced to his pack and got the coil
of rope. Back he ran and hastily climbed the tree beside the one in which Lew and the bear
were resting. The bear eyed him angrily, but kept her attention centred on the pup. Charley
climbed to a point a little higher than the limb on which the bear rested. Quickly he fashioned
a noose and got his rope ready for a throw. Then he realized that he could never make a successful
cast among the limbs.

An idea came to him. Drawing his little axe, he quickly cut and trimmed a small limb, leaving
a fork on the end of it. He put the noose on the forked end and cautiously extended the pole.
All the while he was urging on the dog, which now began to jump up against the trunk of the
tree. The bear more and more centred her attention on the yelping dog. Her hair bristled, and
she growled continually. She bent her head down and got ready to deal the dog a savage blow
if he came up the tree. Her posture could not have been better for Charley's purpose. Swiftly
but quietly he extended the pole until the noose was just beyond the bear's nose, then lowered
it swiftly and pulled back hard on the rope. Luck was with him. The bear, taken utterly by
surprise, was fairly noosed before she saw the rope.

Charley's sharp jerk to tighten the lasso almost pulled the bear from her perch. She grasped
the trunk of the tree with her paws to avoid falling, and that gave Charley an opportunity
to tighten and secure his rope. To keep from falling, the bear had to maintain her hold on
the tree. Thus she could not claw or bite the rope.

"I've got her," shouted Charley.

It was true enough. In a moment he was almost sorry that he had her. For Lew could not reach
the ground without climbing past the bear, and although the animal was caught by the neck,
he dared not trust himself within reach of those fearful claws. It occurred to Charley that
perhaps he could strangle the bear, or even pull her from the tree. He did not want to kill
the animal lest he get into difficulty with the law and so incur the displeasure of his chief.
Nor did he want to tumble her to the ground because that would certainly mean the breaking
of his rope and the probable loss of part of it.

"What are we going to do, Lew?" he called.

"There's a strong limb about four feet above her head," replied Lew, peering down through the
branches. "If you could get your rope over that, we could drop her to the ground and strangle
her until she's about all in. Then we could cut the rope and beat it."

"That sounds all right," said Charley, dubiously, "and I guess we'll have to try it. I see
nothing else to do."

Fortunately his rope was long. He had taken a turn or two around a limb before making his cast,
and he now held the bear taut, with ease. The loose end dangled down the trunk.

"I don't know about this," said Charley with a wry face. "It isn't as simple as it looks. I'll
have to unwind the rope from this limb and hold it with one hand while I throw the loose end
with the other. I don't know whether I can do it or not. And how am I to get the end again?"

"Can't you catch it with your pole?"

Charley looked at the pole. He had let go of it when he noosed the bear, but it had lodged
in a branch within reach.

"Here goes," he said. "I'll try."

Cautiously he unwrapped one winding from the limb. Then bracing himself, and pulling hard so
as to keep the line taut, he unloosed the second coil. The rope now hung free in his hand.
The bear was not quiet for a moment. She had struggled constantly from the instant she was
noosed. She continued to tug and pull at the rope. But she was at such a disadvantage that
she could not put her full weight into her struggles. Nevertheless the strain on Charley's
arm was terrific. To lessen the tension would give the bear more leeway and so make the strain
still greater. And to hold the bear with one hand, while he cast his rope and got it in with
the other, Charley at once saw was impossible.

"I can't do it, Lew," panted Charley. "She's nearly pulling my arm off."

He gathered up the rope and put it back over the limb, preparatory to taking a turn about the
branch once more. While he was attempting to work the rope around the limb, the dog suddenly
increased his clamor.

The bear gave a terrific, convulsive jerk on the rope and jerked it through Charley's hand.
The sudden pull completely unbalanced him and he fell from the limb. But instantly he tightened
his clutch on the slipping rope and in a second was dangling in air, frightened but safe. He
slid to the ground, and drew the rope taut. Now he had the rope over a limb, as he wanted it,
but the limb was on the wrong tree.

"I'll try it, anyway," he said.

He tied the end of the rope about the trunk of the tree in which Lew and the bear rested.

"I'm going to pull her off her perch, Lew," he cried. "If I succeed, she'll swing over toward
the other tree. I may be able to pull her up on her hind feet. Anyway, I think I can hold her,
and if you come down as quick as you can, the two of us can certainly pull her up. Are you ready?"

Lew came down the tree as far as he dared. "I'll be with you the second she drops," he said.
"Pull!"

Charley suddenly threw his entire weight on the rope. The bear, taken by surprise, was jerked
clear of the limb. She dropped downward and then swung toward the other tree like an enormous
pendulum. Lew slid down the tree like a flash and landed in a heap beside Charley. He was up
in an instant, and, grabbing the rope, added his weight to Charley's. The bear was fairly on
the ground, but almost straight under the limb over which the rope hung. She was clawing frantically
at the noose.

"Let's give a jerk," said Charley. "Together--now!"

They strained suddenly at the rope and the bear rose to her hind feet to ease the strain on
her neck. Instantly they pulled in the slack.

"We've got her now," cried Lew. "Pull again!"

Once more they strained at the rope. It tightened about the neck of the bear, shutting off
her wind. She rose to her very tiptoes and the boys pulled in a little more slack.

"We could choke her to death now," said Charley, "but we mustn't. How are we going to get out
of this?"

"Let's tie the rope fast and take our packs some distance away. She won't strangle for a while.
Then we can come back and free her. I think she will not attack us, for she is too much afraid
of the dog. We'll keep him on a leash and beat it the minute we get the rope."

"But how are we going to get the rope?" demanded Charley.

"Gee! You've got me. Maybe we'll think of something while we're carrying the packs away."

The two boys got their packs and hurried along their route for some hundreds of yards. Then
they laid their packs down and ran back. But Charley carried his rifle on the return trip.

The bear was still pawing at the rope when they got back. The hair on her neck was worn off
by her violent struggles, and the skin was bleeding freely.

"That bear will wear a collar on her neck for life," said Charley. "If we ever see her again,
we'll know her."

An idea came to him. "I've got it," he said. "I'll cut that rope with a bullet. You stand ready
with the dog, and I'll be ready for a second shot, if necessary. We're not going to take a
chance of being badly hurt, law or no law."

Lew untied the dog from the tree and held the leash with his left hand. Charley handed him
the axe, and Lew stepped a little aside where he could use it, if necessary. But it was one
thing to talk about cutting the rope with a bullet and another thing to do it, for the bear
kept the rope in motion continually. Charley leveled his weapon and tried to get a bead on
the rope. It seemed to him that the bear would never stand still. But the beast had nearly
reached the limit of endurance. Her tongue was protruding from her mouth, her eyes seemed ready
to pop from her head. She was gasping pitifully. Her own struggles were slowly strangling her.
Suddenly she stopped fighting and hung limp. The rope stretched like a rod. Instantly Charley's
rifle cracked. The line was severed as though some one had cut it with a sword. It flew upward
into the tree and the bear dropped to the ground. The noose about her neck came loose and she
breathed freely.

"Quick!" cried Lew. "She'll be on her feet in a second."

Charley untied the rope from the tree, drew the severed end to earth, and gathering up rope
and rifle, fled toward his pack, with Lew at his heels, dragging the frantic dog by main force,
for the animal was wild to charge the fallen bear.

As they ran, they glanced back over their shoulders. At first the bear did not move. Then she
stirred uneasily and a second later, rose to her feet and ran madly away. The boys stopped running.

"I guess both parties had a lesson," said Lew.

Chapter XI

The Secret Camp in the Wilderness

Their encounter with the bear made the two lads forget for a while their weariness. They made
fast time along the fire trails. After a long tramp, they topped the final ridge and paused
to rest and study the country. This they could do with ease, for the summit of the mountain
was rather sparsely timbered. A very little search disclosed a tree that was at once tall and
easy to climb, and that was surrounded only by low brush that would not obstruct the vision.
From this lookout they gained a wide view in every direction.

"We can see for miles and miles," said Charley. "The forester was right in telling us to come
often to this lookout. We can discover more from here in a minute than we could by a week of
wandering about among the trees."

Slowly the boys swept their vision around the horizon. Everywhere the mountains appeared to
bask in the warm spring sunlight, seemingly as secure as cats dozing by a fireplace. The fleecy
clouds, passing across the face of the sun, threw shadows on the hillsides, making beautiful
patterns of light and shade. The fresh, young growths gave forth a soft green tint, in pleasing
contrast to the darker colors of the pines. Brooks sparkled in the bottoms. Far as the eye
could reach this gorgeous panorama extended.

"Isn't it wonderful?" said Charley, after the two boys had surveyed the scene in silence. "The
forest is one of nature's very finest gifts. And to think what we do to it by our carelessness.
At any minute this green paradise may become a very hell of roaring flame, just because some
smoker is too careless to blow out his match before dropping it, or some camper too lazy to
make sure his fire is extinguished. Why, it seems to me that a murderer is an innocent angel
compared to such a man. Think what he does! He kills the fish and the birds and the animals
and perhaps some human beings, and he destroys not only the wood that civilization must have,
but he ruins the very ground so that it cannot produce another forest. It seems to me that
a man who does that ought to be punished more severely than any mere murderer. Why, a murderer
kills only a single being. The man who starts a forest fire kills countless living things.
I tell you, Lew, it makes me mighty proud to have a part in protecting this grand forest."

The boys were silent, wrapped in thought, until Lew suddenly pointed to a dense growth of evergreens
directly below them, and not very far down the ridge. "That must be our camp site," he said.
And both boys examined the spot with interest.

"That must be it," said Charley. "It's dense enough, goodness knows! And there is a little
stream of water stealing out of the lower side of the thicket. So there is a spring in there.
Let's go down and take a look at it."

They shouldered their packs, whistled the pup to their heels, and went down to the thicket.
In a space not less than a hundred yards in diameter rhododendrons grew in indescribable density,
while above them towered some huge hemlocks. The two boys came close to the thicket and peered
into it. Even now, in the bright glare of the full sun, deep twilight reigned beneath the rhododendrons.
Evidently they were growths of great age. Their stems were like young saplings. Their tops
rose high and spread wide. And their branches were laced and interlaced and twisted and grown
together so as to make a mass almost impenetrable.

"Great Ned!" cried Lew. "A passer-by would have about as much chance of seeing us in there
as we have of discovering China from this hillside. The question is, how are we going to get
into the place?"

Charley dropped on his hands and knees and crawled slowly under the low rhododendron branches.

"Keep right in my tracks, Lew, if you come in," warned Charley. "If there are any snakes in
here, they'd bite a fellow before he could see them. I'll look sharp for them and if you follow
me, you won't run any risk."

He picked up a fallen branch, trimmed it, and crept on, stick in hand. Suddenly he crowded
back hard on Lew, almost kicking him in the face. At the same time he began to thrash about
in the leaves ahead of him.

"Great Cæsar!" he exclaimed. "I almost crawled on a big rattler. He was so near the color of
the ground that I didn't see him until he coiled and raised his head. Gee! That was a close shave."

"As long as you didn't get bitten," said Lew, "It's a good thing it happened. We'll be on our
guard now."

"Yes, indeed. Did you put the potassium permanganate in the first-aid kit, and the hypodermic
syringe?"

"Surest thing you know."

"We'll just carry them with us, Lew. We won't take any chances on death by snake-bite. These
mountains are full of rattlers and copperheads."

"And we won't take any chances on being bitten in this thicket, either," answered Lew. "We'll
put the pup in ahead of us."

They whistled in the dog and sent him scouring through the thicket. But either there had been
no more snakes within it or else all had fled, for the dog raced eagerly about but found nothing
to alarm him.

Confidently the boys now pushed into the interior of the thicket. At the very heart of it lay
the spring. It came bubbling up through pure, white sand, and had formed a deep basin, over
the lower edge of which the crystal water went rippling away through the thicket.

"We'll put our tent right here," said Charley, indicating a level spot beside the spring basin.
"We'll have to clear away some of the bushes to make room for it. We can use what we cut as
a screen, though nobody would ever see a tent away in here, especially one of brown khaki,
like ours."

He drew his little axe and began clearing a space for the tent, cutting the rhododendron stems
a little below the surface of the ground. Lew piled the branches at one side. Then the tent
was dragged in and set up, the rope being used as a ridge and tied to two strong saplings.
The sides of the tent were squared and pegged down.

"Drive the pegs tight, Lew," directed Charley. "We don't want to have anything crawling under
the sides. Thank goodness, we have a sod cloth."

After they had completed this task and set about bringing in the duffel, Charley remarked,
"We can't go in and out this way, on our hands and knees. We've got to make a path. We'll find
the best way out and trim the bushes so that we can walk upright."

"We'd better not make the path straight," said Lew. "If we zigzag it, nobody will know it really
is a path."

After they had picked out a level route they trimmed back the rhododendron branches so that
they could walk through the thicket, though the branches at the very edge were left undisturbed.
The cut branches were added to the screen about the tent. Then the duffel was carried in and
stowed in the tent.

"What bothers me," said Charley, "is to know how to put up our aerial. We don't dare hang it
up where it can be seen, and I don't know how well it will work among these hemlocks."

"All we can do is to put it up and try it," said the ever practical Lew, "and the sooner we
do it the better."

Quickly they had their wires suspended between two hemlock trees. The aerial reached almost
from trunk to trunk, and the wires were completely hidden by the branches that stood out all
about them.

"If she'll work," commented Charley, "it's a peach of an arrangement. Nobody would discover
that aerial in a hundred years. I can hardly wait until evening to test it out."

"Willie might be listening in again to-day," suggested Lew. "It will take him several days
to get that new outfit made. We'll try him on the hour."

"Good idea, Lew." He looked at his watch. "It's ten minutes to the hour now. If Willie is listening
in, we'll soon know whether or not our aerial will work."

They began putting the tent in order, stowing the duffel in neat little piles. Just outside
the tent Lew built a foundation for the alcohol stove, by leveling the earth and setting a
flat stone for the stove to stand on. Meanwhile, Charley was stuffing the tick with dry leaves.

Exactly on the hour Lew sat down at the wireless key and sent a call flashing into the air.
Promptly; his receiver buzzed in response.

"Got him," said Lew, and while Charley went on filling the tick and bringing in hemlock branches
to use like springs under the tick, Lew conversed with Willie. The latter was still working
at the new wireless set, and had listened in every hour during the day. All the other members
of the Wireless Patrol were likewise hard at work, and it was practically certain that by the
time the vacation was ended each would have earned his share of the money needed to buy the
desired battery.

"I can't tell you where our camp is," rapped out Lew, "because that is a secret that we are
not supposed to tell. The forester does not want anybody to know that Charley is employed by
the forestry department. We are posing as fishermen. Tell the fellows not to talk about Charley
and tell Charley's father the forester does not want it known for a time that Charley is a
fire patrol. He thinks that we have a better chance to find things out if it is not known that
we are connected with the forestry department."

Willie said that he would caution the boys and tell Mr. Russell. Also he said he would be in
his workshop until supper time and would listen in most of the time. The club members would
be at their instruments as usual to catch the time from Arlington and pick up some of the news.
Lew replied that he would call Willie then, if he needed him.

For some time after Lew laid down the receivers, the two boys worked silently. They finished
setting the hemlock branches in the earth, placed the stuffed ticking above them, and laid
their blankets in position. They brought the wireless outfit into the tent and set the instruments
in a corner. The grub was stacked in another corner. A little pool was dug in the stream just
below the spring, to make a place for washing dishes. Their extra clothes were hung on the
ridge-rope. The first-aid kit was fastened to the tent wall where it would be handy, and Charley
put the permanganate and the hypodermic syringe in his pocket.

They had almost completed their task, when a low whistle was heard outside the thicket. The
pup pricked up his ears and was about to bark. Lew grabbed him and held his jaws together.
Then both boys sat silent, listening and looking questioningly at each other. Soon the whistle
was repeated.

"We've got to find out who's whistling," said Charley. "Keep the pup quiet and I'll slip out
and take a look."

He left the tent, but had hardly gone ten feet before a voice cried, "Hello, Russell! Are you
in the thicket? This is Morton, the ranger."

"Sure we're here," replied Charley, an expression of relief coming on his face. "We didn't
know who it was and kept quiet until we could take a look. I'm coming out now."

He hurried from the thicket and shook hands warmly with the newcomer. Instinctively he knew
that he was going to like his ranger. Big, broad-shouldered, quite evidently powerful, with
a kindly expression, a winning smile, and a deep voice that instantly created confidence, the
ranger was a picture of honest manhood. No one could look into his deep blue eyes, set far
apart, or examine the lines on his face, at once betokening strength of character with gentleness,
and not feel that here was a man in very truth. One knew instinctively that he would never
hesitate a second to risk his life to save another's, and that he would be as gentle as a woman
in his dealings with all creatures. But the great, strong jaw and the straight mouth and long
nose all foretold fearless courage, and were ample warning that the man would be terrible if
stirred to wrath.

"Come in and see our camp," said Charley, after the two had conversed for a moment. And he
led the way into the thicket.

The ranger followed, his practiced eye noting everything. "You've made a good job of it," he
said with commendation, when he was at last seated in the tent. "Nobody will ever find you
here, unless you do something to betray your position. You'll have to be a little careful about
fires. I wouldn't make any during the daytime."

"We aren't going to make any at all," explained Charley. "Mr. Marlin gave us an alcohol stove
to cook with."

"I don't believe you need go so far as that. Use your alcohol stove during the day. At night
nobody can see smoke, and if you screen the blaze, nobody will ever discover you. It would
be pretty dismal here at night without any light. Let's see if we can't fix up a little fireplace
that will help you out."

He got a number of large, flat stones, which he set on edge, fashioning a high, square fireplace
that opened toward the front.

"The stones will screen the flames on three sides, if you don't build too big a fire," he said,
"and your tent will shut off the view on the fourth side."

"Thank you," said Charley. "It will be a whole lot more cheerful with a fire. We have a candle
lantern that we intended to use, but a fellow just ought to have a fire when he's in camp."

As they began to discuss the work ahead of them, the ranger inquired, "What instructions did
Mr. Marlin give you?"

"He said that we should keep our connection with the department secret," said Charley, "and
if possible, avoid meeting any one. If we do bump into anybody, we are to pose as fishermen.
He said you would give us detailed instructions."

"Very well. First, about your outfit. Have you any firearms?"

"A light, high-powered rifle and a pistol."

"You can't carry a rifle in the forest at this season without exciting suspicion. Leave your
rifle here. Let me see your pistol? Have you another?"

Charley handed him his pistol and said that he had no other.

"Then take this," he said as he handed Charley his automatic. "Let your chum carry your pistol.
I'll get another at the office. It isn't likely that you will ever need to use a weapon in
the forest. I have been a ranger for years and have never yet drawn one, but I never travel
without one. You'll meet some pretty tough characters in the forest and sometime your life
may depend on having your pistol. My advice is never to patrol without it. But keep it out
of sight. Keep your badge out of sight, too. And since you are supposed to be nothing more
than fishermen, you'll have to play the parts. Carry your rods and catch a few fish each day
during the season."

"Where are we to patrol, and what hours are we to observe?"

"You are especially employed to guard this virgin timber, though, of course, you must protect
any part of the forest you happen to be in. Take some good hikes over the region right away
and get acquainted with it. Use your map and, if possible, learn the region by heart. Then
your map will mean something to you. Learn where the virgin timber lies. Keep a close watch
on it, and on any fishermen or campers. I'll spend at least two days a week out here and you
must report to me each time I am here. Meantime, you must report to the office every night
the last thing before you turn in. The chief said you had a wireless and could do it. Maybe
you can, but it beats me to know how."

"We'll show you in a little while," smiled Charley as he glanced at his watch. "Willie will
surely be listening in within twenty minutes and we'll call him."

"I'll have to take your word for it," said the ranger. "I can't wait a minute. It will be long
after dark before I get out of the mountains. I telephoned my wife I'd be late, but she always
worries when I'm out after dark. You know snakes are bad up here, and they're all out at night.
And by the way, you'd better carry some of this permanganate. Do you know anything about it,
and what to do with it if you're bitten?" The ranger started to pull a bottle from his pocket.

"Thanks," said Charley. "It's mighty good of you to offer to share with us. But we have permanganate
and a syringe both, and we know what to do with them."

"Good. But be careful where you step. What do you wear on your feet?"

He examined the boys' shoes and canvas leggings. "They're all right. I don't believe any snake
will bite through them. But high leather boots would be safer. Bear it in mind when you buy
new shoes. Now I must go."

"When and where am I to report to you?" asked Charley.

They agreed upon a place of meeting, half-way between the highway and Charley's camp, whereupon
the ranger, holding out his hand, said, "Good-bye and good luck to you."

"Do you have to go?" asked Charley. "Couldn't you stay overnight with us?"

"I'd like to, but the wife would worry herself sick."

"Suppose she knew that you were going to stay here. Would that make it all right?"

"I'm often away overnight during the fire season," smiled the ranger. "It's the snakes that
she's afraid of. She'd rather have me stay here all night than come through these mountains
after dark. You see her father was bitten by a snake when she was a girl and she is mortally
afraid of them."

"Then you're going to stay here all night," said Charley, with decision. "I'll get word to
her right away."

The ranger smiled incredulously. "I wish you could," he said. "It would relieve her mind."

Charley threw aside the pack cover that had been placed over the wireless instruments. The
ranger looked at the outfit with wondering interest. Charley glanced at his watch and threw
over the switch.

"Willie might be listening in," he explained, as the sparks began to leap between the points
of his spark-gap. Twice he called, then a bright smile came over his face. "Got him," he said.

For some moments he alternately worked his key and listened to the return buzzing in his receiver.
Then he turned to the ranger. "Willie has the forester on the telephone," he said. "What shall
I tell him?"

"Ask him to tell Katharine that I shall stay here with you in your camp overnight, as I could
not get home until long after dark."

With fascinated gaze the ranger watched the sparks fly under Charley's manipulation of the
key. Then there was a long silence as the three sat waiting for the reply.

"Katharine says to tell Jimmie she's awful glad," said Charley, relaying the forester's message
literally, "and to thank the new patrol for taking care of him."

Then and there Charley knew that he was going to like not only the ranger, but also the ranger's
little wife. As for the ranger, he was almost spellbound.

"I know you talked to the chief," he said, "but what gets me is <i>how</i> you did it. Why,
if I knew how and had an outfit like that, I could talk to Katharine any time and anywhere."

"We'll make you an outfit and teach you how to use it," cried the two boys together. "You shall
have your first lesson to-night."

Twilight drew near. Lew brought out the grub bag, and Charley began cooking some food over
the little alcohol stove.

"I think that you can safely take a chance on a wood-fire at this hour," said the ranger. "I'll
build it myself."

He placed a few dried leaves within the fireplace and stacked some twigs, broken into short
lengths, in a cone-shaped heap above the leaves. At once he had a bright little fire that made
almost no smoke but gave lots of heat, though the flames did not reach as high as the stone
sides of the fireplace. Quickly a little bed of coals formed, and Charley put his frying-pan
directly over them. In no time the air was savory with the odor of sizzling bacon and hot coffee.

Squatted about the little fire, the three guardians of the forest ate their evening meal. From
time to time the ranger thrust a stick into the fire, and so kept the flames alive. But it
was a dim little blaze at best. Yet it was mighty cheering and comforting as the darkness wrapped
the forest, and the gloom beneath the rhododendron thicket became inky and impenetrable.

For a long time after supper was eaten and the dishes cleaned, the three sat before their little
fire. Spellbound, the recruits listened to this veteran guardian of the forest as he told them
of his work in the woods, of his encounters with beasts, of birds and reptiles, harmful and
otherwise, and of the rocks, and flowers, and trees. For the ranger loved the forest even as
Charley did.

When the evening was farther advanced, and the air was vibrant with the voices of the wireless,
Lew and Charley took turns reading the news, while the ranger's expression of amazement and
admiration grew deeper and deeper, and his liking and respect for his young subordinate increased
rapidly. Finally the ranger was given his first lesson in radio-telegraphy. While Lew was writing
down for him the wireless alphabet, Charley was showing him how to make the letters on the
spark-gap. Before they turned in for the night, the ranger had learned to distinguish the difference
between the sound of a dot and of a dash as the signals buzzed in the receiver.

Chapter XII

On the Trail of the Timber Thieves

Very early the next morning the ranger was afoot. Before ever the faintest streaks of light
penetrated the thicket, he had started the coffee to boiling on the little stove, and breakfast
was almost ready before he wakened his young comrades.

"Why didn't you call us sooner?" asked Charley indignantly, as he leaped out of his blanket.
"It's our place to do the work here, not yours."

The ranger smiled. "It would have been cruel to waken you earlier. It's easy to see that you
aren't accustomed to such stiff work as your hike here yesterday must have been. You slept
like logs."

"We intend to do our full share of the work," said Charley.

"I'm sure of it," replied the ranger. "If I had thought you were trying to shirk, I'd have
had you out of bed long ago."

Many a time afterward Charley thought of that statement and pondered over it. He was learning
a good deal about life these days.

Grateful indeed was the warm coffee, for the April morn was chill. Quickly the food was eaten,
and the ranger prepared to depart.

"I don't want to burden you with rules," he said in parting. "Your business is to protect the
forest. Every day you will meet some new situation. You must do your best to protect the harmless
creatures of the forest, as well as the timber. That means you may have to deal with gunners
who are violating the law. Such men, with firearms in their hands, are dangerous. You may come
across timber thieves. Get acquainted with your territory so that you can tell whether a felled
tree is on state land or on private property. Your maps show you where the lines run, and you
will find the trees along these lines blazed. If you find lumbering operations going on within
the state forest, do your best to stop the cutting and report the matter at once. You may find
traps set out of season. And it is practically certain you will have to deal with fires and
perhaps the men who start them. Being a fire patrol involves a whole lot more than merely walking
about through the woods. I can't give you rules that will cover all the situations you will
find yourself in. Common sense is the best rule. The chief has given you a very important post
here. It's an unusual responsibility for one so young. But we both expect you to make good.
I'll be disappointed if you don't. You know if you fail, I'll have to take part of the blame."
He shook hands with both boys and was gone.

"He's a prince," said Charley, after the ranger had left the thicket. "He knows just how to
treat a fellow. Why, I've simply got to make good now. I'd get my ranger in bad if I didn't."

Quickly they put their camp to rights, then slipped their pistols into their pockets and got
their fishing-rods.

"What is the first thing on the programme?" asked Lew.

"We'll go up to the top of the hill and have a good look over the country," replied Charley.
"It's just about time for campers to be cooking their breakfasts. If there are any of them
near us, we might see the smoke from their fires and locate them. You know the ranger wants
us to keep tab on everything that's going on in our district."

They ascended the mountain and climbed the tree from which they had viewed the country on the
preceding day. The sun was just coming over the eastern summits, sending long, level rays of
light flashing among the dark pines, making beautiful patterns of sun and shade. In the bottoms
the night mist had gathered in little pools, in places completely blotting out the landscape.
The tree tops, upthrusting through these banks of fog, looked like wooded islets in tiny gray
lakes. In every direction the two boys scanned the country, looking sharply for slender spirals
of smoke. But they saw only mist curling upward.

"It looks to me," said Lew, "as though mighty few people ever get into this valley. It's such
a hard journey to get here that I suppose the fishermen will stop at the streams in the valleys
nearer the highway, and nobody else would want to come here at this time of year. Unless this
timber is set afire purposely, I believe there is not much danger of its being burned."

"There's just the rub," replied Charley. "It would naturally be safe, being so hard to get
to, and for that reason it wouldn't be watched as well as more accessible regions, particularly
when it is difficult to get fire patrols. But because some one is evidently trying to burn
this particular stand of timber, it is especially necessary to guard it. Mr. Marlin wants it
watched continually, but so secretly that no one will realize that it is being guarded. That
might make the incendiary careless--providing he comes again--and so lead to his detection.
We must do nothing to betray ourselves. We'll have to be careful not to mark this tree in any
way, so that a passer-by would guess it was used as a watch-tower. And we shall have to be
sure that we don't wear a path leading from it to our camp."

For many minutes the boys sat in the tree, well screened from observation by the spreading
limbs, yet themselves able to see perfectly. In every direction they searched again and again
for telltale columns of smoke, but saw nothing.

"It looks to me," remarked Charley, "as though there isn't a soul in this region except ourselves.
If that is so, it is the best possible time to do a little exploring. Suppose we take a look
at the valley above our camp. We can cover a lot of ground between now and noon and yet get
back here for another observation during the dinner hour. We ought to be in this watch-tower
or at some other point equally good every time men would naturally be having fires, and that
means morning, noon, and night. Between times we can explore the forest. It means some pretty
stiff hiking, but I guess we can stand it."

They drew their map and compared it with the country as it actually appeared.

"We aren't so far from the end of the state land in this direction," commented Lew. "That's
the very place you suggested exploring. We might look up the line, as Mr. Morton suggested.
You notice the stand of pines ends a long distance this side of the line. That's all hardwood
forest up that way."

"The sooner we get at it, the better," agreed Charley.

Carefully they descended the tree, picked up their fishing-rods, and hastened down the mountainside
as fast as it was safe to travel. The nearer they came to the centre of the valley, the larger
the trees grew. Evidently the rich soil had worked down into the bottom, during the centuries,
and the tree growth was enormous. Under these huge trees there was no underbrush, and the two
boys could make fast time. They approached the stream, which flowed swiftly along under the
tall pines, where they had no doubt trout innumerable lurked in the shadowy depths. The temptation
to stop and fish was strong, but they put it aside and pushed on up the valley.

For a long time they passed like ghosts among the pines. The earth was springy with the accumulated
needles of many years, into which their feet sank silently. Under the huge trees everything
seemed to be hushed. There was no wind to set the pines awhispering, and the music of the brook
stole through the forest like the low singing of a muted violin string.

For a long distance they passed through a pure stand of pines. Then the character of the forest
began to change. Soon they were in a mixed growth, and not long afterward they found practically
nothing but deciduous trees about them.

"We're not far from the line now," suggested Lew. "This must be the stand of hardwoods we saw
from the lookout tree. I doubt if it is more than half a mile to the line."

"Keep your eyes open for blazed trees," said Charley. "We ought to see some before many minutes."

They had gone on, perhaps a quarter of a mile, when Lew said, "It looks pretty thin ahead.
Either there is a natural opening in the forest or else the timber has been cut out."

Charley thought of what Mr. Morton had told him about timber thieves operating along the boundary
lines. He was glad that he had decided to explore this particular section of his district.
A moment later he was still more glad, for the stillness of the morning air was suddenly broken
by a splitting, rending sound, which was followed by the crash of a great tree as it came thundering
to earth. There could be no mistaking the sound. A tree had been felled. Both boys stopped
dead in their tracks and looked questioningly at each other.

"Timber thieves!" said Charley in a low voice. His cheeks paled a trifle. Then a look of determination
came into his eyes.

"What shall we do?" asked Lew in a loud whisper.

"I don't know," replied Charley. "But we'll find out what they are doing. Then we can decide
what to do ourselves."

He drew his automatic but as quickly thrust it into his coat pocket, as he remembered what
the ranger had told him. But though the pistol was in his pocket, he still grasped it in his
hand. The tense look on his face showed plainly enough that he was ready to shoot right through
his coat. Lew, observing his companion's movements, followed his example.

Minute after minute the two young forest guards stood silent, listening for the sound of axes
or other customary noises that ordinarily accompany lumbering operations. But the morning stillness
was undisturbed. A puzzled expression crept over their faces.

"Maybe that tree wasn't cut at all," whispered Lew. "Maybe it just fell of itself."

"We'll find out," replied Charley, and cautiously they began to make their way toward the point
whence the sound had come. Sheltering themselves behind trees, they advanced rod after rod.
The stillness remained unbroken. The stand of trees grew thinner, with more and more underbrush.
Presently they saw before them an unmistakable clearing in the forest. Rapidly they advanced,
screened by the bushes, until they stood close to the edge of the clearing. Beyond question
somebody had been cutting trees. Over a considerable area the timber had been felled, and whoever
had felled it had cut ruthlessly. Hardly a sapling remained in all the cleared area. On every
hand trees lay prone. Some had been trimmed and cut into pieces. Some remained exactly as they
fell. Everywhere freshly cut stumps told plainly enough what had occurred.

"Somebody's cutting timber all right enough," whispered Charley, "and it's on state land. I
wonder where they are. They certainly cut that tree we heard fall, but I haven't heard an axe
or a human voice and I don't see any signs of lumbermen."

"Maybe they're at camp eating breakfast. It's still early, you know."

"If they are," said Charley, "then this is the very time to investigate. We'll look around
before anybody gets back."

Glancing once more about the opening to make sure that nobody was in sight, they stepped from
behind their concealing bushes and started across the open space. But immediately they came
to a dead stop. Like rifle-shots, a succession of sharp sounds rang out, accompanied by splashing
noises. The two boys were at first alarmed, then puzzled. They looked at each other in amazement.

"What was that?" asked Lew.

"I don't know," replied Charley. "At first I thought somebody was shooting at us. But I didn't
hear any bullets hum. And the noise didn't sound exactly like a gun, either. It was like the
noise a fellow makes when he hits the water real hard with a board." Perplexed, he looked into the warm brown eyes. Now thought ies of
the lamb and the bare feet and came in a pious mood. "Palma novella" he admitted, "I love
you with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind."

That was pretty. The girl was stirred and held out his hand. Wulfrin also displeased the advertising
does not. "But now we want to be a bit funny!" he exclaimed. "This would benefit I you! "He
lifted the pitcher and drank. Graciosus forge a spoon, milk and offered it the lips of his
bride.

It was not the only one on Pratum, but wanted a kingdom of grace symbolic act to commit.

She opened the already red lips, she said: "Today is resistant to the milk you give me. me drink,
Wulfrin. "He handed her the jar, and she sipped so fast that it you resumed in the same hands.
Then she seemed tired, because she was the head on the shoulder and gradually sink into his
arms and nodded. The Foehnluft became Asphyxiation hot. Wulfrin Graciosus and fell silent, too,
and this helped himself by he spooned his milk and a rural custom of the last bowl with both hands
raised to his mouth.

Wulfrin looked at the young neck. It contained not touched and him with his lips. She awoke.

"But
we are sitting on the tower like the three enchanted," she said. "Go, kingdom of grace, hole
us the book, where the brother is shown that the pins - you know - that when you have your last visits
of the mother, I looked over his shoulder, is shown.

"kingdom of grace she consented, but obviously unwillingly.

Palma sought and found the sheet. About the Latin texts with clean lines and was bright colors
depicted as a helmeted arm stretches defensively against a girl, that seemed to pursue him. With
the warrior, he seemed to have nothing in common but the Helmet,
but the longer he gazed at the painted girl, the more it began with
his brown to the same eyes and golden hair Palma.

The figure was, however, wrote: "Byblis."

"Stories and interpret, kingdom of grace," asked Palma. Graciosus remained silent. "Well, I
will explain.

This is the brother of Malmort as he was at first and I wegstoesst. "

"This is nothing for you, Palma!" Graciosus defended quite timid, "let," and he withdrew the
Book their hands.

"You two are boring!" she pouted.

"I'd rather go.

Over There on the slope I saw blooming Rose bushes are in tight.

I want to weave a wreath, "and she sprang.

A blinding flash went off about Pratum and Hoefling through the veins.

"Why did you taken from her the book? "he asked irritably.

"Because it's not for girls is good," said justified the kingdom of grace.

"Why not?"

"My sister loves the brother in the book."

"Of course she loves him. What is to be found there?"

Graciosus replied with an air of disgust: "She loves him she wants him sinful!."

Wulfrin discolored and turned deathly pale. "Silence, scoundrel!" he shouted with distorted
Trains, "or I throw up over the wall!"

"For God's sake," stammered Graciosus, "what's the matter? Are you bewitched? Will you mad?"
He had jumped away from Wulfrin and the book, in which this hineinstarrte
with terrified eyes.

"I implore you to Wulfrin, take common sense and let you say that has a pagan Poet contrived,
frivolous and luegnerisch he has invented what may not be what is
not, can be, what would be an abomination among Christians and pagans!

"

"And you read books so base and delight you in the evil, villain?"

"I read with Christian eyes," defended the kingdom of grace offended, "to my warning and the
integrity that I know the tempter, and not inadvertently slip into
the sin!

"

The hands of the courtier and trembled convulsively above the leaf.

"With all the saints, Wulfrin, destroy the book is not, this is the most expensive of the pen!"

"Into
the fire with him!" cried the courtier, and because there was no stove as the blazing of the
open Heaven, he tore the paper into shreds and threw it high into the swirling storm.

There was a silence. Graciosus looked groaning the mutilated book, while Wulfrin with folded arms,
brooding and sinister eyes. Sun crept over him coming back Palma and sat him the slight twisting
of her wreath on the loaded head.

He shuddered as he felt the fencing, it pulled away, ripped it in two, and threw it at the feet
with a curse of the over heated girl.

As her eyes flashed and she reached her full height, "You Loathsome you doing to me! so? "Angry
tears broke out her." Now I take the kingdom of grace do not hurt you! "

"Palma," he ordered, "like you come home! On the Alp!

Do not turn around, I go through the gorge! you walk over me the way, I'll throw you into the
river! "

She looked at him miserably. His Todesblaesse, the bristling hair, the unfortunate face filled
her with fear and pity.

She moved against him when they wanted him hold with both hands, the throbbing temples. "Away!"
he cried, and tore the sword from the vagina.

She turned. He looked over the railing and saw her through the course in wild Alp hurried. He
also left the fort and struck out by the roar of the nearby stream, the way to the gorge, the
most terrible in Raetien. Kingdom of grace he was no escort.

As he descended into the gorge where the river was raging, and he sought the path in the undergrowth,
intrude on his foot or his ugly Nachtgevoegel vorleuchtende lightning, and a whistling bat tangled in
his hair. He entered a hell. Above the raging tide turned and writhed monstrous figures that
the flaming sky ripped apart and embraced in the darkness again.

There was nothing of the clear laws and the beautiful masses of the earth. This was a world
of arbitrariness, of defiance, of rebellion. Stretched arms Felsstuecke hurled against the sky.
This grew out of an impending major the wall, there a huge body hung over the abyss. Right
in white foam was a Giant left to the whole fall and shock of impact with the chest and roared
with delight. Wulfrin step but without fear, because he feels comfortable
among these outlaws.

Also it took the pleasure of the outrage, he slipped on a wild drive, let the feet hang over in depth,
called to him and splashed and sang, and shouted to the abyss.

As the gaze of his head thrown back came across a woman in a robe,
the by the way tell.

"Nun, what have you done wrong?" he asked. She replied: "I am the Faustina and the man was
poisoned. And you, sir, what is your action? "

Laughing, he replied: "I desire my sister!"

As the terrified killer, a cross struck over the other and ran it quickly could. Even he was
astonished and frightened by the loud words of his mystery. It was hunting him, and he fled from
themselves heavy roles shook the ground as oeffne he to devour him. From a vertical wall down
a powerful block suggested that he and jumped down with a second
set in the splashing of the tide.

The sky was silent for a while, and Wulfrin groped in the dark night. Since lit up again the
gorge, and on a pine toppled over the precipice, he saw his sister with bare and secure the feet
to walk, and now they lay before him and touched his knee.

"What have I done to you," she cried, "why running away, why do you curse me? Brother, Brother, what
have I sinned against thee? I can not find it! Behold, I have to follow you, it is stronger than me!
I ran over there, I saw the bridge. Kill me dear! I not live, if you hate me! Do as thou hast
threatened! "

He let out a scream, grabbed, threw it, saw it in the storm light against the rock , Go tumbling,
soft keys and your knees under it. He bent over the sunken. They did not move, and stuck on
the end of blood. As he lifted her on mighty arms his chest and walked, with nowhere to go,
embrace the love, the Tale.

He had the Klus behind, as it whizzed past him, and he saw a boy, of a shy Ross sought to curb.
"Hey, Gabriel," he called out to him, "say the judge, To upgrade the room and judge the meal!
Thousand torches ignited! Malmort shine! I consider marriage with the sister! "The storm swallowed
the frenzied words. Malmort with its Towers was still black on the weather, bright night sky.

growing up with his load path to the castle, he saw lights up to chase
back and forth.

Then met He frightened the mother, who had hastened to meet him half
way.

"Wulfrin" she pleaded with outstretched arms, "where did you Palma?

"As they take," he said, offering her the lifeless.

Chapter Four

Since Wulfrin awoke the next day, he was among the black shadowy clumps of Arve enormous, while the
mats shone round about even in the midday sun. He had just yet, inhaling the spicy scent forest,
serene and happy dreaming from the competition for carried away in a Roman arena and in the
javelin with a laurel wreath. His blood flowed quiet, and his brow was bright

After yesterday Palma down the mother's arms, he had retreated into
the darkness.

With wrong feet, restless in the course, this way and he was chasing through the territory of
Malmort, until well past midnight, and was then niedergestuerzt at dawn and in a leaden sleep
lost.

He found himself on a gently curving hills, surrounded by meadows, far from the ringing The
Herd bells, in deep solitude. Only a woodpecker hammers, and two Eichhoerner romped and teased
in the middle of their green district.

Wulfrin rubbed the sleep from his eyes and looked around.

Then he discovered about the Huegelrande the gables and pinnacles of Malmort. He slipped on
the slope, and they disappeared.

Gradually crept up to him, yesterday, he shook his head, he did not
trust him, he wanted He could not believe it.

Was not he the Strong and Free, happiness, and Confident, of the
enemy in the eye saw and cut the Irrsal with the sword?

What had happened? An enigmatic woman had prevailed against him,
swear to what he did not doubt.

A Girls that are in the boredom of a mountain palace the most perfect
brother devised, was attributed to him, and had foolishly jumped him
hung on his neck.

A treacherous Becher unusual wine or the cheeky image of a fable or extravagant the hot breath
of the Hair dryer or whatever it might have been otherwise, had beguiled him, and distraught.
And what he thrown on the rocks, was not his sister - as they would
have the yawning abyss exceeded - but some delusion of the stormy
night.

"And it was my sister and I smashed it, I'm their single" defied he, and yet it took an infinite
compassion, and the fervent love for the young Life he had abused and destroyed. He saw her with
all her gestures, each its sweet and innocent words took shape, he looked into her eyes and blessed
in their wail. Now he felt it, the united, weeping and flattering to him, and knew that she was
still alive and breathing.

"My soul blood of my veins!" he cried, and re: "Palma Palma!"

"- Palma!" repeated the echo.

"Palma my wife!" The response was horrified and stopped.

A deadly rain ran through his marrow.

Relying on the rights, he raised himself half of the earth, and reached with his left hand
to his bleeding chest like on the battlefield. "It fits!" he groaned. "I am the barrier-free,
the offender, the damned, I must Die so that his sister live! But how have I offended the sky? which have
I curled the hell? "Quickly, he mused about his life, he found it no blemish, only venial Fail. "Well,
who's true to's true, I have just the terrible lot drawn from the
helmet and I wonder not, yes I know the horrors of the battlefield.

It's over! "

Since it seemed as yet the existence of an estate, so light it otherwise
evaluated, now as he, whether cost even in grim horror, his deepest
secret charm and loveliness had.

He raised his hands high in front of the face and sobbed ...

Gradually
extends the shade, and there was silence over the meadow.

And he put himself a hand on his shoulder. Without turning his head, he said: "I come" and was
rise, for he knew there was death, which came to him to him by the
sudden abyss to lead.

"Stay, Wulfrin!" said the soft voice of the judge, "I am committed
to you," and Mrs. Stemma let down by him slide on the moss in a wide
long robe, which itself the tops of the feet covered.

"Do not touch me!" he shouted, throwing himself back. "I am a wretch!"

"I sought you long," she said. "Why you stayed far away? You is anxious for Palma? Which was only
slightly wounded, but located in a deep swoon.

Waking she has told, what surprised you yesterday as the storm in the canyon as they slipped and
the reflection lost. In your arms you have borne it. "

Wulfrin remained silent.

"Or they talked untrue, and you threw the rocks to smash them?"

He nodded.

She was silent for a while, then she raised her hand and touched his
shoulder again.

"Wulfrin, You hate your sister or - you love her, you felt as the courtier from head to Toe was
shaking.

"It's horrible," he moaned.

"It's horrible," she said, "but it's not unexplainable.

You are far from each other adult, wurdet your faces and figures
are not used to, and so you were fresh to you and new, as ye fandet
as a stranger and a strange woman.

Brave! Calls and call it to your mind and senses.

Palma and Wulfrin are one blood!

They will shudder and cool and no longer confuse the divine flame
of love with the sisters creative fire of the earth.

"

He did not answer, that he had hardly heard her words, but murmured
tenderly, "Why Have you been baptized Palma novella?

This is an even stranger and more beautiful name! "

Stemma replied: "I have called the young palm tree, because from the ruins of the tomb aufspriesst
fresh and joyful, and in my life! who commits an outrage against the slender stem, the judge
and kill me! Only Palma is innocent. Your raging flame you do not have a Hairs of the eyelash,
not the outermost edge of the dress scorched.

Unfortunately, as is come up about such suffering? "

"Like a plague that evaporated from the soil! But my guardian angel warned me before Malmort.
Since you called me, I shut the ear. I turned and fell into the hands of the Lombards. Why have
you checked the arrow of Witigis? "He looked down on. Then he cried in despair and seized and
pressed firmly on the arm of the judge, the dark eyes on the calm
face stapling: "At the head of God -"

"At the head of Palmas," she said.

"She is my sister?"

"How else? I do not know different. What are you thinking?"

"Then my head and forfeit any of my breaths a sin!" He jumped up, while him with sinewy arms, embraced,
so that he emporzog with it.

"Where, Wulfrin? In depth? No, you may this strong body and this brave heart not destroy! Take
your horse and ride! Ride to your Emperor! Mix with your Waffenbrueder! A few Tagritte, health
and energy and you're looking so free as the others! "

"That's impossible," he said miserably. "We do not suffer the slightest blemish in our flock, treacherous
and I should hide the shame of us? "

"To startle your horse, riding day and night, over mountains and land, jump in a ship bring
a sea and a second between them and you, and if you vast, dolphin and mermaid before you dive
from the blue islands and promontories, daring adventure and beauty as prey! "

"What shall it profit?" he said. "You to go with me, the mermaid, impart the face, and I embraced
them in every woman! Because I'm married to her forever. No, I can not live! "

"This is cowardice!" she said softly.

The shame drove him like a slap in the face the blood. He reared up.

"You have pretty woman, "he shouted." I must not die as a coward, thou shalt own judge and condemn.
The light of day, of all people, I will confess the atrocities and make the atonement, "He cried
in angry indignation, but then softened his face, for he had found the solution to it was fitting.

"Nonsense!"
she said. "Such things hidden confession is not the day for you are a Criminals only in your
mind. The fact is, however, and only the act be directed. "

"Woman, which is revealed! Hear what I'm doing. I walk to the emperor and say to him, "Hoefling
Wulfrin the desires one's own blood, the child of his father! It is so he can not help it. Complete
the sinners of the world! And speaking of the Emperor: The offense is not done, so Wulfrin responds:
I perform with every breath "!

"A sinful sibling love," threatened Stemma, "is the fire."

Wulfrin laughed.

"And you're standing there before all the people in your nakedness?"

"I will stand," he said, "than the one who I am."

"So you lack the intellect and the strength to carry the mystery of sin?"

"This is woman's nature and woman's pleasure," he said contemptuously.

"And you will come with the Emperor, and I will judge you?"

"You!"

"I will!" she said and walked away slowly.

Now that Wulfrin thought
decided his fate, and completed, came the rest of the evening about
him. He remained under his Arve, until the sun went down and the day
following her. And as she lay with broken spears and gave off their
blood in the sky, he went out with her and saw her sister as the Spaetlicht
to the green robe and on quiet soles . Nachschreiten Checked sword
not regretted it. "You are a warrior Over There need, "he said to
himself, and changed even among the blessed heroes.

As it was night
and shone the moon that he went gently downhill, for he thought a
side to win and reach his emperor without his Malmort and the footsteps
of sister touching you. Both he wanted to only see you on court days.
He came to power, the here without violence and overthrow cliffs and
wide over flooded. The moonlight tempted him, to to a store and wish
Felsstueck and painless dahinzufliessen with the waves. He was himself
a dream.

Then he saw elf or elf diving. It was swimming in the white
river, gleamed a neck, and now the bare arm raised in a hunting horn,
the height, the silver of the moon. He recognized his stolen Inheritance
and came close without haste and surprise, the friendly miracle.

"Mr.
Wulfrin" cheered a boy's voice, "Rejoice! Happy for you! I think your
Horn, "and Gabriel, the shepherds had knocked over his shirt again,
jumped up at him.

"Just this afternoon," he says, "I saw it when
fishing on the bottom. I knew it same, but I was not alone and had
to await the night. It has lain long? " He shook the horn and let
the water drain out of the bulge carefully. "If It is not just spoiled,
"He lifted it to his mouth and pushed into it, that the mountains
echoed. "Here, sir!" he said. "Indeed, it has done him nothing. A
brave battle horn!"

Wulfrin grabbed it and hung it around. But when
he was a gold ring - some Beutestueck - by wanted to move the hand
to be worth at the boy protested Gabriel. "No, sir, put rather a word
for me that I can ride with the Emperor! But now I must be home! I
have to do in the stables. Are you coming? I raised white footprints
on the rock, and we go through a back door again as quickly as in
the courtyard at the castle the way. "

And Wulfrin followed. The
convenience and warmth of the boy had his senses and spirits heats.
The recovery of his heritage, caught the image of the father and the
child's mind on. And even though the same had happened to a human
boy, trembled above the current a gleam of spirits help. "In the end
it is the father," he said to himself, "and he is me , Stand by when
he can. If he is still some there, he does not let me die miserably.
I will call him. Maybe he replies. There is a belief that the dead
from the grave talking to his children. I dare! I blow him awake!
I ask nothing more than "Father, Palma is your child? he speaks not,
he probably nods or shakes his head. "Although Hoefling of Stemma
in no doubt, the nature of violence about him had fought him yet the
contradiction between faith in the Living and the question of the
dead little of. He simply felt that he the father - when this should
be achieved - would have to consult and advise, before he accuse himself
and set himself leave. But his rest was gone, his curious mind, and
he heard no word of what the boy was chatting under way ".

Similarly,
restless Stemma step behind the lighted window of the climb up above
the Castle rock saw rise. From a distance, and depth was a tone hergedrungen
to her, she hated and believed to have destroyed them. During her
child asleep on the bed she went restlessly up and down. She realizes
Wulfrin, as before the emperor and People of a rare, indeed incredible
outrage accused, and she was afraid that and how they will judge him
over.

Was it conceivable that the nature lost this way? that such
a fair man in such a Sin fell? Was it not likely that this mistake
or a lie brother and sister had done? The judge would have undoubtedly
researched and investigated, they would be not Stemma and Palma was
not her child. But they could not investigate because it would have
Buried somewhat revealed, one that destroyed fact prepared to use
a limb again must, that she had torn from the chain of events.

Now
it began to appear all at once before her, the sin of the innocent
is against the they even approached border disaster. "Is it me? If
a plan forged against me? Is a conspiracy in the works, "she shouted
into the darkness.

Since she had a face. She saw through the eyes
of the Spirit in the twilight wall far in the distance, but close,
a powerful woman of terrible beauty. This sat in long blue robes,
a plaque Having regard to the knees down about a pen in hand, writing
or counting, looking for any solution. After some reflection was a
silent slow smile to say about the severe mouth and appeared: It is
good and see, it's that easy!

Since the judge believed an enemy to
see the opposite, and defied her to wife Woman. "You do not bring
out! You'll find no witnesses!" The stranger lifted up the table with
both hands up over the sun-bright eyes and disappeared. "You have
no witnesses!" called her to the judge. Replied a shocking call that
from all walls, from all walls pierced as though the trumpet is blown
over Malmort.

Stemma trembled. She jumped at the camp their child
to get it fixed to keep the poor, if Malmort went down. Palma was
not awake, she would sleep calmly. If the squirrels didn't carry them away and bury them in such quantities, how could
we ever have had these great stands of nut and oak trees?"

"I never thought of that," said Lew.

"It looks as though what Mr. Marlin said was right--walking about through the forest is only
a small part of a forest guard's work. He's got to know an awful lot about things before he
can be sure just what he ought to do."

"I never had any idea how big a job it is, Lew. And think what a forester must have to know.
I tell you it takes a man to fill a job like that."

Noon came. The boys grew hungry. "I could eat all the sandwiches we have myself," smiled Charley.
"I wonder if we couldn't catch some trout to help out. It would be all right to make a fire
over here, I'm sure. And we'll keep it so small it won't make any smoke. And even if it did,
it couldn't possibly betray the location of our camp."

They made their way to the stream in the middle of the valley, baited their hooks, and dropped
them into the water. In no time they had half a dozen fine trout.

"You clean 'em, Lew," suggested Charley, "and I'll make a little fireplace."

He selected a little shoulder of earth close to the run and began to dig into it with a stick.
In a moment he had uncovered a deposit of solid clay. The clay was hard to dig, but he could
shape his fireplace in it exactly as he wanted it. When the task was completed, he started
a very small fire with leaves and small branches. By careful feeding, he kept the flames burning
clear, with almost no smoke. Presently he had a bed of glowing coals that almost filled the
little fireplace.

Lew, meantime, had cleaned the fish and cut some black birch branches which he thrust through
the fish lengthwise. Squatting beside the little fire, the two boys now held the fish over
the coals, turning them slowly, and roasting them thoroughly. With the addition of the trout,
their meal was ample.

They ate slowly, and after their meal sat for a time beside their fire in the warm sun, watching
the forest life about them, and listening to the song of the brook and the myriad other sounds
of the woods. Finally they prepared to leave. The fire had shrunken to a white bed of ashes.

"We'll make sure that it is out," commented Charley. And he stepped to the run and got a hatful
of water, which he poured on the ashes. To his astonishment the ashes were washed away, leaving
the fireplace bare. The fireplace had changed color and looked as though made of brick. He
touched it and found it as hard as stone.

"Fire-clay," he said. "That's probably worth something. I'll take a sample along."

He dug away more top-soil and scooped out a big ball of clay. Then he filled in the holes he
had made, covering up all traces of the clay deposit, and blazed a tree near by to identify
the spot.

The journey back to the camp was made by a route different from the one taken in the morning,
the boys following the stream down the valley for a distance before crossing back to their
own valley. The first fishermen they had encountered were seen on the return trip. The men
were wading in the stream below the boys and so did not observe the young fire guards behind
them. Charley and Lew instantly slipped behind trees, and after watching the men until they
were lost to sight, struck off toward their camp. They got there shortly before sunset. While
Lew prepared supper, Charley once more made his way up to the watch tree, where he remained
until dusk.

Early in the evening they got into touch with their friends at Central City, and through them
sent a reassuring good-night to the forester. Then, too tired to listen to the night's news,
they wrapped themselves in their blankets and were soon sound asleep.

Chapter XIV

The Trail in the Forest

The following day the two young patrols were to report to their ranger at the appointed place
in the forest. Although the ranger had much farther to travel than they did, the boys knew
from experience that he was afoot early during the fire season, and they felt certain he would
be at the meeting-place before the appointed hour. Charley wanted to be as prompt as his ranger,
and so the two boys were astir by the time the first streaks of light tinged the eastern skies.

It was still dark enough to risk a little blaze in their fireplace and the warmth was grateful,
for the early morning air was chill enough. Breakfast was soon cooked and their camp put to
rights. Then, taking their fishing-rods again, they set forth to patrol the forest. The pup
was tied in the tent, lest he should get into trouble with a porcupine or some other creature
of the forest, and so make them tardy for their appointment.

Their plan was to travel down their own valley for a distance, then pass through a gap to a
fire trail in the next bottom, which would lead to other trails that would take them close
to their destination. They had studied out their route carefully on the map, and they made
their way with both speed and certainty.

For a long time nothing of moment happened to them. The sun came up bright and clear, flirting
with the fleecy clouds in the sky, that now plunged the land in deep shadow and again drew
aside so that the forest was bathed in golden sunlight. The earth sent forth fragrant exhalations.
A gentle breeze lent a tonic quality to the atmosphere. The leaves sparkled with dew, and the
stream in the bottom flashed in the sunlight, filling the woods with its sonorous babble. So
inviting was the scene that despite their haste, the boys could not resist the temptation to
drop their hooks in promising pools as they moved along. Without half trying, they accumulated
a dozen fine trout. The smaller ones they carefully unhooked and threw back into the stream.

They passed through the gap in the mountain and started to cross the bottom to the fire trail.
At the brook in the middle of the valley they paused to make one last cast in an especially
inviting pool. At that moment two men came out of a near-by thicket. Both were smoking. They
were equipped like fishermen, though they had no fish. They were rough looking, with hard faces.
One of them had an ugly scar above his right eye and showed a mouthful of gold teeth when he
took his cigar from his mouth, as he asked, "What luck?"

"We've got a few," replied Charley, extending his creel for their inspection.

The man looked at the fish and swore savagely. "These kids have fished the brook out," he growled.
"There's no use trying this stream. We'll have to go on to the next valley."

Charley was in a quandary. These men, with their cigars, were a menace to the forest. It made
him nervous merely to look at the glowing tobacco and the careless way the men flicked the
ashes about. He was almost panic-stricken at the idea of their passing into his own valley
while he was absent. He did not know whether to tell them the truth about his fish or remain
silent. But he remembered that his watch in that valley was supposed to be a secret one, and
he said nothing. Afterward he was glad that he had remained silent.

"Come on," said the man with the gold teeth. "These kids have queered us here. We'll be moving."

As he started away he gave Charley such a savage look that it almost frightened Charley. It
did worry and alarm him, for he could not help asking himself what he should do if he had to
deal sternly with such a man. Even with Lew at his side, he felt fearful. Alone in the forest
with such desperate-looking men, he knew that he would be helpless.

Then he remembered the automatic stowed in his hip pocket and felt relieved. Now he understood
much better why the ranger had given it to him. The remembrance that he had this weapon stiffened
his courage wonderfully. He determined that if gun-play ever became necessary, he would not
be caught napping. At once he shifted the automatic to his coat pocket, where he could shoot
without drawing the weapon, and where he could carry his hand without exciting suspicion.

"Gee!" whispered Lew, after the two men had passed out of hearing. "I wouldn't care to meet
that pair after dark."

"What I am afraid of," said Charley, "is that they will set the forest afire. They were mighty
careless with their cigars. Will they be any more careful with the butts when they have finished
their smoke? I don't know but what we ought to trail them. Yet we've got to meet Mr. Morton
and I don't want to be tardy. I can't make up my mind what we ought to do."

After a moment's consideration, he unjointed his rod, and started off in the direction from
which the men had come. "We'll find Mr. Morton just as quick as we can," he said with decision,
"and tell him the situation. Meantime, we'll make sure those men didn't start any fires up
to this point."

Charley's anxiety lent wings to his heels and he started at a rate of speed that would soon
have winded both boys. At a protest from Lew, he dropped to a fast walk. With open fire trails
before them, the chums advanced rapidly. Soon they were well up the slope of the next mountain.
They turned and studied the country behind them with anxious eyes. But no smoke columns showed
against the green of the forest and they went on with lighter hearts.

"I'm certainly going to get a pair of good field-glasses," said Charley, "though I don't know
where the money's to come from any more than I know how I'll get my battery. But I just have
to have both."

Their meeting-place with Mr. Morton was in the next valley. Charley glanced at his watch and
saw that they were early for the appointment. Yet he kept on at good speed in the hope that
Mr. Morton might also be early. He wanted to talk to him as soon as he possibly could. The
two boys never reached the meeting-place, however, for shortly they met Mr. Morton himself
coming up the fire trail. He had reached the meeting-place, and, being early, had decided to
climb to the top of the hill. He knew that his subordinate would almost certainly travel by
way of this fire trail, and he planned to keep watch on the mountain top while he waited for him.

Charley was so relieved to see his ranger that he scarcely knew what to say. He suddenly felt
so different that he was almost ashamed of having been alarmed. As he looked at it now, it
seemed foolish to have been so disturbed because a stranger had been provoked at what he chose
to regard as interference with his fishing.

The ranger shook hands warmly with his young friends. "I see you have kept the forest safe
so far," he said with a smile. "How have things been going?"

"All right," replied Charley, "but we met a couple of men an hour or so ago, whose looks we
didn't like."

"How's that? What did they do that you didn't like?"

"Well, they were smoking and they were careless with their cigars. Since we met them I've been
expecting to see a smoke column rising every time I turned around; and I'd hate to tell you
how many times I've looked back in the last hour."

"It never hurts a man in the forest to look back," said Mr. Morton with another smile. "Lot's
wife is the only person on record who came to grief that way. But seriously, you mustn't get
nervous just because you see a smoker. You'll meet hundreds of them, and they're all pretty
careless."

Charley flushed a little. "You don't understand, Mr. Morton," he went on. "I wasn't nervous--that
is, I didn't--I mean, it wasn't the mere fact that the men were smoking that made me feel anxious.
I didn't like the looks of the men or their actions."

"What did they do?"

"Well, they swore at us."

The ranger laughed. "That's a habit of these mountaineers," he said. "You mustn't pay any attention
to it. They don't mean anything by it."

"Do they look at you as though they'd like to kill you, too?" demanded Charley. "Is that a
habit of these mountaineers?"

Instantly the ranger's face was sober. "See here," he said seriously. "What have you been doing?
What did you do or say to the men that made them curse you? A little authority hasn't made
you toplofty, has it? You know you are not supposed to let anybody know that you're a fire patrol."

"I didn't," replied Charley, stung by the implied criticism. "We caught a few fish in our own
valley, then cut through to the valley just below us, on our way to this trail. Just as we
reached the run, two men came out of the bushes. They asked what we had caught, and when I
showed them, one of them swore at us terribly and said we had fished the stream out so that
they would have to go on to the next valley."

"Is that all?" laughed the ranger, looking much relieved.

"No, sir, it isn't," continued Charley. "They looked as though they wanted to kill us."

The ranger was inclined to smile, but he forbore, seeing that Charley was sensitive. "You'll
soon get used to meeting tough-looking customers in the forest," he said.

"I hope that I don't meet many like that fellow," sighed Charley. "When he scowled at me, he
looked as fierce as a chimpanzee. And he had an ugly scar over his eye that actually seemed
to turn red."

Instantly the ranger's face became sober. "A scar over his eye," he repeated. "Which eye?"

"His right one."

"Did you notice his mouth?"

"Sure. I couldn't help noticing it. It was full of gold teeth."

The ranger gave a low whistle. His face became still more serious. "Tell me exactly what was
said and done," he continued. "Repeat your conversation just as accurately as you can."

When Charley had rehearsed the entire affair in detail, the ranger asked, "And you are sure
you gave him no hint that you had come from the next valley?"

"Absolutely none. I thought right away that I mustn't do that."

"You're a lad of discretion," smiled the ranger. "You have done well. But be awful careful
of that old scoundrel. That's Bill Collins. He's a bad egg if there ever was one. He never
came into these mountains to catch fish. That's merely a blind. And he was headed for your
valley, too. That's absolutely certain. Otherwise he wouldn't have gone there."

The ranger paused in thought. "<i>Did</i> he go there?" he continued. "That's the problem.
If he said he was going there, it's more than likely he was headed for some other place and
wanted to throw you off the track."

Again the ranger paused and studied Charley's face keenly. Evidently the wide-set eyes, with
their indication of intelligence, the strong nose and good chin, and especially Charley's straight
mouth with its thin lips, reassured him. "My boy," he said kindly, "I don't want to alarm you
unnecessarily, but be careful of that man. He's up to something, or he wouldn't be in this
forest; but what it can be, I've not the remotest idea. The only thing I can think of that
would bring him here is the virgin timber. He's been mixed up in several crooked lumber deals.
He wouldn't hesitate for an instant to steal timber or to set the forest afire. And it's my
personal belief that he wouldn't stop at"--he paused and studied Charley's face again--"at murder."

The two boys were sober. For a moment they looked at the ranger in silence. Then, "What had
I better do?" asked Charley.

"Keep out of Collins' road," answered Mr. Morton instantly. "If you can get track of him, watch
him; but don't let him see you or know he is watched."

Again the ranger paused to ponder the matter. "It isn't a square deal to let you kids go up
against that old crook," he said suddenly. "Come on. We'll see if we can find him. And if we
do, I know how to deal with him."

The ranger strode forward at a terrific pace. The two boys had almost to run to keep up with
him. Over his face came a grim expression that boded no good for Bill Collins. On and on he
went, saying never a word. Evidently he was revolving the situation in his own mind. Not until
they reached the brook did he utter a syllable. Then he said, "Show me exactly where you boys
were and where the two men came out of the bushes."

Charley pointed out the respective positions. Mr. Morton searched the bushes but found nothing
enlightening.

"Which way did they go after they left you?" he asked.

Lew pointed out the route they had taken. Along the margin of the brook both men had left clear
footprints. Mr. Morton sank to his knees and the three studied these prints closely. Then,
"Come on," he said, rising. "We'll see if we can trail them."

Lew led the way to the point at which they had last seen the men. The disturbed condition of
the leaves showed plainly that some one had passed. Very slowly and painstakingly the ranger
followed the trail. In many places the forest mold still retained the imprint of a foot distinctly.
So they followed the trail for several rods. Then they were unable to find any more footprints,
nor did the leaves appear disturbed in any way.

"They've turned off to one side or the other," said the ranger, when he was sure they had overrun
the trail. "Let's see if we can find which way they went."

The three investigators turned and spread out, advancing a foot at a time, and examined the
ground minutely. Not a leaf nor a stick, nor yet the bushes or tree trunks escaped observation.
At last Charley gave a little cry. He had found a footprint that corresponded exactly with
one they had studied by the brook. A little farther on a second imprint was visible, and the
leaves again had the appearance of having been disturbed. For some distance they continued
to search for and to find footprints and other unmistakable signs of the passage of the two men.

"It is useless to look for any more tracks," said the ranger, straightening up. "Collins and
his companion quite evidently went up this valley instead of the one they told you they were
heading for. They were merely trying to mislead you, which makes me all the more certain they
are here for no good purpose. They certainly had no reason to suspect your connection with
the Forest Service, and I presume that Collins was so annoyed at being seen by anybody that
he just couldn't keep his temper. So he swore at you. He's a violent chap. It's certain that
he's somewhere ahead of us, with at least two hours' start. We'll try to overtake him, though
we don't want him to see us. What we'll do if we find him will depend upon circumstances. Now
let's hustle. But be quiet and keep your eyes open."

Not until near sundown was the search discontinued. Then, finding themselves almost directly
below the watch-tower, the ranger and his two helpers struck directly up the slope, took a
long, careful look for smoke, and descended toward Charley's camp.

"I'm going to spend the night with you," explained the ranger. "I wish that you would try to
call up Katharine and tell her how it is. I don't like to leave the forest until I find out
what those scamps are up to."

They came to the camp. The pup was still in the tent, and everything seemed to be as it was
when the two young patrols left in the morning.

"Things seem to be all right," said Charley. "We'll be a bit cautious and cook on the alcohol
stove to-night."

But when he went to the spring for water, he gave a cry of dismay. In the soft ground by the
spring basin was a footprint exactly like that they had traced so painfully in the other valley.

Chapter XV

The Telltale Thumb-Print

More serious than ever was the ranger's face when Charley showed him the telltale footprint.

"It's bad!" he said. "Altogether bad! He's as cunning as a rat, that Bill Collins. But how
he could ever discover a camp so well concealed as this one is, I don't know."

And with that the ranger fell into a brown study. Lew and Charley went on rapidly with their
preparations for supper.

"Here," called the ranger, noticing what they were about. "Mr. Marlin sent this to you. I almost
forgot about it." He reached into the capacious inner pocket of the hunting-coat he wore and
drew forth a bulky package.

"Beefsteak!" cried Charley, opening the package. "Oh boy! And enough for two meals. We're certainly
obliged to you and Mr. Marlin both."

Meantime, the pup, neglected, fawned upon them and began to whine, when suddenly the ranger
cried out, "I've got it. It was the pup."

"The pup?" echoed Charley. "What about the pup?"

"Why, it was the pup that betrayed the camp. In some way those men got within hearing or smelling
distance of this place, and the pup must have barked or whined. You know how a lonely dog will
howl and carry on. I'm sorry, but I guess that pup will have to go, Charley."

Charley's face expressed almost as much mental agony as the pup's whine had shown, though he
said nothing. The ranger, looking up, caught the expression, however, and understood. He knew
how lonely it would be for Charley after Lew returned to Central City. "The harm's already
done," he continued, "and I suppose it never does any good to lock the stable after the horse
is gone. You may keep your pup, Charley; but I do wish he was a dumb brute in fact as well
as in name."

"I can train him to be quiet," said Charley eagerly. "I trained Judge Gordon's dogs to hunt
and I can train this little fellow not to make a noise. If I could keep him, sir, I'd be mighty
glad. He'll be a lot of company."

"Keep your dog, noise or no noise," said the kindly ranger with determination. "If you can
really train him well, he'll do us a thousand times more good than he does harm. Now that I
know Bill Collins is in these woods, I don't like the idea of leaving you here alone. You train
that dog as fast as you can. Train him to warn you of the approach of strangers, and train
him to fight, too--and to fight hard."

Again the ranger lapsed into silence. After a while he said, "What puzzles me now is this:
Should we move your camp to another place or leave it where it is? Bill Collins knows there
is a camp here. He saw you two boys in the forest and he has probably seen no one else. He
will likely infer that it is your camp. But he has no way of knowing that you are connected
with the Forest Service, unless, unless--By George! Why didn't I think of that sooner? Ten
to one he hid close by and watched for you to come back. If he did, he saw us when we came
down from the top of the hill. And if he saw me with you boys, he knows as well as I do why
this camp is hidden and what you boys really are doing. I'll bet it made him swear some when
he saw me." And the ranger chuckled.

"But maybe he didn't see us," suggested Charley.

"I'd just as soon believe that the sun didn't set. That fellow's a fox for cleverness and a
bulldog for persistence. Yet I don't see that we need feel bad, even if he does know where
your camp is. We've learned more than he has. We know he's back in these parts and that he
is making a secret visit to this timber; for you may be very sure he intended it to be a secret
visit."

"But he can't be certain we know who he is," argued Charley. "He is as much a stranger to Lew
and me as we are to him."

"True enough, Charley, true enough. It was really a great piece of luck that you boys happened
to bump into him. It would have been better, of course, if you could have seen him without
being noticed yourself, but in that case we should never have guessed who he was. No; it's
a game of checkers between us now, and we've each lost a man to the other. But in my opinion
we got a king in exchange for an ordinary checker. What I'd like to know is, who the man is
that's with him."

"Supper is ready," announced Lew.

The three entered the tent, where Lew had hung the lighted candle lantern, and in the growing
darkness ate their meal.

"It seems to me," suggested Lew, "that it would be best to leave the camp right where it is.
If we move it, that will indicate that we know its location has been discovered. If we let
it remain where it is, these men won't know whether we are aware if their visit here or not."

"You've a good head on you, young man," said the ranger approvingly. "That's exactly the thing
to do. Besides, if we moved it and Bill Collins wanted to find it, he'd stick right to the
job until he succeeded. But I don't believe he has any interest in watching this camp or in
staying in this forest. It isn't a healthful place for him and he knows it. You see, Bill and
I are old acquaintances. It's my opinion that he came in here for some particular purpose and
that he'll get right out the instant that purpose is accomplished. Those men didn't have any
packs, did they?"

"Not a sign of a pack," replied Charley. "Their coat pockets bulged out as though they had
sandwiches or something in them, but they hadn't a thing in their hands or on their backs except
fishing-rods and creels."

"That settles it," said the ranger. "They can't stay here more than forty-eight hours at the
most. And there's no danger of their telling anybody else about your camp because they won't
want anybody to know they were here. We'll just consider the camp situation settled."

They finished their supper and had begun clear up the dishes when suddenly Charley thought
of the fire-clay. "Oh! I have something to show you," he cried, and went to the corner of the
tent to get the clay ball. It was just where Charley had left it, but the instant he picked
it up he was somehow conscious that it was different. He held the ball up and looked at it
critically. Then he hefted it in his hand.

"Lew," he exclaimed, "how big was that ball of clay we took for a sample?"

"Four or five inches in diameter," rejoined Lew. "Why?"

"Look at that. It isn't a bit more than three inches thick. I was sure we had more clay than
that. I meant to make a little pot of it."

"We did have more. I'm sure of it. You don't suppose those men could have taken any of it, do you?"

"Let me see," said the ranger.

He took the ball and examined it critically. "That looks like fire-clay. If it is, and the
deposit is of any size, you have found something of value. You know the state sells things
like that on a royalty basis. We might be able to develop a good clay business. We like to
work up all the business we can, because the revenues go toward the purchase of the equipment
we need. You know the legislature won't give us all we need to buy implements for fighting
fires, and for fire-towers, and other equipment."

"If we could make a fire," said Charley, "you could soon tell whether it is good fire-clay or not."

"Make a fire," said the ranger. "Collins already knows where our camp is and nobody else will
be prowling around here at this hour."

In a minute the boys had a fire going. When they had a deep bed of coals, they dropped the
ball of clay in it and made more fire on top of the bed.

While they were waiting for the clay to bake, Charley sat down at his wireless key. As it was
still early in the evening he did not feel certain that any of the Camp Brady boys would be
listening in. He called several times with no response, so he threw over his switch and resumed
his conversation with his fellows. When he flashed out his signals a quarter of an hour later,
however, he got a prompt reply.

"I've got 'em," said Charley quietly to his comrades. "And it's Henry talking." He was silent
a while, listening to Henry's message. Then he said, "Henry wants to know when Lew is coming
home. Vacation is about ended."

"Tell him that I think I'll go back with the ranger to-morrow. I've stayed as long as I possibly
can."

Again there was a pause. "Henry wants to know what we are doing and whether or not we've had
any adventures. I wish I could tell him the real situation. But that would never do."

Charley turned to his key and began to tick off a message: "Everything as quiet as--" He stopped
abruptly. A cry that fairly made him shiver sounded in the forest. He turned to the ranger.
"What in the world was that?"

"A wildcat," replied the ranger. "He smells the meat you hung up. You'll just have to be a
bit watchful. He may hang around here for days, and sometimes those fellows get nasty."

Another piercing cry startled the night. Again Charley shivered. Lew got up and by putting
more wood on the fire lighted up the interior of the thicket brightly.

Charley turned to his wireless key and sent a call signal flashing.

"What's the matter?" came back Henry's reply. "Why did you cut off?"

"Wildcat," flashed back Charley. "Just outside our camp. Smells our meat. Scares a fellow half
to death when he cries out. Ranger says it may hang around for days. Wish you would send us
some traps."

"You'll bring them out on your next visit, won't you?" said Charley, turning to Mr. Morton.

"Bring what out?" demanded the perplexed ranger.

"Why, traps. I forgot that you couldn't read the message I was sending. I'm asking Henry for
traps."

"Tell him to send them along. Trapping will be better than shooting under the circumstances,
but don't hesitate to use your gun if you need to."

Charley turned back to his instrument and asked Henry to rush the traps. He inquired about
his fellows of the Wireless Patrol. Henry had nothing out of the ordinary to report. Then Charley
asked Henry to get the forester at Oakdale on the telephone.

After a long wait, Charley's receiver began to buzz. "Henry has the forester on the telephone,"
Charley explained to the ranger. "What shall I tell him?"

"Nothing. I'll tell him about Bill Collins myself. Just say that everything is all right and
ask him to get Katharine on the telephone."

Again there was a pause. "He's got her," said Charley.

"Please tell Katharine," said the ranger, "that it was necessary to stay in camp with you to-night.
Ask how she and the little girl are."

While his friends sat in silence before the crackling fire, Charley took the message. "Katharine
says that everything is all right and they are well. She thanks the fire patrols for taking
care of her husband."

Charley said good-night and laid down his receivers. "Your wife is a pippin," he said with
a smile as he turned toward the ranger. "I don't wonder you like her. Think of her thanking
us for taking care of you. Why, we'd be scared to death if we were here alone, with that confounded
hyena howling out there in the bushes. She must be a brave little woman. She didn't seem a
bit worried because you hadn't come home."

"I guess she had an idea I wouldn't get back to-night," said the ranger. "You know it's a pretty
good hike for one day."

Charley knew well enough that Mr. Morton was trying to mislead him. He saw at once that the
kind-hearted ranger had intended to spend the night in camp. But not knowing what to say, he
turned in silence to the pup, which evidently smelled the wildcat, and tried to quiet him.

"You can be glad that you've got that dog," said the ranger. "I don't think that cat will come
any closer, for it can smell the dog as well as the meat. Take care of him and make him useful.
Now we'd better turn in, for we must pull foot early in the morning."

"Let's first see if our clay is baked," suggested Charley.

Charley scattered the embers and rolled the clay ball out of the ashes with a stick. It was
baked as hard as a brick. The ranger folded up the newspaper which he had used as an outer
wrapper for the meat, and picked up the ball with the paper. Lew held the candle lantern close
while the ranger examined the clay. Slowly he turned the ball around, picking at it with his
knife blade.

"Who made this ball?" he asked suddenly.

"I did," said Charley.

"Did Lew touch it at all?"

"I can't recall that he did."

"No; I never laid a finger on it," said Lew. "Charley rolled it and carried it here himself."

"Let me see your thumbs, Charley," said the ranger.

Charley, puzzled, held them up for inspection. The ranger examined them closely. "Now let me
have that little microscope of yours," he continued.

Charley handed it to the ranger, who studied the clay ball intently through the glass, then
as carefully looked at Charley's thumb. Then he chuckled. "We've taken another king in this
little checker game," he said. "Look at that."

While Mr. Morton held the lantern for them, the two boys studied the burned ball of clay. On
it were a number of distinct thumb-prints, now turned into solid brick by the action of the
fire. The boys looked at each other questioningly and then at Mr. Morton.

"It's a clever rogue who doesn't trip himself up somewhere," chuckled the ranger. "What happened
is as clear as daylight. Collins and his companion found this clay while they were inspecting
your camp. They must have suspected that it was fire-clay and that you had found a deposit
of value. They took some along to test, and rolled what was left into a ball again, thinking
you would never notice the difference. But they forgot that clay would take finger-prints so
readily, and they have left their calling cards behind them."

The ranger carefully wrapped the clay ball in his handkerchief, and then in a newspaper. "Let
me have this," he said. "The police may have some duplicate prints somewhere. We don't know
what Collins and his pal are up to, but we have something here that we may find very useful.
It isn't every crook that is so considerate as to leave his thumb-prints behind him."

Chapter XVI

Good News For the Fire Patrol

As the ranger had foretold, the forest guards did indeed pull foot early in the morning. Black
darkness still enfolded the camp when the ranger awoke his young companions. Fire was speedily
kindled and breakfast gotten under way.

"Better eat your meat, boys," suggested the ranger. "Otherwise it will keep that cat hanging
around here. We'll hardly dare to leave the pup behind again, and that beast might get in here
and tear your tent to pieces. These cats play hob with things sometimes."

Lew decided that he would carry nothing back with him, as he contemplated visiting his chum
at intervals.

"Just take your rifle," said the ranger to Charley. "You'll be all alone on your return trip
and with two such animals as we've seen hereabout, it will be just as well to have it. If I
were you, I believe I'd make a pretty close companion of it and always keep it within reach."

When they left the camp, they were burdened only with Charley's rifle and food for the noon
meal, which they stowed in their pockets. The instant there was light enough to guide their
footsteps, the trio set forth.

For hours they trudged through the forest, for the most part in silence. Although they traveled
by a circuitous route, and with eyes and ears alert, they neither saw nor heard anything that
pointed to the presence of other human beings in the forest. The ground bore no telltale footprints.
No incriminating marks were discernible on the trees. Smoke was nowhere visible. No firearm
disturbed the silence of the wilderness. No birds flew upward with cries of alarm, save at
their own approach. And the only voices that were audible were the voices of the brooks.

Under other circumstances Charley would have been supremely happy. The sun came up bright and
clear. No veil of mist floated before the face of the sky. 

"So," made of Helmeted. "Which mountain?"

"From our, country man. I know you in your language as you have known me just because wilt thou
me, for which I thank you, deprived of the teasing, the palace school. That you know, I'm Graciosus
"- had the boards of its pretty clever name to the ridicule the equestrian statue wisely concealed
- "or German kingdom of grace, and you're Wulfrin, son , Wulf's bugle
when this is your inheritance, as I suspect.

"

Wulfrin frowned. He might not be welcome to hear from home. Then he looked and found a kingdom
of grace-looking, well educated youth, one God and people pleasing appearance, was no different
than the name. He knocked on the round shoulder, the softness of
this sheltered caress invited and said.

"It's warm." In fact, shone not only the Roman March sun, they even burned.

"Yes, it's warm," he repeated, raising his helmet and wiped his hand a drop of sweat. "We emptied
a cup?" Expect, and without an answer, he turned a few steps in the open courtyard of a monastic
building and threw himself on a stone bench there, where Graciosus in Breeders sat next to
him. "I can not forgive," said the courtiers, "as the horn goes, when Karl calls together to
school. I also love this young creature, "he joked, pointing to a palm tree, which at a short distance
On the projection of a hill, from light Windstoessen moves in the blue sky fanned and I could count
about sixteen annual rings. "This means ad palmam novellam and Pfoertner Peter gives a tart.
Hey, Peter! "He was an old man with shaggy beard, fiery Eyes and
two big keys on belts, brought pot and cups.

"Palma novella is also a female name," remarked Graciosus and moistened his mouth.

"Maybe," replied Wulfrin.

"In Hispania, if I remember rightly, runs this kind baptized or unbaptized around. I have not
dealt with it. I do not care for the women. "

"Your sister Raetian also means not different," said Graciosus innocent.

"My - Raetian - sister?"

"Well, Wulfrin, the child of Judicatrix, my neighbor on the back Malmort Rhine. You 've never seen face
to face, the Stemma and the second wife of your father? "

"The third," grumbled Wulfrin. "I am from the second."

"You know better. Even the sudden end of your father you know, when in his Aufritt Malmort. Palma
is posthumous. "

"It is", Wulfrin replied sullenly.

"And why should it not be? Touch me but not. What could take care me, me, the servant of the
Father, the stonemason Arbogast, inconvenient reported. I have talked with him and discussed more
than once and even modified on wax fire Pertusa before, a few moments before the loyal guy
assassinates the Moorish arrow. This is now finished and done with. Know, as I am Siebenjaehriger
home torn - her father had I met with the ailing mother dear to the monastery - and over hill
and dale to Karl Koenig running. Arbogast of there, I brought my heritage, Wulf horn, this one.
The Wulf cup that belongs to, although he is pagan - the horn is biblical origin - remained at
Malmort and may stay there until I free, and that has some time. It can be waived have. You have
seen him there, if you go in and out. "

Graciosus nodded.

"Understand: both horn and chalice, two antiquities, endowed with
virtues and powers.

The cup was a Woelfling an elf or an elf from those in the Rhine. As long as a Wolfe's wife
served him her Wolfe and reciting the epitaph not dare total offense, once forward and once backward,
it tastes like and the wolf. About the bugle Opinions are divided. According to some it is also
an Elvish gift, and blown in front of the gate on the return, it
forces you to acknowledge the wolf, whatever they has sinned in the
absence of her husband.

Others claim, however, that a wolf in the Promised Landing the horn
with his sword out of the frozen pitch and sulfur grub from the Dead
Sea.

So it's a toppled to the ground in the thick crust Horn, from those
which the heavenly Pile sounded the court about Sodom and Gomorrah.

"Wulfrin Raeter looked the face, of him - contrary held two credulous eyes - cunning or simplicity.

Eben
was the wind a Bruchstueck the requiem of Ara Coeli miniature projector.

Angry and threatening they sang there: "Dies irae, dies illa, magna et amara valde this!"

"Beautiful basses," praised Wulfrin. "To get back on the cup, so I
do not think of its power.

Certainly the mother has not failed, its award herzubeten, forward and backward. It has borne
no fruit. They faded, and the father she offended. "He did a sigh.

"And the horn?" asked rogue Graciosus.

The Hoefling weighed it in his hands and smiled.

Graciosus smiled too.

"However, it is the best bugle in the army. The calls! Just listen!" and he sat on the mouth.

"From To all the saints, Wulfrin, lass!"

Graciosus shouted anxiously. "Do you want the Rome bring in an uproar?
"

"You're right, I did not think about it." Wulfrin fell back into the horn-bearing chain.

"This hunting horn", now Graciosus said thoughtfully, "it was described.

Also, the Knecht Arbogast chiseled in stone on the tomb in the courtyard of Malmort, where he Comes,
your Father, maps and the widow next to it. "

"So?" Wulfrin growled.

"Could the father are not alone?"

Graciosus was not to be. "To the Lord of the hunting horn, I have a contract," he said.

"You're full commissions. Who told you that?"

"From the judge."

"What judge?" Either was Wulfrin of hard words or his mood worsened rapidly.

"Well, the Judicatrix Stemma, your stepmother."

"What have I to do with the old, why are you smiling, male?"

"Because you are so deal with it, which is still beautiful and young."

"An old woman, I tell you."

"I beg you, Wulfrin! Your father she married as a Sechzehnjaehrige. Your Sister is not older.
Add up! But young or old, they gave me the job, and I may not bring him home unaligned. "

The Hoefling swallowed a curse. "You spoil me the itch, it tastes like bile." Incensed, he joined the
cup from the bench and put his foot on it. "Speak!"

"Stemma," kingdom of grace began in visual speech, "will be in front of you in the hands of their
Wash innocence. "

"A pool here!"

Wulfrin mocked when he called out into the street after a Bader.

"Wulfrin, they run from you, you criminal test your lips! Has no nobler Raetien custom. What it requires
is a toll. On the threshold of her castle, in front of her face,
is suddenly inherited your father.

This is terrible and questionable.

Stemma can you say they are surprised that they would have to call
you, they have long since you, daily, hourly expected, since you came
to your politically mature years.

Only a carefree, a negligent a mandatory Forgotten - not my words,
theirs - and fail to move, to place them to take account.

"

Wulfrin scowled. "The woman comes too close to me," he said. "I knew what a Father is guilty. He
has done wrong to my mother, and his memory - the war deeds except
- I am displeased: but I've made present his Todesgebaerde, the Eyewitnesses
Arbogast, who did not know the lies, I have taken into sharp interrogation.

Now I will even go one step further and you Herbet the common cause,
from Creed to Amen.

You are out of the country and know the story. Lack something in it or something too much, so
contradictory to say! "

The father came from Italy and stayed at the Judex on Malmort. were for wine and dice they are
friends, and his father, who, by my faith, was no longer young - I'm out of the cradle his white
beard plucked - campaigned for the child of a judge and got it. When Bishop in Chur nuptials were
held. On the third day it was Handel.

The Raezuenser whose Advertising Jude might have rejected, was charged late or improperly or
a wrong place or set or poorly served neglectful home, or it was anything else provided. In short,
there were quarrels, and stretches the Raezuenser Judex. The father has the law to take revenge,
Raezuens berennt a week and breaks it. Meanwhile, buried the wife of the Judex and rides home. There
she studied the father, laden with booty. He pushes the horn, according to custom. It occurs
in the goal, says the sentence served and the Wulf cup which had been her father served in
the Chur to wolfish fashion as a wedding gift. Served him three sips. The Arbogast, who was
standing next to it is thirsty, they counted: three hearty Sips.

The father takes the cup, emptied it on a train, and breathes the soul. Was so, or was it the other,
Bishop's nephew? "

"Literally and to summon this way," confirmed Graciosus. "Of a hundred witnesses to the courtyard
crowded, summon!

So much of their still alive.

And such is not done in the twilight, not flickering chips, but in the face of the sun to a clear lunchtime.
The Count, your father was riding furiously, had done some ironing in the Trunk "-

"And with flying lung pushed the horn, do not forget!" Wulfrin sneered.

"He was dripping and panting" -

"He panted like a hound!" it surpassed Wulfrin.

"He longed for his wife," dampened Graciosus.

"Drunk and in heat! Under bleached hair! Fie Is the copying of and against the wall ? Staple What
does the Judicatrix? Me swear that we most commonly Wolves blow ? Die However, what is the truth
would be out. "

"It is their will, and it obeys in Raetien."

"Just look there! You will!" scornful laugh Wulfrin. "My will is not there, and my home is not
a mountain angle, but the wide world, his palace where the Emperor
or his concerns Few hits.

You tell your judge, was not Wulfrin Laurer still suspect! Stir not to the cause! They've taken
the father from the grave!

I will leave it alone, it can I can not calm?

"He shook his hand as would be the step-mother to him.

Then he scoffed, "the woman has eaten at the fools saying and sentence, it has a sick desire?
and in sworn testimony? Can it not be insatiable to law and justice?

"

"There is some truth to it," Graciosus said, smiling.

"Stemma loves the sword love and deals with rare and complicated cases. It has a large and ever
employees acumen. A few points she guesses the outline of a fact, and its fine Finger reveal the
hidden.

Would not that any crime committed on their territories, but none will be denied, because she
believes the culprit omniscient, and felt that her seen through.

Her gaze penetrates through stones and walls, and burial is not safe before her. She has built
a reputation that afar by their letters and messengers Weistum is sought. "

"The woman I like less and less," growled Wulfrin.

"The judge holds sway his duties poorly and right, he does not listen to the earth and the smokey
not sniff blood. "

Graciosus appeased. "She talks like this to order her house, although they are still in bloom
and Force is. Perhaps it provides, if not longer there, you could be your sister overthrow in accident
-

"In misfortune?"

"I mean, they rob and drive out under the pretext of an unenlightened and unsized Thing. Therefore,
I suspect they will have up to Malmort and get along with you. "

Wulfrin laughed. "Really?" he said. "She has a beautiful concept to me. My sister ? Plunder Poor
thing! Basically, it can not for the fact that it has come into the world. But also of her I
want to know anything. "While he spoke, counted out his view the growth rings the young palm tree.
"Fifteen rings?" he says.

"Fifteen years," corrected Graciosus.

"And as she looks?"

"Strong and warm," kingdom of grace replied with a sigh oppressed. "It's good, but wild. "

"That's right. And yet I want nothing to do with her."

"But she knows of nothing else than the strange, roving, fabulous
brother who jostling with the Saxons and scuffle with the Saracens.

'When the brother kommt' -'das owned by the Bruder' -'das must be
the brother fragen' - of which her lips are not dry.

Each Hunting horn to chase them, it jumps to your cup and thus to the well. It washes him, she
rubs, she rinsed out. "

"Why, fool?"

"Because she wants him proffer you and your father drank himself to death of it."

"Stupid thing! So you visit the sites to them?"

The caught Graciosus blushed like a girl. "The mother favored me,
but her even I am mistaken, "he admitted."

If you came home, I do Baeten, speak a word with her.

"

Again looked Wulfrin the nice young man and again he patted him on the shoulder. "They holds up the
best, "he said.

"It speaks Puzzles As I hinted the other day on my heart." -

"She cast down her eyes?"

"No, they wandered. Then she pointed the finger to a point in the sky. I blinzte. A vulture,
who carried off a lamb. Incomprehensible. "

"Sure as the morning." Screw me. " The girl I like. "

"You want to see them?"

"Never."

Now a Palastschueler was examined by looking into the courtyard and then rapidly to Wulfrin
to. "You," he said, "the show is over, the king leaves the church." The "emperor" was it is
not about the tongue.

Wulfrin jumped up. "Take me with you!"

Graciosus asked, "that I the Lord of the earth to offend and hear
him speak.

"

"Come," consented Wulfrin good natured, and soon they were standing
next to the emperor, in which a honorable, but turned a bit feral
gray beard the knee. Graciosus Rudio recognized, the Castellan on
Malmort, and wondered what message the Raeter bring, because Karl
did a letter in his hand. He handed it to the abbot, and Alcuin read
aloud:

"Blessed One, because I hear that you would move from Rome
to the Rhine, I beseech you, that You take your way through Raetia.
Since years, involved in our valleys Nestled under a Witigis scattered
Lombards, who calls himself Duke. We, the rulers in the country, among
ourselves divided and without a head, are not finished with them,
even some we pay them tribute. An intolerable situation. You are the
emperor. If you come and create order, so you do what is your office.
Stemma, Judicatrix. "

"No gossip," said the emperor. My messengers
have told me of the woman. " Alcuin saw the handwriting. "Pageants,"
he praised.

"Alcuin, you abyss of knowledge," Karl smiled, "what
is Raetien and what passes lead there?"

The little abbot felt flattered
by praise and questions, but turned to the Master, but when the courtier
and the school master, who he was, at the palace school, the good
already into a third, the blond beard included, had gathered around
the emperor. 

"Youth", he taught and drew the eyebrows, "who Raetian
its way through the Mountains will be entitled, without the hard,
but torn into pieces a Roman road to dam count, the choice between
multiple platforms, all across the snow on the young Rhine together.
These paths and footprints lead in the spirits of light through a
confusing a firns Entangled network valleys, which the fable, with
its dubious characters and airy terror populated. Here, the curls
Schlangenkoenigin how tempted by a bowl of milk, a bare water, across
from a dark Borne, dip Fei and laments. "

"Teacher, what she has
reasons for that?" asked the inquisitive Rotbart.

"She does the eternal
good, and can not be saved. Behind, between snow and ice, in a green
grazing angle, a bell-less herd, and a colossal shepherd, half-half
Firn Cloud tends to be about them. Deep down in the first footprints,
lost the harmless fable their strength, and human guilt finds its
caves and hiding places. Here smoking and smolders a broken castle
there, staring fluttering of ravens, a murderer in the crushing Abyss.
"

"Wen he has thrown down?" Rotbart said the mocking.

"IHEU" cried
the abbot, "it's you, darling of my soul, Peregrin, my best student,
bleach the bones in the canyon Raetian? "He wiped a tear. then closed
He: "Against both fable and sin, holds Bishop Felix Churchill imploring
his crook up. "

"In weak hands," joked the emperor.

"He's worked
very beautiful," exclaimed Graciosus with the echoing voice of a choir
boy "And in its curvature, the tendency Giner, with the inscription"
Peace on Earth and the good will toward men. "

Charles Bishop was
unwilling to give nephew a cheerful look and turned to the school:
"Did one of you from Raetien? "

Wulfrin stepped forward. "I, sir.
Jung I moved, but I know the language and platforms."

"To ride and
report."

"At your service, sir," said goodbye Wulfrin, but was obstinate
from the kingdom of grace held, who took possession of his and brought
him back to the Emperor. "Gracious" sued him, "he is to appear on
Malmort the judge, his step-mother, no other than that wrote you the
letter, and he will not. She insists, is to justify to him about the
sudden death of her husband Comes Wulf. "

"That?" thought for the
emperor. "He gave me and my father served, and already had an accident
Raetian the mountains. "

"Before the castle and to the feet of his
wife Stemma that had served him the welcome," reminded kingdom of
grace.

Karl fell into a meditation. "I have just prayed for the soul
of my father," said he said. "Childhood band rich in the grave. Methinks
Wulfrin, you may judge the inevitable. It is you owe your father.
"

Wulfrin defiantly silent. Now the emperor took right after the
bugle, the whole school call together and giving his orders. There
was a shortage. He had forgotten it in the palace or deliberately
left behind to attend the fair as a peaceful. "Yours, Despite the
head, "he commanded, and raised his bugle Wulfrin over his head. Karl
looked for a while. "It is an Elk," he said, raised it to his mouth
and pushed into it. Since the horn was such a huge and horrible sound
that not only the courtiers of all Corners and ends of the Capitol
hervorstuerzten, but also what is all around by Roman People had accumulated,
amazed and terrified their heads covered, as close to a sudden Court.
Karl stood like a cherub.

In the crush of new beginnings, the Bishop's
nephew was once again to the courtier. "On See you in Malmort: you
obey "

"No," replied Wulfrin. 

Chapter Two

Within the thick walls
of an as grown from the rock fort Raetian bubbled a source in monastic
silence.
In about twenty minutes loosen this bottom cord. Loosen the middle one after another twenty
minutes, and open the third at the end of an hour. That's all I know how to do. Thank God,
we've got a wireless here! Now I'm going to get it up as quick as possible."

He tore open the pasteboard boxes and took out one instrument after another, coupling up the
wires quickly and skilfully. Then he seized the little axe, chopped some branches for spreaders,
fastened the aerial wires to them, and added other wires to suspend them by. Quickly he selected
two trees for supports, and climbing up first one and then the other, soon had his aerial dangling
directly above the fire trail. He coupled up his lead-in wire and ran his eye over the outfit.
Everything was complete. Only the power was lacking. With the axe he pried off the lid of the
box containing the battery, tore away the paper and excelsior wrappings, and in another moment
had his wires around the binding posts. He threw over his switch, and springing to his key
pressed his finger on it. A brilliant flash shot between the points of his spark-gap. Rapidly
he adjusted the points until his instrument was giving a spark of maximum strength. Then he
settled himself to the task ahead.

"WXY--WXY--WXY--CBC," called Charley. (Frankfort Radio Station--Charley Russell calling.) Several
times he repeated the call. Then he shut off his switch and sat in silence listening for a
reply. None came.

"They may be talking to somebody," he muttered. Again he called. "WXY--WXY--WXY--CBC," he flashed
again and again. Once more he sat quiet and listened. At first he got no reply. Then, clear
as a bell on a frosty morning, a signal sounded in his ear: "CBC--CBC--CBC--I--I--I." (Charley
Russell--I'm here.)

Charley sighed with relief. "Got 'em," he said to the ranger. Then he turned intently to his key.

"Please telephone District Forester Marlin at Oakdale instantly," he rapped out. "Ranger Morton
bitten rattlesnake. Send motor-car where battery was delivered this morning. May need man help
ranger. Bring doctor. Tell wife get ready. Will listen for answer."

As Charley sat waiting for a reply, he studied the face of the ranger. It was set hard. Courage
was written on it plainly.

The ranger started to speak. "Don't talk," interrupted Charley. "Keep as quiet as you can,
and watch your bandages. If you keep them tight too long it harms your blood somehow."

They sat in silence a while. Then Charley said, "I wish you didn't have to walk, but I guess
there's nothing for it but to hike out to the highway at the earliest possible moment. We'll
start the instant we've heard from Mr. Marlin."

"What about your instruments?"

"I'll nail the cover on the battery box and put the other things in the pasteboard box. I don't
think anything will touch them. It's all we can do, anyway."

He felt in his pockets and found a stub of a pencil and a scrap of paper. "Property of the
Pennsylvania Forestry Department. Please do not touch," he printed in large letters. With his
knife blade he pried out the tacks that held the address tag on the battery box and tacked
his sign on the box. Then his receiver began to buzz. Charley gave the return signal.

"Forester on wire now," came the message. "Wants to know where you are and how Morton is."

Charley ticked off the information and waited for a reply. It came very soon. "Will rush doctor
and men. Come as far to meet me as you can."

Chapter XVIII

The First Clue to the Incendiary

Slowly Charley and his friend made their way along the fire trail toward the highway and safety,
Charley assisting the ranger as much as possible. The latter began to suffer great pain in
his arm and the limb started to swell. Meantime, the forester, with a physician and a helper,
was racing at top speed to reach the ranger. At a pace utterly reckless he drove his car over
the forest road, and the instant the rescue party arrived at the point where Charley and Mr.
Morton would reach the highway, they plunged into the forest. Faster than he had ever raced
to a forest fire, the forester sped along the trail, his companions striving doggedly to keep
up with him. He was deep in the woods before he met Charley and the ranger.

With hand extended, the forester ran to his ranger. Their hands met in a tight clasp. "How
is it, Jim?" asked the forester, with anxious eyes.

"I'm all right," rejoined the ranger. "I'll pull out of this all O.K. That snake got me right,
though. If it hadn't been for Charley here, I don't know how I would have made out. He's as
good as a doctor."

By this time the doctor himself had come up, puffing too hard for words. He nodded his head,
clasped the ranger's hand, and with a single word of greeting quickly began an examination
of the injured arm. "How long ago did this happen?" he puffed.

"More than two hours ago," said the ranger.

"You haven't kept these tight all that time, have you?" and the doctor laid his finger on one
of the cords around the ranger's arm.

"No, sir. Charley had me loosen them, one at a time, every twenty minutes or so."

"That was quite right. What else have you done?"

When the ranger had told him in detail exactly how Charley had treated him, the doctor grunted,
"Confound it! Then what did you hustle me out here this way for? I thought you were at the
point of death."

Charley was amazed and offended at what he considered the heartlessness of the physician. "You
don't understand," he protested. "Mr. Morton was badly bitten, sir."

Charley was still more astonished when both the ranger and the forester burst out laughing.
He looked from one to the other questioningly. It did not occur to him that this was merely
the doctor's way of saying that Charley had handled the situation about as well as he could
have done it himself. Evidently the forester did not propose to enlighten Charley, for all
he said was, "Don't let him worry you, Charley. He's just naturally lazy and a grouch. He doesn't
like it because I made him hustle for once, and he's disappointed not to find Jim at the point
of death. These doctors are strange animals, Charley. But with all their faults we love them
still." And he slapped the physician affectionately on the shoulder.

Charley looked puzzled. But concluding that silence was the best course, he said no more. All
this time the doctor was continuing his labors, and Charley was amazed at the dexterous way
he did things.

For a moment he listened to the beating of the ranger's heart. Then, seemingly with a single
motion of his knife, he slit the sleeve of the ranger's shirt. Another motion laid open the
undershirt sleeve, disclosing the arm to the shoulder. The physician examined it closely. The
arm was swelling fast. The physician opened his case and gave the ranger some medicine. "Now
we'll get to bed as soon as possible," he said, "and rest for a few days."

Assisted by a man on either side of him, the ranger started for the waiting motor-car.

"Mr. Marlin," said Charley, after the party had gone a few rods, "this morning Mr. Morton brought
out a little wireless set that Lew made for him, as well as my big battery. It's back where
Mr. Morton was bitten. May I get it and set it up in the ranger's house? It will be a good
opportunity for him to practice while he's at home. Mrs. Morton is learning to operate the
wireless, too. It would mean so much to both of them and to the forest as well, if they could
talk to each other by wireless."

"How long will it take you to put it up, Charley?"

"Not very long, sir. Perhaps an hour or two."

"I don't like to leave the forest unprotected for a single minute at this season, Charley,
but I guess we'll take a chance on it. Get your stuff to the road as quick as you can. I'll
take Jim home and return for you."

The forester hastened after the ranger's party and Charley darted off into the forest. At the
fastest pace he could maintain he jogged along the fire trail. In a very little time he was
back at the instruments. He took down the aerial, threw away the spreaders, uncoupled the amplifier
which he needed for use himself, and replaced the little outfit in the pasteboard box. Then
he hurried back to the road, where the forester was already waiting to whirl him away to the
ranger's house.

If Charley had had any doubts whatever about his liking the ranger's wife (though he hadn't),
they would have vanished the instant he came in sight of the ranger's home. It was a small,
weather-beaten cottage set in the shoulder of a hill, with the forest all around it. About
the house itself was a clearing of a few acres, with a little orchard on the slope behind the
house. The home itself was enclosed by an unpainted picket fence. Lovely old trees shaded it.
Vines clambered riotously over its soft, gray clapboards. Well arranged shrubs and bushes had
been planted here and there. There were flowers about the base of the house and along the borders.
The grass was trimmed as neatly as a city lawn. Even now before plant growth had started, the
yard was attractive. With pleasure Charley noted that the ranger had set out two European larches,
evidently brought in from a forest plantation, at his gateway. One glance at the inviting and
neatly kept yard told Charley what he would find within the house itself.

Nor was he disappointed when he entered the door and found the house as clean as a whistle,
plainly but neatly and attractively furnished, and beautiful with a wealth of flowers and plants
that, had quite evidently received loving and intelligent care. On the wall Charley instantly
noted the telephone, and hanging on a nail beside it was the leather case with the ranger's
portable telephone instrument.

There was not the slightest doubt in Charley's mind that he was going to like the ranger's
wife. And when, a moment later, she came quietly into the room and took his hand in hers and,
with moist eyes, thanked him for saving her husband's life, she won Charley's heart completely.
She was slight and girlish and good to look at, and made Charley think of some of his nice
girl friends at high school. Yet Mrs. Morton had been married a good many years, for just behind
her stood her daughter, Julia, a girl of twelve, waiting her turn to thank Charley.

But girlish though the ranger's wife appeared, Charley did not need to be told that she was
not of the weeping, hysterical sort. On every hand were evidences of efficiency and foresight.
A fire was evidently burning briskly in the stove, and kettles of water, presumably heated
in case of need, were steaming on the range, easily seen through the open kitchen door. In
the sick-room were evidences of the same sort of forethought. Everything that the house possessed
that could possibly be useful in treating the ranger had been assembled in handy little piles.
This must have been done before the ranger reached home, for most of the piles were untouched.

The ranger was resting comfortably in bed, though his arm was badly swollen and his face was
distorted with pain. At sight of Charley his countenance lighted up. He reached out his left
arm and wrung Charley's hand until the lad winced.

"The doctor says I'll pull through this all right, though I'll have a painful time of it,"
said the ranger, "and he told the truth, at least as far as the pain is concerned. But the
pain's nothing. The thing that counts is the fact that I am safe at home. I owe it to you,
Charley, and you may be sure I'll never forget."

That was as much as the ranger, reticent, hating any display of emotion, quiet like most men
of the woods, could bring himself to say. But Charley knew that it meant volumes. He tried
to reply, but found himself also suffering from a strange embarrassment. So Charley said good-bye
to the ranger, assured him that he would take good care of the forest, and set about fixing
the wireless outfit. The forester helped him. Quickly they got up the aerial, brought the lead-in
wire into the living-room, and set up the instruments on a board table close beside the telephone
instrument.

"Now everything is complete except for the battery," Charley said to the forester when they
had finished wiring up the outfit. "Half a dozen dry cells will supply all the current needed."

"I'll send them out by the doctor in the morning," said the forester.

Charley showed Mrs. Morton how to wire the cells and couple them to the instruments. Then he
told her how to adjust her spark-gap and tune the instrument to any given wave-length. He compared
his watch with the clock on the wall.

"At eight o'clock every night," he said, "I will call you up. Suppose you take Mr. Morton's
initials as your call signal. What are they?"

"J. V. M.," replied Mrs. Morton.

"Very well. Then at eight o'clock every night I will call J. V. M. slowly a number of times.
Then I will tick off the alphabet slowly and the numerals one to ten. You listen in, and if
the sounds are blurred or not sharp, tune your instrument as I have shown you until you can
hear distinctly. If you make the letters with a pencil as you read them, it may help you. I'm
sure you will soon learn to read. I'll repeat the alphabet and the numbers three times slowly.
Then I'll listen in for five or ten minutes. If you want to try to call me, give my signal
and follow it with your own, thus: 'CBC--CBC--CBC--JVM.' That means 'Charley Russell--James
Morton calling.' If I hear you, I will send the letters 'JVM--JVM--JVM--I--I--I.' That means
'James Morton--I am here.' Then you can begin to send your message. I hope we'll be able to
talk to each other very soon."

"It won't be my fault if we don't," smiled the ranger's wife.

"Now I must be off," said Charley. "I've no doubt Mr. Marlin is getting impatient. We'll just
clean up this mess and then I'll go."

"I'll clean things up," insisted Mrs. Morton.

"No; I made the mess and I'll clean it up," protested Charley.

He began to pile the torn pieces of pasteboard together so he could thrust them into the stove.
The bottom of the pasteboard box had been built up with several layers of pasteboard, evidently
cut from other boxes. Charley took them out one at a time, preparatory to crumpling up the
box itself. As he lifted the last layer of pasteboard he stopped in blank amazement. Then he
called excitedly for Mr. Marlin. Before him lay a piece of green pasteboard exactly like the
charred fragment taken from the ash heap in the burned forest.

Chapter XIX

The Forester's Problem

For a moment the two men looked at each other in astonishment. Then, "Keep that," said the
forester. "We'll talk the matter over on our way back." Mrs. Morton, not comprehending what
had happened, also looked astonished. But like the wise woman she was, she held her peace.
Charley tossed the other pasteboards in the fire, stuffed the green piece in his pocket, and
said good-bye to his new friend. The forester, after telephoning to his office, followed Charley,
and a moment later the two were spinning up the road toward the fire trail.

"I can't understand it," said Charley. "Here's a package direct from Lew, with the very clue
we're looking for, and Lew never said a word about it. I can't understand it. I'm certain Lew
sent the box. That was his handwriting on it. And I'm just as sure he never saw that bit of
pasteboard, for Lew would never slip up that way. I just can't understand it."

They reached the point where Charley was to leave the car and plunge into the forest. But Mr.
Marlin, instead of stopping his motor, turned into a natural opening in the woods and drove
slowly among the forest trees. In a moment he ran the car into a stand of pines, where it was
protected by the dense tops above and well hidden from sight of the highway.

"You couldn't get in here with anything but a Henry," laughed the forester. "This old bus has
taken me lots of places you would never have believed possible."

He took the key from the switch on the dashboard, and the two stepped to the ground. Charley
wondered what the forester intended to do, but by this time he knew enough not to ask questions.
The forester started up the trail with him. When they came to the big battery Charley understood,
for without a word the forester took Charley's little axe and began to chop poles to carry
the battery with. In a few moments these handles were bound fast. The forester tossed the traps
over his shoulder. Charley tied the amplifier box to his belt. Then they picked up the battery
and started toward camp.

Suddenly Charley stopped. "By George!" he cried. "I forgot all about the pup. I wonder where
he got to."

He whistled and whistled, but apparently in vain. They went on, and at intervals Charley whistled
for the dog while he and the forester were resting. Still no dog appeared. Charley's face grew
long. "Gee! I'll miss that pup," he said regretfully. "Why didn't I think of him sooner?"

Night was at hand when the two reached Charley's camp. Nothing had been disturbed. Charley
took advantage of the remaining daylight to couple up the battery and the amplifier to his
wireless. He tested the outfit and found he had a strong spark that cracked like a whip when
he touched the key.

"Look at that!" he cried. "Now I feel better. I can always get into communication with somebody
now."

"You aren't a bit more pleased than I am, Charley," smiled the forester. "I'll take back all
I ever said about the wireless. If Morton can learn to talk by wireless, the rest of my crew
can also. When the dull season comes, I'll start a radio school with you as instructor and
we'll make every man in the service learn to operate the wireless. The Department ought to
be glad to supply a good outfit; but if we can't get the money, we can at least make some outfits
like yours. We're going on a wireless basis or my name is not Marlin."

The forester was interrupted by a joyous bark and in rushed Charley's pup. "You blessed little
fellow," said Charley, fondling the animal. "I suppose you lost our trail when we got into
the motor-car and you probably hung around the battery all day and followed our trail back
here. That's pretty good. You've got great stuff in you, pup. The next thing I teach you will
be to stand guard over things as you probably did over that battery to-day."

Darkness fell. Supper was cooked and eaten. "Have you heard that cat lately, Charley?" asked
the forester.

"No," replied Charley, "but I think I'll put the traps out anyway."

"We can attract it even if it isn't near by," said the forester. "Have you a can of salmon
that you can spare?"

"Sure."

"Then give me the traps and bring your can."

Charley got the things asked for. The forester, taking the flash-light, led the way through
the thicket to the open forest. At some distance from the camp the forester stopped and turned
the beam from the search-light upward. Finally he found what he was looking for--a small branch
about seven feet from the ground. Then he cut the top of the salmon can, and punching holes
in the sides near the top, fastened a string to the can and suspended the can from the limb.
Then he set the traps in a circle under the can, fastening the chains to convenient saplings,
and threw two or three small pieces of the salmon on the ground within the circle of traps.
Then they made their way back to camp.

Charley lighted a little friendship fire in the fireplace the ranger had made, and the two
sat down beside the flames. It was little more than three weeks since Charley had first entered
the forest. During that time he had really seen very little of the forester. Yet as he sat
beside his chief, Charley felt as though he had known him always. A common emotion had drawn
them close together this day, and somehow Charley believed that his feeling of affection for
his chief was fully reciprocated. For a time they sat in silence, each busy with his own thoughts.

"Charley," said the forester, after a time, "this accident to Jim hits me pretty hard. It not
only leaves the finest piece of forest under my care without a direct overseer at the most
dangerous time of the year, but there were so many things we had planned to do this spring
that cannot be done without a ranger to supervise them. To be sure, I could transfer a ranger
here, but I have work for every man in his particular district. Besides, nobody knows this
territory like Jim. I believe you know it better than anybody besides Jim. I only wish you
were old enough to take his place for a time.

"We're away behind with our planting, and there are trails to be brushed out, new ones to be
cut, roads to be built, camp sites to be selected, timber to be cruised, a big lumber operation
to be watched and the trees to be marked for cutting and the lumber scaled, improvement cuttings
to be made, camp sanitation to be enforced, a fire-tower to be built on the mountain here where
your watch tree is. There's a tremendous lot of work that Jim and I had mapped out for the
spring and summer.

"Now it looks as though we should not be able to get any of it done. We can't do a thing without
a ranger to direct operations. Part of the timber to be cut is in Lumley's district. He joins
you here on the north. He will look after all the lumbering in his territory, and I may have
to let him take charge of it all. It's a big operation and will have to be watched closely.
I just wish I knew where I could find a man capable of taking Jim's place for a while."

"What will the ranger have to do in looking after this operation?"

"He'll have to mark the trees to be cut and see that only those marked are cut; and he'll have
to make sure the regulations are observed in felling the trees and disposing of the tops; and
finally he'll have to scale the lumber and make sure that the state gets paid for all that is cut."

"What is there so difficult about that?" demanded Charley. "Tell me what sort of trees are
to be cut, and I can select and mark them as well as the next man. And if you give me a copy
of the regulations, I can tell whether or not the lumbermen are observing them. If I can't
make them live up to regulations, I can easily report to you. And as for scaling timber, that's
a mere matter of arithmetic. I could learn to do that in five minutes. Couldn't I help you
with the lumbering? And as for the other jobs, Mr. Marlin, give me some books that tell about
them and let me study up on them. I could put in several hours here every night in study. You
don't know how much I could learn in a week. And then you could give me some practical lessons
after I had studied up the theory of things. I'm sure I can do lots of the work you were counting
on Mr. Morton to do. Won't you let me help you?"

"Bless your heart, Charley! I know you mean every word you say. But you don't realize the difficulties
you would encounter. Your chief job would be in handling men, tough men some of them, too.
You could never do it, never. But I certainly wish you were old enough to attempt it. There's
nobody I'd trust sooner than you, Charley. You've got a good education, and you think quickly
and clearly. You've been equal to every emergency you've faced yet."

"Then why isn't that a pretty good reason to trust me further?"

"Trust you, Charley? I trust you absolutely. But you are too young. You could never do it."

Charley said no more. The hope that had sprung up in his heart died as suddenly as it had been
born. In his heart he believed that with all the study and effort he was willing to put into
it, he could do a ranger's work all right. But he saw it was not to be.

"Anyway," he muttered to himself, "I'm going to be a ranger some day, and I'll show the chief
now that I'm the best fire patrol he ever had. That's the best way to qualify for promotion."

He turned to his wireless, threw over his switch and flashed out the call signal of the Wireless
Patrol. In his delight at the power of his new battery he almost forgot his disappointment.
In a very short time he got a reply from Henry.

"Don't say anything about that pasteboard," cautioned the chief.

"I don't intend to," answered Charley. "I'm going to write to Lew about it and let you take
the letter out in the morning. You never can tell who will pick up a wireless message."

For several minutes Charley chatted briskly with Henry, who said the new battery carried the
signals to him as clear as a bell. Charley told Henry about Mr. Morton's accident, omitting
reference to his own part in the affair, and then through Henry got into touch with both Mrs.
Morton and the assistant forester at headquarters. Mr. Morton was getting along all right,
though he suffered very great pain. The forester's assistant reported everything quiet in the
forest.

Charley turned away from his wireless key, and got out pencil and paper. By the light of the
candle lantern he began his letter to Lew, and had almost finished it when the pup, his hair
bristling, ran to the door of the tent, growling savagely. An instant later both the forester
and Charley leaped to their feet as the stillness of the forest was broken by an awful scream
that rang through the dark and was thrown back by the mountain in a magnified echo even more
terrifying than the original cry.

Chapter XX

Charley Wins His First Promotion

With startled eyes, Charley looked at the forester, at the same time reaching for his rifle.
To Charley's surprise the forester began to grin.

"I guess you got your cat, Charley," he chuckled. "But it sure did startle a fellow."

The first piercing scream of the wildcat was succeeded by a variety of furious screams. The
animal could be heard thrashing about in the leaves, spitting, snarling, growling, rattling
the chain, and evidently fighting furiously to free itself from the trap.

Taking both the candle lantern and the flash-light, as well as rifle and axe, the two men started
for the cat.

"Grab that dog," said the forester, as the pup darted out of the tent ahead of them.

Charley whistled and called, but the pup was too wild with excitement to heed the command.

"Hurry up," said the forester, "or you won't have any pup left."

They pushed rapidly through the thicket, then ran toward their traps. Faintly they could see
the wildcat. The pup was worrying it. With arched back, hair erect, eyes ablaze, and snarling
furiously, the wildcat was waiting its opportunity to strike. The pup circled about it, yelping
and barking, every second growing bolder because the animal did not spring at it.

"Give me that rifle, quick!" said the forester. "That cat'll kill the pup in another minute."

He seized the weapon, sank on one knee, quickly sighted along the barrel, and pulled the trigger.
Even as he fired, the cat leaped toward the pup. For a second there was a terrific scuffling
in the leaves. Then the search-light's beam showed the pup lying motionless, its neck broken
and torn, while the cat was clawing the air wildly, and spitting and snarling in fury.

"Don't ever let one of those critters get on your back, Charley," said the forester, as he
approached the cat for a final shot. "Sometimes they will follow a fellow in the forest. It's
seldom they really attack a man, but if a fellow loses his nerve and runs, they will sometimes
leap on him. A single swipe of those claws will cut a fellow to ribbons."

The forester was now close to the cat, which had gotten to its feet and had crouched, snarling,
ready for a leap.

The forester circled so as to get a shot at the animal's shoulder. Quickly raising his rifle,
he fired. The cat screamed, clawed the air desperately for a few seconds, and lay still.

Charley rushed in and tenderly lifted his motionless pup from the ground. There were tears
in his eyes as he bore the little body to one side. "Poor fellow," he said, "I'll miss you
awfully. I was counting on you a lot to help me guard this timber. You did the best you knew
how. You thought you were helping me, didn't you?"

He passed his hand across his eyes and faced the forester. "It's some consolation to know that
that beast paid for this, and paid well. I'm sure glad he's dead. It's a good thing for the
forest."

"Yes, that's a good job done," replied the forester, "and a nice skin and a bounty for you.
That ought to be some consolation to you. But I'm mighty sorry about the pup. "Woman, let me go!" he asked. "And that you may give up satisfied I insist
you still see the kingdom of grace, and we engaged the nurse. Where he lives? "

"Thank you, Wulfrin. Graciosus lives not far from here, in Pratum." She pointed to a broken gorge,
above which rose a green Alp high. "I'll give you a Guide. The boy here. "She pointed down into the courtyard,
where a shepherd boy busied himself with to sharpen a scythe.

Palma was standing next to him and chatted.

"Gabriel", the judge called him, "You lead your Lord Wulfrin after Pratum."

"The courtier? With joy!" shouted the boy.

"He is dreaming of it," declared the judge, "after the emperor to
ride.

You looking over him."

"May I with?" Palma said, raising his head.

"No," said the judge.

"Brother!" asked her and stretched his hands.

"Not again! To hell!" he cursed. Her eyes filled with tears. "Come, then, Little fool! "

Since the dreie bareheaded in the wet and ready gates stood, while all around the sun burned, said
the border escorting Judge Wulfrin: "I entrust you Palma: beware!"

"Hallelujah! This, Angel Gabriel!" shouted the girl.

Down at the Burgweg said the shepherd: "Lord, there are two ways to
Pratum One rising. through the canyon, the other over the mountain.

"He pointed with his hand." If you and the young mistress popular, so we take it. Above it
is looking far and funny, and it could become cloudy in the evening. It is a Gewitterchen in
the air. "

"Yes, over the mountain, Wulfrin!" Palma said. "I will show you where my lake," and leichtgeschuerzt
beat her over a light pad, which began to rise soon and was getting steeper.

Easily as on wings, with free breathing chest went uphill and the
girl remained under the scorching sun and fresh cool as a crucial
source.

The mountain was in the child's Joy. Falter her gleaming and vast, the principal, and the
wind played with her blonde hair.

Wulfrin looked around for Malmort that emerged from the little gray shimmering morning landscape.
"What happened to me," he asked himself, "in that walls there?" How could this innocent me
Frightening creatures, this cheerful playmate, this nimble Gems with
bright eyes and Swift feet?

"He was well liked and he liked the boy began to chat.

Gabriel told by the Lombards, which he had crept to scout the judge.

They are everywhere and nowhere. They nest in the passports, spy
on the messenger and plunder the seams.

They intoxicate themselves over in the stolen hot wines boast with defeated Weapons tales,
from the manufacture of iron crown and deny or blaspheme the course of the world. They worship
the devil, the leader of the regiment, "but" ended, the boy, "they are believing Christians,
because they steal from our churches, all that is holy bones together, so much they can catch it.
It is time that the Lord Emperor of the right thing and they see fixed districts and a judge to give.
"

Now, Gabriel had reached the Emperor, whose renewed luster to their dignity in this wild mountain,
threw his enthusiastic eyes and he cried: "This and no other I want
to serve!

My name is Gabriel and beat you with fists, I would prefer Michael and blows with the sword!
Law must be there, and the Emperor is always right, because he is
one with God the Father, Son and Spirit.

He has taken over the world government and guards, a flashing sword
in hand, the Christian Peace and the millenary kingdom.

"

Now he had the Emperor Wulfrin describe the clasps of his crown, the
blue, long Coat, the face of profound, the cropped head, the mustache
hanging, "the Hoefling we imitate him, "he said, laughing.

"How looks the Emperor?" Palma asked, and answered without hesitation Wulfrin ". mildness"

The children listened attentively and admired the man with the master
of the world dealing pflog but as soon as the height was reached where
spread of lawn, it was with the devotional over.

Gabriel shouted against a serious wall of rock, the boys cheering kindly playing replied, and
Palma, ran contrary to the courtiers by the hand, a dark green clear waters, hid the wall
with her giant shadow still face the sun already high. They converted the shore strewn with Felsbloecken
to a mossy projection, the soft seats offered. Here she pulled him down, and how they pitched
this, she said, "Now is the fairy tale meets of the brother and sister
who move together over hill and dale.

Everything is beautiful ever since. "

"Domesticated below one?" Wulfrin teased the boys. Gabriel did not answer, because he did not
make himself just before the courtier.

"Stupid Tales," laughed the latter, "there are no elves."

"No," Gabriel said thoughtfully, scratching the ear, "there is no data, only they do not call
them with vicious words, or even throwing stones into the water.

But, sir, where do you have your hunting horn? You wore it on the page because you came to
Malmort. "

"It crashed into the river, made it off the courtier.

"This is not good," said the boy.

"Heho, Gabriel!" shouted it from a distance, and another shepherd was visible. "A foal has lost
his way after Alp Grun, coal-black with a white sheet on the forehead. I bet it belongs to Malmort.
"

Gabriel leaped into the air. "Holy Mother of God," cried he, "that is our Magra, who do I have
to! Dear Mr. dismiss me. You'll find their way already. A man is more reasonable than a beast.
There, "he pointed right," Do you see the red Ridge? The search, behind it is Pratum. Even the little
white lady know.

"And was gone he, without bothering to answer.

"Palma", Wulfrin laughed, "when down there shone an elf?"

"I would not be surprised," she said. "Often when I lie here, I get up, get gently down to the shore
and try the water with the toe.

And then I feel as if I solve me by myself, and I'm swimming and splashing in the flood. But
behold! "

She pointed to a majestic snow mountains that they entwoelkte opposite. His transfigured raised
lines on the noisy sky pure and delicate, but without sharpness, as if to scratch him and wounding,
and were both seriously and charm, strength and Loveliness, as if they had been formed before
the creation in man and woman, youth Age and dispersed.

"Now is resplendent and be glad the snow mountain," says Palma, "but at night when it is moonlight,
He pulls Blaeulich robe and talks secretly and eagerly. Since I am youngest here late, made himself
the sweet note to do with me, I drew and drew tears my heart from the body. But behold! "She repeated.

A
cloud hung over the white peaks, without touching it, a heavenly feast with slowly changing forms.
Here, an arm raised in a cup, there tended Friends or lovers to each other, and quietly sounded an
airy harp. Palma laid the Finger to his lips.

"Still," she whispered, "that girl!"

Silently looked at the Couple the high ride, but overheard by mortal eyes heavenly joy dissolved
up and melted away. "Abide! Or goeth only!" Palma said jubilant gesture, "We are blessed like
you! Is not it, brother? "And she looked up with drunken eyes to the ground of his own.

It is the sultry noon, came with her bewitching spell. Palma embraced the brother in Love and innocence.
They flattered his curls as the air and kissed him dream like the lake to their feet the shore.
Wulfrin but went under in nature and was a with the life of the earth.
His chest swelled.

His heart was pounding fit to burst. Fire blazing before his eyes ...

Then they heard a childish voice: "Look, Wulfrin as they embrace in the deep!"

His gaze slid down into the shadowy dark waters, the rocks and shore, and the brother and sister doubled.
"Who are the two BWA? he cried.

"We, brother," said Shy Palma, and was shocked Wulfrin that his sister in the Was poor. Shaken
by a shudder, he jumped up, and without looking back to Palma, followed him on his foot, he ran
into the sun and the nearby ridges, where now a figure with a broad hat and a long staff seemed
to be on guard.

"Good day! Good day!" bewillkommte kingdom of grace and sisters, without a step of Place to do.
He held out their hands only. "I have solemnly Ohm have to pledge, "he explained," so long as
the Lombard threat takes the limit of my pastures to convert guarding, but not exceed, for
Pratum is a fief of the bishopric, and the church holds peace. Welcome, Wulfrin, Palma and not
less! "His eyes walked quickly between the courtier and the girl both he seemed embarrassed.
He was it also, because he believed the cause of their way to know, and they were silent, he
began a great talk.

"They have been great for the good Ohm evil," he said.

"We were sitting in the room for three the desserts, because the judge had come to Churchill to
the bishop against the Lombards to drift into the arms of what he
had to refuse her as a child of peace.

Stemma and the uncle fought in the nuts, as they do sometimes, about the goodness of human nature.
Now, recently had two wicked stories occurred.

Jucunda, the young wife of Montafuners, Bishop Felix who had gefirmelt -

"With me. She was his favorite," said Palma, the step-back close to the courtier.

"Hush!" said this unruly, and the girl ran to a flower .-- was "from their Man caught with
a noble servant and thrown through the castle window. A few days later hit the middle of the Schams
Stiftshof the Bergüner after a short exchange of words the skull , and yet they had just the winning
bids for the priestly Ohms and kissed each other the Lord's body
received.

Such, it stopped in front of Stemma, but the uncle replied: 'The are momentary flashes and eclipses
of reason, but nature is good and is by the grace even better. " The uncle is a bit Pelagians,
hi, hi! "

"Pelagians?" Hoefling said the absent-minded, for his gaze Palma said to him again lunged, "this
is not a genre of Greek warriors?"

"Not so, Wulfrin, it is a genus heretics So. Stemma and the uncle were arguing about the bad.
As does the bishop, who is short-sighted to Felix - he has that name
height where near where he has a summer house - a flame.

We celebrate the departure of the Lombards " he smiled.

Stemma looked and noticed in her quiet way, 'I mean, they are it myself ', and right on the hill, they
danced like demons to the fire.

Because it makes noise on the court.

A villain falls to the door into the house and talk: 'Bishop, done
according to the Gospel and give me the rock, after you filled his
pockets with Byzantines have, for your coats we stole over in the
sacristy on!

" The uncle solidifies. Now that the Lombard on Stemma, which sat
in the shadows, 'The woman there,' he sneered, "He has a halo around
her head, her forehead with the band!"

Since rises Stemma and people through with their terrible eyes: 'In Stand up! " 'Oh, yes,'
says he, "the judge!" and bends the knee.

Since the low ohms breathed at last, after vomited Boxes and crates, called him back from the
Dome of the Hoellenkerl her to the window. He rode bare heel of the most beautiful Stiftsgaul, which
he placed over a purple altar cloth - to He had hung himself the other way a chasuble - and moved the
church with the stolen horse Crook of Chur such about the bare buttocks, and that he rose
bolzgerade Staff in the rubble flew.

'Bishop, bless me! " shouted the Lombard. The uncle in his Piety is defeated. 'Go in peace,
my son! " He spoke and raised his hands.

'You, Bishop,' shouted the Lombard, 'The devil! "

'And you also get it! " was the uncle back. "I would not really tell should be "ended Graciosus
half remorseful," it has the terrible Ohm angry. "

Palma had laughed, and the Hoefling wry face, and grace kingdom became more talkative and zutulicher.

"We
have not seen for ages, Wulfrin," he said. "I left Rome soon after you, but I have not seen
anything there! What friendships I have made! I booklet was your pick in the palace and met
him himself, who wrote it. What a head! Almost too heavy for the little body! What all of
it nest hatched!

Hardly a Viertelstuendchen I tasted the famous man, but in this tiny space of time he took
me for my Fixed whole life in everything good.

Then it knocked modestly and quietly, and who enters - I pray you,
Wulfrin - the emperor.

I was dying of awe. But he was gracious and delighted to you think! in your story, Wulfrin he
let himself tell me "-

Graciosus now understood his own word, not because they were caught between the herds and the
green Pratum was full of bleating and bellowing. One of the lean and wolfaehnlichen Mountain
dogs beschnoberte the courtiers, but then jumped to caress him and licked him, Graciosus if
the animal's bad behavior would have no reference. Palma but was the Hirtenmaedchen surrounded
and stared in amazement.

The young lady was from Malmort affable, and asked all their names and herds.

"I'm certainly not a talker," said Graciosus after he had made room, "but you understand when the emperor
ordered - I had to report minutely and cups of horn, and especially the amazing Stemma made the
high Mr create. "

The Hoefling looked peevish.

"What a man!" lobpries kingdom of grace.

"The content and the height of the century! Who admired it enough? And yet, yet - Wulfrin I did
of the courtiers, whose society I do not could be avoided entirely,
heard something that saddens me deeply, something from a certain Regine
... Do you know?

"

"This is his Kebsin" went out Wulfrin honest.

"Bad, very bad! A Raisin in the Sun! Not a perfect example! And Karlstoechter?"

"All the weather and storms," ​​roared Wulfrin, "who made me the guardian
of Karlstoechter ordered?

"

"The Karlstoechter!" cried the midst of the herds Palma, in the distance, the resounding had understood
Wulfrin speech. "They are: Hiltrud, Rotrud, Rothaid, Gisella, Bertha, Adaltrud and Himiltrud. Kingdom
of grace has manufactured a table like this. "Repeated the girl Raetian them foreign-sounding
name, and coated with jubilant laughter, the young lady with continued.

Graciosus

slowed his pace. Confidential, he sought the hand of the courtier. "Marriage is sacred, "he
said," and that the emperor should not forget, because it is so high. You have guessed, Wulfrin
that I am born out of her. Therefore, I have a great view of her and a real passion of mine
in a pattern of virtue to be. A good Bad girls do not bring with me. You know my affection, which
I firmly believe that if I also sometimes Palma is troubling. Now we are alone - it now seems
manageable - the could be the time - if it were your will "-

"Be
of good cheer, kingdom of grace," encouraged Wulfrin, "the matter
is settled."

Would have one of the more violent, which nested on
the rocks Raetian, craving for Palma resorted Wulfrin would like him
in the face and defied the sword from its sheath torn, but have Graciosus
was harmless, as angry that he could ever have. And he felt himself
driven to a sudden terror of a dark, sister to marry.

"Done?" Graciosus
asked, "do you mean? between you and the judge, but as do you think
- Palma is not at the end too wild and big for me "?

"Do not be stupid
and not Fackler longer! Want it?"

The one leaving had exceeded a
Huegelwelle and saw the one now again, from which they were talking
about. She had separated from the shepherdesses and stood before one
of the deep schnellstroemenden and creeks, which cut through the high-mats.
Next to her was wrong a bleating Lamb, which had lost the flock, and
sitting on the bank edge, dissolves a kropfige Beggar bloody rags
from her sore foot and was washing it with fresh water. Rapidly the
girl got rid of the shoes, put them with a pitying look next the cretin,
raised the lamb in his arms waded with him through the flow and let
it be Herd chase.

Then came an epiphany about kingdom of grace. "I
dare, I take them!" he exclaimed. "They is good and merciful to every
creature! "

"So go ahead and judge the Brautmahl, I will advertise
for you. That is your castle?" In the distance rose from a district
of hurdles and stables, a newly built round tower, about what drove
straight up the hair dryer a monstrous cloud dragon. Graciosus turned
sideways, looking for the bridge, while the courtier the raging river
in a sentence jumped.

Wulfrin reached the nurse. "You walk barefoot
bride?"

"I'm not a bride, and what use to me the shoes, if I'm not
through with you the World can run? "

"You're not the fool to speak
in earnest, and the woman on Pratum not unshod . Go "

"Kingdom of
grace has not opened his mouth against me."

"He advertises through
the mine. Take it, I advise you, if you love no other."

She shook
her head. "Only you, Wulfrin."

"That does not count."

She raised
her clear eyes on him. "Do you happen to such a big favor?"

He nodded.

"So
I do it to please you."

"You're a good kid." He stroked her cheek.
"I will protect you, that you nothing hostile befall, and are available
at your first boy gossip. "

You did not flush, but his eyes filled
with tears. "Well," she said, "but we want to go slow that it takes
an hour until we reach Pratum. "The tower was before them. The Hoefling
but it was evident now because he gave away his sister, that they
is dearest to him on the earth is.

"Here we are enthroned as the
angels," said Graciosus after its guests the spiral staircase led
up through the left his tower, and was on the pinnacle, where the
meal prepared was. The table was next to the bread with a bowl of
milk and the carved spoon a jug of wine full of dark black, a bishop's
dishes, for it was with the miter and describes the two Krummstaeben.
The dreie sat on a bench, the girl in the Middle.

When they reached the Lumley home, Charley felt his dislike for the man increasing. Unlike
the neat and attractive dwelling of the Mortons, the Lumley house was dirty and disorderly.
The children were unclean and ragged. They had no manners whatever. Yet they obeyed readily
enough when their father spoke to them. But it did not take Charley long to discover that they
obeyed because of fear. When he realized that, he thought of the vicious look he had noted
in the ranger's eye. There were dogs innumerable about the place, and they all slunk away when
their master approached. Yet all the time, as he showed Charley about, the ranger was almost
obsequious. This evident contradiction between the man's actions and his looks made Charley
distrust him immediately, and it was with heavy heart that he said good-bye to Mr. Marlin and
watched him drive away.

The ranger showed Charley to the room that was to be his. Charley began to carry his luggage
up-stairs. He would much rather have taken it all himself, but the ranger insisted upon helping
him. When Charley saw how the man eyed every package and scrutinized every article, he understood
quickly enough that Lumley wanted to help him, not because of any wish to be courteous, but
simply because of his burning curiosity. Especially was the ranger curious about Charley's
wireless outfit, but Charley volunteered no information.

The more Charley considered his situation, the gloomier he felt concerning it. He had looked
forward to his coming, after Mr. Marlin had told him of the arrangement, with a feeling of
pleasant anticipation. Charley was not the least bit shy and made friends readily. He had a
feeling that all the men in the Forest Service must be pretty fine men and that their interest
in their work would make them, like Mr. Marlin and Mr. Morton, eager to help a recruit. Thus
Charley had believed that Lumley would be very helpful to him. He had intended to put himself
more or less in Lumley's hands and trust to the ranger for guidance. But a very few minutes
spent with Lumley made Charley feel that he could not take the man into his confidence. He
almost felt as though he dared not, though when he came to consider the matter fully, that
attitude seemed foolish. Lumley was a guardian of the forest as well as himself, and surely
he could trust him with matters that pertained to the forest.

Charley tried to fight down this feeling of distrust. It seemed to him very wrong to accept
a man's hospitality, even if he was to pay well for it, and at the same time be suspicious
of the man. But hardly had he decided that he ought to be frank with his fellow ranger when
Lumley began asking questions that caused the feeling of distrust to return with renewed force.
Lumley's questions were intended to seem innocent enough; but Charley was sharper than he perhaps
looked, and he saw the real intent behind the questions. The man was slyly trying to find out
all he could about Charley's history, and particularly how much Charley had been paid as a
fire patrol and what he was to get as a ranger.

Charley answered most of Lumley's questions openly enough, but could not tell him what he was
to get as a ranger, for he had never once thought about the matter, nor had Mr. Marlin mentioned
it. But when Charley told Lumley so, he could see that the ranger did not believe him.

When the ranger began to question Charley about his recent work in the woods, Charley answered
him evasively. Lumley knew that Charley had been acting as fire patrol, because Mr. Marlin
had told him so. But Charley felt very sure he did not know where the secret camp had been
pitched, for Mr. Marlin had distinctly said that matter was a secret between Charley and himself.
So Charley answered him evasively and soon turned the conversation to other matters.

While Charley was arranging his duffel, two or three dirty youngsters came bouncing into the
room and at once began to drag Charley's wireless apparatus from the pasteboard box. With a
cry Charley sprang toward them and snatched the instruments out of their hands. The ranger
gave a savage oath and aimed a kick at the lads, but they dodged and ran from the room.

At first Charley was terribly annoyed. But in a second he was glad the incident had happened.
Nothing had been injured and he had had a warning of what might be expected. It gave him a
good opportunity to shut up his things without seeming to be suspicious of his host. Charley
acted at once.

"I have no need of this wireless outfit at present," he said, "and if you have a spare box
and some nails, I will just nail these things up until I have time to set up the outfit." So
the wireless instruments were safely boxed up and locked in a closet, along with Charley's
rifle and fishing-rod. There was nothing in his remaining luggage that could be much harmed,
even if the youngsters did get hold of things.

As soon as his belongings were stowed away, Charley decided that he would go to the forester's
office and talk over his work. He had three miles to walk, and although he had already trudged
several times that distance, heavily loaded, he did not hesitate for a moment. When Lumley
suggested that he use the telephone and avoid the walk, Charley merely smiled.

"I don't mind it," he said.

"I'd like to see myself walk that distance for any such fool errand," growled the ranger.

When Charley had said he didn't mind the walk he had told the truth. Yet he had understated
it. The fact was that he hugely enjoyed the walk. He was rested from his long carry, and with
nothing to weight him down, his feet felt light as feathers. He trudged briskly along the smooth
highway, every sense alive to the delights of the forest. All about him the woods were vocal
with the calls of birds. The wind whispered and sighed in the pine tops. And sometimes, when
the air in the bottom was still as sluggish water, Charley could hear the wind roaring among
the trees far up on the hillsides. The scent of spring was in the air--that indescribable mixture
of the smell of opening buds and flowers and green things and rank steaming earth, that together
make such an intoxicating odor. And all about him Charley caught glimpses of the wild life
of the forest.

It was late in the day when he reached the forester's office. The forester seemed greatly surprised
to see him.

"I came to talk to you about my work," explained Charley.

The forester frowned. "What is the telephone for?" he asked a bit brusquely.

"I didn't want to talk over my business before that man," protested Charley.

The forester looked at him sharply. "What business do you have excepting the business of the
forest?" he asked.

"None," said Charley.

"Then surely you could discuss forest matters in the presence of a ranger."

"It may be that I am unreasonable," said Charley, "but I don't like that man. There's something
about him that I don't trust."

The forester looked at Charley searchingly. "Sometimes," he said, "I almost feel that way myself.
I realize that Lumley is mouthy and inquisitive and disagreeable personally, but he has been
in the Forest Service a long time and it hardly seems right not to trust him. He's a pretty
efficient ranger."

"Well, I'm here, anyway," continued Charley. "I came to find out what my first duties are to
be and how to do them."

"There's a little tree planting that simply must be done in your territory, late though it
is," said Mr. Marlin. "To-morrow I shall send you out with a small crew to do it."

"Please show me just how it ought to be done," said Charley.

The forester smiled with approval. "Come out-of-doors," he said, picking up a mattock. And
he led the way to a bed of seedling spruces that had been heeled in the ground, and dug up
two or three of them.

"These ought to be lifted in small bunches and their roots puddled," he said, dipping the earth-covered
roots in water to show how to puddle them. "They should be planted thus." He struck his mattock
sharply into the soil, bent it to one side, and in the hole thus opened thrust a tiny tree.
Then he stepped on the ground close to the seedling and pressed the earth tight about it.

"That's all there is to it," he said. "Your crew will work in pairs, one man carrying the trees
in a pail of water and inserting them in the ground, while the other man carries the mattock
and opens the holes. The trees should be planted in straight rows and about four feet apart
each way. You will have to go ahead of the crew and set up the line pole. Pick out some trees
or saplings to sight by and you will have no trouble to keep your line straight."

"Is that all?"

"You'll have to oversee the work, of course. Make sure the planting is done right, and watch
your men. You will have to take whatever steps seem necessary to keep them working well and
cheerfully. Sometimes it is a good thing to switch a man from one job to another. It rests
him to use another set of muscles."

"What else am I to do?"

"Day after to-morrow I want you to brush out the fire trails leading to your old camp. That
is, you must start brushing them out. It will take several days. They are so overgrown now
that they are a real menace to the forest. These trails were originally five feet wide. We
took out all the roots and underground growths down to mineral soil. You must cut away all
the brush that has grown in, chop it into short lengths, and pile it in little piles in the
trail itself for burning on windless days. You must grub out the roots that have grown in,
too. Really the entire trail ought to be grubbed again, but we can't do that now. You will
have to assign men to cut brush, to pile it, and to grub up the roots. That's about all I can
tell you."

"It sounds very easy," said Charley, "but I am willing to confess that handling these tough
looking mountaineers is more than I counted on."

"Are you going to quit so soon?" asked the forester with scorn. "I thought you had more stuff
in you than that, Charley."

Charley turned red. "Who said anything about quitting?" he demanded. "I only want to know what
I am to do if I get into trouble with the men."

"That's more than I can tell you. It's up to you as a ranger to find the ways to manage your
men. But I can tell you this. It is always best to follow Mr. Roosevelt's plan and speak softly
but carry a big stick. Be kind to the men. Be square with them. Play no favorites. Look after
their interest. But don't let them loaf on the job. They expect to have to work, and they won't
have much respect for a man who doesn't hold them to their task. After all, they are not very
different from horses. They have to be driven if they are to work."

"I suspect some of them will be hard to drive," said Charley, "if the few I have seen hereabout
are good samples."

"It all depends upon how you get started with them. Don't let them get away with you. Let them
know you are the boss. And remember this: as a ranger you have power to hire and fire these
men. If it comes to a show-down, don't hesitate to fire a man. We're short-handed, but we can
much better afford to lose a laborer than to have an entire crew spoiled."

"Thank you," said Charley. "I feel better already. If you don't mind, I'm coming to you before
each new job and get you to show me exactly how it should be done. A fellow can get along so
much better if he really knows what he is talking about."

"Good boy," smiled the forester. "I don't believe I am going to be disappointed in you, Charley."

Charley shook the forester's hand and started back to his new habitation, which he reached
just as supper was ready.

After supper he and the ranger talked about the forest. Or rather Lumley did. He was so loquacious
that Charley soon stopped talking and let his companion carry on the conversation alone. Lumley
was quite able to do it, for he was truly, as Mr. Marlin had described him, mouthy. He had
something to say about everything, and what he had to say was usually of a derogatory character.
He was guarded in what he said about Mr. Marlin, yet Charley saw that he was trying to damn
the forester by faint praise.

"You may make a good ranger in time all right," he said bluntly to Charley, "but it seems mighty
funny to me to take a raw high school boy and put him in charge of the finest stand of timber
in the entire forest. I'm the man that post ought to go to. Besides, I have a greater interest
in that timber than any one else."

Charley choked back his resentment at the statement about himself and asked, "Why have you
a greater interest in that timber than any one else?"

"Because our family used to own that timber," he said, sudden passion inflaming his eyes. And
Charley once more saw in them that savage look he had detected before. "If my old fool of a
grandfather hadn't let himself be bilked out of the whole holding," he said coarsely, "I'd
own that timber to-day and I'd be a millionaire instead of a poor forest-ranger. By rights
the land is mine, anyway." And again the ranger swore at his dead ancestor.

Charley listened in disgust but made no comment. The ranger saw that he had talked too much.
He muttered an apology. "When I see somebody else getting the money that ought to be mine,"
he said, "it makes me so mad that I could almost commit murder." Then he quickly changed the
conversation and once more became the smooth, oily individual he was when Charley first saw him.

But Charley had seen and heard enough to be utterly disgusted with the man. As early as possible
he got away to his room on the pretext of weariness, but it was a long time before he went to bed.

Early next morning he was at headquarters, where Mr. Marlin introduced him to the half dozen
men who were to serve under him. Ordinarily ten men would form a unit for planting, but Charley
did not know that, and so was ignorant of the fact that Mr. Marlin had tried to make his first
day of authority easy and successful by giving him only a few selected men to handle. Mr. Marlin
introduced Charley to the men one by one, as they came in. Charley tried to talk to them, but
found it rather difficult. The mountaineers had little to say.

When the men were all on hand, Mr. Marlin turned to them and said, "By the way, men, this is
the lad who saved Morton's life."

At the mention of the sick ranger, Charley saw the men's faces light up.

"He's a little young yet, but he knows his business. Jim says he handled the snake-bite as
well as any doctor could have done. I want you all to be good to this lad and help him as much
as you can."

Now they had found something in common to talk about. All day long, at intervals, the crew
discussed rattlers; and Charley told them, at their request, just how the ranger was bitten
and what had been done to save him.

"You see," he said, "the danger from snake-bite comes when the poison reaches the heart. So
it is necessary to suck as much of it out as possible and to prevent the remainder from reaching
the heart except a little at a time. That's why the bandages were put on the arm so tight.
The old notion of taking a stimulant was all wrong. The thing to do is to keep the heart beating
as slowly as possible until the venom reaches it. Then if it begins to slow up, give a stimulant."

This suggestion was contrary to all forest practice and Charley could see that the men were
greatly interested in it. How much his recital about the snake contributed to his success that
day he never realized. He kept his lines straight, switched his men from one task to another,
now relieved this man or that, and did his work in such a highly efficient manner that he would
have had no trouble anyway; but at intervals all through the day the men reverted to the rattlesnake
story. They were so busy thinking about something else they almost forgot about Charley.

But the next day had a different tale to tell. The forester had increased Charley's crew by
four men, and a tougher looking lot Charley had never seen. Rough, rugged, reckless mountaineers,
there was not one of them who could not have picked Charley up and broken him in half with
ease. And one of them, a tall, surly fellow, was quite evidently bent on making trouble.

Charley's knees almost shook under him when he faced the crew and realized that it was up to
him to command and control these men. Also he knew that he was lost if he showed any hesitation.
The instant the party reached the trail, therefore, Charley seized an axe.

"Let's get at it, men," he said, starting work himself.

"What do you want us to do?" asked the tall, surly looking chap. The others gathered round
to see what Charley would say. And Charley realized that he was on trial with the men.

"You heard what the forester said," he replied pleasantly. "We're to brush this trail out.
I want it made as good as it was when it was first completed. Mr. Marlin said you were a mighty
good crew and knew your business thoroughly. So you don't need any instructions from me."

Evidently the reply tickled the men. Charley saw one or two of them nudge their fellows and
chuckle; and all of them looked slyly in the direction of the man who had asked the question.
Charley judged that the fellow was trying to make game of him and that the crew thought Charley
had come out on top. Charley did not mean to lose this slight initial advantage.

With his axe he began briskly chopping away the brush along the sides of the trail. Here and
there he noticed little bushes that had sprung up in the trail itself.

"I wish you would take a mattock," he said to the man nearest him, "and grub out all the plants
in the trail. Take out all the roots and get everything clean down to mineral soil." To the
others he said: "We'll chop up the brush fine and pile it right in the trail to burn on windless
days."

The crew fell to with a will and the work went forward briskly. Presently they reached a place
where the trail was badly overgrown. Charley assigned two more men to grub up roots. He was
learning fast. Most of the time he worked at the head of the gang, so he could see what was
ahead, and be prepared for any new situation that arose. But from time to time he walked back
among the crew to see that the work was being done right.

Evidently the crew liked the way Charley was taking hold. They worked cheerfully and skilfully.
That is, all did with the exception of the tall, surly fellow. He seemed bent on annoying Charley,
but Charley paid no attention to him. At last, however, a situation arose that he dared not
overlook. The trail had originally been five feet wide, but the bushes, crowding in on either
side, had greatly narrowed it. The main reason for brushing out this trail at this time was
to widen it again to its original size so as to make it an effective barrier against fire.
The tall laborer was deliberately neglecting to cut bushes that had sprung up within the original
five-foot area.

The instant Charley noticed this, he spoke to the man. The others, scenting trouble, stopped
work to look on. Charley sensed the situation and set himself for a tussle. "Let them know
you're boss," he remembered Mr. Marlin had said to him. So he stepped toward the man and said
quietly, "I neglected to say that I want this trail cleared to its original width. Just take
out those bushes you have missed."

"The trail's wide enough," said the man, sulkily. "Lots of trails aren't half as wide as that."

"It isn't a question of how wide other trails are," said Charley good-naturedly, "or of how
wide this ought to be. All I can do is to obey orders. Mr. Marlin told me to clear the trail
just as it was originally."

The man looked angrily at Charley and sudden passion lighted up his eyes. "If Mr. Marlin wants
this trail that wide, he can say so himself. But nobody's goin' to make me take orders from
a high school boy. I know how this trail ought to be brushed."

Charley saw that it had come to a show-down. Inwardly he was greatly agitated. His heart beat
so fast and the pulse in his temples throbbed so violently that he was afraid the men would
see how excited he was. But he took a grip on himself and answered slowly, thinking hard all
the time, and trying not to betray his real feelings. Again he recalled what his chief had
said about letting the men know he was boss.

"You are quite right," said Charley slowly. "Nobody can make you take orders from a high school
boy. This is a free country and you do not have to take orders from anybody if you don't want
to. You are free to quit this job at any time you like and nobody can stop you. But as long
as you stay on the job you will have to obey orders. I'll give you your time and you can get
your pay at the office if you want to quit. If you want to stay, just brush out that trail
as Mr. Marlin wants it brushed."

Without waiting for a reply Charley turned away and returned to his place at the head of the
line. The men about him resumed their work with a will. In a moment the tall laborer picked
up his axe and began clearing out the bushes he had missed. Charley had won.

Chapter XXII

Charley Finds Another Clue

As he trudged homeward that evening, Charley pondered over the events of the day. At first
he did not know whether to rejoice or be sorry over the outcome of his encounter with the laborer.
He was sure the man would hate him, and if he did, he might try to make more trouble for him.
On the other hand, he realized that if he had let the man get the better of him, he could never
have hoped to maintain discipline; and Charley was old enough to know that without discipline
he could not succeed in any post of authority.

Perhaps he was most worried by the fact that he could not talk to Mr. Marlin about the matter.
Of course, he could have used the telephone, but the idea of discussing his difficulties before
the Lumley family was so repugnant to him that he could not bring himself to attempt it. So
he decided to get up his wireless at once. Then he could talk to Mr. Morton and Lumley could
not understand what was being said. He felt free to tell the Mortons anything. By this time
Mrs. Morton could operate the wireless readily and her husband was learning fast. So Charley
hurried to eat his supper and get his wireless installed.

He foresaw that Lumley would insist upon helping him. He steeled his mind to the event and
accepted the proffered assistance with the best grace he could. Afterward he thanked his lucky
stars that he had done so.

While there was still light enough out-of-doors, Charley assembled and hoisted his aerial;
and Lumley, who was really dexterous, was of great help to him. As soon as the aerial dangled
aloft, Lumley got tools to bore a hole in the window-sash for the lead-in wire.

Now Charley got another insight into Lumley's character. It was a little difficult to make
the hole just where it was wanted. Lumley instantly became impatient and went ahead recklessly.
Suddenly his bit snapped. With a volley of oaths, Lumley threw down his brace and hammered
the broken bit out of the window-frame. In doing so, he broke out a long splinter of wood,
leaving a gaping crack in the sash. He swore until he was out of breath. Then he got some putty
and puttied up the hole, forcing the putty into the crack with his thumbs. Then the wire was
brought in through the sash and Charley began wiring up his instruments. But it had taken half
an hour to accomplish what five minutes of patience would have done. Charley was utterly disgusted
with the ranger's show of temper.

As he coupled up the instruments, he answered, as politely as he could, the ranger's numberless
questions. Behind every question he saw, or thought he could see, some ulterior motive. By
every means he could, Lumley was trying to find out all that was possible about Charley and
his relations with the forester. And Charley could see that Lumley was envious of his intimacy
with Mr. Marlin and jealous of him because, though a mere boy, he was already as high up in
the service as Lumley was after years in the department. Charley realized that this was an
unfair way to view the matter, as he, Charley, was not really a ranger, and did not expect
to continue as a ranger after Mr. Morton was well enough to resume his duties. But he could
see that Lumley took no account of that. He began to understand that it was the man's nature
to be suspicious and jealous.

That was clear enough from Lumley's remarks about himself; for again he repeated the story
of his family's former ownership of the big timber, and of how he had been robbed of his heritage.
Charley felt sure the man had brooded over the matter until his judgment was warped. He listened,
however, without comment.

Presently Lumley began to make insinuations about the forester, telling Charley that Mr. Marlin
had been as much the child of luck as he had himself; but Mr. Marlin had had all the good luck,
while he had had all the bad luck. When he spoke of Mr. Marlin's rise from the ranks, Charley
could see plainly enough that Lumley was green with jealousy. He thought he ought not to listen
to such talk, and telling Lumley flatly that Mr. Marlin's industry, he was sure, was the main
reason for his success, Charley turned the conversation into more agreeable channels. Finally
Charley finished coupling up his instruments and tested his spark.

"It's a slower way to talk," said the ranger as he watched Charley adjust his spark-gap, "but
I can see that it beats the telephone all hollow. Why, a wind-storm, or a snow, or a thunder-storm
can put the telephone out of business quicker than you can say scat, and it may take hours
and hours to find the trouble and remedy it. I guess you couldn't put the wireless out of commission,
could you?"

"That's where you are wrong," smiled Charley. "A piece of iron laid across the terminals for
half an hour would put this battery completely out of business."

How easily the telephone could be put out of business was soon shown; for the very next day
a terrific wind-storm came along, uprooting large trees, wrenching loose great limbs which
it hurled for many yards, bending flat some of the smaller, weaker saplings and ripping its
way through the forest with a roar indescribable. Charley was with his crew brushing out the
fire trail. The wind was accompanied by some rain, and the crew sought shelter under an overhanging
ledge of rock. While they waited for the storm to blow itself out, Charley turned the situation
over in his mind. Hurricanes were something he had never thought to ask Mr. Marlin about. He
felt sure the storm would mean some new duty for him, but he did not know exactly what. He
hesitated to ask his crew, for he did not want to betray his ignorance. But a chance remark
one of his men dropped about repairing the telephone-line furnished a clue for Charley. He
thought the matter over, and by the time the storm had ended, Charley had come to a decision.
Right or wrong, he determined to act promptly.

"I want one of you to help me look after the telephone-line," he said, picking out one of the
crew. "The rest of you can go on with the fire trail."

With this helper, he made his way out to the telephone-line and followed it the entire length
of his territory. In several places saplings had blown across it. One tree, partly uprooted,
was leaning against it. And in one place the line was actually broken. Charley had no tools
for handling wire, and he decided that he would henceforth carry a pair of nippers in his clothes.
Fortunately for Charley, the wire had stretched so much before it broke that he and the man
were able to get the broken ends together and give them a twist. The repair was temporary,
but it would answer until a permanent job could be done. When Charley reported to headquarters
that night, the chief commended him for his good judgment in repairing the telephone-line so
promptly.

The few days that Charley had worked in the forest had made his hands very sore, for he had
no gloves. He had cut and scratched and torn his fingers until it seemed to him there was room
for no more bruises. He wanted to get some gloves, but did not know when he could get to a
store to buy any. He mentioned the matter to Lumley.

"Buy them by mail," said Lumley. "We get most of our goods from mail-order houses."

Charley had never bought anything by mail, and had not thought of securing his gloves in that
way. "That would be all right," he said, "but I wouldn't know how to order."

"Here," said the ranger, plunging his hand into a cabinet, "these catalogues will help you."
And he drew forth three catalogues from as many different mail-order houses. There was one
from Slears and Hoebuck, one from Montgomery Hard, and a third from Carson and Derby.

Instantly Charley thought of the telltale piece of green pasteboard and a quick suspicion leaped
into his mind. As quickly it faded out. He could not for a single second bring himself to suspect
a guardian of the forest of being a woodland incendiary. Yet he could not refrain from asking,
"Which one of these concerns do you buy from?"

"Whichever one sells cheapest," replied the ranger.

Charley found some cheap working gloves that he thought would suit him and ordered several pairs.

In the days that followed, he thought often over the problem of the green pasteboard. It was
true he had made another step in unraveling the problem, but he did not see that it helped
him much. He had discovered that Lumley sometimes bought stuff from Carson and Derby, but doubtless
dozens of other near-by dwellers also did. Furthermore, it did not follow that any near resident
had fired the forest. Some one from a distance might have done so. The more Charley thought
about the matter, the less importance he placed upon his discovery, and he decided to say nothing
about it to any one. How the guilty party was ever to be traced Charley could not even imagine.
The situation appeared hopeless.

However, Charley had small chance to worry about the matter. As the days passed, the forester
laid more and more duties upon him. Many a lad would have thought the forester was imposing
upon him, but Charley was eager to do everything he possibly could. He realized that the more
he accomplished, the greater would be his experience; and that the larger his experience was,
the faster he ought to get ahead. He had the good sense to know that the short way of spelling
opportunity is <i>w-o-r-k</i>. And he realized that he had his chance here and now. So he did
everything he possibly could do and asked for more.

The forester, like any other man in authority, was pleased beyond words at this spirit. His
response was to pile the work on Charley. He was testing him out, to see whether the desire
for work was just a whim or whether Charley possessed that real ambition, that inward spirit
of progress that drives a man on and on through the years to greater and greater accomplishments.
For the best worker in the world is the man who works because he wishes to work, and who is
always striving to become a better workman.

Certainly Charley became a better workman, as any one does who works in the spirit he exhibited.
The mere getting of a wage, the mere earning of a living hardly figured in Charley's calculations.
He was working to learn, to get ahead, to climb up in the Forestry Service. Hence there was
nothing perfunctory in what he did. He strove for perfection; and like all who so strive, he
began to attain it.

Before he had been many weeks a ranger, Charley was as valuable a man in many ways as the forester
had under him. All Charley lacked to make him perhaps the very best man was wider experience;
and this was coming to him daily. Furthermore, Charley was fortunate enough to have learned,
through his schooling, that although experience is the best teacher, he is a fool who learns
only through his own experience. All the information in all the books that Charley had ever
studied was the result of experience--somebody else's experience. And he had early grasped
the fact that to learn through the experience of others is to save time and difficulty. So
now he supplemented his own experiences by much reading and study at night and by the discussion
of forest matters with the more intelligent of his workmen.

New experiences came to him frequently. The forester surveyed and laid out a road through the
forest. Charley helped with the surveying and learned much about levels and grades and the
theory of road making. And after the road was fairly started, the forester left its completion
largely to Charley. This new road was to lead into the big timber operation which was shortly
to begin in Charley's territory.

Already a great crew had been assembled and much timber had been cut in Lumley's district.
Lumley had to oversee this operation and he was kept far busier than he liked to be. So Charley
saw little of him.

In overseeing the operation in his own tract, Charley would have to select and mark the trees
for cutting, see that they were felled so as to save the young growths, compel the prompt removal
of trees that had fallen across little saplings that had been bent under them, and make sure
the tops were properly lopped off and either burned where possible or piled so that they would
quickly rot. Then he would have to be particular that the trees were thrown away from the roads
and lines, and that a strip at least one hundred feet wide was kept cleared of brush between
the cutting operations and the remainder of the forest, as a protection against the spread
of fire. Then there would be timber to scale and a hundred other things to be looked after.
To safeguard the state's interests would require both experience and determination should the
timber operators wish to be tricky. Mr. Marlin intended that Charley, as a reward for the fine
spirit he was showing, should handle the lumber operation in his own district entirely alone,
just as a full-fledged ranger would do. It was both a high compliment to Charley and a fine
reward, for the timber operation was large, involving great sums of money, and even with the
most careful supervision the state might easily be defrauded of thousands of dollars.

But Mr. Marlin was far too wise to put Charley in such a position without adequate training.
Personally, therefore, he began to prepare him for the work. Accompanied by Charley, he went
entirely over the operations in Lumley's territory. He carried a duplicate of the contract
under which the wood was being cut. Together they discussed every phase of the contract, and
the forester showed Charley how each step in the operation should be carried out; how the trees
should be selected and marked, how they should be felled and trimmed, how the brush should
be disposed of, and finally how the timber should be scaled at the skidways along the highway,
whence the timber was being carted away in huge trucks.

Then he went with Charley into the latter's own district and started him at the task of selecting
and marking the trees for cutting. These had to be greater than ten inches in diameter, breast-high,
and had to be marked. Crooked trees and wolf trees whose unduly large tops harmed lower growths
were also to be cut. The trees were marked by blazing them at the butt and breast-high and
striking the blazes with a heavy hammer that left the imprint of the state's marker on the
wood. Merely to select and mark all the trees to be cut was a considerable task, but Charley
tried to do this and carry on his other work as well. It meant that he worked from the earliest
possible moment in the morning until he could no longer see at night. Day after day he worked
at his tasks, content to eat cold meals that Mrs. Lumley packed for him, and reaching home
so weary that he tumbled into bed and was asleep the instant he had telephoned his daily report
to his chief.

Darkness had already fallen, one night, when Charley drew near the Lumley habitation. To his
surprise he saw a light up-stairs in Lumley's room. As he drew nearer, he could faintly discern
the forms of two men in the chamber. Involuntarily he stopped to scrutinize the figures. At
the same instant Lumley's dogs began to bark, as they always did when any one approached. Quick
as a flash the curtain of the chamber window was pulled down. But in that brief instant Charley
was sure he recognized the man with Lumley. It was Bill Collins.

Charley was startled completely out of his weariness. A moment later he got a second shock.
Like a flash it came to him where he had first seen Lumley. He had been with Collins the day
the latter had appeared in the forest. Collins had attracted Charley's attention so strongly
that he had hardly noticed Collins' companion. Yet now he was certain he was right. He was
certain that he was not mistaken.

From the beginning he had believed that he had seen Lumley somewhere before the forester introduced
Lumley to him. Now it came to him where he had first seen Lumley. Lumley was the man he and
Lew had seen with Bill Collins.

Still another surprise awaited Charley. When he entered the house Lumley was seated at the
table opposite a stranger, and the stranger was not Bill Collins. But he resembled Collins
so much that Charley did not wonder that, at such a distance, he had made the mistake of thinking
the man was Collins.

Chapter XXIII

A Startling Discovery

Charley was glad enough that the man was not Collins. Had he been Collins, Charley would have
had another matter to worry about. He was carrying such a load of responsibility these days
that he sometimes felt that he couldn't stand another thing; and in moments of depression he
thought he could not continue to carry the load he already had.

For Charley was learning the lesson that every man in authority learns: when the forester laid
out a piece of work for him, the forester expected him to get it done. No matter what the difficulties
were, Charley had to find a way to surmount them. Many and many a day he would gladly have
exchanged places with the humblest laborers in his crew.

All that was required of them was merely to do what they were told to do, hour after hour or
day after day. There was no need for them to lie awake wrestling with problems that seemed
impossible of solution, as Charley had more than once lain awake.

For it had not all been smooth sailing for Charley, any more than it is for any man in authority.
After his first set-to with the surly laborer, he had not had any open trouble with his men.
But more than one of his crew did not always do an honest day's work, and any failure on the
men's part put Charley behind with the amount of work he was expected to get done. This difficulty
Charley had finally remedied by asking for Mr. Morton's help. The latter had sent for several
of the laborers and had shown them that in hindering Charley they were hurting the Forest Service
and thus, in the long run, harming themselves.

Furthermore, as the days passed, and Charley showed that he knew his job, that he was just
to everybody, that he had control of his temper, that he expected a fair day's work every day,
while he himself accomplished more actual work each day than any man in his gang, the attitude
of the men under him changed. Before the summer ended, Charley had as loyal a crew as any man
could ask for. And to their loyalty they began to add ambition. For Charley was able gradually
to instil into them the spirit which made them want to do as much as any other crew and a little
bit more.

So his road making came on apace. Rapidly the rude highway advanced through the forest. Every
day after his crew had gone home, Charley went over the area to be made the succeeding day,
examining carefully every inch of the ground and determining how he would meet each little
problem that would come up. Thus prepared, he speedily acquired a reputation for unusual ability.
The result was that his men, when stopped by some obstacle, at once came to him for assistance,
though at first they would have scorned to ask a "high school boy" for enlightenment about
any task in the forest.

The road under construction was being pushed straight through the heart of the big timber.
It was to lead directly to the foot of the mountain on the top of which Charley and Lew had
had their secret watch tree. You
I never were allowed to touch it, drunkard, and on the seventh day you buried Malmort! See you
this poison? "She lifted the bottle out of his bosom." Why I live was that you the Proffered
death? Fool me from an antidote! Now you know! Palma novella under my heart has killed you!
And now I am not suffering any more! "

So bright and bold words persuaded the judge.

By their loud scolding brought to himself, she looked again the Comes, now in the clearest moonlight
lay. The terrible story he did not care, he lay motionless with stretched
feet.

Now she saw that she had spoken to the stones, and struck a pool on. "Today I am a fool!" she
said. "I want to go to bed."

She turned. Palma novella was standing behind her, white, with eyes aghast, the face disfigured,
paralyzed with horror. The second horn shock had awakened her, and she was the mother crept after
anxious to toe.

Two ghosts faced each other. Stemma then grabbed the girl's arm and dragged it back to the castle.
She had given her a mouth secrets and a witness and this witness was her child.

Chapter Five

had disappeared since the courtier from Malmort weighed at the heavy walls of silence and Grief.
The servants all sorts of rumors, and servants and prostitutes put their heads together. The young
lady was sick. It was done to her. Some magic - whether it a Drude encounter a poisonous herb
or swallowed or drunk from a malicious source - have the poorest
deprived of reason.

Mangle her slumber, she was crying incessantly and let neither comfort nor touch it. Your resist food
and drink and they vanish the skeleton. The sounds and Wilde was still even and gentle and her thin
thread of life to tear become. The troubled judge follow her every step, and should not in it the
eyes can be.

Two maids stood together at the fountain and whispers. Benedicta was
the young lady suddenly met in the hallway and wanted to kiss the
hand of your fee. Palma had retreated fearfully and I cried out: "Do
not touch me!" Veronica had peered through the keyhole and what is
seen? something quite incredible: the proud Stemma prostrated before
her child, caressing him, embraced his knees pleading and for the
grace that open the mouth and a Bite touching you.

While these operations were afoot, Charley and his laborers were back in the forest, running
a telephone-line along the new road. Holes had to be dug, poles cut, barked, hauled, and set
up, and the wires strung. While his men set the poles, Charley himself, with a helper, strung
the wires. At this job he needed no instruction. His experiences with the wireless were now
of great value to him, for he understood about insulation, grounding, short circuits, and the
like as well as any skilled lineman.

So the telephone-line came on apace, and long before the tower was finished, Charley had the
line complete from the highway, where it joined the main line, to the summit of the hill where
the tower was going up. He installed an instrument in a waterproof box nailed to a tree, so
that he could now talk from the hilltop to the forester's office. When the tower was finally
completed, he ran the lines up inside the angle-irons to protect them from the terrific winds,
so that the tower man could instantly communicate with the forester at Oakdale.

Now the cabin went up. Large, flat stones were assembled and a rough but stable foundation
made below the level of the ground. Trees were felled, barked, squared on two sides, and properly
notched at the corners. When a sufficient number had been prepared, the frame of the cabin
was erected, log being laid upon log, with the corners dovetailing. Wooden pins held the logs
in place. Windows and a door were cut out and framed. Then the rafters for the roof were fashioned,
the sheathing nailed on, and shingles, made at a former lumber operation in Mr. Marlin's own
territory, completed the job. A fireplace was made of big stones and concrete, and the cabin
was about complete. A telephone extension was run into the building. At any time now a fire
patrol could take up his twenty-four-hour watch at the fire-tower.

The early rush of fishermen was past; but the fine weather still brought hosts of them into
the woods, and the danger of fire increased rather than lessened. The scanty rainfall in spring
had left the woods still dry, and now but few showers came. Fire patrols were still difficult
to obtain, however, and Charley decided that he would take up his residence, at least temporarily,
in the new cabin.

There was ample room in it for two men, should a fire patrol be secured, and by living there,
Charley would, of necessity, spend much time at this observation post. Night and morning and
at intervals between, when he was at home, he could ascend to the tower and view every part
of the neighboring forest. Furthermore, the location was very convenient, for the tower was
close to the heart of his district. By living here he would be with his work twenty-four hours
a day.

Mr. Marlin approved of Charley's decision to move into the cabin. With the new road completed,
the forester could come to the very foot of the mountain in his motor-car. He was in instant
communication with his ranger by telephone and, when it was necessary, he could get to him
by motor-car with the greatest ease.

The forester himself helped Charley move his belongings from Lumley's house to the new cabin.
While Mr. Marlin was loading Charley's other luggage on his truck, Charley was dismantling
his wireless. When he removed the lead-in wire from the window-sash, he noticed Lumley's finger-marks
in the puttied crack and told Mr. Marlin about the ranger's fit of temper. When everything
was finally packed, Charley thanked Mrs. Lumley for her hospitality and then climbed into the
waiting truck.

As he sat down beside the forester, he sighed with relief. Merely to get away from Lumley's
house made him feel as though a burden had been lifted from his shoulders. Mr. Marlin laughed
at him, but that did not disturb Charley. He had never been able to rid himself of his feeling
of distrust for Lumley, and he felt oppressed when he was in the Lumley home.

Charley and the forester carried Charley's possessions from the truck to the new cabin. A tiny
stove had been brought along for Charley to cook on. Although it was so small, it was heavy
enough. Between that and the battery, the two had all the carrying they wanted before everything
was finally placed in the cabin.

Charley fastened his aerial between the fire-tower and his old watch tree, which was still
standing, but which had been shorn of most of its branches to allow the watchman in the tower
to see past it. Finally, everything was complete. The wireless was in working condition, Charley's
few furnishings were in place, the stores put away, and the cabin was fully ready for his occupancy.

Immediately Charley called up Mrs. Morton on the telephone and asked her to talk to him on
the wireless. A moment later their invisible messages were speeding back and forth over the
miles of billowing pine tops that intervened between the two little forest homes, and no listener
in on the department telephone system could either know that they were talking or tell what
they said. Charley was overjoyed when Mrs. Morton told him that her husband was about ready
to come back to work. His arm was still painful and he could not use it much, but he could
now get around well and was fast becoming strong again.

When Charley told the forester the news, the latter expressed his pleasure. He studied Charley's
face a moment to see how Charley felt over the news.

"You realize what it means to you when Jim is able to do his work again, do you?" asked Mr. Marlin.

"Certainly," said Charley. A feeling of regret passed through his mind and was mirrored on
his face. But there was nothing unkind or unfair about it. "Maybe some day I'll qualify as
a real ranger," sighed Charley, "but I'm glad I had this opportunity to learn something."

"Charley," continued the forester, "you've earned the right to see this lumber operation through.
It's a big responsibility. You've worked night and day to get ready for the job. Do you think
I'm the kind of man who would rob you of the reward that you have justly earned?"

"I don't exactly understand," said Charley.

"I mean," replied the forester, "that no matter whether Jim gets well in time or not, you are
going to handle the lumber operation in this district. Jim can do something else. There's plenty
of work for a dozen rangers. You are to be the boss of this job."

"Do you really mean it?" cried Charley in delight.

"Surely I mean it," said the forester. "It wouldn't be a fair deal not to let you take charge
after the way you've tried to qualify for the work." Indeed, living, living Poison,
"and had lifted the crystal from the bust and emptied.

For a while she stood, she took a step and a second tottering against Wulfrin. "Be strong!"
she sighed and collapsed. Rudio bent over the corpse, raised it to his arms and carried her
to Faustina.

There she sat at the grave, but the bondsmen bent and the face placed in the lap of the lady.

Now
revealed to the emperor to the girl that has a miserable look after
the mother accused folded his hands and commanded.

"Well, you remember the day I first met you in the forest, Charley, I was cruising with two
good timber estimators. They're skilled men. We were making the estimate on which this sale
was based. I sent in my estimate and the department made its figures on that basis. But the
timber that is actually being taken out doesn't begin to scale what I thought it would. Of
course I was wrong in not cruising a bigger strip. But I just couldn't spare the time, then.
Evidently the stand over in Lumley's district is not so heavy as it is here. The right way
to estimate timber is to cruise strips entirely across the stand. You can't make a correct
estimate by cruising an acre or two as I did and estimating an entire stand on the basis of
that acre or two. You see the stand in the bottom may be half as heavy again as the stand on
the hillside."

Mr. Marlin paused. After a moment, he went on, "Before the lumbermen get into your district
I want to make another estimate. You and I will cruise a few strips the entire width of the
stand. That will take quite a little time. We can't start to-day, but we'll get at it at the
first opportunity. Meantime, I want you to get all the practice you can in scaling lumber,
so that you can do it readily. You will have to scale every stick cut in your district and
keep tally on all the lumber that is taken out. It's highly important work, for the state depends
upon your figures to get its just pay for the lumber cut. If you make mistakes, the state will
lose accordingly. I want you to practice scaling so that you can do it as readily as you can
measure a board with a yardstick."

"Then I'll do some practicing to-day," said Charley. "You sent my crew into another district
and I can put in a whole afternoon practicing."

"Very good. Today, on the eve of his departure, he thought of a solemn requiem mass for
the salvation of his father to attend the king Pippin.

To his left was the abbot Alcuin, while a retinue of courtiers, from all countries Christianity
zusammengewaehlte palace school, held at a respectful distance, half out of respect, half
gently with the idea in a favorable moment to to forgive and to escape
the show. They went down the mountain and climbed
into the motor-car.

"Perhaps you would rather do this some other time," said the forester suddenly. "You'll have
to walk back, for I must go right along to my office. And it's a great deal farther back here
than it would have been to Lumley's house."

Charley's reply was a good-natured laugh. "Have you ever found me afraid of a little hike?"
he asked. "I may not have another opportunity as good as this, for I'm going to be mighty busy
when my crew gets back."

They drove on, and at the skidways Mr. Marlin dropped his subordinate. "I'll be out to see
you to-morrow," he said, "with some maps and specifications I must work out to-night. Good-bye."

"He's a prince," muttered Charley, and fell to measuring logs.

Applying his log-rule to the small end of each log, he noted the diameter of the log and from
the scale on the rule read the number of board-feet in the log. Already Charley had done a
little scaling of logs and he went at the work readily. As he scaled pile after pile of logs,
he worked faster and faster, acquiring greater facility with every measurement. The contents
of each pile he noted down, a log at a time, on a bit of paper. When he had finished the work,
he totaled up the board-feet, and whistled when he realized what a tremendous quantity of lumber
was contained in the log piles he had been measuring.

"Gee!" he said to himself. "At the price lumber is selling for now, those logs are worth a
small fortune. Gad! It makes a fellow feel pretty sober when he thinks how easily he could
make a mistake that would cost the state hundreds of dollars."

He tucked his record in his pocket, along with his pencil, and started for his cabin. Despite
the fact that he was soon to lose his place of authority, he could not help feeling happy.
His diploma had been awarded to him on Commencement day, although he had not been able to be
present to receive it, and that was one cause for happiness. His comrades had never yet been
able to visit him, but he had received a letter that morning telling him that the entire Wireless
Patrol was coming out to spend a Sunday with him in the new cabin. That was a second cause
for happiness. His friend, Mr. Morton, was almost well, and that was a third cause for happiness.
And finally, he had earned the confidence of his chief so completely that his chief was entrusting
to him the very important task of overseeing the lumber operation. That made Charley's heart
swell with pride. Even the near approach of his reduction to the ranks again could not mar
his happiness; for in his heart he knew that he had made good and that it was only a question
of time until he should become a ranger in fact as well as in name.

So he went on his way happy, rejoicing in his accomplishment, enjoying the new life of the
forest, joyous with the strength and hope and confidence of youth. He came at last to his trail's
end, and climbed the tower to look for fire and to watch the sun go down.

"It's warm enough so that a fellow could sleep up here now," he said to himself suddenly. "I'll
just build a bunk up here and then I can sleep here whenever I feel like it. If I wake up in
the night, I can take a look around and make sure everything is all right."

He went down to his cabin and got a rope, some boards, foot-rule, saw, hammer, auger, and nails.
He went back to the tower and made some measurements. Then he came down, cut his boards, bored
holes into them, tied them together, and went up again with his tools and nails and the end
of the rope. He hauled up the boards and drew them into the watch-tower. Then he nailed them
together and had a snug little bunk that stretched completely across one side of the little
structure. He wove the cord back and forth across the bunk through the auger holes in place
of springs. Then he went down to the ground, made a tick out of one of his sheets, filled it
with leaves and got it up to the tower. The Duke pulled the trigger, because - now is the funny story - the young Wife of
one of our men, one shared my own Judges, little older than you "-

"My playmates Brunetta, the child Faustina -

"It is this jump in between. 'In the perforated side of God,' she cried, 'the Poor Mr. Wulf wears
the horn, and is none other than the son of the Count, the image in the stone is on Malmort. His own
sister, Lady Palma, tells me about him, from small on and on and on without stopping. You must not
die ', they turned to the bound, 'Which it would be a great suffering and killed her little
heart. For know, you're her heart Kaefer although she has never seen you with my eyes. Send,
and they will replace you with their whole attire.

There are delicious thing. All their treasure, the judge the child, when it had its stature,
donated and delivered up '. "

"So Duke Witigis learned the name of his prisoners, and the blonde Rosmunde he order has the existence
of a magnificent treasure.

They embraced the Duke and implored the jewels of Malmort. Your frontal band has its pearls and
her ivory comb half his Teeth lost. Brief, Goldsmith Rachis has been sent to you and offers
you the exchange. Opt: Jewelry or brother!

Marriage had ended the Lombard, rushed the girl to the castle, up the steep stairs up, disappeared
into the door and came back breathless, shimmering and sounding in the Apron taken to wearing
bright robe. This they did with the left, while the rights piece by piece as a day-care centers and
the curved fingers lifted the goldsmith about answered. Slides, Stirnbaender, belt, pearl beads
disappeared in the sack, which Rachis had opened, even for the blond braids Rosmundens an elaborate
crest of Ivory with the Saviour and the Apostles in relief.

Each wandering through his hands Composition accompanied the goldsmith with the praise of the
connoisseur, not without a bit of malice, wanted to make the enthusiastic
girl felt his loss.

You do not even flinched by mouth, they shone with joy at the dedication all of their property.

Since you came for but a doubt. "You are honest?" she said. "You send me a brother? It is better
that I accompany you, "and she went wegfertig.

"Impossible, madam," protested the Lombard, that's not possible!

You discovered our hiding place and endangered the life of the brother also yours. The judge,
however, would you robbed of us believe. Do not be unwise to give up and not an alien power!
"He loaded with the sack. "A Schlummerchen, lady and if you open your eyes, are you the brother of
the costs you gold and property. I swear! "He lowered the three Fingers with a fierce gaze to the
ground. "The down there!" he vowed.

"A credible oath!" said a female voice. Rachis turned shocked and bent the knee before a helmeted
woman with severe features, the spear, which it in your hand taken to an armed servants handed. The
judge liked her out of consideration for fatigued Animal Burgweg have climbed the steep walk. She reached
Palma protective arm and looked disparagingly to the Lombards. "Oaths you with God and his saints,"
she said, "You swear loaded. More you swear the truth of the father of lies Habet her commits you
not, with all divine to rob her Lombard, never more in Raetien to burn? And now that you, as
all evil, escaping before the eyes of the emperor throws, her right
and left devastating flames!

I come from Chur and is aware of your actions, break your oath! You say your Witigis, the judge
would chase after him and chastise him, if not a Of larger coming in, and he is already there, whose
hand reaches him, he fled to the ends of the earth! " Now her eye fell on the bag of the goldsmith.
"What are you wearing away there, thief?" asked they contemptuously.

"An honest trade," protested this and opened the bag, while the girl's
mother stormy embraced. "I buy my brother!" she cried. "He's in the
power of the Witigis is advised aiming at him until I was the Duchess
"- raised the innocent child, the blonde Rosmunde in the married state
- "where my jewelry was, and how much I give him!"

The judge got
away from her and asked Rachis: "Is that true?"

"In my neck, my lady!"
 By George! They could afford to bid high. Just see what
they've stolen in one day's cut of timber."

The forester's face grew black as a thundercloud. "But we'll fix them, Charley," he cried.
"We'll get all that money back for the state and maybe put these fellows in prison besides.
Anyway, we'll put Lumley there sure. Don't breathe a word of this to a soul. We'll check up
Lumley's figures every day now at the skidways. When we have enough evidence, we'll act. Meantime,
don't let a soul suspect that you know anything, and don't do anything to alarm Lumley."

Chapter XXIV

Checkmated

Charley was afoot very early next morning. At the usual time he flashed out a wireless call
for the Mortons, and the ranger himself answered. Mr. Morton could now operate the wireless
quite readily, though, of course, with nothing like the skill his wife had acquired. He reported
that he was to return to duty the next morning, starting work, with a big crew, on a six-foot
fire-line along the summit of Old Ironsides. Charley was overjoyed at the news. It meant that
now he would have a chance to see this friend from time to time.

Mr. Marlin had not said that he would come to see Charley this morning, nor had he telephoned
any message to that effect; but when Charley heard the steady chugging of a motor in the valley
below, he believed it must be the forester. He was not quite certain, however, because the
motor did not seem to beat exactly like Mr. Marlin's. The dense foliage completely hid the
approaching car from view, so that Charley could not see what sort of an automobile it was.

It mattered little to Charley, however, who it was. He was the soul of hospitality, and at
once he set some coffee to boiling for his approaching visitor.

This proved to be the forester. He presently came puffing up the slope, and after he had drunk
some coffee and gotten his breath, the two men began to plan how they should best watch Lumley.
The logs must be checked up carefully, yet it was desirable that no one see Charley measuring
them. Finally it was decided that each day Charley should measure them in the early evening
immediately after the last log truck had started away with its load. There would be nobody
around then, and Charley could easily measure the day's cut and get home to his cabin before dark.

For an hour the two guardians of the forest discussed matters that pressed for attention. Then
the forester rose to go. "I have Lumley's report on yesterday's cut," he said, "and if nobody
is around when we reach the skidways, we'll just check it up. We can drive out in a few minutes,
but you will have to walk back. Get your log-rule and come on." And they went down the mountain
to the end of the new road.

"Hello!" cried Charley in surprise, as he caught sight of the forester's car. "You're driving
a big truck, eh? I thought that motor didn't sound like your Henry."

"Yes; there was a load of stuff to be hauled out for Jim's crew. He starts work to-morrow.
I killed two birds with one stone by bringing the stuff, which I dumped at Jim's, and then
coming on out here."

As they reached the car, Charley said, "It looks powerful."

"It's one of those old army trucks Uncle Sam gave us. Got a great battery and tremendous power.
Get in."

They climbed aboard. Mr. Marlin touched the starter and the engine began to chug. He let in
his clutch but the car would not move. The car happened to be standing on a moist spot and
its great weight had pressed the wheels far down into the soft new road. Mr. Marlin threw on
the power. The truck jumped, something snapped sharply and a banging noise followed as the
car moved jerkily ahead.

"Thunderation!" cried the forester. "I've broken the differential. I bet ten dollars on it."
And investigation proved his diagnosis was correct. "I suppose it will take all summer to get
a new part," growled the forester. "This truck will have to stand here idle until repairs come.
But <i>we</i> can't stand here idle. Come on."

They set off down the road. After a long hike they came to the skidways at the main road. Nobody
was in sight.

"We'll begin at one end and work toward the other until we hear somebody coming. Then we'll
have business elsewhere."

Pile by pile they scaled the logs, Charley using the log-rule under Mr. Marlin's close observation,
while the forester himself kept tally. Alone in the big woods, they talked freely.

"Why do you suppose Lumley took a chance like this?" asked the forester. "He might have known
he'd get caught."

"Primarily because he wanted the money, of course," maintained Charley. "But there's another
thing that may play a part in the matter. Did you know that Lumley's folks once owned this
virgin timber?"

"I've heard that a generation or two back the Lumley family owned big tracts of land hereabouts.
Naturally some of that land would now be included within the limits of the state's holdings."

"When I was living at Lumley's, he told me over and over about his family's having owned this
timber and his grandfather's having been swindled out of it. He seemed to me to be mighty unreasonable
about it. He was awful sore, and said he'd be a millionaire to-day if he had all the timber
his grandfather owned and that it was his by rights, anyway. I recall that he said the thought
of anybody else's getting the money for the timber made him almost want to commit murder."

The forester looked sober. "He's a bad egg," he said. "I really believe he wouldn't hesitate
to commit murder if he were cornered. You want to watch him. We'll have to be mighty careful
how we handle this business."

"Hark!" said Charley. "Isn't that the sound of a truck?" And as they listened, faintly they
could hear the sound of a motor.

"Probably a log truck coming for a load. If we'd had a few minutes more, we could have completed
the job. There are only two piles left. We'll just disappear until this truck goes away. Then
we can come back and finish."

The beating of the motor sounded louder. The two men moved toward the forest. As they passed
the farther end of the first unmeasured log pile, the forester stopped in amazement. A man
sat on the ground, leaning lazily against the logs. It was the man Charley had seen that night
at Lumley's.

"What are you doing here, Henry Collins?" demanded the forester sternly.

"I'm working for the lumber company," said the man, sullenly.

"You appear to be working hard," replied the forester scornfully.

"I help load the trucks," said the fellow, as the forester turned on his heel and walked away,
followed by Charley.

"You don't suppose that he could have heard what we said, do you?" asked Charley, anxiously.

"Heard every word of it," replied the forester. "The jig is up. That was Bill Collins' cousin
and he's as crooked as Bill. Lumley will know what's afoot as quick as Collins can get word
to him. We've got to act quick. There's a detail of state constabulary at Ironton, and they
could get here in a motor in thirty minutes if I could only telephone them. Why in thunderation
did I ever leave the office without my portable instrument? The nearest 'phone is at Jim Morton's.
It will take me three-quarters of an hour at my best pace to make it. But it's the best I can
do. I'll hike for Jim's. You hustle back to your tower and keep a close watch on things. I'll
telephone you as soon as I can. We've got to step lively if we are to catch that scoundrel Lumley."

Chapter XXV

The Crisis

The forester hastened down the highway at a A tremendous pace. Charley set out along the forest
road he had so recently built. Before he knew it, he was running madly. He ran for a long distance,
hardly conscious that he was running. Presently he stopped from very fatigue. Then he realized
that he was greatly excited and that he was running from sheer nervousness.

"This won't do at all," he muttered to himself. "You're worse than an old hen. If ever you
needed to keep your head, it's right now."

He took a grip on himself, drew a long breath, and settled to a fast walk, thinking hard. He
could not see how he himself could accomplish the arrest of Lumley. If his chief did not think
it advisable to attempt it, he was very certain that he ought not to try it himself. And he
was glad at the thought. For he could not help but recall the wicked gleam in Lumley's eyes,
the man's savage outburst of temper, and his vicious talk. He understood well enough that Lumley
would not submit to arrest without a struggle.

Then the thought came to him that he had no business trying to arrest Lumley, even if he could
do it. The chief was attending to that and the chief knew best what to do under the circumstances.
Also, the chief had given him his orders. His business was to obey orders. And those orders
were to take care of the forest.

Fresh alarm seized him. Why had the forester given him those orders? Was there danger of any
one's setting fire to the forest? At the thought Charley was almost in a panic again. A passionate
love for the great woods he was guarding had sprung up in Charley's heart. He held come to
dread fire with a dread unspeakable. He had come to regard it with a feeling of absolute terror.
In this feeling there was nothing of physical fear. A little blaze in the forest made him so
wild with anger that nowadays he would fight it recklessly. His fear was the dread lest the
immemorial trees he was guarding should be wasted and the forest destroyed. It was apprehension
for the forest, not for himself, that troubled Charley.

Rapidly he passed along the road, now jogging to relieve the nervous tension, now proceeding
at a fast walk. He came to the slope of the mountain but his pace was no whit slower. At last,
panting and almost exhausted from his terrific efforts, he reached the crest. He staggered
to the ladder and climbed painfully to the watch-tower. Steadying himself, he swept the horizon
in every direction. The forest seemed to slumber. No smoke arose, no winds swayed the tree
tops. The twilight peace enfolded everything. Satisfied that all was safe, Charley sank down
on his bunk and lay there until he was rested. Then he climbed down to his cabin and cooked supper.

Never since he had been alone in the forest had Charley so much felt the need of companionship
as he did now. He lighted a little fire in his hearth and the cheery snapping of the burning
sticks comforted him. He sat down at his wireless and talked with Mr. Morton. The latter could
not tell him much about the situation. The forester had telephoned from his place for the police
and the latter had started at once for the forest. That was all Mr. Morton knew. Charley called
up Lew and told him as much of the situation as he thought wise, and got the news from Central
City. When he threw over his switch and turned away from his wireless table, he felt somewhat
comforted. But the feeling of dread and apprehension had not altogether left him.

For some time he read, or tried to read. Study he could not. At last he went to the telephone
and called Mr. Marlin. He reported that all was well in the forest. He was burning to ask his
chief all about the situation, yet hardly dared. He might say something that the chief would
rather have unsaid; for always there was the possibility of listeners in on the telephone.
And Lumley's family could listen in as readily as any others.

Doubtless Mr. Marlin appreciated Charley's self-restraint. Before he said good-night, he remarked
casually to Charley, "I may want you to do some work at the lumber camp to-morrow. I tried
to find Lumley there late this afternoon to give him some orders, but he had gone away. I have
asked his wife to have him call me the moment he comes home. Don't forget my final instructions
to you this afternoon. Good-night."

To an outsider the message would mean nothing, as Mr. Marlin intended it should. But to Charley
it told the whole story. Lumley had fled before the arrival of the forester and the state police.

Charley reviewed the forester's words to him, as they talked at the log piles.

Again a feeling of apprehension came to Charley, and this time there was something of personal
fear about it. Again Charley recalled the fugitive ranger's violence of temper, and his evident
jealousy of the chief. And as Charley considered the matter now, he saw that Lumley must have
been even more jealous of him, Charley, than he was of the chief. Now he understood all the
prying efforts Lumley had made to learn the size of his pay. Quite evidently Lumley could not
endure to see another man get ahead. Charley felt sure that it would not be safe for him to
meet Lumley. He resolved to be on his guard every second. Then he sighed with relief at the
thought that Lumley had fled.

But a moment later his face became very grave. "How do I know that Lumley has fled?" he asked
himself. "To go any distance, he would have to walk along a highway, or ride in a motor-car,
or board a train; and in any case he might be seen and traced. On the other hand, Lumley knows
the forest like a book. He has lived in it for years. Where else could he so well hope to elude
pursuit?" Charley felt certain that Lumley must be somewhere in the forest.

Immediately he got his rifle, filled the magazine, and stood it within reach. He tried to read,
but was too nervous. Then he thought of the open windows and his light within the cabin. Any
one could see through the windows--or shoot through them. Charley put his flash-light in his
pocket and blew out his lamp. The evening was warm, and Charley opened the door and sat down
on the sill, leaning against the jamb of the door, and cradling his rifle across his knees.

Soon his eyes became accustomed to the darkness. From where he sat, Charley could look out
over what seemed like infinite stretches of forest. The moon had not yet risen, and the valleys
below him were vast depths of darkness. Mist floated above, partly obscuring the stars. A gentle
breeze was blowing up here on the mountain top, but Charley knew that down in the valleys the
air was like stagnant water. The whispering of the trees around him was like the quiet breathing
of a babe asleep, and the occasional sounds of the forest creatures were no more disturbing
than the gentle murmurs of a dreaming child. Peace enfolded the forest. It seemed to Charley
as though that great, invisible, beneficent Spirit we call God had cradled the forest in His
arms as a mother cradles her little ones. The thought comforted him. Something of the peace
about him crept into his own heart. He drew a long sigh and sat back.

After a time he began to feel drowsy. He took his blanket and his rifle, and, closing his cabin
door, climbed to the fire-tower. He closed and bolted the trap-door in the floor of the tower.
For some time he sat on the edge of his bunk, watching the forest. Behind the eastern mountains
the sky began to glow. The moon was coming up. In another hour or two, Charley knew, the forest
would be flooded with silvery light. He loved the moonlight on the pines, but he was becoming
too sleepy to stay awake to see it. The moment the moon's first rays shot over the eastern
hilltops, Charley lay back in his bunk, stood his rifle within reach, drew the blankets about
him, and was almost instantly asleep.

Yet he slumbered uneasily. Terrible dreams disturbed him. Once or twice he awoke and started
up in alarm. Once the slender tower seemed to vibrate as though some one were mounting the
ladder. 

"You see, madam," cried the woman that you know how I killed him! The poison me Peregrin shown. "

"Peregrin" asked the judge with disguised voice. "That's not possible," she said.

"He showed it to me and warned me. I wandered in despair among the pines of Silvretta. As I see
it in his long, dark dress, the stooped and roots dig. Flowers nodded with brown bells. He summons
me, and one of these flowers in hand, says he to me, 'woman, you must beware of the children
from this fruit! Its juice kills, except in the hands of the doctor. " He meant well with his warning
glance at the brown curls out and blew me to a grim evil thoughts. No trespass to his Soul!
But I'm talking foolish. He's long been an angel of God, since it after the great Level hiking
in the mountains went down, as they say, and it was not long after that hour. You remember still,
the Judex your father, whom he healed the wound had been worth it, what you were unwelcome,
as it up as a wise cleric would have still have much to teach. "

"Talking not," commanded the judge, "and end your confession.

On the following day are you went from your cabin to Silvretta and have dug the roots? "

"Yes. You rode, and I ducked, so that you know me not want to, but You turn up test twice in the
saddle.

And now, be merciful, my lady, and give me my share. " She let her head fall on the breast,
so its the lush black hair growth over the Face fell.

Stemma mused, looking down at Faustina, and moved her fingers with scattered long Straw from
her hair. "Faustina, my playmate," she finally said, "I can not up
concerned.

"

The whole Faustina was in an uproar. "Why not?" she cried indignantly, "you've got to, or I
cry out that the sound of all walls: She killed her husband! "

Stemma it behaved the mouth.

"Let the dead men's bones!" scolded her when she threatened one of
the buried bones out scratching dogs.

"Be merciful!" Faustina prayed, "let me cut off the head, even after it cost God and kissed his
cross. Then it grows again to me in heaven and Stenio right Lupulus left, we are sitting on a
bench and shake hands. Then I asked, "and they stretched his neck.

"I can not judge you, fool," Stemma said gently.

"On three factors. Clipboard!"

As you begin confess what you did, still lived and ruled the Judex my father. After his death
and that of the Comes, because I inherited the sword, I have proclaimed
loudly: "From everything is Happened!

From now no more sinful! " But even if I did not cry this would have , Can I still could not judge
you, and you went out freely, because for what you did fifteen years are completely gone in the
country, and here is an ancient tradition that debt the statute of
limitation in fifteen years.

"

"Statute of limitation? What that is?" Faustina asked amazed.

"The
effect of the time lost its power."

A mocking laugh was flashed over
the white teeth of Raeterin. "So, for example, she said, "if I had
poisoned my husband yesterday and overnight, the time completely,
so today I am not a killer anymore. Such stupidity! "

"But, you stay
a murderer," she instructed Stemma slow to anger, "but you are having
with the earthly Judges to create anything, but only with the heavenly.
Atonement through good works! You have made a start: fifteen years
weigh laborious and honest. "

"Nothing they weigh!" Faustina was
angry. "I can see you want to save me! Calmly he began to consider what he could do. He
thought of the dry cells he had first used. They were still wired together and in the cabin.
Like a flash Charley coupled them to his instrument, but the cells were exhausted. He could
get no spark from them.

Again he sat down and thought. Suddenly he leaped to his feet. "The army truck!" he cried.
"If he overlooked that, I'll beat him yet."

He began to assemble tools and instruments. But when he looked for wire to fashion an aerial,
his face grew black. The intruder had taken both aerial and lead-in wire, and Charley hadn't
a hundred feet of wire left in the place. What should he do? What could he do?

Again he paused and pondered. And again an idea came to him. "They use trees for aerials,"
he muttered, "and they make perfect ones to receive by. I don't know whether one could send
from them or not. But it's my last chance. I'll try it."

He gathered together his tools and instruments, including the creepers he had used in putting
up the telephone-line, carefully stowed them all in a big basket and started down the mountain.
A hundred yards from the door he turned about and ran back. When he came out of the cabin again,
his rifle was tucked under his arm. Then he went down the mountain as fast as he could travel.

Fearfully he studied the truck as he drew near. It was untouched. With a cry of joy, Charley
tore open the battery box. In no time he had some wires fast to the battery. He spread out
his instruments and coupled everything carefully together. The outfit lacked only an aerial.

Buckling on his creepers, and stuffing some spikes and a hammer in his pocket, Charley rapidly
mounted a tall tree that stood close beside the truck. As luck would have it, the tree stood
all by itself, its nearest neighbors having been cut in making the road. Two-thirds of the
way up the tree, Charley drove a spike deep into the wood. He sank a second spike not far from
the first. Then he drove home a third. The lead-in wire dangled behind him at his belt. He
unfastened it and twisted it tight to the spikes, wrapping it close about one after the other.
Then he climbed down and made sure his wire did not touch the earth. Trembling with eagerness,
he sat down at his key.

One moment he paused, drawing out his watch. With a cry of joy, he put his finger on the key.
It was almost the hour at which he was accustomed to exchange morning greetings with Mr. Morton.
He pressed his key and a sharp flash resulted. Joyously he adjusted his spark-gap until he
had a fine, fat stream of fire leaping between the posts. Then he fairly held his breath as
he rapped out the ranger's call signal.

"JVM--JVM--JVM--CBC," he called and listened. There was no response. Again he called. And again
there was no response. His face became pale. His fingers began to tremble. And you wake from the horrible dream, the now tormented
and taken as directed. "

"Yes and no, mother. I was awakened by a call, I looked out hurry up and follow you on the Foot. You
stood in the courtyard in front of the statues and unlock the father
and told him "- they stopped, shuddering.

"What I told?" asked the judge.

"You said" - Palma spoke very softly - ". I am not his child You said that I was already in
your heart. You said that you and I have killed him. "

"Love fool" smiled Stemma, "take up all your mind and lose any of my Words. I would have talked
to a stone? as a superstitious? or a fool? Do you know me like that?

And you would not be the child of the Comes?

Who else was I married? Have I not told that I was a prisoner on
Malmort until I wooed the Comes?

And I would have her husband killed? I, the judge and the doctor of the country would have, Poison
mixed? Can you believe it? Do you think that's possible? "

"No, mother, no! And yet, you said it!"

"Palma, Palma, not mistreat
me! Otherwise I would have to hate you!"

Palma burst into tears and
threw herself hopeless against the breast of the mother, the sobbing
Pressed at all in itself. "You're killing me with your tears," she
said. "Believe me, Little fool! "

Palma raised his face and looked
around. "Feast here on the edge of a kid, mother?" Long before he reached the nearest
blaze, Charley smelled smoke. As he drew near the fire, he studied it as best he could. He
rejoiced that it was so small. The mist bank and the heavy fall of dew had so moistened things
that the fire crept but slowly.

Charley cut a pine branch and fell upon the flames ferociously. A great anger surged up in
his heart, like the fierce passion that takes possession of a bull when he sees red. It lent
power and determination to him. Yet Charley tried to conserve his strength. Yard after yard
he beat out the flames, thankful that he had to face only a little creeping fire. Small as
it was, the blaze was, nevertheless, hot and stifling.

Rod after rod Charley fought his way around the ring of fire, never pausing for a single instant
to rest. By the time he had completed the circle and the blaze was out, Charley was beginning
to tire badly. He doubted if he could beat out the six fires alone. If they grew any larger,
he knew he could not. And larger they were becoming, for the first faint puffs of the morning
breeze were beginning to stir the tree tops.

Half a mile through the trees Charley smashed his way to the next ring of fire. He could see
that the flames were leaping a little higher and that they were eating their way along at a
faster pace than the first fire had traveled. He knew it would be hard to stop this blaze.
But he cut a new bough, and gritting his teeth, once more fell to fighting fire.

Quickly he found it was quite a different fire from the one he had extinguished. Fitfully the
wind was coming up. When it blew, the flames seemed to leap at Charley. His shoes, his clothes,
his hands and wrists were blistered by the heat. His fingers were torn and his muscles ached.
His lungs and throat became painful. His eyes grew blurred. He could no longer see clearly.
There was a ringing noise in his ears. Yet coughing, choking, gasping for breath, stumbling
and tripping, and at times falling prone, he fought his way along the line of fire.

He was so weak, so worn out from physical exertion and nervous strain that he could no longer
think clearly. But blindly, stubbornly, doggedly, he fought the flames. His movements became
mechanical. Sometimes his descending bough hit the fire and sometimes it struck the unignited
leaves. Charley was fast nearing the point of exhaustion. He could scarcely control his movements.
Yet he tried valiantly to hold himself to his task. He thought of the turtle-dove on the burning
stump and for a moment the thought seemed to give him new strength. But the inspiration was
only momentary. Blindly now he staggered along the line of fire, gasping, reeling, swaying,
hardly able to keep his feet. He tottered on.

He could hardly raise his brush. His efforts were useless. Yet he hung doggedly to his duty.
Just as he was about to plunge headlong into the flames, a shout sounded in his ears, forms
came rushing through the smoke, and Charley was lifted in the forester's strong arms and borne
to one side.

Chapter XXVI

More Thumb-Prints

For a long time Charley lay on his back, hardly conscious of anything. But slowly the pure
air revived him and his powers came back. He sat up, then rose unsteadily to his feet. In a
few moments he felt all right. He began to look about him. The fire he had been fighting was
extinguished. He ascended an easily climbed tree and saw that the third fire in the valley
was also out. He knew that the fire fighters had gone on to the next valley to subdue the blazes
there. The wind was still no more than a zephyr and he knew they would succeed. The forest
was saved. A feeling of great relief came to him.

He sat down and rested, thinking what he ought to do. He remembered what the forester had said
about the desirability of an immediate investigation of incendiary fires. Here was his job.

He made his way to the blackened area where he had put out the first fire. The space burned
over was small. Charley stood and looked at it for some moments, thinking the problem over.
Then he walked slowly around the burned area, examining it closely, but not stepping within
the fire-line. Then he wet a finger and held it aloft. Unmistakably the light breeze was from
the west. It had doubtless been blowing from that quarter all the morning, though this particular
fire had been extinguished when there was hardly more than a suspicion of a breeze. The fire
would have spread in an elongated circle, or more exactly an oval. Charley tried to figure
out the exact starting point. He felt sure he could estimate it within a few yards.

When he had decided about where the fire must have originated, he made his way cautiously,
a yard at a time, toward that point. He was careful not to disturb the leaves any more than
was necessary in putting down his feet. Carefully he scrutinized every inch of the ground he
covered. He was looking for a mound of burned leaves or any other suspicious thing. But he
found none. Look where he would, the leaves seemed to have been disturbed before the fire started.

Not far from the point selected by Charley as the probable place of the fire's origin, the
ground thrust up in a little, low shoulder, as though there might be an outcropping ledge of
rock there. Immediately around this elevation the ground was clear of brush. No trees stood
near. Charley paid little attention to the mound until he noticed that it was hollowed out
on top. 

Since whispered the Abbot, the oats stuck his learning: "It is not Constantine. I got out long
ago. But it is good that he applies for it, otherwise riders and Gaul melted in the flame.
"The little abbot stood on her toes and whispered in the large Emperor's ear: "It is the philosopher
Marcus Aurelius and heath." "Really?" Karl smiled.

They went to the gate of Ara Coeli, through which they disappeared, the emperor has Devotion deepened,
so that he not noticed a nice young man in Raetian costume Near by
the stand and to attract his attention by the most respectful greetings
sought.

"Stop, gentlemen," cried one of the now arrived at the equestrian statue courtiers, and began
right and left hands of the next to him changing, "now that all drives and swells" - Earth
Lenz and smell came from nearby gardens - "I want my cup and what else dear to me is garland
of violets to drink but no incense, least of all a funeral mass. I have discovered around a
tavern with the sign of a stone-sucking wolf.

This has made me thirsty.

Let's look a bit to the rider and then beat it in the taverns.

"

"Who is it?" asked one.

"A Greek Emperor"

"That we set off" -

"As he spreads his legs!" -

"Ride the guy in
the flood?" -

"Hey, groom" -

"Cute Animal" -

'Bulges like a hog!
"

So it went quickly and flashed a cheeky joke about the others. It was about eighteen inches square
and almost a foot deep. In the bottom of it were charred ends of sticks and a little candle
grease, buried under the mass of ashes.

When Charley had carefully scraped and blown out all the ashes possible, he lay flat on his
belly and examined the place minutely. Some person or persons had dug a little square chamber,
like a sunken box, right in the shoulder of the mound. Charley decided that a candle had been
placed in the centre of the box-like excavation, leaves packed loosely about the base of the
candle, some fine, dry twigs stacked across the edges of the excavation, and across the top
of the hole other dry twigs had been placed. Then the candle had been lighted, the open side
of the excavation closed with twigs thrust vertically into the clay, and leaves heaped over
and about the excavation.

As Charley examined the mound, he could not but admire the devilish cunning exhibited in the
construction of this fire box. The open space about the mound would give full sweep to the
morning breeze, and the box was located in the windward shoulder of the little mound, exactly
where the breeze would hit it hardest. The piles of leaves heaped about the box would spread
the flames on all sides.

The candle grease in the bottom of the excavation, Charley had no doubt, was the remains of
one of his own candles, taken with the food supplies from his cupboard. Nor did he doubt that
the man who had taken it was Lumley. He must have disappeared in the forest the moment Henry
Collins had told him what was afoot, for there could be no doubt Collins had informed him.
After the moon rose, so that he could see well, Lumley must have come to the cabin, stolen
food and candles, cautiously removed the aerial and grounded the battery, and gone straight
down the valley to set his fires. If he could not get the money for the timber, or at least
some of it, quite evidently Lumley did not intend to allow any one else to have it, not even
the state.

In his own mind Charley had no doubt whatever that the incendiary was Lumley, and that he had
done exactly the things Charley pictured him as doing. Even now he must be somewhere in the
forest. But Charley felt relieved when he realized that in all probability Lumley had no firearms.
He must have fled without taking time to equip himself. Also Charley doubted if he would remain
in the forest. The forester would be certain to scour the woods for him, and Lumley could hardly
hope to evade pursuit indefinitely. 

"Stemma, you're still young, and I'm still young, little older than when we made love" Peregrin sobbed
softly.

"We loved us," said Stemma.

"You lagest in my arms!"

"What surprised you the Judex and strangled,"
she said, tough. It made Charley feel bad to think that
he did not have enough direct evidence to insure Lumley's conviction for arson as well.

