We made several excursions on foot to the neighboring villages, over winding and beautiful
roads and through enchanting woodland scenery. The woods and roads were similar to those at
Heidelberg, but not so bewitching. I suppose that roads and woods which are up to the Heidelberg
mark are rare in the world.

Once we wandered clear away to La Favorita Palace, which is several miles from Baden-Baden.
The grounds about the palace were fine; the palace was a curiosity. It was built by a Margravine
in 1725, and remains as she left it at her death. We wandered through a great many of its rooms,
and they all had striking peculiarities of decoration. For instance, the walls of one room
were pretty completely covered with small pictures of the Margravine in all conceivable varieties
of fanciful costumes, some of them male.

The walls of another room were covered with grotesquely and elaborately figured hand-wrought
tapestry. The musty ancient beds remained in the chambers, and their quilts and curtains and
canopies were decorated with curious handwork, and the walls and ceilings frescoed with historical
and mythological scenes in glaring colors. There was enough crazy and rotten rubbish in the
building to make a true brick-a-bracker green with envy. A painting in the dining-hall verged
upon the indelicate--but then the Margravine was herself a trifle indelicate.

It is in every way a wildly and picturesquely decorated house, and brimful of interest as a
reflection of the character and tastes of that rude bygone time.

In the grounds, a few rods from the palace, stands the Margravine's chapel, just as she left
it--a coarse wooden structure, wholly barren of ornament. It is said that the Margravine would
give herself up to debauchery and exceedingly fast living for several months at a time, and
then retire to this miserable wooden den and spend a few months in repenting and getting ready
for another good time. She was a devoted Catholic, and was perhaps quite a model sort of a
Christian as Christians went then, in high life.

Tradition says she spent the last two years of her life in the strange den I have been speaking
of, after having indulged herself in one final, triumphant, and satisfying spree. She shut
herself up there, without company, and without even a servant, and so abjured and forsook the
world. In her little bit of a kitchen she did her own cooking; she wore a hair shirt next the
skin, and castigated herself with whips--these aids to grace are exhibited there yet. She prayed
and told her beads, in another little room, before a waxen Virgin niched in a little box against
the wall; she bedded herself like a slave.

In another small room is an unpainted wooden table, and behind it sit half-life-size waxen
figures of the Holy Family, made by the very worst artist that ever lived, perhaps, and clothed
in gaudy, flimsy drapery. [1] The margravine used to bring her meals to this table and DINE
WITH THE HOLY FAMILY. What an idea that was! What a grisly spectacle it must have been! Imagine
it: Those rigid, shock-headed figures, with corpsy complexions and fish glass eyes, occupying
one side of the table in the constrained attitudes and dead fixedness that distinguish all
men that are born of wax, and this wrinkled, smoldering old fire-eater occupying the other
side, mumbling her prayers and munching her sausages in the ghostly stillness and shadowy indistinctness
of a winter twilight. It makes one feel crawly even to think of it.

  [1] The Savior was represented as a lad of about fifteen
  years of age. This figure had lost one eye.

