[8] Fourth: That any of mankind are condemned by predestination is a cruel heresy. For it is
cruel to believe that the Lord, who is love itself and mercy itself, suffers so vast a throng
of persons to be born for hell or so many myriads of myriads to be born condemned and doomed,
that is, to be born devils and satans, and that He does not provide out of His divine wisdom
that those who live aright and acknowledge God should not be cast into everlasting fire and
torment. The Lord is still the Creator and the Savior of all men and wills the death of no
one. It is cruel therefore to believe and think that a vast multitude of nations and peoples
under His auspices and care should be handed over as prey to the devil by predestination. 

I proceeded in the following way. To make use of a large number of subjects accustomed to intelligent
self-observation, I made the first series of experiments with the regular students in my psychology
lecture course in Harvard University.
 Paramount in what proceeds is divine providence, for this is constantly in the end
for which the universe was created. The operation and progress of the end through means is
what is called divine providence.

[2] Inasmuch as the proceeding divine is the Lord Himself and paramount in it is divine providence,
to act contrary to the laws of His divine providence is to act contrary to Himself. As order
does not exist without laws, for they constitute it, and each law derives from order that it,
too, is order, it follows that God, who is order, is also the law of His order. Similarly it
is to be said of divine providence that as the Lord is providence Himself, He is also the law
of His providence.

[3] Furthermore, there is no activity except on a subject and on the subject by means; action
is impossible except on a subject and on it by means. Man is the subject of divine providence;
divine truths by which he has wisdom, and divine goods by which he has love, are the means;
and by these means divine providence pursues its purpose, which is the salvation of man. For
he who wills the purpose, wills the means. Therefore when he who wills the purpose pursues
it, he does so through means. But these things will become plainer on being examined in this order:

i. The activity of divine providence to save man begins at his birth and continues to the close
of his life and afterwards to eternity. ii. The activity of divine providence is maintained
steadily out of pure mercy through means. iii. Instantaneous salvation by direct mercy is impossible.
iv. Instantaneous salvation by direct mercy is the flying fiery serpent in the church.

332. It was shown above that a heaven from mankind is the very purpose of the creation of the
universe; that this purpose in its operation and progress is the divine providence for the
salvation of man; and that all which is external to man and available to him for use is a secondary
end in creation--in brief, all that is to be found in the three kingdoms, animal, vegetable
and mineral. In one concern I heard that the scientific manager became convinced that all the working-chairs
for the women were too low and that the laborers therefore had to hold their arms in a psychophysically
unfavorable position during the handling of the apparatus.

[2] Observe just a fruit tree. It springs up first as a slender shoot from a tiny seed, grows
gradually into a stalk, spreads branches which become covered with leaves, and then puts forth
flowers and bears fruit, in which it deposits fresh seed to provide for its perpetuation. This
is also true of every shrub and of every herb of the field.

[3] As there is a correspondence of man's life with the growth of a tree, let us draw the parallel
or make the comparison. In case that certain knowledge is indispensable for the work or that technical
abilities must have been acquired, the vocation is surrounded by examinations. This is true of
the lower as well as of the higher activities. The direct examination is everywhere supplemented
by testimonials covering the previous achievements, by certificates referring to the previous education,
and in frequent cases by the endeavor to gain a personal impression from the applicant. But if
we take all this together, the total result remains a social machinery by which perhaps the elimination
of the entirely unfit can be secured. But no one could speak of a really satisfactory adaptation
of the manifold personalities to the economic vocational tasks.
 Man is also described in the Word by a tree, and his wisdom from
love by a garden; nothing else is meant by the Garden of Eden.

[4] True, man is a corrupt tree from the seed, but still a grafting or budding with shoots
taken from the Tree of Life is possible, by which the sap drawn from the old root is turned
into sap producing good fruit. Which of you moreover can by taking thought add a cubit to his
stature? .. . if then you are unable to do what is least, why do you take thought for the rest?
Consider the lilies, how they grow . . . If then God so clothed the grass, which is in the
field today and is cast into an oven tomorrow, how much more will he clothe you, 0 men of little
faith? (Lu 12: 6, 7, 25-28).

333. The activity of divine providence for man's salvation is said to begin with his birth
and continue to the close of his life. For this to be understood, it should be known that the
Lord sees what a man's nature is and foresees what he wills to be and thus what he will be.
For him to be man and thus immortal, his freedom of will cannot be taken away. The Lord therefore
foresees his state after death and provides for it from the man's birth to the close of his
life. With the evil He makes the provision by permitting and withdrawing from evils, in the
case of the good by leading to good. Divine providence is thus continually acting for man's
salvation, but more cannot be saved than are willing to be saved, and those are willing who
acknowledge God and are led by Him. Those are not willing who do not acknowledge God and who
lead themselves. The latter give no thought to eternal life and to salvation, the former do. In
a pencil factory the women in one department have to grasp with one movement a dozen pencils,
no more and no less. Some learn this at once without effort, and they earn high wages; others
never can learn it in spite of repeated trials.


[2] Inasmuch as the Lord foresees the states of all after death, and also foresees the places
in hell of those who do not desire to be saved and the places in heaven of those who do desire
to be saved, it follows that He provides their places for the evil by the permitting and withdrawing
of which we spoke, and their places for the good by leading them. Unless this was done steadily
from birth to the close of life neither heaven nor hell would remain standing, for apart from
this foresight and providence neither would be anything but confusion. It may be seen above
(nn. 202, 203) that everyone has his place provided for him by the Lord through this foresight.

