We prowled on several hours, sometimes by the seaside, sometimes inland, and finally managed
to get lost, which is a feat that requires talent in Bermuda. I had on new shoes. They were
No. 7's when I started, but were not more than 5's now, and still diminishing. I walked two
hours in those shoes after that, before we reached home. Doubtless I could have the reader's
sympathy for the asking. Many people have never had the headache or the toothache, and I am
one of those myself; but every body has worn tight shoes for two or three hours, and known
the luxury of taking them off in a retired place and seeing his feet swell up and obscure the
firmament. Once when I was a callow, bashful cub, I took a plain, unsentimental country girl
to a comedy one night. I had known her a day; she seemed divine; I wore my new boots. At the
end of the first half-hour she said, "Why do you fidget so with your feet?" I said, "Did I?"
Then I put my attention there and kept still. At the end of another half-hour she said, "Why
do you say, 'Yes, oh yes!' and 'Ha, ha, oh, certainly! very true!' to everything I say, when
half the time those are entirely irrelevant answers?" I blushed, and explained that I had been
a little absent-minded. At the end of another half-hour she said, "Please, why do you grin
so steadfastly at vacancy, and yet look so sad?" I explained that I always did that when I
was reflecting. An hour passed, and then she turned and contemplated me with her earnest eyes
and said, "Why do you cry all the time?" I explained that very funny comedies always made me
cry. At last human nature surrendered, and I secretly slipped my boots off. This was a mistake.
I was not able to get them on any more. It was a rainy night; there were no omnibuses going
our way; and as I walked home, burning up with shame, with the girl on one arm and my boots
under the other, I was an object worthy of some compassion--especially in those moments of
martyrdom when I had to pass through the glare that fell upon the pavement from street-lamps.
Finally, this child of the forest said, "Where are your boots?" and being taken unprepared,
I put a fitting finish to the follies of the evening with the stupid remark, "The higher classes
do not wear them to the theater."

The Reverend had been an army chaplain during the war, and while we were hunting for a road
that would lead to Hamilton he told a story about two dying soldiers which interested me in
spite of my feet. He said that in the Potomac hospitals rough pine coffins were furnished by
government, but that it was not always possible to keep up with the demand; so, when a man
died, if there was no coffin at hand he was buried without one. One night, late, two soldiers
lay dying in a ward. A man came in with a coffin on his shoulder, and stood trying to make
up his mind which of these two poor fellows would be likely to need it first. Both of them
begged for it with their fading eyes--they were past talking. Then one of them protruded a
wasted hand from his blankets and made a feeble beckoning sign with the fingers, to signify,
"Be a good fellow; put it under my bed, please." The man did it, and left. The lucky soldier
painfully turned himself in his bed until he faced the other warrior, raised himself partly
on his elbow, and began to work up a mysterious expression of some kind in his face. Gradually,
irksomely, but surely and steadily, it developed, and at last it took definite form as a pretty
successful wink. The sufferer fell back exhausted with his labor, but bathed in glory. Now
entered a personal friend of No. 2, the despoiled soldier. No. 2 pleaded with him with eloquent
eyes, till presently he understood, and removed the coffin from under No. 1's bed and put it
under No. 2's. No. 2 indicated his joy, and made some more signs; the friend understood again,
and put his arm under No.