DONOVAN PASHA AND SOME PEOPLE OF EGYPT

By Gilbert Parker

Volume 1.

CONTENTS

Volume 1. WHILE THE LAMP HOLDS OUT TO BURN THE PRICE OF THE GRINDSTONE-AND THE DRUM THE DESERTION
OF MAHOMMED SELIMON THE REEF OF NORMAN'S WOE

Volume 2. FIELDING HAD AN ORDERLY THE EYE OF THE NEEDLE A TREATY OF PEACE AT THE MERCY OF TIBERIUS
ALL THE WORLD'S MAD

Volume 3. THE MAN AT THE WHEEL A TYRANT AND A LADY

Volume 4. A YOUNG LION OF DEDAN HE WOULD NOT BE DENIED THE FLOWER OF THE FLOCK THE LIGHT OF
OTHER DAYS

INTRODUCTION

To the FOREWORD of this book I have practically nothing to add.  It describes how the book
was planned, and how at last it came to be written.  The novel--'The Weavers'--of which it
was the herald, as one might say, was published in 1907.  The reception of Donovan Pasha convinced
me beyond peradventure, that the step I took in enlarging my field of work was as wise in relation
to my art as in its effect upon my mind, temperament and faculty for writing.  I knew Egypt
by study quite as well as I knew the Dominion of Canada, the difference being, of course, that
the instinct for the life of Canada was part of my very being itself; but there are great numbers
of people who live their lives for fifty or seventy or eighty years in a country, and have
no real instinct for understanding.  There are numberless Canadians who do not understand Canada,
Englishmen who know nothing of England, and Americans who do not understand the United States.
If it is so that I have some instinct for the life of Canada, and have expressed it to the
world with some accuracy and fidelity, it is apparent that the capacity for understanding could
not be limited absolutely to one environment.  That I understood Canada could not be established
by the fact that I had spent my boyhood there, but only by the fact that some inner vision
permitted me to see it as it really was.  That inner vision, however, if it was anything at
all was not in blinders, seeing only one section of the life of the world.  Relatively it might
see more deeply, more intimately in that place where habit of life had made the man familiar
with all its detail, but the same vision turned elsewhere to fields where study and sympathy
played a devoted part, could not fail to see; though the workman's craft, which made material
the vision, might fail.

The reception given Donovan Pasha convinced me that neither the vision nor the craftsmanship
had wholly failed, whatever the degree of success which had been reached.  Anglo-Egyptians
approved the book.  Its pages passed through the hands of an Englishman who had done over twenty
years' service in the British army in Egypt and in official positions in the Egyptian administration,
and I do not think that he made six corrections in the whole three hundred pages.  He had himself
a great gift for both music and painting; he was essentially exacting where any literature
touching Egypt was concerned; but I am glad to think that, whatever he thought of the book
as fiction, he did not find it necessary to grant absolution as to the facts and the details
of incidents in character and life pourtrayed in Donovan Pasha.

Who the original of 'Donovan Pasha' was I shall never say, but he was real.  There is, however,
in the House of Commons today a young and active politician once in the Egyptian service, and
who bears a most striking resemblance to the purely imaginary portrait which Mr. Talbot Kelly,
the artist, drew of the Dicky Donovan of the book.  This young politician, with his experience
in the diplomatic service, is in manner, disposition, capacity, and in his neat, fine, and
alert physical frame, the very image of Dicky Donovan, as in my mind I perceived him; and when
I first saw him I was almost thunderstruck, because he was to me Dicky Donovan come to life.
There was nothing Dicky Donovan did or said or saw or heard which had not its counterpart in
actual things in Egypt.  The germ of most of the stories was got from things told me, or things
that I saw, heard of, or experienced in Egypt itself.  The first story of the book--'While
the Lamp Holds out to Burn'--was suggested to me by an incident which I saw at a certain village
on the Nile, which I will not name.  Suffice it to say that the story in the main was true.
Also the chief incident of the story, called 'The Price of the Grindstone--and the Drum', is
true.  The Mahommed Seti of that story was the servant of a friend of mine, and he did in life
what I made him do in the tale. 'On the Reef of Norman's Woe', which more than one journal
singled out as showing what extraordinary work was being done in Egypt by a handful of British
officials, had its origin in something told me by my friend Sir John Rogers, who at one time
was at the head of the Sanitary Department of the Government of Egypt.

I could take the stories one by one, and show the seeds from which this little plantation of
fiction sprang, but I will not go further than to refer to a story called 'Fielding Had an
Orderly', the idea of which was contained in the experience of a British official whose courage
was as cool as his wit, and both were extremely dangerous weapons, used at times against those
who were opposed to him.  When I read a book like 'Said the Fisherman', however, with its wonderfully
intimate knowledge of Oriental life and the thousand nuances which only the born Orientalist
can give, I look with tempered pride upon Donovan Pasha.  Still I think that it caught and
held some phases of Egyptian life which the author of 'Said the Fisherman' might perhaps miss,
since the observation of every artist has its own idiosyncrasy, and what strikes one observer
will not strike another.

A FOREWORD

It is now twelve years since I began giving to the public tales of life in lands well known
to me.  The first of them were drawn from Australia and the Islands of the Southern Pacific,
where I had lived and roamed in the middle and late Eighties.  They appeared in various English
magazines, and were written in London far from the scenes which suggested them.  None of them
were written on the spot, as it were.  I did not think then, and I do not think now, that this
was perilous to their truthfulness.  After many years of travel and home-staying observation
I have found that all worth remembrance, the salient things and scenes, emerge clearly out
of myriad impressions, and become permanent in mind and memory.  Things so emerging are typical
at least, and probably true.

Those tales of the Far South were given out with some prodigality.  They did not appear in
book form, however; for, at the time I was sending out these Antipodean sketches, I was also
writing--far from the scenes where they were laid--a series of Canadian tales, many of which
appeared in the 'Independent' of New York, in the 'National Observer', edited by Mr. Henley,
and in the 'Illustrated London News'.  By accident, and on the suggestion of my friend Mr.
Henley, the Canadian tales 'Pierre and his People' were published first; with the result that
the stories of the Southern Hemisphere were withheld from publication, though they have been
privately printed and duly copyrighted.  Some day I may send them forth, but meanwhile I am
content to keep them in my own care.

Moved always by deep interest in the varied manifestations of life in different portions of
the Empire, five or six years ago I was attracted to the Island of Jersey, in the Channel Sea,
by the likeness of the origin of her people with that of the French-Canadians.  I went to live
at St. Heliers for a time, and there wrote a novel called 'The Battle of the Strong'.

Nor would it be thought strange that, having visited another and newer sphere of England's
influence, Egypt to wit, in 1889, I should then determine that, when I could study the country
at leisure, I should try to write of the life there, so full of splendour and of primitive
simplicity; of mystery and guilt; of cruel indolence and beautiful industry; of tyranny and
devoted slavery; of the high elements of a true democracy and the shameful practices of a false
autocracy; all touched off by the majesty of an ancient charm, the nobility of the remotest
history.

The years went by, and, four times visiting Egypt, at last I began to
write of her.  That is now five years ago.  From time to time the stories
which I offer to the public in this volume were given forth.  It is
likely that the old Anglo-Egyptian and the historical student may find
some anachronisms and other things to criticise; but the anachronisms are
deliberate, and even as in writing of Canada and Australia, which I know
very well, I have here, perhaps, sacrificed superficial exactness while
trying to give the more intimate meaning and spirit.  I have never
thought it necessary to apologise for this disregard of photographic
accuracy,--that may be found in my note-books,--and I shall not begin to
do so now.  I shall be sufficiently grateful if this series of tales does
no more than make ready the way for the novel of Egyptian life on which I
have been working for some years.  It is an avant courier.  I hope,
however, that it may be welcomed for its own sake.
                                                       G.  P.

NOTE: A Glossary will be found at the end of the volume.

WHILE THE LAMP HOLDS OUT TO BURN

There is a town on the Nile which Fielding Bey called Hasha, meaning "Heaven Forbid!"  He loathed
inspecting it.  Going up the Nile, he would put off visiting it till he came down; coming down,
he thanked his fates if accident carried him beyond it.  Convenient accidents sometimes did
occur: a murder at one of the villages below it, asking his immediate presence; a telegram
from his Minister at Cairo, requiring his return; or a very low Nile, when Hasha suddenly found
itself a mile away from the channel and there was no good place to land.  So it was that Hasha,
with little inspection, was the least reputable and almost the dirtiest town on the Nile; for
even in those far-off days the official Englishman had his influence, especially when Kubar
Pasha was behind him.  Kubar had his good points.

There were certain definite reasons, however, why Fielding Bey shrank from visiting Hasha.
Donovan Pasha saw something was wrong from the first moment Hasha was mentioned.

On a particular day they were lying below at another village, on the Amenhotep.  Hasha was
the next place marked red on the map, and that meant inspection.  When Dicky Donovan mentioned
Hasha, Fielding Bey twisted a shoulder and walked nervously up and down the deck.  He stayed
here for hours: to wait for the next post, he said-serious matters expected from head quarters.
He appeared not to realise that letters would get to Hasha by rail as quickly as by the Amenhotep.

Every man has a weak spot in his character, a sub-rosa, as it were, in his business of life;
and Dicky fancied he had found Fielding Bey's. While they waited, Fielding made a pretence
of working hard--for he really was conscientious--sending his orderly for the mamour-- [magistrate]--and
the omdah--[head of a village]--, and holding fatuous conferences; turning the hose on the
local dairymen and butchers and dategrowers, who came with backsheesh in kind; burying his
nose in official papers; or sending for Holgate, the Yorkshire engineer, to find out what the
run would be to the next stopping-place beyond Hasha.  Twice he did this; which was very little
like Fielding Bey.  The second time, when Holgate came below to his engine, Dicky was there
playing with a Farshoot dog.

"We don't stop at Hasha, then?" Dicky asked, and let the Farshoot fasten on his leggings.

Holgate swung round and eyed Dicky curiously, a queer smile at his lips.

"Not if Goovnur can 'elp, aw give ye ma woord, sir," answered Holgate.

Fielding was affectionately called "the Governor" by his subordinates and friends.

"We all have our likes and dislikes," rejoined Dicky casually, and blew smoke in the eyes of
the Farshoot.  "Aye, aw've seen places that bad! but Hasha has taaste of its own in Goovnur's
mouth, ma life on't!" "Never can tell when a thing'll pall on the taste.  Hasha's turn with
the Governor now, eh?" rejoined Dicky.

Dicky's way of getting information seemed guileless, and Holgate opened his basket as wide
as he knew.  "Toorn, didst tha sway" (Holgate talked broadly to Dicky always, for Dicky had
told him of his aunt, Lady Carmichael, who lived near Halifax in Yorkshire), "toorn, aw warrant!
It be reg'lar as kitchen-fire, this Hasha business, for three years, ever sin' aw been scrapin'
mud o' Nile River."

"That was a nasty row they had over the cemetery three years ago, the Governor against the
lot, from mamour to wekeel!"

Holgate's eyes flashed, and he looked almost angrily down at Dicky, whose hand was between
the teeth of the playful Farshoot.

"Doost think--noa, tha canst not think that Goovnur be 'feared o' Hasha fook.  Thinks't tha,
a man that told 'em all--a thousand therr--that he'd hang on nearest tree the foorst that disobeyed
him, thinks't tha that Goovnur's lost his nerve by that?"

"The Governor never loses his nerve, Holgate," said Dicky, smiling and offering a cigar.  "There's
such a thing as a man being afraid to trust himself where he's been in a mess, lest he hit
out, and doesn't want to."

Holgate, being excited, was in a fit state to tell the truth, if he knew it; which was what
Dicky had worked for; but Holgate only said:

"It bean't fear, and it bean't milk o' human kindness.  It be soort o' thing a man gets.  Aw
had it once i' Bradford, in Little Cornish Street. Aw saw a faace look out o' window o' hoose
by tinsmith's shop, an' that faace was like hell's picture-aye, 'twas a killiagous faace that!
Aw never again could pass that house.  'Twas a woman's faace.  Horrible 'twas, an' sore sad
an' flootered aw were, for t' faace was like a lass aw loved when aw wur a lad."

"I should think it was something like that," answered Dicky, his eyes wandering over the peninsula
beyond which lay Hasha.

"Summat, aw be sure," answered Holgate, "an' ma woord on't .  .  .  ah, yon coomes orderly
wi' post for Goovnur.  Now it be Hasha, or it be not Hasha, it be time for steam oop."

Holgate turned to his engine as Dicky mounted the stairs and went to Fielding's cabin, where
the orderly was untying a handkerchief overflowing with letters.

As Fielding read his official letters his face fell more and more.  When he had read the last,
he sat for a minute without speaking, his brow very black.  There was no excuse for pushing
past Hasha.  He had not been there for over a year.  It was his duty to inspect the place:
he had a conscience; there was time to get to Hasha that afternoon.  With an effort he rose,
hurried along the deck, and called down to Holgate: "Full-steam to Hasha!"

Then, with a quick command to the reis, who was already at the wheel, he lighted a cigar, and,
joining Dicky Donovan, began to smoke and talk furiously.  But he did not talk of Hasha.

At sunset the Amenhotep drew in to the bank by Hasha, and, from the deck, Fielding Bey saluted
the mamour, the omdah and his own subordinates, who, buttoning up their coats as they came,
hurried to the bank to make salaams to him.  Behind them, at a distance, came villagers, a
dozen ghaffirs armed with naboots of dom-wood, and a brace of well-mounted, badly-dressed policemen,
with seats like a monkey on a stick.  The conferences with the mamour and omdah were short,
in keeping with the temper of "Fielding Saadat"; and long into the night Dicky lay and looked
out of his cabin window to the fires on the banks, where sat Mahommed Seti the servant, the
orderly, and some attendant ghaffirs, who, feasting on the remains of the effendi's supper,
kept watch.  For Hasha was noted for its robbers.  It was even rumoured that the egregious
Selamlik Pasha, with the sugar plantation near by--"Trousers," Dicky called him when he saw
him on the morrow, because of the elephantine breeks he wore--was not averse to sending his
Abyssinian slaves through the sugar-cane to waylay and rob, and worse, maybe.

By five o'clock next day the inspection was over.  The streets had been swept for the Excellency--which
is to say Saadat--the first time in a year.  The prison had been cleaned of visible horrors,
the first time in a month.  The last time it was ordered there had been a riot among the starving,
infested prisoners; earth had been thrown over the protruding bones of the dear lamented dead
in the cemetery; the water of the ablution places in the mosque had been changed; the ragged
policemen had new putties; the kourbashes of the tax-gatherers were hid in their yeleks; the
egregious Pasha wore a greasy smile, and the submudir, as he conducted Fielding--"whom God
preserve and honour!"--through the prison and through the hospital, where goat's milk had been
laid on for this especial day, smirked gently through the bazaar above his Parisian waistcoat. 

Phebe belonged to the order of deaconesses, in which capacity she had been the helper of many, including
Paul himself. In what respect she served them is not particularly specified. Like the women
in the gospels who waited on our Saviour, she may have ministered to them of her substance,
though there can be little doubt that, as the holder of an official station in the Church, she ministered
to them by her services also."

It is but recently, however, that deaconesses have become incorporated into the religious life
of Scotland, and, so far, they do not exist in connection with the Free Church, of which Chalmers was
the able and heroic leader, but only in connection with the national Church--the old historic Church of Scotland.
Within this Church the question has assumed the form, not alone of the revival of the apostolic
order of deaconesses, but also of the organization of all the manifold activities of women
within the Church into one whole, which is put under the authority and direction of the officers
of the Church.

Isolated attempts in this direction had previously been made, but in 1885 the first definite
steps were taken when the Committee on Christian Life and Work, of which Dr. Charteris was
the Convener, presented to the General Assembly a report on "The need of an organization of
women's work in the Church," part of which is as follows: "The organization
of women's work in the Church has become a subject of pressing interest.

The Assembly has already sanctioned and regulated the organization of women's work in collecting
for foreign missions, and in sending out and superintending missionaries. The great and growing
strength of the movement thus recognized is one of the most gratifying things in our mission;
... but of still older date, and not less powerful, is the part taken by women in the home
work of the parish church. Lady visitors are carrying messages of divine truth and of human sympathy into
the dwellings of the poor both in town and country. Many have been trained as nurses that they
may be skilled ministrants to the suffering and sick; and there can be little doubt that the
greater part of the actual personal help which ministers receive in parishes is from the women
of the congregations. But those who have done most of the good work are most instant in asking
from the Church some means of doing still more. From ministers and from their female helpers
have come many requests to the committee for some provision for training; some recognition and
organization of those who are trained.... In the Church of England are many homes for nurses and
deaconesses; training institutions for female mission work of every kind; and the rapidity with
which they are multiplying proves of itself how much they are needed;
also non-conformist institutions of the kind, and some separate from
all Churches.

Your committee believe that the time has fully come for our Church's taking steps to supply her
own wants in this important department of mission work."[75]

The General Assembly then directed the committee to inquire into the subject of women's work
in the Church, and to bring up a definite report to the next assembly.

The committee accepted the task, sent out requests to every parish for suggestions as to the forms of Christian
work to be carried on by women, and the best means of making preparation
for their special training, and prepared themselves by personal inspection
of the leading institutions for training women workers in England
to be able to answer intelligently the same questions.

A scheme was reported in 1886 which should incorporate all existing parish organizations, such
as Sabbath-school teachers' and women's societies of all kinds, and
should aim at increasing their number and working power.

In 1887 regulations were perfected for working this scheme, and the
approval of this by the Assembly of 1887 made the new plan a part
of the organized work of the Church.

The comprehensive character of the new departure in the Church of Scotland is plainly seen
from a view of the organization as it now exists. The three grades into which the Christian
women workers are divided embrace every kind of work done in connection
with the Church.

The first grade is general in its character, and forms an association called the Women's Guild.
In each parish the members of Bible-classes, of Young Women's Congregational Associations, of
mission working parties, of Dorcas societies, as well as tract distributers, Sabbath-school
teachers, members of the Church choir, and any who are engaged in the service of Christ in
the Church are all to be accepted as members of the guild. The next higher grade is the Women
Workers' Guild, for which a certain age is required, and an experience of at least three years,
with the approval of the kirk session which enrolls them. In connection with this guild are
associates, who have a similar relation to the members of the Women Workers' Guild that the
associates have to deaconesses in the English deaconess houses. They are not pledged to regular
or constant service, but engage to do some work or contribute some money every year. They can
go to the deaconess house, put on the garb of the deaconess while
there, and as long as they remain can assume the responsibilities
and enjoy the privileges belonging to deaconesses.

The third higher grade is that of the deaconesses.

Any one desiring to become a deaconess "must purpose to devote herself, so long as she shall
occupy the position of a deaconess, especially to Christian work in connection with the Church,
as the chief object of her life."[76] Provision was also made for
a training-school and home where deaconesses could be prepared for
their duties.

There are a great many ladies who for a long time have been engaged
in doing the practical work of a deaconess without being clothed in
the garb, or invested with the office.

The Church of Scotland recognized these workers by providing two classes of deaconesses, who should
be equal in position, but have different spheres of activity. Those who for seven years had been
known as active workers, and who have given their lives largely to Christian service, are accepted
as deaconesses of the first class, and are free to work wherever they find themselves most useful
within the limits of the Church. The second class embraces those who shall have received training
in the deaconess institution, or have been in connection with it for at least two years.

When the measure was finally passed by the General Assembly there
was no delay in carrying into execution the details indicated by the
plan of work.

The Deaconess Institution and Training Home was at once started. It was located at Edinburgh, as
the most central and convenient place for the institution, and as furnishing the most available
advantages for the instruction and training of the deaconesses.

From here as a center the work is expected to penetrate into every part of Scotland by means of the
trained workers whose services will be available for all parts of the country when desired by
the ministers and kirk sessions.

With true Scotch prudence and wisdom it was arranged that the lady who was chosen to be the
superintendent should fit herself thoroughly for the duties of her responsible place by becoming
familiar with the workings of similar institutions in England.

She was accordingly given six months' leave of absence, which she spent among the great London
Homes, and only assumed the duties of her position May 1, 1888.

Meanwhile the Home had opened under the temporary care of a lady who had been a worker in Mrs.
Meredith's Prison Mission, and for six years a Mildmay deaconess. It had from the beginning
the warm co-operation of sympathizing, influential friends.

Regular courses of lectures were arranged on subjects connected with Christian work, and as similar
courses will be demanded of like institutions in America it may be
interesting to give the syllabus in full:

SYLLABUS OF LECTURES.

(On Tuesdays at 12.)

1. B.--Professor Charteris. Four Lectures.

"How to Begin a Mission."

Nov. 29.--1. Whom to visit, and why. The ills we know of, bodily, spiritual, social; and seek to
lessen. Dec. 6.--2. How to induce the people who belong to no church--perhaps care for none--to come
in.

Dec. 13.--3. What to do with the children; (a) to attract, (b) to influence them. Dec. 20.--4.
What agencies besides Sunday services prove best.

2. C.--Dr. P. A. Young. Six Lectures.

"Medical Hygiene for the Use of Visitors."

Jan. 3.--1. Object and scope of the course of lectures; short sketch of the structure and functions
of the human body, including a brief description of the functions of digestion, absorption, circulation,
respiration, excretion, secretion, and enervation.

Jan. 10.--2. Fractures, how to recognize and treat them temporarily; bleeding, and how to treat
it; the use of the triangular bandage.

Jan. 17.--3.

Treatment of fainting, choking, burns and scalds, bites from animals,
bruises and tears from machinery, convulsions, sunstroke, persons
found insensible, suspected poisoning and frostbite; how to lift and
carry an injured person.

Jan. 24.--4. Sick-room, its selection, preparation, cleaning, warming, ventilation, and furnishing,
bed and bedding, infection and disinfection. Jan. 31.--5.

Washing and dressing patients, bed-making, changing sheets, lifting helpless patients, food administration,
medicines and stimulants, what to observe regarding a sick person.

Feb. 7.--6.

Taking temperature, baths, bedsores, nursing sick children, application
of local remedies, poultices, fomentations, blisters, etc.; management
of convalescents.

3. D.--Rev. George Wilson.

Four Lectures. "Difficulties Encountered by District Visitors."

Feb. 14.--1.

Difficulties proceeding from indifference. Feb. 21.--2. Difficulties proceeding from ignorance.
Feb. 28.--3.

Difficulties proceeding from adversity. Mar. 6.--4. Difficulties proceeding from anxiety. Note.--Questions
invited from the ladies.

4. E.--Rev. Dr. Norman Macleod. Four Lectures. "Some Qualifications of a Church Worker, especially
among the Poor."

March 13.--1.

Motives and aims. March 20.--2. Difficulties and hindrances, how to overcome them. March 27.--3.
Conditions of success. April 3.--4. Helps, agencies, etc.

5. F.--Rev. John McMurtrie. Two Lectures.

             "History and Methods of Missions to the
               Heathen."

April 10.--1. History of missions. April 17.--2. Methods of missions.

Another wise provision in this Scotch home is the arrangement by which
those who do not wish to become deaconesses, but who want to become
competent Christian workers in their own homes, can come here and
spend some months in receiving training and instruction in various
methods of Christian work.

There is no department in life in which many blunders and much loss of time and usefulness cannot
be prevented by making use of the experience of others who have previously
overcome the difficulties to be encountered.

In other words, we need to obtain all the preparation and discipline
we can possibly have in order to do our work well; and especially
is this true of Christian work, which demands the highest service
that the heart and soul of humanity can give.

Many individuals will come to the home to be trained and fitted to work in their own homes,
and will start new lines of Christian activity that will win the
sympathies and efforts of many who are eager to be employed in good
works, if only they can have competent direction.

A pamphlet entitled The Deaconess Institution and Training Home says: "Are there not many parts
all over Scotland--mines, quarries, etc.--where the population is
poor and hard-working?

Would it not in such places be an advantage both to minister and people to have a Christian lady,
trained, experienced, and devoted, to live and work among them? Or, which would be possible in
every parish, would it not be a great advantage that in case of need--in a mining accident,
an outbreak of sickness--a trained Christian nurse should be available during the emergency?"

The
General Assembly provided that deaconesses should be solemnly inducted into their office at
a religious service in church. It also provided "that along with the application for the admission
of any person to the office of a deaconess there shall be submitted
a certificate from a committee of the General Assembly intrusted with
that duty stating that the candidate is qualified in respect of education,
and that she has had seven years' experience in Christian work, or
two years' training in the Deaconess Institution and Training Home."

Also, "Before granting the application, the kirk session shall intimate to the presbytery their
intention of doing so, unless objection be offered by the presbytery at its first meeting thereafter."
On Sunday, December 9, 1888, the first deaconess was set apart to
her duties.

The kirk session was already in possession of the necessary certificates testifying to her "character,
education, experience, devotedness, and power to serve and co-operate with others." Due intimation
had been made to the presbytery. The questions were put that were appointed by the General
Assembly:

"Do you desire to be set apart as a deaconess, and as such to serve the Lord Jesus Christ in
the Church, which is his body?

"Do you promise, as a deaconess of the Church of Scotland, to work
in connection with that Church, subject to its courts, and in particular
to the kirk session of the parish in which you work?

"Do you humbly engage, in the strength and grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ, our Lord and Master, faithfully and prayerfully to discharge
the duties of this office?"

The lady who, by answering the above questions, received the sanction of the Church as one of
its appointed officers was Lady Grisell Baillie, of Dryburgh Abbey.

She writes to the author of this book: "I count it a great honor to be permitted to serve in
the Church of my fathers, and I pray that I may be enabled faithfully
and prayerfully to fulfill the duties to which I am called, and that
it maybe for the glory of our God and Saviour that I am permitted
to work in his vineyard."

Miss Davidson, who was temporary superintendent of the home, but who is now engaged in organizing
branches of the Women's Guild throughout Scotland, and Miss Alice
Maud Maxwell, the present superintendent of the home, have also been
set apart to the same office.

As has been said, "Each represents an old Scottish family, whose members have been distinguished
for Christian and philanthropic labors;" and "each represents a different
type of deaconess work."

Lady Grisell Baillie is engaged in gentle ministrations among the people of her own home.
Miss Davidson is at the service of every minister who desires aid
in organizing women's work in his parish.

And Miss Maxwell is at the training-home, leading a busy life in directing the class labors and
missionary activities that center around it and in impressing her life and spirit upon a band
of workers who are to further Christ's cause both at home and in the mission field.

The mention of any facts that can bring before us the varied character that the deaconess work
can assume is valuable. For to be truly useful, this cause needs to provide a place for women
of very unlike qualities, and also to allow a certain degree of freedom which will insure
the individuality of each worker.

The action of the Church of Scotland has had its influence upon the
Reformed Churches throughout the world holding the presbyterial system.

At the session of the London Council of the Alliance of Reformed and Presbyterian Churches during
the summer of 1888, Dr. Charteris presented a report embracing many
of the features of the elaborate scheme which he had previously devised
for the Church of Scotland.

And the Council, in receiving the report, not only approved it, but
"commended the details of the scheme stated in the report to the consideration
of the churches represented in the Alliance."

We may regard the Presbyterian churches of Great Britain, therefore, as committed, not only to
the indorsement of deaconesses as officers in the service of the
Church, but to the organization of the whole work of women in the
churches, under ecclesiastical authority and direction.

There is one feature of the deaconess cause as it has been developed in the Church of Scotland
that is of especial interest to the Methodists of America. Most of the great deaconess houses of England
have sprung from the personal faith and works of earnest-souled individuals.

Mildmay, for example, is a living testimony to the faithfulness and
energy of the Rev. Mr. Pennefather and those associated with him.

Within the Church of England the recognition accorded deaconesses
is a partial one, resting on the principles and rules signed by the
archbishops and eighteen bishops, and suggested for adoption in 1871.

But as yet the English Church has not formally accepted this utterance,
and made it authoritative.

The German deaconess houses, while receiving the practical indorsement of the State Church of
Germany, are not in any way officially connected with it. Even Kaiserswerth itself is solely
responsible to those who contribute to its support for a right use of the means placed at its
command. The same fact applies to the Paris deaconess houses. They are all detached efforts, not
parts of a general system. But the Scotch deaconesses are responsible to a church, and a church
is responsible for their work. The Church of Scotland is, therefore, justified in its claim when
it says that the adoption of the scheme of the organization of women's
work by the assembly of 1888, "is the first attempt since the Reformation
to make the organization of women's work a branch of the general organization
of the Church, under the control of her several judicatories."[77]
The second attempt was made, which was the first also for any Church
in America, when, May 18, 1888, the Methodist Episcopal Church of
the United States instituted the office of deaconess, and made it
an inherent part of the Church economy, under the direction and control
of the Annual Conferences.

[75] Organization of Women's Work in the Church of Scotland. Notes by A. H. Charteris, D.D.;
p. 4. [76] Report of Committee on Christian Life and Work, 1888, p. 36.
  So he answered:

"All-seeing and all-knowing art thou, O effendi, and I have reckoned the rentals even to this
hour for the ten years--fifty piastres for each feddan--"

"A hundred for the five years of high Nile," interposed the Mudir.

"Fifty for the five lean years, and a hundred for the five fat years," said Abou Seti, and
wished that his words were poisoned arrows, that they might give the Mudir many deaths at once.
"And may Allah give thee greatness upon thy greatness!"

"God prosper thee also, Abou Seti, and see that thou keep only what is thine own henceforth.
Get thee gone in peace."

"At what hour shall I see the face of my son alive?" asked Abou Seti in a low voice, placing
his hand upon his turban in humility.

"To-morrow at even, when the Muezzin calls from the mosque of El Hassan, be thou at the west
wall of the prison by the Gate of the Prophet's Sorrow, with thy fastest camel.  Your son shall
ride for me through the desert even to Farafreh, and bear a letter to the bimbashi there. 
If he bear it safely, his life is his own; if he fail, look to thy feddans of land!"

"God is merciful, and Seti is bone of my bone," said Abou Seti, and laid his hand again upon
his turban.  That was how Mahommed Seti did not at once pay the price of the grindstone, but
rode into the desert bearing the message of the Mudir and returned safely with the answer,
and was again seen in the cafes of Manfaloot.  And none of Ebn Haroun's friends did aught,
for the world knew through whom it was that Seti lived--and land was hard to keep in Manfaloot
and the prison near.

But one day a kavass of the Khedive swooped down on Manfaloot, and twenty young men were carried
off in conscription.  Among them was Seti, now married to Ahassa, the fellah maid for whom
the grindstone had fallen on Ebn Haroun's head.  When the fatal number fell to him and it was
ordained that he must go to Dongola to serve in the Khedive's legions, he went to his father,
with Ahassa wailing behind him.

"Save thyself," said the old man with a frown.

"I have done what I could--I have sold my wife's jewels," answered Seti.

"Ten piastres!" said old Abou Seti grimly.  "Twelve," said Seti, grinning from ear to ear.
Thou wilt add four feddans of land to that I will answer for the Mudir."

"Thy life only cost me two feddans.  Shall I pay four to free thee of serving thy master the
Khedive?  Get thee gone into the Soudan.  I do not fear for thee: thou wilt live on.  Allah
is thy friend.  Peace be with thee!"

II

So it was that the broad-shouldered Seti went to be a soldier, with all the women of the village
wailing behind him, and Ahassa his wife covering her head with dust and weeping by his side
as he stepped out towards Dongola.  For himself, Seti was a philosopher; that is to say, he
was a true Egyptian.  Whatever was, was to be; and Seti had a good digestion, which is a great
thing in the desert.  Moreover, he had a capacity for foraging--or foray.  The calmness with
which he risked his life for an onion or a water-bag would have done credit to a prince of
buccaneers. He was never flustered.  He had dropped a grindstone on the head of his rival,
but the smile that he smiled then was the same smile with which he suffered and forayed and
fought and filched in the desert.  With a back like a door, and arms as long and strong as
a gorilla's, with no moral character to speak of, and an imperturbable selfishness, even an
ignorant Arab like Seti may go far.  More than once his bimbashi drew a sword to cut him down
for the peaceful insolent grin with which he heard himself suddenly charged with very original
crimes; but even the officer put his sword up again, because he remembered that though Seti
was the curse of the regiment on the march, there was no man like him in the day of battle.
Covered with desert sand and blood, and fighting and raging after the manner of a Sikh, he
could hold ten companies together like a wall against a charge of Dervishes.  The bimbashi
rejoiced at this, for he was a coward; likewise his captain was a coward, and so was his lieutenant:
for they were half Turks, half Gippies, who had seen Paris and had not the decency to die there.
Also it had been discovered that no man made so good a spy or envoy as Seti.  His gift for
lying was inexpressible: confusion never touched him; for the flattest contradictions in the
matter of levying backsheesh he always found an excuse.  Where the bimbashi and his officers
were afraid to go lest the bald-headed eagle and the vulture should carry away their heads
as tit- bits to the Libyan hills, Seti was sent.  In more than one way he always kept his head.
He was at once the curse and the pride of the regiment. For his sins he could not be punished,
and his virtues were of value only to save his life.

In this fashion, while his regiment thinned out by disease, famine, fighting, and the midnight
knife, Seti came on to Dongola, to Berber, to Khartoum; and he grinned with satisfaction when
he heard that they would make even for Kordofan.  He had outlived all the officers who left
Manfaloot with the regiment save the bimbashi, and the bimbashi was superstitious and believed
that while Seti lived he would live. Therefore, no clansman ever watched his standard flying
in the van as the bimbashi--from behind--watched the long arm of Seti slaying, and heard his
voice like a brass horn above all others shouting his war-cry.

But at Khartoum came Seti's fall.  Many sorts of original sin had been his, with profit and
prodigious pleasure, but when, by the supposed orders of the bimbashi, he went through Khartoum
levying a tax upon every dancing-girl in the place and making her pay upon the spot at the
point of a merciless tongue, he went one step too far.  For his genius had preceded that of
Selamlik Pasha, the friend of the Mouffetish at Cairo, by one day only.  Selamlik himself had
collected taxes on dancing-girls all the way from Cairo to Khartoum; and to be hoist by an
Arab in a foot regiment having no authority and only a limitless insolence, was more than the
Excellency could bear.

To Selamlik Pasha the bimbashi hastily disowned all knowledge of Seti's perfidy, but both were
brought out to have their hands and feet and heads cut off in the Beit-el-Mal, in the presence
of the dancing-girls and the populace.  In the appointed place, when Seti saw how the bimbashi
wept-- for he had been to Paris and had no Arab blood in him; how he wrung his hands--for had
not absinthe weakened his nerves in the cafes of St. Michel?--when Seti saw that he was no
Arab and was afraid to die, then he told the truth to Selamlik Pasha.  He even boldly offered
to tell the pasha where half his own ill-gotten gains were hid, if he would let the bimbashi
go.  Now, Selamlik Pasha was an Egyptian, and is it not written in the Book of Egypt that no
man without the most dangerous reason may refuse backsheesh?  So it was that Selamlik talked
to the Ulema, the holy men, who were there, and they urged him to clemency, as holy men will,
even in Egypt--at a price.

So it was also that the bimbashi went back to his regiment with all his limbs intact.  Seti
and the other half of his ill-gotten gains were left. His hands were about to be struck off,
when he realised of how little account his gold would be without them; so he offered it to
Selamlik Pasha for their sake.  The pasha promised, and then, having found the money, serenely
prepared the execution.  For his anger was great.  Was not the idea of taxing the dancing-girls
his very own, the most original tax ever levied in Egypt?  And to have the honour of it filched
from him by a soldier of Manfaloot--no, Mahommed Seti should be crucified!

And Seti, the pride and the curse of his regiment, would have been crucified between two palms
on the banks of the river had it not been for Fielding Bey, the Englishman--Fielding of St.
Bartholomew's--who had burned gloriously to reform Egypt root and branch, and had seen the
fire of his desires die down.  Fielding Bey saved Seti, but not with backsheesh.

Fielding intervened.  He knew Selamlik Pasha well, and the secret of his influence over him
is for telling elsewhere.  But whatever its source, it gave Mahommed Seti his life.  It gave
him much more, for it expelled him from the Khedive's army.  Now soldiers without number, gladly
risking death, had deserted from the army of the Khedive; they had bought themselves out with
enormous backsheesh, they had been thieves, murderers, panderers, that they might be freed
from service by some corrupt pasha or bimbashi; but no one in the knowledge of the world had
ever been expelled from the army of the Khedive.

There was a satanic humour in the situation pleasant to the soul of Mahommed Seti, if soul
his subconsciousness might be called.  In the presence of his regiment, drawn up in the Beit-el-Mal,
before his trembling bimbashi, whose lips were now pale with terror at the loss of his mascot,
Mahommed Seti was drummed out of line, out of his regiment, out of the Beit-el-Mal.  It was
opera boufe, and though Seti could not know what opera boufe was, he did know that it was a
ridiculous fantasia, and he grinned his insolent grin all the way, even to the corner of the
camel-market, where the drummer and the sergeant and his squad turned back from ministering
a disgrace they would gladly have shared.

Left at the corner of the camel-market, Mahommed Seti planned his future. At first it was to
steal a camel and take the desert for Berber.  Then he thought of the English hakim, Fielding
Bey, who had saved his life.  Now, a man who has saved your life once may do it again; one
favour is always the promise of another.  So Seti, with a sudden inspiration, went straight
to the house of Fielding Bey and sat down before it on his mat.

With the setting of the sun came a clatter of tins and a savoury odour throughout Khartoum
to its farthest precincts, for it was Ramadan, and no man ate till sunset.  Seti smiled an
avid smile, and waited.  At last he got up, turned his face towards Mecca, and said his prayers.
Then he lifted the latch of Fielding's hut, entered, eyed the medicine bottles and the surgical
case with childish apprehension, and made his way to the kitchen.  There he foraged.  He built
a fire; his courage grew; he ran to the bazaar, and came back with an armful of meats and vegetables.

So it was that when Fielding returned he found Mahommed Seti and a savoury mess awaiting him.
Also there was coffee and a bottle of brandy which Seti had looted in the bazaar.  In one doorway
stood Fielding; in another stood Mahommed Seti, with the same grin which had served his purpose
all the way from Cairo, his ugly face behind it, and his prodigious shoulders below it, and
the huge chest from which came forth, like the voice of a dove:

"God give thee long life, saadat el bey!"

Now an M.D. degree and a course in St. Bartholomew's Hospital do not necessarily give a knowledge
of the human soul, though the outlying lands of the earth have been fattened by those who thought
there was knowledge and salvation in a conquered curriculum.  Fielding Bey, however, had never
made pretence of understanding the Oriental mind, so he discreetly took his seat and made no
remarks.  From sheer instinct, however, when he came to the coffee he threw a boot which caught
Mahommed Seti in the middle of the chest, and said roughly: "French, not Turkish, idiot!"

Then Mahommed Seti grinned, and he knew that he was happy; for it was deep in his mind that
that was the Inglesi's way of offering a long engagement.  In any case Seti had come to stay.
Three times he made French coffee that night before it suited, and the language of Fielding
was appropriate in each case.  At last a boot, a native drum, and a wood sculpture of Pabst
the lion-headed goddess, established perfect relations between them.  They fell into their
places of master and man as accurately as though the one had smitten and the other served for
twenty years.

The only acute differences they had were upon two points--the cleaning of the medicine bottles
and surgical instruments, and the looting.  But it was wonderful to see how Mahommed Seti took
the kourbash at the hands of Fielding, when he shied from the medicine bottles.  He could have
broken, or bent double with one twist, the weedy, thin-chested Fielding.  But though he saw
a deadly magic and the evil eye in every stopper, and though to him the surgical instruments
were torturing steels which the devil had forged for his purposes, he conquered his own prejudices
so far as to assist in certain bad cases which came in Fielding's way on the journey down the Nile.

The looting was a different matter.  Had not Mahommed Seti looted all his life--looted from
his native village to the borders of Kordofan?  Did he not take to foray as a wild ass to bersim?
Moreover, as little Dicky Donovan said humorously yet shamelessly when he joined them at Korosko:
"What should a native do but loot who came from Manfaloot?"

Dicky had a prejudice against the Murderer, because he was a murderer; and Mahommed Seti viewed
with scorn any white man who was not Fielding; much more so one who was only five feet and
a trifle over.  So for a time there was no sympathy between the two.  But each conquered the
other in the end.  Seti was conquered first.

One day Dicky, with a sudden burst of generosity--for he had a button to his pocket--gave Mahommed
Seti a handful of cigarettes.  The next day Seti said to Fielding: "Behold, God has given thee
strong men for friends.  Thou hast Mahommed Seti"--his chest blew out like a bellows-- "and
thou hast Donovan Pasha."

Fielding grunted.  He was not a fluent man, save in forbidden language, and Seti added:

"Behold thou, saadat el bey, who opens a man's body and turns over his heart with a sword-point,
and sewing him up with silken cords bids him live again, greatness is in thy house!  Last night
thy friend, Donovan Pasha, gave into my hands a score of those cigarettes which are like the
smell of a camel-yard.  In the evening, having broken bread and prayed, I sat down at the door
of the barber in peace to smoke, as becomes a man who loves God and His benefits.  Five times
I puffed, and then I stayed my lips, for why should a man die of smoke when he can die by the
sword? But there are many men in Korosko whose lives are not as clean linen. These I did not
love.  I placed in their hands one by one the cigarettes, and with their blessings following
me I lost myself in the dusk and waited."

Mahommed Seti paused.  On his face was a smile of sardonic retrospection.

"Go on, you fool!" grunted Fielding.

"Nineteen sick men, unworthy followers of the Prophet, thanked Allah in the mosque to-day that
their lives were spared.  Donovan Pasha is a great man and a strong, effendi!  We be three
strong men together."

Dicky Donovan's conversion to a lasting belief in Mahommed Seti came a year later.

The thing happened at a little sortie from the Nile.  Fielding was chief medical officer, and
Dicky, for the moment, was unattached.  When the time came for starting, Mahommed Seti brought
round Fielding's horse and also Dicky Donovan's.  Now, Mahommed Seti loved a horse as well
as a Bagarra Arab, and he had come to love Fielding's waler Bashi-Bazouk as a Farshoot dog
loves his master.  And Bashi-Bazouk was worthy of Seti's love.  The sand of the desert, Seti's
breath and the tail of his yelek made the coat of Bashi-Bazouk like silk.  It was the joy of
the regiment, and the regiment knew that Seti had added a new chapter to the Koran concerning
horses, in keeping with Mahomet's own famous passage

                   "By the CHARGERS that pant,
                    And the hoofs that strike fire,
                    And the scourers at dawn,
                    Who stir up the dust with it,
                    And cleave through a host with it!"

But Mahomet's phrases were recited in the mosque, and Seti's, as he rubbed Bashi-Bazouk with
the tail of his yelek.

There was one thing, however, that Seti loved more than horses, or at least as much.  Life
to him was one long possible Donnybrook Fair.  That was why, although he was no longer in the
army, when Fielding and Dicky mounted for the sortie he said to Fielding:

"Oh, brother of Joshua and all the fighters of Israel, I have a bobtailed Arab.  Permit me
to ride with thee."  And Fielding replied: "You will fight the barn-yard fowl for dinner; get
back to your stew-pots."

But Seti was not to be fobbed off.  "It is written that the Lord, the Great One, is compassionate
and merciful.  Wilt thou then, O saadat."

Fielding interrupted: "Go, harry the onion-field for dinner.  You're a dog of a slave, and
a murderer too: you must pay the price of that grindstone!"

But Seti hung by the skin of his teeth to the fringe of Fielding's good- nature--Fielding's
words only were sour and wrathful.  So Seti grinned and said: "For the grindstone, behold it
sent Ebn Haroun to the mercy of God.  Let him rest, praise be to God!"

"You were drummed out of the army.  You can't fight," said Fielding again; but he was smiling
under his long moustache.

"Is not a bobtailed nag sufficient shame?  Let thy friend ride the bobtailed nag and pay the
price of the grindstone and the drum," said Seti.

"Fall in!" rang the colonel's command, and Fielding, giving Seti a friendly kick in the ribs,
galloped away to the troop.

Seti turned to the little onion-garden.  His eye harried it for a moment, and he grinned. 
He turned to the doorway where a stew-pot rested, and his mind dwelt cheerfully on the lamb
he had looted for Fielding's dinner.  But last of all his eye rested upon his bobtailed Arab,
the shameless thing in an Arab country, where every horse rears his tail as a peacock spreads
his feathers, as a marching Albanian lifts his foot.  The bobtailed Arab's nose was up, his
stump was high.  A hundred times he had been in battle; he was welted and scarred like a shoe-maker's
apron.  He snorted his cry towards the dust rising like a surf behind the heels of the colonel's
troop.

Suddenly Seti answered the cry--he answered the cry and sprang forward.

That was how in the midst of a desperate melee twenty miles away on the road to Dongola little
Dicky Donovan saw Seti riding into the thick of the fight armed only with a naboot of domwood,
his call, "Allala-Akbar!" rising like a hoarse-throated bugle, as it had risen many a time
in the old days on the road from Manfaloot.  Seti and his bobtailed Arab, two shameless ones,
worked their way to the front.  Not Seti's strong right arm alone and his naboot were at work,
but the bobtailed Arab, like an iron-handed razor toothed shrew, struck and bit his way, his
eyes bloodred like Seti's.  The superstitious Dervishes fell back before this pair of demons;
for their madness was like the madness of those who at the Dosah throw themselves beneath the
feet of the Sheikh's horse by the mosque of El Hassan in Cairo.  The bobtailed Arab's lips
were drawn back over his assaulting teeth in a horrible grin.  Seti grinned too, the grin of
fury and of death.

Fielding did not know how it was that, falling wounded from his horse, he was caught by strong
arms, as Bashi-Bazouk cleared him at a bound and broke into the desert.  But Dicky Donovan,
with his own horse lanced under him, knew that Seti made him mount the bobtailed Arab with
Fielding in front of him, and that a moment later they had joined the little band retreating
to Korosko, having left sixty of their own dead on the field, and six times that number of
Dervishes.

It was Dicky Donovan who cooked Fielding's supper that night, having harried the onion-field
and fought the barn-yard fowl, as Fielding had commanded Seti.

But next evening at sunset Mahommed Seti came into the fort, slashed and bleeding, with Bashi-Bazouk
limping heavily after him.

Fielding said that Seti's was the good old game for which V.C.'s were the reward--to run terrible
risks to save a life in the face of the enemy; but, heretofore, it had always been the life
of a man, not of a horse. To this day the Gippies of that regiment still alive do not understand
why Seti should have stayed behind and risked his life to save a horse and bring him wounded
back to his master.  But little Dicky Donovan understood, and Fielding understood; and Fielding
never afterwards mounted Bashi-Bazouk but he remembered.

And in the course of time Mahommed Seti managed to pay the price of the grindstone and also
of the drum.

THE DESERTION OF MAHOMMED SELIM

The business began during Ramadan; how it ended and where was in the mouth of every soldier
between Beni Souef and Dongola, and there was not a mud hut or a mosque within thirty miles
of Mahommed Selim's home, not a khiassa or felucca dropping anchor for gossip and garlic below
the mudirieh, but knew the story of Soada, the daughter of Wassef the camel- driver.

Soada was pretty and upright, with a full round breast and a slim figure. She carried a balass
of water on her head as gracefully as a princess a tiara.  This was remarked by occasional
inspectors making their official rounds, and by more than one khowagah putting in with his
dahabeah where the village maidens came to fill their water-jars.  Soada's trinkets and bracelets
were perhaps no better than those of her companions, but her one garment was of the linen of
Beni Mazar, as good as that worn by the Sheikh-Elbeled himself.

Wassef the camel-driver, being proud of Soada, gave her the advantage of his frequent good
fortune in desert loot and Nile backsheesh.  But Wassef was a hard man for all that, and he
grew bitter and morose at last, because he saw that camel-driving must suffer by the coming
of the railway.  Besides, as a man gets older he likes the season of Ramadan less, for he must
fast from sunrise to sunset, though his work goes on; and, with broken sleep, having his meals
at night, it is ten to one but he gets irritable.

So it happened that one evening just at sunset, Wassef came to his hut, with the sun like the
red rim of a huge thumb-nail in the sky behind him, ready beyond telling for his breakfast,
and found nothing.  On his way home he had seen before the houses and cafes silent Mussulmans
with cigarettes and matches in their fingers, cooks with their hands on the lids of the cooking
pots, where the dourha and onions boiled; but here outside his own doorway there was no odour,
and there was silence within.

"Now, by the beard of the Prophet," he muttered, "is it for this I have fed the girl and clothed
her with linen from Beni Mazar all these years!" And he turned upon his heel, and kicked a
yellow cur in the ribs; then he went to the nearest cafe, and making huge rolls of forcemeat
with his fingers crammed them into his mouth, grunting like a Berkshire boar.  Nor did his
anger cease thereafter, for this meal of meat had cost him five piastres--the second meal of
meat in a week.

As Wassef sat on the mastaba of the cafe sullen and angry, the village barber whispered in
his ear that Mahommed Selim and Soada had been hunting jackals in the desert all afternoon.
Hardly had the barber fled from the anger of Wassef, when a glittering kavass of the Mouffetish
at Cairo passed by on a black errand of conscription.  With a curse Wassef felt in his vest
for his purse, and called to the kavass--the being more dreaded in Egypt than the plague.

That very night the conscription descended upon Mahommed Selim, and by sunrise he was standing
in front of the house of the Mamour with twelve others, to begin the march to Dongola.  Though
the young man's father went secretly to the Mamour, and offered him backsheesh, even to the
tune of a feddan of land, the Mamour refused to accept it.  That was a very peculiar thing,
because every Egyptian official, from the Khedive down to the ghafhr of the cane-fields, took
backsheesh in the name of Allah.

Wassef the camel-driver was the cause.  He was a deep man and a strong; and it was through
him the conscription descended upon Mahommed Selim-- "son of a burnt father," as he called
him--who had gone shooting jackals in the desert with his daughter, and had lost him his breakfast.
Wassef's rage was quiet but effective, for he had whispered to some purpose in the ear of the
Mamour as well as in that of the dreaded kavass of conscription.  Afterwards, he had gone home
and smiled at Soada his daughter when she lied to him about the sunset breakfast.

With a placid smile and lips that murmured, "Praise be to God," the malignant camel-driver
watched the shrieking women of the village throwing dust on their heads and lamenting loudly
for the thirteen young men of Beni Souef who were going forth never to return--or so it seemed
to them; for of all the herd of human kine driven into the desert before whips and swords,
but a moiety ever returned, and that moiety so battered that their mothers did not know them.
Therefore, at Beni Souef that morning women wept, and men looked sullenly upon the ground--all
but Wassef the camel-driver.

It troubled the mind of Wassef that Mahommed Selim made no outcry at his fate.  He was still
more puzzled when the Mamour whispered to him that Mahommed Selim had told the kavass and his
own father that since it was the will of God, then the will of God was his will, and he would
go. Wassef replied that the Mamour did well not to accept the backsheesh of Mahommed Selim's
father, for the Mouffetish at the palace of Ismail would have heard of it, and there would
have been an end to the Mamour.  It was quite a different matter when it was backsheesh for
sending Mahommed Selim to the Soudan.

With a shameless delight Wassef went to the door of his own home, and, calling to Soada, told
her that Mahommed Selim was among the conscripts. He also told her that the young man was willing
to go, and that the Mamour would take no backsheesh from his father.  He looked to see her
burst into tears and wailing, but she only stood and looked at him like one stricken blind.
Wassef laughed, and turned on his heel; and went out: for what should he know of the look in
a woman's face--he to whom most women were alike, he who had taken dancing-girls with his camels
into the desert many a time?  What should he know of that love which springs once in every
woman's heart, be she fellah or Pharaoh's daughter?

When he had gone, Soada groped her way blindly to the door and out into the roadway.  Her lips
moved, but she only said: "Mahommed--Mahommed Selim!"  Her father's words knelled in her ear
that her lover was willing to go, and she kept saying brokenly: "Mahommed--Mahommed Selim!"
As the mist left her eyes she saw the conscripts go by, and Mahommed Selim was in the rear
rank.  He saw her also, but he kept his head turned away, taking a cigarette from young Yusef,
the drunken ghaffir, as they passed on.

Unlike the manner of her people, Soada turned and went back into her house, and threw herself
upon the mud floor, and put the folds of her garment in her mouth lest she should cry out in
her agony.  A whole day she lay there and did not stir, save to drink from the water-bottle
which old Fatima, the maker of mats, had placed by her side.  For Fatima thought of the far-off
time when she loved Hassan the potter, who had been dragged from his wheel by a kavass of conscription
and lost among the sands of the Libyan desert; and she read the girl's story.

That evening, as Wassef the camel-driver went to the mosque to pray, Fatima cursed him, because
now all the village laughed secretly at the revenge that Wassef had taken upon the lover of
his daughter.  A few laughed the harder because they knew Wassef would come to feel it had
been better to have chained Mahommed Selim to a barren fig-tree and kept him there until he
married Soada, than to let him go.  He had mischievously sent him into that furnace which eats
the Fellaheen to the bones, and these bones thereafter mark white the road of the Red Sea caravans
and the track of the Khedive's soldiers in the yellow sands.

When Fatima cursed Wassef he turned and spat at her; and she went back and sat on the ground
beside Soada, and mumbled tags from the Koran above her for comfort.  Then she ate greedily
the food which Soada should have eaten; snatching scraps of consolation in return for the sympathy
she gave.

The long night went, the next day came, and Soada got up and began to work again.  And the
months went by.

II

One evening, on a day which had been almost too hot for even the seller of liquorice-water
to go by calling and clanging, Wassef the camel-driver sat at the door of a malodorous cafe
and listened to a wandering welee chanting the Koran.  Wassef was in an ill-humour: first,
because the day had been so hot; secondly, because he had sold his ten-months' camel at a price
almost within the bounds of honesty; and thirdly, because a score of railway contractors and
subs. were camped outside the town.  Also, Soada had scarcely spoken to him for three days past.

In spite of all, Soada had been the apple of his eye, although he had sworn again and again
that next to a firman of the Sultan, a ten-months' camel was the most beautiful thing on earth.
He was in a bitter humour. This had been an intermittent disease with him almost since the
day Mahommed Selim had been swallowed up by the Soudan; for, like her mother before her, Soada
had no mind to be a mat for his feet.  Was it not even said that Soada's mother was descended
from an English slave with red hair, who in the terrible disaster at Damietta in 1805 had been
carried away into captivity on the Nile, where he married a fellah woman and died a good Mussulman?

Soada's mother had had red-brown hair, and not black as becomes a fellah woman; but Wassef
was proud of this ancient heritage of red hair, which belonged to a field-marshal of Great
Britain--so he swore by the beard of the Prophet.  That is why he had not beaten Soada these
months past when she refused to answer him, when with cold stubbornness she gave him his meals
or withheld them at her will.  He was even a little awed by her silent force of will, and at
last he had to ask her humbly for a savoury dish which her mother had taught her to make--a
dish he always ate upon the birthday of Mahomet Ali, who had done him the honour to flog him
with his own kourbash for filching the rations of his Arab charger.

But this particular night Wassef was bitter, and watched with stolid indifference the going
down of the sun, the time when he usually said his prayers.  He was in so ill a humour that
he would willingly have met his old enemy, Yusef, the drunken ghaffir, and settled their long-standing
dispute for ever.  But Yusef came not that way.  He was lying drunk with hashish outside the
mosque El Hassan, with a letter from Mahommed Selim in his green turban--for Yusef had been
a pilgrimage to Mecca and might wear the green turban.

But if Yusef came not by the cafe where Wassef sat glooming, some one else came who quickly
roused Wassef from his phlegm.  It was Donovan Pasha, the young English official, who had sat
with him many a time at the door of his but and asked him questions about Dongola and Berber
and the Soudanese.  And because Dicky spoke Arabic, and was never known to have aught to do
with the women of Beni Souef, he had been welcome; and none the less because he never frowned
when an Arab told a lie.

"Nehar-ak koom said, Mahommed Wassef," said Dicky; and sat upon a bench and drew a narghileh
to him, wiping the ivory mouthpiece with his handkerchief.

"Nehar-ak said, saadat el Pasha," answered Wassef, and touched lips, breast, and forehead with
his hand.  Then they shook hands, thumbs up, after the ancient custom.  And once more, Wassef
touched his breast, his lips, and his forehead.

They sat silent too long for Wassef's pleasure, for he took pride in what he was pleased to
call his friendship with Donovan Pasha, and he could see his watchful neighbours gathering
at a little distance.  It did not suit his book that they two should not talk together.

"May Allah take them to his mercy!--A regiment was cut to pieces by the Dervishes at Dongola
last quarter of the moon," he said.

"It was not the regiment of Mahommed Selim," Dicky answered slowly, with a curious hard note
in his voice.

"All blessings do not come at once--such is the will of God!" answered Wassef with a sneer.

"You brother of asses," said Dicky, showing his teeth a little, "you brother of asses of Bagdad!"

"Saadat el basha!" exclaimed Wassef, angry and dumfounded.

"You had better have gone yourself, and left Mahommed Selim your camels and your daughter,"
continued Dicky, his eyes straight upon Wassef's.

"God knows your meaning," said Wassef in a sudden fright; for the Englishman's tongue was straight,
as he well knew.

"They sneer at you behind your back, Mahommed Wassef.  No man in the village dare tell you,
for you have no friends, but I tell you, that you may save Soada before it is too late.  Mahommed
Selim lives; or lived last quarter of the moon, so says Yusef the ghaffir.  Sell your ten-
months' camel, buy the lad out, and bring him back to Soada."

"Saadat!" said Wassef, in a quick fear, and dropped the stem of the narghileh, and got to his
feet.  "Saadat el basha!"

"Before the Nile falls and you may plant yonder field with onions," answered Dicky, jerking
his head towards the flooded valley, "her time will be come!"

Wassef's lips were drawn, like shrivelled parchment over his red gums, the fingers of his right
hand fumbled in his robe.

"There's no one to kill--keep quiet!" said Dicky, But Wassef saw near by the faces of the villagers,
and on every face he thought he read a smile, a sneer; though in truth none sneered, for they
were afraid of his terrible anger.  Mad with fury he snatched the turban from his head and
threw it on the ground.  Then suddenly he gave one cry, "Allah!" a vibrant clack like a pistol-shot,
for he saw Yusef, the drunken ghaffir, coming down the road.

Yusef heard that cry of "Allah!" and he knew that the hour had come for settling old scores.
The hashish clouds lifted from his brain, and he gripped his naboot of the hard wood of the
dom-palm, and, with a cry like a wolf, came on.

It would have been well for Wassef the camel-driver if he had not taken the turban from his
head, for before he could reach Yusef with his dagger, he went down, his skull cracking like
the top of an egg under a spoon.

III

Thus it was that Soada was left to fight her battle alone.  She did not weep or wail when Wassef's
body was brought home and the moghassil and hanouti came to do their offices.  She did not
smear her hair with mud, nor was she moved by the wailing of the mourning women nor the chanters
of the Koran.  She only said to Fatima when all was over: "It is well; he is gone from my woe
to the mercy of God!  Praise be to God!"  And she held her head high in the village still,
though her heart was in the dust.

She would have borne her trouble alone to the end, but that she was bitten on the arm by one
of her father's camels the day they were sold in the marketplace.  Then, helpless and suffering
and fevered, she yielded to the thrice-repeated request of Dicky Donovan, and was taken to
the hospital at Assiout, which Fielding Bey, Dicky's friend, had helped to found.

But Soada, as her time drew near and the terror of it stirred her heart, cast restless eyes
upon the whitewashed walls and rough floors of the hospital.  She longed for the mud hut at
Beni Souef, and the smell of the river and the little field of onions she planted every year.
Day by day she grew harder of heart against those who held her in the hospital--for to her
it was but a prison.  She would not look when the doctor came, and she would not answer, but
kept her eyes closed; and she did not shrink when they dressed the arm so cruelly wounded by
the camel's teeth, but lay still and dumb.

Now, a strange thing happened, for her hair which had been so black turned brown, and grew
browner and browner till it was like the hair of her mother, who, so the Niline folk said,
was descended from the English soldier-slave with red hair.

Fielding Bey and Dicky came to see her in hospital once before they returned to Cairo; but
Soada would not even speak to them, though she smiled when they spoke to her; and no one else
ever saw her smile during the days she spent in that hospital with the red floor and white
walls and the lazy watchman walking up and down before the door.  She kept her eyes closed
in the daytime; but at night they were always open--always. Pictures of all she had lived and
seen came back to her then--pictures of days long before Mahommed Selim came into her life.
Mahommed Selim!  She never spoke the words now, but whenever she thought them her heart shrank
in pain.  Mahommed Selim had gone like a coward into the desert, leaving her alone.

Her mind dwelt on the little mud hut and the onion field, and she saw down by the foreshore
of the river the great khiassas from Assouan and Luxor laden with cotton or dourha or sugar-cane,
their bent prows hooked in the Nile mud.  She saw again the little fires built along the shore
and atop of the piles of grain, round which sat the white, the black, and the yellow-robed
riverine folk in the crimson glare; while from the banks came the cry: "Alla-haly, 'm alla-haly!"
as stalwart young Arabs drew in from the current to the bank some stubborn, overloaded khiassa.
She heard the snarl of the camels as they knelt down before her father's but to rest before
the journey into the yellow plains of sand beyond.  She saw the seller of sweetmeats go by
calling--calling.  She heard the droning of the children in the village school behind the hut,
the dull clatter of Arabic consonants galloping through the Koran.  She saw the moon--the full
moon-upon the Nile, the wide acreage of silver water before the golden-yellow and yellow-purple
of the Libyan hills behind.

She saw through her tears the sweet mirage of home, and her heart rebelled against the prison
where she lay.  What should she know of hospitals--she whose medicaments had been herbs got
from the Nile valley and the cool Nile mud?  Was it not the will of God if we lived or the
will of God if we died?  Did we not all lie in the great mantle of the mercy of God, ready
to be lifted up or to be set down as He willed?  They had prisoned her here; there were bars
upon the windows, there were watchmen at the door.

At last she could bear it no longer; the end of it all came.  She stole out over the bodies
of the sleeping watchmen, out into the dusty road under the palms, down to the waterside, to
the Nile--the path leading homewards.  She must go down the Nile, hiding by day, travelling
by night--the homing bird with a broken wing-back to the but where she had lived so long with
Wassef the camel-driver; back where she could lie in the dusk of her windowless home, shutting
out the world from her solitude.  There she could bear the agony of her hour.

Drinking the water of the Nile, eating the crumbs of dourha bread she had brought from the
hospital, getting an onion from a field, chewing shreds of sugarcane, hiding by day and trudging
on by night, hourly growing weaker, she struggled towards Beni Souef.  Fifty--forty--thirty--ten--
five miles!  Oh!  the last two days, her head so hot and her brain bursting, and a thousand
fancies swimming before her eyes, her heart fluttering, fluttering--stopping, going on--stopping,
going on.

It was only the sound of the river--the Nile, Mother of Egypt, crooning to her disordered spirit,
which kept her on her feet.  Five miles, four miles, three miles, two, and then--she never
quite remembered how she came to the hut where she was born.  Two miles--two hours of incredible
agony, now running, now leaning against a palm tree, now dropping to her knees, now fighting
on and on, she came at last to the one spot in the world where she could die in peace.

As she staggered, stumbled, through the village, Yusef, the drunken ghaffir, saw her.  He did
not dare speak to her, for had he not killed her father, and had he not bought himself free
of punishment from the Mudir?  So he ran to old Fatima and knocked upon her door with his naboot,
crying: "In the name of Allah get thee to the hut of Wassef the camel-driver!"

Thus it was that Soada, in her agony, heard a voice say out of the infinite distance: "All
praise to Allah, he hath even now the strength of a year-old child!"

IV

That night at sunset, as Soada lay upon the sheepskin spread for her, with the child nestled
between her arm and her breast, a figure darkened the doorway, and old Fatima cried out:

"Mahommed Selim!"

With a gasping sound Soada gathered the child quickly to her breast, and shrank back to the
wall.  This surely was the ghost of Mahommed Selim-- this gaunt, stooping figure covered with dust.

"Soada, in the name of Allah the Compassionate, the Merciful, Soada, beautiful one!"

Mahommed Selim, once the lithe, the straight, the graceful, now bent, awkward, fevered, all
the old daring gone from him, stood still in the middle of the room, humbled before the motherhood
in his sight.

"Brother of jackals," cried old Fatima, "what dost thou here?  What dost thou here, dog of
dogs!"  She spat at him.

He took no notice.  "Soada," he said eagerly, prayerfully, and his voice, though hoarse, was
softer than she had ever heard it. Mr. Roe's novels are of the manufactured kind. Like those of
many others who are in the business, they give the impression that they are easily written,
and might possibly be turned out by a machine, had invention progressed
a little farther than it has.

Still his piéces de manufacture are very good of their kind, and sell very well--like the moral
romances in China, which are disposed of by weight and in fragments,
in such vast quantities, and which are so entirely a matter of mere
pastime that the authors never think it worth while to affix their
names to them.

Like and Unlike may be safely intrusted by the most fastidious aunt to the most unsophisticated
of nieces--and it is not unlikely that the niece would greatly enjoy its perusal. It is by
no means devoid of interest, and indicates in many particulars that familiarity with the press
which preserves any work of its nature--so far as style is concerned--from harsh judgment.
There are better books--but certainly there are thousands which are much worse.

TITAN. From the German of JEAN PAUL FRIEDRICH RICHTER, by CHARLES
T. BROOKS. Boston: Ticknor & Fields.

1863.

To many men JEAN PAUL has always been the greatest of German writers, however they might protest
their preference for some other idol. CARLYLE knows and names GOETHE as the intellectual culmination
of the past age--and yet shows in every sentence the influence of The Only One, with very
barren traces indeed of The Old Heathen; reminding us of those devotees who profess a faith
in GOD, but manifest it in the worship of some congenial saint. At the present day, Richter, instead
of being overrated, is neglected.
  And Allah put a thorn into my heart, that a sharp pain went through my body--and
at last I fell."

Soada's eyes were on him now with a strange, swimming brilliancy.

"Mahommed--Mahommed Selim, Allah touched thine eyes that thou didst see truly," she said eagerly.
"Speak not till I have done," he answered. "When I waked again I was alone in the desert, no
food, no water, and the dead camel beside me.  But I had no fear.  'If it be God's will,' said
I, 'then I shall come unto Soada.  If it be not God's will, so be it: for are we not on the
cushion of His mercy, to sleep or to wake, to live or to die?'"

He paused, tottering, and presently sank upon the ground, his hands drooped before him, his
head bent down.  Old Fatima touched him on the shoulder.

"Brother of vultures didst thou go forth; brother of eagles dost thou return," she said.  "Eat,
drink, in the house of thy child and its mother."

"Shall the unforgiven eat or drink?" he asked, and he rocked his body to and fro, like one
who chants the Koran in a corner of El Azhar, forgetting and forgotten.

Soada's eyes were on him now as though they might never leave him again; and she dragged herself
little by little towards him, herself and the child--little by little, until at last she touched
his feet, and the child's face was turned towards him from its mother's breast.

"Thou art my love, Mahommed Selim," she said.  He raised his head from his hands, a hunger
of desire in his face.

"Thou art my lord," she added: "art thou not forgiven?  The little one is thine and mine,"
she whispered.  "Wilt thou not speak to him?"

"Lest Allah should strike me with blindness and dry up the juice of my veins, I will not touch
thee or the child until all be righted.  Food will I not eat, nor water drink until thou art
mine--by the law of the Prophet, mine."

Laying down the water-jar, and the plate of dourha bread, old Fatima gathered her robe about
her, and cried as she ran from the house: "Marriage and fantasia thou shalt have this hour."

The stiffness seemed to pass from her bones as she ran through the village to the house of
the Omdah.  Her voice, lifting shrilly, sang the Song of Haleel, the song of the newly married,
till it met the chant of the Muezzin on the tower of the mosque El Hassan, and mingled with
it, dying away over the fields of bersim and the swift-flowing Nile.

That night Mahommed Selim and Soada the daughter of Wassef the camel- driver were married,
but the only fantasia they held was their own low laughter over the child.  In the village,
however, people were little moved to smile, for they knew that Mahommed Selim was a deserter
from the army of the Khedive at Dongola, and that meant death.  But no one told Soada this,
and she did not think; she was content to rest in the fleeting dream.

"Give them twenty-four hours," said the black-visaged fat sergeant of cavalry come to arrest
Mahommed Selim for desertion.

The father of Mahommed Selim again offered the Mamour a feddan of land if the young man might
go free, and to the sergeant he offered a she-camel and a buffalo.  To no purpose.  It was
Mahommed Selim himself who saved his father's goods to him.  He sent this word to the sergeant
by Yusef the drunken ghaffir: "Give me to another sunset and sunrise, and what I have is thine--three
black donkeys of Assiout rented to old Abdullah the sarraf."

Because with this offer he should not only have backsheesh but the man also, the fat sergeant
gave him leave.  When the time was up, and Mahommed Selim drew Soada's face to his breast,
he knew that it was the last look and last embrace.

"I am going back," he said; "my place is empty at Dongola."

"No, no, thou shalt not go," she cried.  "See how the little one loves thee," she urged, and,
sobbing, she held the child up to him.

But he spoke softly to her, and at last she said: "Kiss me, Mahommed Selim.  Behold now thy
discharge shall be bought from the palace of the Khedive, and soon thou wilt return," she cried.

"If it be the will of God," he answered; "but the look of thine eyes I will take with me, and
the face of the child here."  He thrust a finger into the palm of the child, and the little
dark hand closed round it. But when he would have taken it away, the little hand still clung,
though the eyes were scarce opened upon life.

"See, Mahommed Selim," Soada cried, "he would go with thee."

"He shall come to me one day, by the mercy of God," answered Mahommed Selim.

Then he went out into the market-place and gave himself up to the fat sergeant.  As they reached
the outskirts of the village a sorry camel came with a sprawling gallop after them, and swaying
and rolling above it was Yusef, the drunken ghaffir, his naboot of dom-wood across his knees.

"What dost thou come for, friend of the mercy of God?" asked Mahommed Selim.

"To be thy messenger, praise be to God!" answered Yusef, swinging his water-bottle clear for
a drink.

V

In Egypt, the longest way round is not the shortest way home, and that was why Mahommed Selim's
court-martial took just three minutes and a half; and the bimbashi who judged him found even
that too long, for he yawned in the deserter's face as he condemned him to death.

Mahommed Selim showed no feeling when the sentence was pronounced.  His face had an apathetic
look.  It seemed as if it were all one to him.  But when they had turned him round to march
to the shed where he was to be kept, till hung like a pig at sunrise, his eyes glanced about
restlessly. For even as the sentence had been pronounced a new idea had come into his mind.
Over the heads of the Gippy soldiers, with their pipestem legs, his look flashed eagerly, then
a little painfully--then suddenly stayed, for it rested on the green turban of Yusef, the drunken
ghaffir.  Yusef's eyes were almost shut; his face had the grey look of fresh-killed veal, for
he had come from an awful debauch of hashish.

"Allah!  Allah!" cried Mahommed Selim, for that was the sound which always waked the torpid
brain of Yusef since Wassef the camel-driver's skull had crackled under his naboot.

Yusef's wide shoulders straightened back, his tongue licked his lips, his eyes stared before
him, his throat was dry.  He licked his lips again. "Allah!" he cried and ran forward.

The soldiers thrust Yusef back.  Mahommed Selim turned and whispered to the sergeant.

"Backsheesh!" he said; "my grey Arab for a word with Yusef the ghaffir."

"Malaish!" said the sergeant; and the soldiers cleared a way for Yusef.

The palms of the men from Beni Souef met once, twice, thrice; they touched their lips, their
breasts, their foreheads, with their hands, three times.  Then Mahommed Selim fell upon the
breast of Yusef and embraced him.  Doing so he whispered in his ear:

"In the name of Allah, tell Soada I died fighting the Dervishes!"

"So be it, in God's name!" said Yusef. There are now eighty-nine deaconesses, eleven of whom are probationers,
and there are stations in five places.

Besides the ones previously mentioned in Germany, two additional stations have been started
in Switzerland: one in Zürich, and one in St. Gall.

Nearly all the Methodist German deaconesses are engaged in caring for the sick; it is only recently
that attempts have been made in some other directions of charitable
endeavor.

In the last report we are told that at Frankfort steps have been taken to reform fallen women.
One of the sisters seems to be especially endowed with tact and ability
for this difficult work.

She has already induced twenty-two of these girls to enter the asylum at Sachsenhausen. The police
authorities and city magistrates have given this same sister access
to the women prisoners, which is a decided favor, coming from German
officials.

Besides her work in this particular, she has devoted her remaining time to the care of the poor
and the sick.

Many deaconesses were called upon to go out as nurses in private families,
and, in order to obtain room to accommodate the added number these
services required, it has been necessary to rent an additional house.

There are two clinics in connection with the institution; one for
those suffering from nose, throat, or lung diseases, the other for
diseases of women.

In both, the hours of consultation are free, and attract numerous visitors. Two hundred and forty-six
people were received in the hospital last year, and were cared for in four thousand one hundred
and fifty days of nursing. Spiritual results are also anticipated from the seed of God's word
sown in the hearts of the sick through daily prayer and Sunday services.

The house at Frankfort is too small for its increasing needs, and
a permanent home of more ample dimensions is greatly to be desired.

In Hamburg the house has been enlarged, and there is now room for thirty-five sisters; yet still
there are more demands made than can be met. In one month ninety requests were handed in for
the aid of the deaconesses. The city authorities offered them a large lot of land at a very
moderate sum, which is at present used as a garden, and adds much to the enjoyment of the home.

On the 4th of March, 1888, occurred the anniversary of the founding
of the Hamburg house, at which time six sisters were set apart to
their life calling by a service of consecration.

As in all places where our deaconesses are employed, so also in Hamburg their influence is felt
in the increase of religious life among the families they serve.

In Berlin, again, there is an imperative call for enlarged house accommodations, and more sisters
are needed to meet the requests for help that are constantly coming to them. As the report
expresses it, "Something must happen!"[49] After six years of activity in Berlin the deaconesses
find themselves well appreciated, and with a broad field of labor. The city authorities gave
them permission to take a house collection during the months of February
and March.

One of the German ministers said, "This is an unusual favor, only
granted in exceptional cases, as when a village is swept away, or
there is an inundation, or a failure of harvests."

             This collection was no easy task. In the
               depth of winter, in rigorous cold and snow the sisters had to climb
weary flights of stairs, in houses four and five stories high, arranged
in flats; to knock at many doors, often meeting with but slight success
or a positive refusal; yet daily they went with fresh courage to their
work, encouraged by the thought that they were toiling not for themselves,
but to serve the needy, "for Jesus' sake."

  It wasn't the heat, and it wasn't
the work, and it wasn't the everlasting care of the sick: it was the ceaseless hunt for the
disease-stricken, the still, tireless opposition of the natives, the remorseless deception,
the hopeless struggle against the covert odds. With nothing behind: no support from the Government,
no adequate supplies, few capable men; and all the time the dead, inert, dust- powdered air;
the offices of policeman, doctor, apothecary, even undertaker and gravedigger, to perform;
and the endless weeks of it all. A handful of good men under two leaders of nerve, conscience
and ability, to fight an invisible enemy, which, gaining headway, would destroy its scores
of thousands!

At the end of the first two months Fielding Bey became hopeless.

"We can't throttle it," he said to Dicky Donovan.  "They don't give us the ghost of a chance.
To-day I found a dead-un hid in an oven under a heap of flour to be used for to-morrow's baking;
I found another doubled up in a cupboard, and another under a pile of dourha which will be
ground into flour."

"With twenty ghaffirs I beat five cane and dourha fields this morning," said Dicky.  "Found
three cases.  They'd been taken out of the village during the night."

"Bad ones?"

"So so.  They'll be worse before they're better.  That was my morning's flutter.  This afternoon
I found the huts these gentlemen call their homes.  I knocked holes in the roofs per usual,
burnt everything that wasn't wood, let in the light o' heaven, and splashed about limewash
and perchloride.  That's my day's tot-up.  Any particular trouble?" he added, eyeing Fielding
closely.

Fielding fretfully jerked his foot on the floor, and lighted his pipe, the first that day.

"Heaps.  I've put the barber in prison, and given the sarraf twenty lashes for certifying that
the death of the son of the Mamour was el aadah--the ordinary.  It was one of the worst cases
I've ever seen.  He fell ill at ten and was dead at two, the permis d'inhumation was given
at four, and the usual thing occurred: the bodywashers got the bedding and clothing, and the
others the coverlet.  God only knows who'll wear that clothing, who'll sleep in that bed!"

"If the Lord would only send them sense, we'd supply sublimate solution-- douche and spray,
and zinc for their little long boxes of bones," mused Dicky, his eyes half shut, as he turned
over in his hands some scarabs a place-hunting official had brought him that day.  "Well, that
isn't all?" he added, with a quick upward glance and a quizzical smile.  His eyes, however,
as they fell on Fielding's, softened in a peculiar way, and a troubled look flashed through
them; for Fielding's face was drawn and cold, though the eyes were feverish, and a bright spot
burned on his high cheek-bones.

"No, it isn't all, Dicky.  The devil's in the whole business.  Steady, sullen opposition meets
us at every hand.  Norman's been here--rode over from Abdallah--twenty-five miles.  A report's
going through the native villages, started at Abdallah, that our sanitary agents are throwing
yellow handkerchiefs in the faces of those they're going to isolate."

"That's Hoskai Bey's yellow handkerchief.  He's a good man, but he blows his nose too much,
and blows it with a flourish.  .  .  .  Has Norman gone back?"

"No, I've made him lie down in my cabin.  He says he can't sleep, says he can only work.  He
looks ten years older.  Abdallah's an awful place, and it's a heavy district.  The Mamour there's
a scoundrel.  He has influenced the whole district against Norman and our men.  Norman--you
know what an Alexander-Hannibal baby it is, all the head of him good for the best sort of work
anywhere, all the fat heart of him dripping sentiment--gave a youngster a comfit the other
day.  By some infernal accident the child fell ill two days afterwards--it had been sucking
its father's old shoe--and Norman just saved its life by the skin of his teeth.  If the child
had died, there'd have been a riot probably.  As it is, there's talk that we're scattering
poisoned sweetmeats to spread the disease.  He's done a plucky thing, though.  .  .  ."  He
paused.  Dicky looked up inquiringly, and Fielding continued.  "There's a fellow called Mustapha
Kali, a hanger-on of the Mudir of the province.  He spread a report that this business was
only a scare got up by us; that we poisoned the people and buried them alive.  What does Norman
do?  He promptly arrests him, takes him to the Mudir, and says that the brute must be punished
or he'll carry the matter to the Khedive."

"Here's to you, Mr. Norman!" said Dicky, with a little laugh.  "What does the Mudir do?"

"Doesn't know what to do.  He tells Norman to say to me that if he puts the fellow in prison
there'll be a riot, for they'll make a martyr of him.  If he fines him it won't improve matters.
So he asks me to name a punishment which'll suit our case.  He promises to give it 'his most
distinguished consideration.'"

"And what's your particular poison for him?" asked Dicky, with his eyes on the Cholera Hospital
a few hundred yards away.

"I don't know.  If he's punished in the ordinary way it will only make matters worse, as the
Mudir says.  Something's needed that will play our game and turn the tables on the reptile too."

"A sort of bite himself with his own fangs, eh?" Dicky seemed only idly watching the moving
figures by the hospital.

"Yes, but what is it?  I can't inoculate him with bacilli.  That's what'd do the work, I fancy."

"Pocket your fancy, Fielding," answered Dicky.  "Let me have a throw."

"Go on.  If you can't hit it off, it's no good, for my head doesn't think these days: it only
sees, and hears, and burns."

Dicky eyed Fielding keenly, and then, pouring out some whiskey for himself, put the bottle
on the floor beside him, casually as it were. Then he said, with his girlish laugh, not quite
so girlish these days: "I've got his sentence pat--it'll meet the case, or you may say, 'Cassio,
never more be officer of mine.'"

He drew over a piece of paper lying on the piano--for there was a piano on the Amenhotep, and
with what seemed an audacious levity Fielding played in those rare moments when they were not
working or sleeping; and Fielding could really play!  As Dicky wrote he read aloud in a kind
of legal monotone:

     The citizen Mustapha Kali having asserted that there is no cholera,
     and circulated various false statements concerning the treatment of
     patients, is hereby appointed as hospital-assistant for three
     months, in the Cholera Hospital of Kalamoun, that he may have
     opportunity of correcting his opinions.
                         --Signed Ebn ben Hari, Mudir of Abdallah.

Fielding lay back and laughed--the first laugh on his lips for a fortnight.  He laughed till
his dry, fevered lips took on a natural moisture, and he said at last: "You've pulled it off,
D.  That's masterly.  You and Norman have the only brains in this show.  I get worse every
day; I do--upon my soul!"

There was a curious anxious look in Dicky's eyes, but he only said: "You like it?  Think it
fills the bill, eh?"

"If the Mudir doesn't pass the sentence I'll shut up shop."  He leaned over anxiously to Dicky
and gripped his arm.  "I tell you this pressure of opposition has got to be removed, or we'll
never get this beast of an epidemic under, but we'll go under instead, my boy."

"Oh, we're doing all right," Dicky answered, with only apparent carelessness.  "We've got inspection
of the trains, we've got some sort of command of the foreshores, we've got the water changed
in the mosques, we've closed the fountains, we've stopped the markets, we've put Sublimate
Pasha and Limewash Effendi on the war-path, and--"

"And the natives believe in lighted tar-barrels and a cordon sanitaire! No, D., things must
take a turn, or the game's lost and we'll go with it. Success is the only thing that'll save
their lives--and ours: we couldn't stand failure in this.  A man can walk to the gates of hell
to do the hardest trick, and he'll come back one great blister and live, if he's done the thing
he set out for; but if he doesn't do it, he falls into the furnace.  He never comes back. 
Dicky, things must be pulled our way, or we go to deep damnation."

Dicky turned a little pale, for there was high nervous excitement in Fielding's words; and
for a moment he found it hard to speak.  He was about to say something, however, when Fielding
continued.

"Norman there,"--he pointed to the deck-cabin, "Norman's the same.  He says it's do or die;
and he looks it.  It isn't like a few fellows besieged by a host.  For in that case you wait
to die, and you fight to the last, and you only have your own lives.  But this is different.
We're fighting to save these people from themselves; and this slow, quiet, deadly work, day
in, day out, in the sickening sun and smell- faugh!  the awful smell in the air--it kills in
the end, if you don't pull your game off.  You know it's true."

His eyes had an eager, almost prayerful look; he was like a child in his simple earnestness.
His fingers moved over the maps on the table, in which were little red and white and yellow
flags, the white flags to mark the towns and villages where they had mastered the disease,
the red flags to mark the new ones attacked, the yellow to indicate those where the disease
was raging.  His fingers touched one of the flags, and he looked down.

"See, D.  Here are two new places attacked to-day.

"I must ride over to Abdallah when Norman goes.  It's all so hopeless!"

"Things will take a turn," rejoined Dicky, with a forced gaiety.  "You needn't ride over to
Abdallah.  I'll go with Norman, and what's more I'll come back here with Mustapha Kali."

"You'll go to the Mudir?" asked Fielding eagerly.  He seemed to set so much store by this particular
business.

"I'll bring the Mudir too, if there's any trouble," said Dicky grimly; though it is possible
he did not mean what he said.

Two hours later Fielding, Dicky, and Norman were in conference, extending their plans of campaign.
Fielding and Norman were eager and nervous, and their hands and faces seemed to have taken
on the arid nature of the desert.  Before they sat down Dicky had put the bottle of whiskey
out of easy reach; for Fielding, under ordinary circumstances the most abstemious of men, had
lately, in his great fatigue and overstrain, unconsciously emptied his glass more often than
was wise for a campaign of long endurance.  Dicky noticed now, as they sat round the table,
that Norman's hand went to the coffee-pot as Fielding's had gone to his glass. What struck
him as odd also was that Fielding seemed to have caught something of Norman's manner.  There
was the same fever in the eyes, though Norman's face was more worn and the eyes more sunken.
He looked like a man that was haunted.  There was, too, a certain air of helplessness about
him, a primitive intensity almost painful.  Dicky saw Fielding respond to this in a curious
way--it was the kind of fever that passes quickly from brain to brain when there is not sound
bodily health commanded by a cool intelligence to insulate it.  Fielding had done the work
of four men for over two months, and, like most large men, his nerves had given in before Dicky's,
who had done six men's work at least, and, by his power of organisation and his labour-saving
intelligence, conserved the work of another fifty.

The three were sitting silent, having arranged certain measures, when Norman sprang to his
feet excitedly and struck the table with his hand.

"It's no use, sir," he said to Fielding, "I'll have to go.  I'm no good. I neglect my duty.
I was to be back at Abdallah at five.  I forgot all about it.  A most important thing.  A load
of fessikh was landed at Minkari, five miles beyond Abdallah.  We've prohibited fessikh.  I
was going to seize it.  .  .  .  It's no good.  It's all so hopeless here."

Dicky knew now that the beginning of the end had come for Norman.  There were only two things
to do: get him away shooting somewhere, or humour him here.  But there was no chance for shooting
till things got very much better.  The authorities in Cairo would never understand, and the
babbling social-military folk would say that they had calmly gone shooting while pretending
to stay the cholera epidemic.  It wouldn't be possible to explain that Norman was in a bad
way, and that it was done to give him half a chance of life.

Fielding also ought to have a few days clear away from this constant pressure and fighting,
and the sounds and the smells of death; but it could not be yet.  Therefore, to humour them
both was the only thing, and Norman's was the worse case.  After all, they had got a system
of sanitary supervision, they had the disease by the throat, and even in Cairo the administration
was waking up a little.  The crisis would soon pass perhaps, if a riot could be stayed and
the natives give up their awful fictions of yellow handkerchiefs, poisoned sweetmeats, deadly
limewash, and all such nonsense.

So Dicky said now, "All right, Norman; come along.  You'll seize that fessikh, and I'll bring
back Mustapha Kali.  We'll work him as he has never worked in his life.  He'll be a living
object-lesson.  We'll have all Upper Egypt on the banks of the Nile waiting to see what happens
to Mustapha."

Dicky laughed, and Fielding responded feebly; but Norman was looking at the hospital with a
look too bright for joy, too intense for despair. 

This was the "Feierabend Haus," the House of Evening Rest, where, somewhat apart from the busy
activity of the great household, those deaconesses whose best strength had been given to faithful
labor in the service could pass the evening hours of life in quiet waiting for the last great
change, while using the experience they had gathered and the strength
still remaining in behalf of the cause they had faithfully served.

Such are the main features of the great establishment that year by
year grew up in this village on the Rhine.

But from this as a center had gradually branched off manifold lines
of service, and many daughter-houses both in Germany and foreign lands.

It was only a year and a half after the home was opened that the first appointment of deaconesses to
work outside of Kaiserswerth was made.

This was an important victory for the new institution. It took place January 21, 1838, on Fliedner's
birthday, when he and his wife escorted two of the sisters to Elberfeld,
where they were to act as trained nurses in the city hospital.

From that time to the present the hospital has continued under the management of the Kaiserswerth
deaconesses.

Soon afterward sisters were sent out to nurse in private families, and in 1839 two more were sent
to superintend the workhouse in Frankfort. As the institution became known there was a constant
demand for superintendents, and matrons for public reformatories, prisons, and charitable establishments.
Between 1846 and 1850 more than sixty deaconesses were at work at twenty-five different stations
outside of the mother-house. About the same time deaconesses began
to work in connection with special churches which called for their
services, having the duties which in England are assigned to those
called "parish deaconesses."
And Dicky knew that presently there would be no time to eat, and then no time to sleep; and
then, the worst!

Dicky had pinned his faith and his friendship to Fielding, and he saw no reason why he should
lose his friend because Madame Cholera was stalking the native villages, driving the fellaheen
before her like sheep to the slaughter.

"Is it a bargain?" he added, as Fielding did not at once reply.  If Fielding would but play
it would take the strain off his mind at times.

"All right, D., I'll see what I can do with it," said Fielding, and with a nod turned to the
map with the little red and white and yellow flags, and began to study it.

He did not notice that one of his crew abaft near the wheel was watching him closely, while
creeping along the railing on the pretence of cleaning it.  Fielding was absorbed in making
notes upon a piece of paper and moving the little flags about.  Now he lit a cigar and began
walking up and down the deck.

The Arab disappeared, but a few minutes afterwards returned.  The deck was empty.  Fielding
had ridden away to the village.  The map was still on the table.  With a frightened face the
Arab peered at it, then going to the side he called down softly, and there came up from the
lower deck a Copt, the sarraf of the village, who could read English fairly.  The Arab pointed
to the map, and the Copt approached cautiously.  A few feet away he tried to read what was
on the map, but, unable to do so, drew closer, pale-faced and knockkneed, and stared at the
map and the little flags.  An instant after he drew back, and turned to the Arab.  "May God
burn his eyes!  He sends the death to the village by moving the flags. May God change him into
a dog to be beaten to death!  The red is to begin, the white flag is for more death, the yellow
is for enough. See--may God cut off his hand!--he has moved the white flag to our village."
He pointed in a trembling fear, half real, half assumed-- for he was of a nation of liars.

During the next half-hour at least a dozen Arabs came to look at the map, but they disappeared
like rats in a hole when, near midnight, Fielding's tall form appeared on the bank above.

It was counted to him as a devil's incantation, the music that he played that night, remembering
his promise to Dicky Donovan.  It was music through which breathed the desperate, troubled,
aching heart and tortured mind of an overworked strong man.  It cried to the night its trouble;
but far over in the Cholera Hospital the sick heard it and turned their faces towards it eagerly.
It pierced the apathy of the dying.  It did more, for it gave Fielding five hours' sleep that
night; and though he waked to see one of his own crew dead on the bank, he tackled the day's
labour with more hope than he had had for a fortnight.

As the day wore on, however, his spirits fell, for on every hand was suspicion, unrest, and
opposition, and his native assistants went sluggishly about their work. Now Severn's banks in
snow are still, And Severn's stream is hushed and pale; The sun shines on the whitened hill,
And glows like summer in the dale; And yet I come, and half in gloom
And half in joy recall thy bloom.

* * * * *

Reader--do you want

SOMETHING NEW FOR DINNER?

It is not necessary to refer to a cook book to know what an excellent fish is the sheep's-head;
you may find it in Noah Webster's large dictionary, where it is described
as "the Sargus Ovis of Mitchell; esteemed delicious food"; or, you
can find it in market.

Mr. Withers was married to a lovely young lady who once worked an entire piano cover with worsted.
They had commenced housekeeping but a few months, when one morning the husband informed his
wife that he should invite a friend to dine with him that day.

Mrs.
Withers was in despair at this announcement, but she smiled and hid
her grief; or at least her grief, in the shape of a Celtic cook, was
at that time not to be seen, being employed in the kitchen, where
she had invited two of her friends to "come in and ate."

Mr. Withers
went down town; his wife then gave directions to the cook, Biddy O'Shaughshenny
by name, to buy a sheep's-head, beef, game, and so forth.

'By the
way, Bridget, have you ever cooked a sheep's-head before?'

'A shape's
hid is it? Then I'm thinking, ma'am, I've cooked the likes of them
minny a time and oft in the owld counthry when I bided with Mister
Maginnis the grate counsillor in Dublin.  All the way from Abdallah Dicky talked to him so, and at
last the only answer Mustapha Kali would make was, "Malaish no matter!"

Mustapha Kali pricked up his ears with hope as he saw the sullen crowds from Kalamoun gathering
on the shore to watch his deportation to the Cholera Hospital; and, as he stepped from the
khiassa, he called out loudly:

"They are all dogs and sons of dogs, and dogs were their grandsires.  No good is in a dog the
offspring of a dog.  Whenever these dogs scratch the ground the dust of poison is in the air,
and we die."

"You are impolite, Mustapha Kali," said Dicky coolly, and offered him a cigarette.

The next three days were the darkest in Dicky Donovan's career.  On the first day there came
word that Norman, overwrought, had shot himself.  On the next, Mustapha Kali in a fit of anger
threw a native policeman into the river, and when his head appeared struck it with a barge-pole,
and the man sank to rise no more.  The three remaining policemen, two of whom were Soudanese,
and true to Dicky, bound him and shut him up in a hut. When that evening Fielding refused to
play, Dicky knew that Norman's fate had taken hold of him, and that he must watch his friend
every minute-- that awful vigilance which kills the watcher in the end.  Dicky said to himself
more than once that day:

              "Christ save us all from a death like this,
               On the reef of Norman's woe!"

But it was not Dicky who saved Fielding.  On the third day the long- deferred riot broke out.
The Copt and the Arab had spread the report that Fielding brought death to the villages by
moving the little flags on his map.  The populace rose.

Fielding was busy with the map at the dreaded moment that hundreds of the villagers appeared
upon the bank and rushed the Amenhotep.  Fielding and Dicky were both armed, but Fielding would
not fire until he saw that his own crew had joined the rioters on the bank.  Then, amid a shower
of missiles, he shot the Arab who had first spread the report about the map and the flags.

Now Dicky and he were joined by Holgate, the Yorkshire engineer of the Amenhotep, and together
the three tried to hold the boat.  Every native had left them.  They were obliged to retreat
aft to the deckcabin. Placing their backs against it, they prepared to die hard.  No one could
reach them from behind, at least.

It was an unequal fight.  All three had received slight wounds, but the blood-letting did them
all good.  Fielding was once more himself; nervous anxiety, unrest, had gone from him.  He
was as cool as a cucumber.  He would not go shipwreck now "on the reef of Norman's woe."  Here
was a better sort of death.  No men ever faced it with quieter minds than did the three.  Every
instant brought it nearer.

All at once there was a cry and a stampede in the rear of the attacking natives.  The crowd
suddenly parted like two waves, and retreated; and Mustapha Kali, almost naked, and supported
by a stolid Soudanese, stood before the three.  He was pallid, his hands and brow were dripping
sweat, and there was a look of death in his eyes.

"I have cholera, effendi!" he cried.  "Take me to Abdallah to die, that I may be buried with
my people and from mine own house."

"Is it not poison?" asked Fielding grimly, yet seeing now a ray of hope in the sickening business.

"It is cholera, effendi.  Take me home to die."

"Very well.  Tell the people so, and I will take you home, and I will bury you with your fathers,"
said Fielding.

Mustapha Kali turned slowly.  "I am sick of cholera," he said as loudly as he could to the
awe-stricken crowd.  "May God not cool my resting- place if it be not so!"

"Tell the people to go to their homes and obey us," said Dicky, putting away his pistol.

"These be good men, I have seen with mine own eyes," said Mustapha hoarsely to the crowd. The
court nodded. It understood that the dumb man had been attacked by two persons.

But who were the two?

Elevating the forefinger of the left hand,
the plaintiff first pointed to its face--or the place most suggestive
of one, and then pressed his own nose flat.

He would have fallen to the ground, but Dicky and the Soudanese caught him and carried him
down to the bank, while the crowd scuttled from the boat, and Fielding made ready to bear the
dying man to Abdallah--a race against death.

Fielding brought Mustapha Kali to Abdallah in time to die there, and buried him with his fathers;
and Dicky stayed behind to cleanse Kalamoun with perchloride and limewash.

The story went abroad and travelled fast, and the words of Mustapha Kali, oft repeated, became
as the speech of a holy man; and the people no longer hid their dead, but brought them to the
Amenhotep.

This was the beginning of better things; the disease was stayed.

And for all the things that these men did--Fielding Bey and Donovan Pasha--they got naught
but an Egyptian ribbon to wear on the breast and a laboured censure from the Administration
for overrunning the budget allowance.

Dicky, however, seemed satisfied, for Fielding's little barque of life had not gone down "On
the reef of Norman's woe." Pre-eminently they must be men of spiritual experience, proven Christians,
"full of the Holy Ghost and of wisdom."

They were also to have practical gifts that would make them efficient
and capable in the duties of every-day life.

1 Tim. iii, 8.

These are some of the qualifications spoken of as belonging to the
diaconate, and are the same in application to either sex.

The woman deacon must, however, besides possessing the above qualities,
be unmarried or a widow. Basha----Pasha.
Bersim----Grass. Bimbashi----Major. Bishareen----A native tribe. Bismillah----In the name of
God. Bowab----A doorkeeper.

Corvee----Forced labour.
Doash----(Literally) Treading.  A ceremony performed on the return of the
         Holy Carpet from Mecca.
Dourha----Maize.

Effendina----Highness. El aadah----The ordinary. El Azhar----The Arab University at Cairo.
Fantasia----Celebration with music, dancing, and processions. Farshoot----The name of a native
tribe. Fatihah----The opening chapter of the Koran, recited at weddings, etc.

Feddan----The most common measure of land--a little less than an acre.
          Also dried hay.
Fellah (plu. fellaheen)----The Egyptian peasant.
Felucca----A small boat, propelled by oars or sails.
Fessikh----Salted fish.
Ghaffirs----Humble village officials.
Ghawdzee----The tribe of public dancing-girls.  A female of this tribe is
            called "Ghazeeyeh," and a man "Ghazee," but the plural
            Ghawazee is generally understood as applying to the female.
Ghimah----The Mahommedan Sunday.

Gippy----Colloquial name for an Egyptian soldier.
Goolah----Porous water-jar of Nile mud.
Hakim----Doctor.
Hanouti----Funeral attendants.
Hari-kari----An Oriental form of suicide.
Hashish----Leaves of hemp.
Inshallah----God willing.
Jibbeh----Long coat or smock, worn by dervishes.
Khedive----The title granted in 1867 by the Sultan of Turkey to the ruler
           of Egypt.
Khiassa----Small boat.
Khowagah----Gentleman.
Koran----The Scriptures of the Mahommedans.
Kourbash----A stick, a whip.

La ilaha illa-llah----There is no God but God. Mafish----Nothing. Magnoon----Fool. Malaish----No
matter. Mamour----A magistrate. Mankalah----A game. Mastaba----A bench. Mejidieh----A Turkish
Order. Modern life shows a strong tendency to organization.

Wherever there are workers in a common cause they are banded together in societies and associations.
It was in accordance with the spirit of the age in which he lived
that Fliedner united his workers in the Rhenish-Westphalian Deaconess
Society, in 1836.

It was a happy inspiration--shall we not say a providential one?--that
furnished a convenient organization for the office under present conditions.


Sarraf----An accountant.
Shadoof----Bucket and pole used by natives for lifting water.
Sha'er----A reciter.  (The singular of Sho'ara, properly signifying a
          poet.)
Sheikh-el-beled----Head of a village.
Shintiyan----Very wide trousers, worn by the women of the middle and
             higher orders.
Sitt----"The Lady."

Tarboosh----Fez or native turban. Tarah----A veil for the head. Ulema----Learned men.

Waled----A boy. Wekeel----A deputy.

Zeriba----A palisade.

