"Who will it be, Mr. Masters, if the gent don't get it?" asked Ribbs from his corner on the
sofa. This was felt to be a pushing question. "How am I to know, Mr. Ribbs?" said the Attorney.
"I didn't make the late squire's will; and if I did you don't suppose I should tell you."

"I'm told that the next is Peter Morton," said Fred Botsey. "He's something in a public office
up in London."

"It won't go to him," said Fred's brother. "That old lady has relations of her own who have
had their mouths open for the last forty years"

"Away from the Mortons altogether!" said Harry. "That would be an awful shame!"

"I don't see what good the Mortons have done this last half century," said the Captain.

"You don't remember the old squire, Captain," said the innkeeper, "and I don't remember him
well. Indeed I was only a little chap when they buried him. But there's that feeling left behind
him to this day, that not a poor man in the country wouldn't be sorry to think that there wasn't
a Morton left among 'em. Of course a hunting gentleman is a good thing."

"About the best thing out," said the Captain.

"But a hunting gentleman isn't everything. I know nothing of the old lady's people,--only this
that none of their money ever came into Dillsborough. I'm all for Reginald Morton. He's my
landlord as it is, and he's a gentleman."

"I hate foreigners coming," said Ribbs.

"'E ain't too old to take it yet," said Harry. Fred Botsey declared that he didn't believe
in men hunting unless they began young. Whereupon Dr. Nupper declared that he had never ridden
over a fence till he was forty-five, and that he was ready now to ride Fred across country
for a new hat. Larry suggested that a man might be a good friend to sport though he didn't
ride much himself; and Runciman again asserted that hunting wasn't everything. Upon the whole
Reginald was the favourite. But the occasion was so special that a little supper was ordered,
and I fear the attorney did not get home till after twelve.

Till the news reached Hoppet Hall that Mrs. Morton had taken herself off to London, there was
great doubt there as to what ought to be done, and even then the difficulty was not altogether
over. Till she was gone neither Lady Ushant nor her nephew would go there, and he could only
declare his purpose of attending the funeral whether he were asked or not. When his aunt again
spoke of the will he desired her with much emphasis not to allude to the subject. "If the property
is to come to me," he said, "anything of good that may be in it cannot be much sweeter by anticipation.
And if it is not I shall only encourage disappointment by thinking of it."

"But it would be such a shame."

"That I deny altogether. It was his own to do as he liked with it. Had he married I should
not have expected it because I am the heir. But, if you please, aunt, do not say a word more
about it."

THE AMERICAN SENATOR.

On the Sunday morning he heard that Mrs. Morton was gone to London, and then he walked over
to Bragton. He found that she had locked and sealed up everything with so much precision that
she must have worked hard at the task from the hour of his death almost to that of her departure.
"She never rested herself all day," said Mrs. Hopkins, "till I thought she would sink from
very weariness." She had gone into every room and opened every drawer, and had had every piece
of plate through her fingers, and then Mrs. Hopkins told him that just as she was departing
she had said that the keys would be given to the lawyer. After that he wandered about the place,
thinking what his life would be should he find himself the owner of Bragton. At this moment
he almost felt that he disliked the place, though there had been times in which he had thought
that he loved it too well. Of one thing he was conscious,--that if Bragton should become his,
it would be his duty to live there. He must move his books, and pipes, and other household
gods from Hoppet Hall and become an English Squire. Would it be too late for him to learn to
ride to hounds? Would it be possible that he should ever succeed in shooting a pheasant, if
he were to study the art patiently? Could he interest himself as to the prevalence or decadence
of ground game? And what must he do with his neighbours? Of course he would have to entertain
Mr. Mainwaring and the other parsons, and perhaps once in the year to ask Lord Rufford to dine
with him. If Lord Rufford came, what on earth would he say to him?

And then there arose another question. Would it not be his duty to marry,---and, if so, whom?
He had been distinctly told that Mary Morton had given her heart to some one, and he certainly
was not the man to ask for the hand of a girl who had not a heart to give. And yet thought
that it would be impossible that he should marry any other person. He spent hours in walking
about the grounds, looking at the garden and belongings which would so probably be his own
within a week, and thinking whether it would be possible that he should bring a mistress to
preside over them. Before he reached home he had made up his mind that only one mistress would
be possible, and that she was beyond his reach.

On the Tuesday he received a scrawl from Mrs. Hopkins with a letter from the lawyer--addressed
to her. The lawyer wrote to say that he would be down on Wednesday evening, would attend the
funeral, and read his client's will after they had performed the ceremony. He went on to add
that in obedience to Mrs. Morton's directions he had invited Mr. Peter Morton to be present
on the occasion. On the Wednesday Reginald again went over, but left before the arrival of
the two gentlemen. On the Thursday he was there early, and of course took upon himself the
duty of chief mourner. Peter Morton was there and showed, in a bewildered way, that he had
been summoned rather to the opening of the will than to the funeral of a man he had never seen.

Then the will was read. There were only two names mentioned in it. John Morton left 5,000 pounds
and his watch and chain and rings to Arabella Trefoil, and everything else of which he was
possessed to his cousin Reginald Morton.

"Upon my word I don't know why they sent for me," said the other cousin, Peter.

"Mrs. Morton seemed to think that you would like to pay a tribute of respect," said the lawyer.
Peter looked at him and went upstairs and packed his portmanteau. The lawyer handed over the
keys to the new squire, and then everything was done.

CHAPTER XI

The New Minister

"Poor old Paragon!" exclaimed Archibald Currie, as he stood with his back to the fire among
his colleagues at the Foreign Office on the day after John Morton's death.

"Poor young Paragon! that's the pity of it," said Mounser Green. "I don't suppose he was turned
thirty, and he was a useful man,--a very useful man. That's the worst of it. He was just one
of those men that the country can't afford to lose, and whom it is so very hard to replace."
Mounser Green was always eloquent as to the needs of the public service, and did really in
his heart of hearts care about his office. "Who is to go to Patagonia, I'm sure I don't know.
Platitude was asking me about it, and I told him that I couldn't name a man."

"Old Platitude always thinks that the world is coming to an end," said Currie. "There are as
good fish in the sea as ever were caught"

"Who is there? Monsoon won't go, even if they ask him. The Paragon was just the fellow for
it. He had his heart in the work. An immense deal depends on what sort of man we have in Patagonia
at the present moment. If Paraguay gets the better of the Patagonese all Brazil will be in
a ferment, and you know how that kind of thing spreads among half-caste Spaniards and Portuguese.
Nobody can interfere but the British Minister. When I suggested Morton I knew I had the right
man if he'd only take it"

"And now he has gone and died!" said Hoffmann.

"And now he has gone and died," continued Mounser Green. "'I never nursed a dear gazelle,'
and all the rest of it. Poor Paragon! I fear he was a little cut about Miss Trefoil."

"She was down with him the day before he died," said young Glossop. "I happen to know that"

"It was before he thought of going to Patagonia that she was at Bragton," said Currie.

"That's all you know about it, old fellow," said the indignant young one. "She was there a
second time, just before his death. I had it from Lady Penwether who was in the neighbourhood."

"My dear little boy," said Mounser Green, "that was exactly what was likely to happen, and
he yet may have broken his heart. I have seen a good deal of the lady lately, and under no
circumstances would she have married him. When he accepted the mission that at any rate was
all over."

"The Rufford affair had begun before that," said Hoffmann.

"The Rufford affair as you call it," said Glossop, "was no affair at all."

"What do you mean by that?" asked Currie.

"I mean. that Rufford was never engaged to her,--not for an instant," said the lad, urgent
in spreading the lesson which he had received from his cousin. "It was all a dead take-in."

"Who was taken in?" asked Mounser Green.

"Well;--nobody was taken in as it happened. But I suppose there can't be a doubt that she tried
her best to catch him, and that the Duke and Duchess and Mistletoe, and old Trefoil, all backed
her up. It was a regular plant. The only thing is, it didn't come off."

"Look here, young shaver;"--this was Mounser Green again; "when you speak of a young lady do
you be a little more discreet"

"But didn't she do it, Green?"

"That's more than you or I can tell. If you want to know what I think, I believe he paid her
a great deal of attention and then behaved very badly to her."

"He didn't behave badly at all," said young Glossop.

"My dear boy, when you are as old as I am, you will have learned how very hard it is to know
everything. I only say what I believe, and perhaps I may have better ground for believing than
you. He certainly paid her a great deal of attention, and then her friends,--especially the
Duchess,--went to work."

"They've wanted to get her off their hands these six or eight years," said Currie.

"That's nonsense again," continued the new advocate, "for there is no doubt she might have
married Morton all the time had she pleased."

"Yes;--but Rufford!--a fellow with sixty thousand a year!" said Glossop.

"About a third of that would be nearer the mark, Glossy. Take my word for it, you don't know
everything yet, though you have so many advantages." After that Mounser Green retreated to
his own room with a look and tone as though he were angry.

"What makes him so ferocious about it?" asked Glossop when the door was shut.

"You are always putting your foot in it," said Currie. "I kept on winking to you but it was
no good. He sees her almost every day now. She's staying with old Mrs. Green in Portugal Street.
There has been some break up between her and her mother, and old Mrs. Green has taken her in.
There's some sort of relationship. Mounser is the old woman's nephew, and she is aunt by marriage
to the Connop Greens down in Hampshire, and Mrs. Connop Green is first cousin to Lady Augustus."

"If Dick's sister married Tom's brother what relation would Dick be to Tom's mother? That's
the kind of thing, isn't it?" suggested Hoffmann.

"At any rate there she is, and Mounser sees her every day."

"It don't make any difference about Rufford," said young Glossop stoutly.

All this happened before the will had been declared,--when Arabella did not dream that she
was an heiress. A day or two afterwards she received a letter from the lawyer, telling her
of her good fortune, and informing her that the trinkets would be given up to her and the money
paid,--short of legacy duty,--whenever she would fix a time and place. The news almost stunned
her. There was a moment in which she thought that she was bound to reject this money, as she
had rejected that tendered to her by the other man. Poor as she was, greedy as she was, alive
as she was to the necessity of doing something for herself,--still this legacy was to her at
first bitter rather than sweet. She had never treated any man so ill as she had treated this
man; and it was thus that he punished her! She was alive to the feeling that he had always
been true to her. In her intercourse with other men there had been generally a battle carried
on with some fairness. Diamond had striven to cut diamond. But here the dishonesty had all
been on one side, and she was aware that it had been so. In her later affair with Lord Rufford,
she really did think that she had been ill used; but she was quite alive to the fact that her
treatment of John Morton had been abominable. The one man, in order that he might escape without
further trouble, had in the grossest manner, sent to her the offer of a bribe. The other,--in
regard to whose end her hard heart was touched, even her conscience seared, had named her in
his will as though his affection was unimpaired. Of course she took the money, but she took
it with inward groans. She took the money and the trinkets, and the matter was all arranged
for her by Mounser Green.

"So after all the Paragon left her whatever he could leave," said Currie in the same room at
the Foreign Office. A week had passed since the last conversation, and at this moment Mounser
Green was not in the room.

"Oh, dear no," said young Glossy. "She doesn't have Bragton. That goes to his cousin."

"That was entailed, Glossy, my boy."

"Not a bit of it. Everybody thought he would leave the place to another Morton, a fellow he'd
never seen, in one of those Somerset House Offices. He and this fellow who is to have it, were
enemies,--but he wouldn't put it out of the right line. It's all very well for Mounser to be
down on me, but I do happen to know what goes on in that country. She gets a pot of money,
and no end of family jewels; but he didn't leave her the estate as he might have done."

At that moment Mounser Green came into the room. It was rather later than usual, being past
one o'clock; and he looked as though he were flurried. He didn't speak for a few minutes, but
stood before the fire smoking a cigar. And there was a general silence, there being now a feeling
among them that Arabella Trefoil was not to be talked about in the old way before Mounser Green.
At last he spoke himself. "I suppose you haven't heard who is to go to Patagonia after all?"

"Is it settled?" asked Currie.

"Anybody we know?" asked Hoffmann.

"I hope it's no d-- outsider," said the too energetic Glossop.

"It is settled; and it is somebody you know; and it is not a d-- outsider; unless, indeed,
he may be considered to be an outsider in reference to that branch of the service."

"It's some consul," said Currie. "Backstairs from Panama, I'll bet a crown."

"It isn't Backstairs, it isn't a consul. Gentlemen, get out your pocket-handkerchiefs. Mounser
Green has consented to be expatriated for the good of his country."

"You going to Patagonia!" said Currie. "You're chaffing," said Glossop. "I never was so shot
in my life," said Hoffmann.

"It's true, my dear boys."

"I never was so sorry for anything in all my born days," said Glossop, almost crying. "Why
on earth should you go to Patagonia?"

"Patagonia!" ejaculated Currie. "What will you do in Patagonia?"

"It's an opening, my dear fellow," said Mounser Green leaning affectionately on Glossop's shoulder.
"What should I do by remaining here? When Drummond asked me I saw he wanted me to go. They
don't forget that kind of thing." At that moment a messenger opened the door, and the Senator
Gotobed, almost without being announced, entered the room. He had become so intimate of late
at the Foreign Office, and his visits were so frequent, that he was almost able to dispense
with the assistance of any messenger. Perhaps Mounser Green and his colleagues were a little
tired of him; but yet, after their fashion, they were always civil to him, and remembered,
as they were bound to do, that he was one of the leading politicians of a great nation. "I
have secured the hall," he said at once, as though aware that no news could be so important
as the news he thus conveyed.

"Have you indeed?" said Currie.

"Secured it for the fifteenth. Now the question is-"

"What do you think," said Glossop, interrupting him without the slightest hesitation. "Mounser
Green is going to Patagonia, in place of the poor Paragon."

"I beg to congratulate Mr. Green with all my heart."

"By George I don't," said the juvenile clerk. "Fancy congratulating a fellow on going to Patagonia!
It's what I call an awful sell for everybody."

"But as I was saying I have the hall for the fifteenth."

"You mean to lecture then after all," said Green.

"Certainly I do, I am not going to be deterred from doing my duty because I am told there is
a little danger. What I want to know is whether I can depend on having a staff of policemen."

"Of course there will be police," said Green.

"But I mean some extra strength. I don't mind for myself, but I should be so unhappy if there
were anything of a commotion." Then he was assured that the officers of the police force would
look to that, and was assured also that Mounser Green and the other gentlemen in the room would
certainly attend the lecture. "I don't suppose I shall be gone by that time," said Mounser
Green in a melancholy tone of voice.

CHAPTER XII

"I must go"

Rufford, March 5th. 

Robby watched them, curled up on the window bench, one foot tucked
under him, his face more sober each minute.

He was sure his mother would shake her head sadly were he to request permission to join the
joyous group of his fellows. Nor did he care--very much--to go out. The recollection of sin and
consequent suffering was too fresh.

Nettie, the grown-up sister, had a visitor, and mamma had joined the
girls, and was chatting cheerfully with them--not at all as she looked
at the cowering little liar under the counterpane up-stairs.

"Mamma," suddenly exclaimed the daughter, "there are old Mr. and Mrs.
Bartol!

                    I do believe you
                         are to be honored by a call from them."

"I sincerely hope not," was the answer. "Papa and I had planned a walk on this lovely evening,
and our friends the Bartols are given to long sittings."

"Besides being insufferably prosy," interpolated plain-spoken Nettie. "They are coming in. Milly,
you and I can run away!" and they fluttered through the back-parlor door.

Mamma's face was overcast with genuine vexation. Her sigh, "How provoking!" reached the alcoved
auditor. Then she advanced to meet a fat old lady, and a fatter, bald old gentleman.

"Is this really you, Mr. Bartol? It is an age since I have met you. I am happy to see you both.
Pray be seated."

"Oh, good gracious!" said Robby, under his breath, sinking back into
his corner, actually sick and trembling.

When he could listen and think again, papa had been sent for, and Mr. Bartol was apologizing
for mingling business with a friendly visit. He wanted to buy a house owned by Mr. Wilcox, situated
near his--Mr. Bartol's--home. The play of negotiation, of parry and thrust, was courteous, as
befitted actors and scene, but Mr. Bartol's intention to buy cheap, and his host's desire to sell
dear, were palpable to the unworldly eavesdropper.

"I am sorry you
hold the property at so high a figure!" finally remarked Mr. Bartol,
rising to take leave. "I must consult the friend who commissioned
me to make inquiries, before I can say anything definite."

Mr. Wilcox
was the impersonation of smiling indifference. "The truth is, my dear
sir, I do not care to sell at all. The property is rising in value,
and I may remove to that part of the city myself next year. I should
lose on it were I to take less than the price I have named."

When
the guests had gone, Mr. Wilcox turned laughingly to his wife:

"Well,
my love, you have lost your walk, but your husband has made four thousand
dollars--clear!"

"You think he will buy the place, then?"

"I know
he will! He wants to settle his daughter there. She is to be married
next month. I had a hint to that effect some days since. I had the
game in my hands from the first. He promised himself that nothing should induce him to encounter it. Therefore
he wrote the above letter.

Arabella, when she received it, had ceased to care very much about the insult of the offer.
She had then quarrelled with her mother, and had insisted on some separation even without any
arrangement as to funds. Requiring some confidant, she had told a great deal, though not quite
all, to Mrs. Connop Green, and that lady had passed her on for a while to her husband's aunt
in London. At this time she had heard nothing of John Morton's will, and had perhaps thought
with some tender regret of the munificence of her other lover, which she had scorned. But she
was still intent on doing something. The fury of her despair was still on her, so that she
could not weigh the injury she might do herself against some possible gratification to her
wounded spirit. Up to this moment she had formed no future hope. At this epoch she had no string
to her bow. John Morton was dead; and she had absolutely wept for him in solitude, though she
had certainly never loved him. Nor did she love Lord Rufford. As far as she knew how to define
her feelings, she thought that she hated him. But she told herself hourly that she had not
done with him. She was instigated by the true feminine Medea feeling that she would find some
way to wring his heart,-- even though in the process she might suffer twice as much as he did.
She had convinced herself that in this instance he was the offender. "Painful to both of us!"
No doubt! But because it would be painful to him, it should be exacted. Though he was a coward
and would fain shirk such pain, she could be brave enough. Even though she should be driven
to catch him by the arm in the open street, she would have it out with him. He was a liar and
a coward, and she would, at any rate, have the satisfaction of telling him so.

She thought much about it before she could resolve on what she would do. She could not ask
old Mrs. Green to help her. Mrs. Green was a kind old woman, who had lived much in the world,
and would wish to see much of it still, had age allowed her. Arabella Trefoil was at any rate
the niece of a Duke, and the Duke, in this affair with Lord Rufford, had taken his niece's
part. She opened her house and as much of her heart as was left to Arabella, and was ready
to mourn with her over the wicked lord. She could sympathise with her too, as to the iniquities
of her mother, whom none of the Greens loved. But she would have been frightened by any proposition
as to Medean vengeance.

In these days,--still winter days, and not open to much feminine gaiety in London, even if,
in the present constitution of her circumstances, gaiety would have come in her way,--in these
days the hours in her life which interested her most, were those in which Mr. Mounser Green
was dutifully respectful to his aunt. Patagonia had not yet presented itself to him. Some four
or five hundred a year, which the old lady had at her own disposal, had for years past contributed
to Mounser's ideas of duty. And now Arabella's presence at the small house in Portugal Street
certainly added a new zest to those ideas. The niece of the Duke of Mayfair, and the rejected
of Lord Rufford, was at the present moment an interesting young woman in Mounser Green's world.
There were many who thought that she had been ill-used. Had she succeeded, all the world would
have pitied Lord Rufford; but as he had escaped, there was a strong party for the lady. And
gradually Mounser Green, who some weeks ago had not thought very much of her, became one of
the party. She had brought her maid with her; and when she found that Mounser Green came to
the house every evening, either before or after dinner, she had recourse to her accustomed
lures. She would sit quiet, dejected, almost broken-hearted in the corner of a sofa; but when
he spoke to her she would come to life and raise her eyes,--not ignoring the recognised dejection
of her jilted position, not pretending to this minor stag of six tines that she was a sprightly
unwooed young fawn, fresh out of the forest,-- almost asking him to weep with her, and playing
her accustomed lures, though in a part which she had not hitherto filled.

But still she was resolved that her Jason should not as yet be quit of his Medea. So she made
her plot. She would herself go down to Rufford and force her way into her late lover's presence
in spite of all obstacles. It was possible that she should do this and get back to London the
same day,--but, to do so, she must leave London by an early train at 7 A.M., stay seven or
eight hours at Rufford, and reach the London station at 10 P.M. For such a journey there must
be some valid excuse made to Mrs. Green. There must be some necessity shown for such a journey.
She would declare that a meeting was necessary with her mother, and that her mother was at
any town she chose to name at the requisite distance from London. In this way she might start
with her maid before daylight, and get back after dark, and have the meeting with her mother--or
with Lord Rufford as the case might be. But Mounser Green knew very well that Lady Augustus
was in Orchard Street, and knew also that Arabella was determined not to see her mother. And
if she declared her purpose, without a caution to Mounser Green, the old woman would tell her
nephew, and the nephew would unwittingly expose the deceit. It was necessary therefore that
she should admit Mounser Green to, at any rate, half a confidence. This she did. "Don't ask
me any questions," she said. "I know I can trust you. I must be out of town the whole day,
and perhaps the next. And your aunt must not know why I am going or where. You will help me?"
Of course he said that he would help her; and the lie, with a vast accompaniment of little
lies, was told. There must be a meeting on business matters between her and her mother, and
her mother was now in the neighbourhood of Birmingham. This was the lie told to Mrs. Green.
She would go down, and, if possible, be back on the same day. She would take her maid with
her. She thought that in such a matter as that she could trust her maid, and was in truth afraid
to travel alone.

"I will come in the morning and take Miss Trefoil to the station," said Mounser, "and will
meet her in the evening."` And so the matter was arranged.

The journey was not without its drawbacks and almost its perils. Summer or winter Arabella
Trefoil was seldom out of bed before nine. It was incumbent on her now to get up on a cold
March morning,--when the lion had not as yet made way for the lamb,--at half-past five. That
itself seemed to be all but impossible to her. Nevertheless she was ready and had tried to
swallow half a cup of tea, when Mounser Green came to the door with a cab a little after six.
She had endeavoured to dispense with this new friend's attendance, but he had insisted, assuring
her that without some such aid no cab would be forthcoming. She had not told him and did not
intend that he should know to what station she was going. "You begged me to ask no questions,"
he said when he was in the cab with her, the maid having been induced most unwillingly to seat
herself with the cabman on the box,--"and I have obeyed you. But I wish I knew how I could
help you."

"You have helped me, and you are helping me. But do not ask anything more."

"Will you be angry with me if I say that I fear you are intending something rash?"

"Of course I am. How could it be otherwise with me? Don't you think there are turns in a person's
life when she must do something rash. Think of yourself. If everybody crushed you; if you were
ill-treated beyond all belief; if the very people who ought to trust you doubted you, wouldn't
you turn upon somebody and rend him?"

"Are you going to rend anybody?"

"I do not know as yet."

"I wish you would let me go down with you."

"No; that you certainly cannot. You must not come even into the station with me. You have been
very good to me. You will not now turn against me."

"I certainly will do nothing--but what you tell me."

"Then here we are,--and now you must go. Jane can carry my hand-bag and cloak. If you choose
to come in the evening at ten it will be an additional favour."

"I certainly will do so. But Miss Trefoil, one word." They were now standing under cover of
the portico in front of the railway station, into which he was not to be allowed to enter.
"What I fear is this; that in your first anger you may be tempted to do something which may
be injurious to your prospects in life"

"I have no prospects in life, Mr. Green."

"Ah;--that is just it. There are for most of us moments of unhappiness in which we are tempted
by our misery to think that we are relieved at any rate from the burden of caution, because
nothing that can occur to us can make us worse than we are."

"Nothing can make me worse than I am."

"But in a few months or weeks," continued Mounser Green, bringing up in his benevolence all
the wisdom of his experience, "we have got a new footing amidst our troubles, and then we may
find how terrible is the injury which our own indiscretion has brought on us. I do not want
to ask any questions, but--it might be so much better that you should abandon your intention,
and go back with me."

She seemed to be almost undecided for a moment as she thought over his words. But she remembered
her pledge to herself that Lord Rufford should find that she had not done with him yet. "I
must go," she said in a hoarse voice.

"If you must-"

"I must go. I have no way out of it. Good-bye, Mr. Green; I cannot tell you how much obliged
to you I am." Then he turned back and she went into the station and took two first-class tickets
for Rufford. At that moment Lord Rufford was turning himself comfortably in his bed. How would
he have sprung up, and how would he have fled, had he known the evil that was coming upon him!
This happened on a Thursday, a day on which, as Arabella knew, the U.R.U. did not go out;--the
very Thursday on which John Morton was buried and the will was read at Bragton.

She was fully determined to speak her mind to the man and to be checked by no feminine squeamishness.
She would speak her mind to him if she could force her way into his presence. And in doing
this she would be debarred by no etiquette. It might be that she would fail, that he would
lack the courage to see her, and would run away, even before all his servants, when he should
hear who was standing in his hall. But if he did so she would try again, even though she should
have to ride out into the hunting-field after him. Face to face she would tell him that he
was a liar and a slanderer and no gentleman, though she should have to run round the world
to catch him. When she reached Rufford she went to the town and ordered breakfast and a carriage.
As soon as she had eaten the meal she desired the driver in a clear voice to take her to Rufford
Hall. Was her maid to go with her? No. She would be back soon, and her maid would wait there
till she had returned.

CHAPTER XIII

In the Park

This thing that she was doing required an infinite amount of pluck,--of that sort of hardihood
which we may not quite call courage, but which in a world well provided with policemen is infinitely
more useful than courage. Lord Rufford himself was endowed with all the ordinary bravery of
an Englishman, but he could have flown as soon as run into a lion's den as Arabella was doing.
She had learned that Lady Penwether and Miss Penge were both at Rufford Hall, and understood
well the difficulty there would be in explaining her conduct should she find herself in their
presence. And there were all the servants there to stare at her, and the probability that she
might be shown to the door and told that no one there would speak to her. She saw it all before
her, and knew how bitter it might be; but her heart was big enough to carry her through it.
She was dressed very simply, but still by no means dowdily, in a black silk dress, and though
she wore a thick veil when she got out of the fly and rang the door bell, she had been at some
pains with her hair before she left the inn. Her purpose was revenge; but still she had an
eye to the possible chance,--the chance barely possible of bringing the man to submit.

When the door was opened she raised her veil and asked for Lord Rufford; but as she did so
she walked on through the broad passage which led from the front door into a wide central space
which they called the billiard-room but which really was the hall of the house. This she did
as a manifesto that she did not mean to leave the house because she might be told that he was
out or could not be seen, or that he was engaged. It was then nearly one o'clock, and no doubt
he would be there for luncheon. Of course he might be in truth away from home, but she must
do her best to judge of that by the servant's manner. The man knew her well, and not improbably
had heard something of his master's danger. He was, however, very respectful and told her that
his lordship was out in the grounds;-- but that Lady Penwether was in the drawing-room. Then
a sudden thought struck her, and she asked the man whether he would show her in what part of
the grounds she might find Lord Rufford. Upon that he took her to the front door and pointing
across the park to a belt of trees, showed her three or four men standing round some piece
of work. He believed, he said, that one of those men was his lordship. 

It came at length from her husband's lips. The answer was only a straw to grasp at.

"He is in a very critical state, indeed. If I had been at home when he was first taken ill I
think the fever would not have reached such a height. But everything almost depends on the
first steps.

We must do what we can now to make up for lost hours."

But all that the best medical skill could do proved useless. The little sufferer lingered through
the long night watch, and when the morning dawned seemed once more
to know them all.

"My mamma," were the first words which fell from his lips, sending a thrill of joy to all their
hearts. It was bliss to see the smile of recognition light once more those sweet blue eyes,
and the parents grasped each other's hand in silent joy. The old physician alone looked grave and
sorrowful. The little light was fast fading out, and this was its dying flicker.

"Mamma, please take Bertie," said the little one, holding up the dimpled
hands.

Very tenderly was he lifted up and laid in her arms.

"Good night, papa, it's most dark now; Bertie is going to sleep."

His mother's tearful face bent over him, and as the strange hand of Death was laid upon his heart-strings
he clasped her closely about the neck, as if she were a refuge from every danger.

They took the little one gently from her arms and laid him on his couch again. Her husband could
not even strive to comfort her. He saw the joy and pride of his existence, the heir of his name
and fortune, around whom so many fair hopes clustered, "taken away by a stroke," and his soul
seemed crushed within him. He bowed his head upon his hands, and, regardless of other eyes, the
proud man groaned, and sobbed, and wept as never in his life he had
done before. Both were too deeply stricken to utter words of comfort.
Clara felt her bleeding heart torn from her bosom. Yet no tears came
to her relief. Her brain seemed bursting with the pressure upon it.
Where was the sustaining power of boasted philosophy in this hour
of darkness?

Ah, when the afflictions of life come home to "the bone
and marrow of our own households" they are far different to us from
those which concern only our neighbors. The nearer she drew to him the slower became her pace, and more majestic. Her veil
was well thrown back, and her head was raised in the air. She knew these little tricks of deportment
and could carry herself like a queen. He had taken a moment or two to consider. Should he fly?
It was possible. He might vault over a railed fence in among the trees, at a spot not ten yards
from her, and then it would be impossible that she should run him down. He might have done
it had not the men been there to see it. As it was he left them in the other direction and
came forward to meet her. He tried to smile pleasantly as he spoke to her. "So I see that you
would not take my advice," he said.

"Neither your advice nor your money, my lord."

"Ah,--I was so sorry about that! But, indeed, indeed,--the fault was not mine."

"They were your figures that I saw upon the paper, and by your orders, no doubt, that the lawyer
acted. But I have not come to say much of that. You meant I suppose to be gracious."

"I meant to be--good-natured."

"I daresay. You were willing enough to give away what you did not want. But there must be more
between us than any question of money. Lord Rufford you have treated me most shamefully."

"I hope not. I think not."

"And you yourself must be well aware of it,--quite as well aware of it as I am. You have thrown
me over and absolutely destroyed me;-- and why?" He shrugged his shoulders. "Because you have
been afraid of others; because your sister has told you that you were mistaken in your choice.
The women around you have been too many for you, and have not allowed you to dispose of your
hand, and your name, and your property as you pleased. I defy you to say that this was not
your sister's doing." He was too much astounded to contradict her rapidly, and then she passed
on, not choosing to give him time for contradiction. "Will you have the hardihood to say that
you did not love me?" Then she paused thinking that he would not dare to contradict her then,
feeling that in that she was on strong ground. "Were you lying when you told me that you did?
What did you mean when I was in your arms up in the house there? What did you intend me to
think that you meant?" Then she stopped, standing well in front of him, and looking fixedly
into his face.

This was the very thing that he had feared. Lord Augustus had been a trouble. The Duke's letter
had been a trouble. Lady Augustus had been a trouble; and Sir George's sermons had been troublesome.
But what were they all when compared to this? How is it possible that a man should tell a girl
that he has not loved her, when he has embraced her again and again? He may know it, and she
may know it;--and each may know that the other knows it;--but to say that he does not and did
not then love her is beyond the scope of his audacity,--unless he be a heartless Nero. "No
one can grieve about this so much as I do," he said weakly.

"Cannot I grieve more, do you think,--I who told all my relatives that I was to become your
wife, and was justified in so telling them? Was I not justified?"

"I think not."

"You think not! What did you mean then? What were you thinking of when we were coming back
in the carriage from Stamford,--when with your arms round me you swore that you loved me better
than all the world? Is that true? Did you so swear?" What a question for a man to have to answer!
It was becoming clear to him that there was nothing for him but to endure and be silent. Even
to this interview the gods would at last give an end. The hour would pass, though, alas, so
slowly, and she could not expect that he should stand there to be rated much after the accustomed
time for feeding. "You acknowledge that, and do you dare to say that I had no right to tell
my friends?"

There was a moment in which he thought it was almost a pity that he had not married her. She
was very beautiful in her present form,-- more beautiful he thought than ever. She was the
niece of a Duke, and certainly a very clever woman. He had not wanted money and why shouldn't
he have married her? As for hunting him,--that was a matter of course. He was as much born
and bred to be hunted as a fox. He could not do it now as he had put too much power into the
hands of the Penwethers, but he almost wished that he had. "I never intended it," he said.

"What did you intend? After what has occurred I suppose I have a right to ask such a question.
I have made a somewhat unpleasant journey to-day, all alone, on purpose to ask that question.
What did you intend?" In his great annoyance he struck his shovel angrily against the ground.
"And I will not leave you till I get an answer to the question. What did you intend, Lord Rufford?"
There was nothing for him but silence and a gradual progress back towards the house.

But from the latter resource she cut him off for a time. "You will do me the favour to remain
with me here till this conversation is ended. You cannot refuse me so slight a request as that,
seeing the trouble to which you have put me. I never saw a man so forgetful of words. You cannot
speak. Have you no excuse to offer, not a word to say in explanation--of conduct so black that
I don't think here in England I ever heard a case to equal it? If your sister had been treated so!"

"It would have been impossible"

"I believe it. Her cautious nature would have trusted no man as I trusted you. Her lips, doubtless,
were never unfrozen till the settlements had been signed. With her it was a matter of bargain,
not of love. I can well believe that."

"I will not talk about my sister."

"It seems to me, Lord Rufford, that you object to talk about anything. You certainly have been
very uncommunicative with reference to yourself. Were you lying when you told me that you loved
me?"

"No."

"Did I lie when I told the Duchess that you had promised me your love? Did I lie when I told
my mother that in these days a man does not always mention marriage when he asks a girl to
be his wife? You said you loved me, and I believed you, and the rest was a thing of course.
And you meant it. You know you meant it. When you held me in your arms in the carriage you
know you meant me to suppose that it would always be so. Then the fear of your sister came
upon you, and of your sister's husband,--and you ran away! I wonder whether you think yourself
a man!" And yet she felt that she had not hit him yet. He was wretched enough; and she could
see that he was wretched; but the wretchedness would pass away as soon as she was gone. How
could she stab him so that the wound would remain? With what virus could she poison her arrow,
so that the agony might be prolonged. "And such a coward too! I began to suspect it when you
started that night from Mistletoe,--though I did not think then that you could be all mean,
all cowardly. From that day to this, you have not dared to speak a word of truth. Every word
has been a falsehood."

"By heavens, no."

"Every word a falsehood! and I, a lady,--a lady whom you have so deeply injured, whose cruel
injury even you have not the face to deny,--am forced by your cowardice to come to you here,
because you have not dared to come out to meet me. Throughout the whole of that district, the lower classes of the inhabitants
scarcely use any other beverage.

Vines, as I have already had occasion to mention, were certainly
cultivated, in early times, farther to the north than they are at
present.

The same proofs exist of vineyards in the vicinity of Caen and Lisieux, as at Jumieges. Indeed,
towards the close of the last century, there was still a vineyard at Argence, only four miles
south-east of Caen; and a kind of white wine was made there, which was known by the name of
Vin Huet.
 Then she turned round and saw Sir George Penwether standing close to them.

Lord Rufford had seen him approaching for some time, and had made one or two futile attempts
to meet him. Arabella's back had been turned to the house, and she had not heard the steps
or observed the direction of her companion's eyes. He came so near before he was seen that
he heard her concluding words. Then Lord Rufford with a ghastly attempt at pleasantry introduced
them. "George," he said, "I do not think you know Miss Trefoil. Sir George Penwether; Miss
Trefoil."

The interview had been watched from the house and the husband had been sent down by his wife
to mitigate the purgatory which she knew that her brother must be enduring. "My wife," said
Sir George, "has sent me to ask Miss Trefoil whether she will not come into lunch."

"I believe it is Lord Rufford's house," said Arabella.

"If Miss Trefoil's frame of mind will allow her to sit at table with me I shall be proud to
see her," said Lord Rufford.

"Miss Trefoil's frame of mind will not allow her to eat or to drink with such a dastard," said
she turning away in the direction of the park gates. "Perhaps, Sir George, you will be kind
enough to direct the man who brought me here to pick me up at the lodge." And so she walked
away--a mile across the park,--neither of them caring to follow her.

It seemed to her as she stood at the lodge gate, having obstinately refused to enter the house,
to be an eternity before the fly came to her. When it did come she felt as though her strength
would barely enable her to climb into it. And when she was there she wept, with bitter throbbing
woe, all the way to Rufford. It was over now at any rate. Now there was not a possible chance
on which a gleam of hope might be made to settle. And how handsome he was, and how beautiful
the place, and how perfect would have been the triumph could she have achieved it! One more
word,--one other pressure of the hand in the post-chaise might have done it! Had he really
promised her marriage she did not even now think that he would have gone back from his word.
If that heavy stupid duke would have spoken to him that night at Mistletoe, all would have
been well! But now,--now there was nothing for her but weeping and gnashing of teeth. He was
gone, and poor Morton was gone; and all those others, whose memories rose like ghosts before
her;--they were all gone. And she wept as she thought that she might perhaps have made a better
use of the gifts which Providence had put in her way.

When Mounser Green met her at the station she was beyond measure weary. Through the whole journey
she had been struggling to restrain her sobs so that her maid should neither hear nor see them.
"Don't mind me, Mr. Green; I am only tired,--so tired," she said as she got into the carriage
which he had brought.

He had with him a long, formal-looking letter addressed to herself. But she was too weary to
open it that night. It was the letter conveying the tidings of the legacy which Morton had
made in her favour.

CHAPTER XIV

Lord Rufford's Model Farm

At this time Senator Gotobed was paying a second visit to Rufford Hall. In the matter of Goarly
and Scrobby he had never given way an inch. He was still strongly of opinion that a gentleman's
pheasants had no right to eat his neighbour's corn, and that if damage were admitted, the person
committing the injury should not take upon himself to assess the damage. He also thought,--and
very often declared his thoughts,--that Goarly was justified in shooting not only foxes but
hounds also when they came upon his property, and in moments of excitement had gone so far
as to say that not even horses should be held sacred. He had, however, lately been driven to
admit that Goarly himself was not all that a man should be, and that Mrs. Goarly's goose was
an impostor. It was the theory,--the principle for which he combated, declaring that the evil
condition of the man himself was due to the evil institutions among which he had been reared.
By degrees evidence had been obtained of Scrobby's guilt in the matter of the red herrings,
and he was to be tried for the offence of putting down poison. Goarly was to be the principal
witness against his brother conspirator. Lord Rufford, instigated by his brother-in-law, and
liking the spirit of the man, had invited the Senator to stay at the Hall while the case was
being tried at the Rufford Quarter Sessions. I am afraid the invitation was given in a spirit
of triumph over the Senator rather than with genuine hospitality. It was thought well that
the American should be made to see in public the degradation of the abject creature with whom
he had sympathised. Perhaps there were some who thought that in this way they would get the
Senator's neck under their heels. If there were such they were likely to be mistaken, as the
Senator was not a man prone to submit himself to such treatment.

He was seated at table with Lady Penwether and Miss Penge when Lord Rufford and his brother-in-law
came into the room, after parting with Miss Trefoil in the manner described in the last chapter.
Lady Penwether had watched their unwelcome visitor as she took her way across the park and
had whispered something to Miss Penge. Miss Penge understood the matter thoroughly, and would
not herself have made the slightest allusion to the other young lady. Had the Senator not been
there the two gentlemen would have been allowed to take their places without a word on the
subject. But the Senator had a marvellous gift of saying awkward things and would never be
reticent. He stood for a while at the window in the drawing-room before he went across the
hall, and even took up a pair of field-glasses to scrutinise the lady; and when they were all
present he asked whether that was not Miss Trefoil whom he had seen down by the new fence.
Lady Penwether, without seeming to look about her, did look about her for a few seconds to
see whether the question might be allowed to die away unanswered. Huet is of opinion, that the use of
cider was first introduced into Neustria by the Normans, who had
learned it of the Biscayans, as these latter had done from the inhabitants
of the northern coast of Africa.

We did not find the Norman cider at all palatable: it is extremely
sour, hard, and austere.

The inhabitants, however, say that this is not its natural character,
but is attributable to the late unfavorable seasons, which have prevented
the fruit from ripening properly.--The apple-tree and pear-tree in
Normandy, far from being ugly, and distorted, and stunted in their
growth, as is commonly seen in England, are trees of great beauty,
and of extreme luxuriance, both in foliage and ramification.



"We should have seen him back in Washington, Sir. Whenever you have anything good in diplomacy
you generally send him to us. Poor young lady! Was she talking about him?"

"Not particularly," said his lordship.

"She must have remembered that when she was last here he was of the party, and it was but a
few weeks ago,--only a little before Christmas. He struck me as being cold in his manner as
an affianced lover. Was not that your idea, Lady Penwether?"

"I don't think I observed him especially."

"I have reason to believe that he was much attached to her. She could be sprightly enough;
but at times there seemed to come a cold melancholy upon her too. It is I fancy so with most
of your English ladies. Miss Trefoil always gave me the idea of being a good type of the English
aristocracy." Lady Penwether and Miss Penge drew themselves up very stiffly. "You admired her,
I think, my Lord."

"Very much indeed," said Lord Rufford, filling his mouth with pigeon-pie as he spoke, and not
lifting his eyes from his plate.

"Will she be back to dinner?"

"Oh dear no," said Lady Penwether. There was something in her tone which at last startled the
Senator into perceiving that Miss Trefoil was not popular at Rufford Hall.

"She only came for a morning call," said Lord Rufford.

"Poor young woman. She has lost her husband, and, I am afraid, now has lost her friends also.
I am told that she is not well off;--and from what I see and hear, I fancy that here in England
a young lady without a dowry cannot easily replace a lover. I suppose, too, Miss Trefoil is
not quite in her first youth."

"If you have done, Caroline," said Lady Penwether to Miss Penge, "I think we'll go into the
other room."

That afternoon Sir George asked the Senator to accompany him for a walk. Sir George was held
to be responsible for the Senator's presence, and was told by the ladies that he must do something
with him. The next day, which was Friday, would be occupied by the affairs of Scrobby and Goarly,
and on the Saturday he was to return to town. The two started about three with the object of
walking round the park and the home farm--the Senator intent on his duty of examining the ways
of English life to the very bottom. "I hope I did not say anything amiss about Miss Trefoil,"
he remarked, as they passed through a shrubbery gate into the park.

"No; I think not"

"I thought your good lady looked as though she did not like the subject"

"I am not sure that Miss Trefoil is very popular with the ladies up there."

"She's a handsome young woman and clever, though, as I said before, given to melancholy, and
sometimes fastidious. The cattle that graze in these pastures are of a large size, and red, and
all horned; very unlike those about Caen, which latter are of small
and delicate proportions, with heads approaching to those of deer,
and commonly with black faces and legs.



"Looks after it altogether himself?"

"I cannot quite say that. He has a land-bailiff who lives in the house there."

"With a salary?"

"Oh yes; 120 pounds a year I think the man has:"

"And that house?" asked the Senator. "Why, the house and garden are worth 50 pounds a year."

"I dare say they are. Of course it costs money. It's near the park and had to be made ornamental."

"And does it pay?"

"Well, no; I should think not. In point of fact I know it does not. He loses about the value
of the ground."

