While even the best memory so long after the event is but little to be depended upon for details,
it may serve especially when supplementing the records, to strengthen the conclusions therefrom.
In this instance it should be stated that it was perfectly well known to the late Charles A.
Dana, then present at Chattanooga as Assistant Secretary of War, and also to myself, who was
serving at the time on General Grant's staff as Inspector General, and was in daily contact
with all the leading officers, that it was General Smith, and General Smith alone, who conceived
and carried out the plan actually used for the capture of Brown's Ferry and the re-establishment
of the direct line of communication between Chattanooga and Bridgeport. Indeed, there was no
question in that army, or at that time, in regard to the matter. Rosecrans was never mentioned
in connection with it, while Smith's praise was in everybody's mouth till the close of the
campaign, not only for the Brown's Ferry movement, but, what was still more important, for
the plan of operations against Bragg's position on Missionary Ridge. He it was who personally
familiarized himself with the terrain in the entire field of operations, which, with the mountains,
valleys, rivers and creeks, that gave it its unique character, was the most complicated and
difficult one of the entire war, if not the most complicated and difficult one upon which a
great battle was ever fought. It was he alone who worked out every detail of the combinations
and movements by which the great victory of Missionary Ridge was won. I state this upon my
own knowledge and not upon hearsay.

Moreover, it was conceded by all in high command that Smith was easily the leading strategist
in that entire host. He knew all the details of the ground and all the difficulties to be overcome,
better than any other man. He studied them more closely, and with more intelligence than any
other man, not only because it was his duty to do so, but because he was conscious of the portentous
fact now so commonly lost sight of that the safety and success of the army depended upon the
discovery and adoption of a feasible plan of action. Grant, the generalissimo, had neither
the time nor opportunity to gather the facts. He was neither an engineer nor strange as it
may seem, a close calculator of the chances.

He necessarily depended upon the Chief Engineer, and the criticism which was sure to come from
others, to gather and sift the data upon which final action must be based. Thomas was there
from the first, able, methodical and invincible, a great field tactician, but not specially
distinguished for his knowledge of engineering, grand tactics or strategy. Sherman came afterwards.
He was bold, active and energetic, and had a fine eye for topography. He knew as well as anyone
what could be done and what could not be done by an army, but he came too late to take part
in the original investigations, or to do anything more than to accept the part assigned to
him, and from an examination of the ground say whether or not he could carry it out. The important
fact is that Smith was, beyond any question, the first mind among them all for working out
just such problems as confronted the leaders of the Union army at Chattanooga, and that task
was by common consent assigned to him. The responsibility was Grant's. His judgment and resolution
must necessarily decide and execute, but it was Smith's place to gather the facts and work
out the details of one of the most complicated military problems that was ever presented for
solution, and it can hardly be too much to say that he discharged his task with such patience,
skill and success as to justly entitle himself to be known in history as the Strategist of
Chattanooga. Were his distinguished associates living, it cannot be doubted they would willingly
concede that honor to him. In their official reports and correspondence at the time they went
far beyond the usual limit to give him praise, and although Grant finally withdrew his friendship
from him, for reasons which will be given hereafter, he never in the slightest degree withdrew
or modified the praise he had awarded him for his services in the Chattanooga campaign.

But to return to the details of the plan of operations. It was Smith who discovered the possibility
of turning Bragg's position on Missionary Ridge, by the Army of the Tennessee. After personal
examination of the lay of the ground he suggested that Sherman's army coming up from Bridgeport
through Lookout Valley should cross to the north side of the Tennessee by the bridge at Brown's
Ferry, and after passing to the east side of Moccasin Point, under cover of the woods, to a
position opposite the mouth of Chickamauga Creek, should re-cross the Tennessee River, by a
bridge to be thrown under cover of darkness, and land on the end of Missionary Ridge with the
obvious purpose of marching along the Ridge and rolling up and destroying Bragg's army, or
taking it in reverse and driving it from its line of supply and retreat. As early as the 8th
of November, Mr. Dana, writing to the Secretary of War, speaks of a reconnaissance made by
Thomas, Smith and Brannan on the north side of the river to a point opposite the mouth of Citico
Creek, near the head of Missionary Ridge, which he thought at that time "proved Smith's plan
of attack impractical." But further investigation proved that a passage could he made higher
up the river, and when Sherman was taken to the place that had been selected, examining both
the place for the bridge and its approaches, on both sides of the river, with his usual care,
he closed his field glasses with a snap and turning to Smith said with emphasis: "Baldy, it
can be done!"

And so much of it as referred to the passage of the river was done without halt or fault, just
as it had been planned. Sherman's entire army, except his rear division that had been cut off
by a break in the Brown's Ferry floating bridge, was brought upon the field just in the way
suggested and by the means which had been provided by General Smith. I assisted in transferring
the troops to the South bank of the river at the point of crossing, by the use of the river
steamer "Dunbar," which had been put under my command so as to make certain that a sufficient
force should be on the ground in time to cover the construction of the bridge. The bridge was
laid successfully and the army was transferred without delay. Every stage of the movement pointed
to an onward and victorious march against Bragg's commanding position, and a complete victory
was finally achieved, but much to the surprise and disappointment of all, it was not attained
at the time nor in the way that had been expected. The prearranged plan, so far as it concerns
Sherman's army, had no other legitimate purpose than to land it on Bragg's exposed right flank
and double him up or drive him from his regular line of supply and retreat. And there is nothing
more certain than that there was no man in authority on either side who intended the battle
to be fought as it was actually fought, nor who seriously expected the victory to be won in
the way it finally was won by Thomas's army, and not by Sherman's.

It is here worthy of remark that for nearly a quarter of a century both Grant and Sherman believed
and contended--in fact both died in the belief--that Sherman's lodgement on the foot-hills
at the north end of Missionary Ridge, and his unsuccessful attack from that place, caused Bragg
to so weaken his center by withdrawing troops from his center and left, to resist Sherman,
that Thomas met with but little resistance when he advanced to the attack about ten hours later,
in obedience to Grant's personal order. But it has been shown by irrefutable testimony, and
is now conceded, that there is not a word of truth in this supposition--"that nothing of the
kind occurred," and that in face of all statements and suppositions to the contrary, however
natural they may have seemed at the time, "not a single regiment, nor a single piece of artillery,"
not even "a single Confederate soldier was withdrawn from Thomas's front to Sherman's on the
final day of the battle. All the Confederate reports are clear and specific on that point."

The simple fact is that the plan of operations for Sherman were clear and perfect, and they
were carried out in their initial stage without fault or accident, but their execution in the
final and vital stage was marred by Sherman himself or by his subordinates, who never reached
the point from which they could strike a fatal blow, or from which they could have taken possession
of Bragg's communications with the rear.

The genuineness of this praise is strikingly attested by General Grant, who almost immediately
after the battle again urged the Secretary of War to give Smith the promotion which he had
previously recommended. Unmistakably referring to the part taken by Smith in making and carrying
out the plans which had yielded such notable results, he wrote, among other things: "Recent
events have entirely satisfied me of his great capabilities and merits. I hasten to renew the
recommendation and to urge it."

Shortly afterwards Grant followed this letter by another asking for Smith's assignment to the
command of East Tennessee, to succeed the luckless Burnside, with whom he was dissatisfied,
but in so doing he intimated that it would be agreeable to him if the government should, in
pursuance of a personal suggestion sent to the War Department about the same time by Mr. Dana,
give General Smith even a higher command. It is now well known that Grant had in mind the command
of the Army of the Potomac, and not only then, but frequently afterwards, assured General Smith
of his support for that great position.

The friendship of Grant, Sherman and Thomas, for Smith, was at that time genuine and unmistakable.
Neither of these great generals had ever served with him before. He was a comparative stranger
to them, and that he should have come amongst them from the East under a cloud as he did, and
should in less than two months have won such unusual praise and recommendations is stronger
testimony than their words themselves to the masterful part he had played at Chattanooga, and
in recognition of which the President made haste to promote him again to the rank of Major
General, at that time the highest grade in the service. It is to be regretted, however, that
the vacancy made by his previous non-confirmation, having long since been filled, and opposition
having arisen on the part of other generals already promoted and confirmed, the President did
not feel justified in dating his new commission back to the date of his original appointment.
The action of the President, the Secretary of War, who concurred in it, and the Senate which
acted upon it, this time without reference to the military committee, set the seal of government
approval in the most signal manner upon the services and abilities of General Smith. No subsequent
action or criticism can deprive him of the great praise and unusual honors which were then
bestowed upon him.

But a new and far less fortunate era was about to open upon General Smith's career. Grant's
work in the west had reached its close, and his extraordinary success had secured for him the
full rank of Lieutenant General, with the command of all the armies of the United States. It
at once became known to me, and to others serving at that time on his staff; that it was from
the first, and till he went east to take charge of his new duties, Grant's intention to assign
Smith to the command of the Army of the Potomac. He had come to trust his intelligence,--his
judgment and his extraordinary coup d'oeil implicitly, and to regard him as a strategist of
consummate ability. He made no concealment of his confidence in him, nor of his intentions
in his behalf, and there can be but little doubt that he would have carried those intentions
into effect could he have done so without injustice to others. But it is also true that after
going to the eastern theatre of war and conferring with the President, Secretary Stanton, General
Meade and General Butler, the Lieutenant General completely changed his mind, not only as to
the proper plan of campaign for the army of the Potomac, which he had not previously visited
or studied, but as to the disposition to be made of Smith and the other leading generals. In
all this he had the sagacious advice and support of General Rawlins, his Chief of Staff and
doubtless of other influential persons. Exactly why he did so, or what were the details of
the argument which brought him to his final conclusions, is still one of the most interesting
unsettled questions of the war. The general argument has already been indicated in the comprehensive
language of Rawlins and that was doubtless strengthened by Mr. Lincoln, whose homely but astute
reasoning convinced him that the better and safer line of operations was overland against Lee's
army wherever it might be encountered, and not through a widely eccentric movement by water
to a secondary base on the James River and thence against Richmond.

It is also doubtless true that finding Meade, who had shown himself to be a prudent and safe
commander, if not a brilliant one, not only favorable to the overland route, but deservedly
well thought of by the President, the cabinet and the army, while Smith, on the other hand,
if not openly opposed to this plan of operations, was somewhat persistent as was his custom,
in favoring a campaign from the lower James, or even from the sounds of North Carolina, Grant
reached the conclusion that it would be better to retain Meade in immediate command of the
principal army, and to place Smith over all the troops that could be mobilized from Fortress
Monroe in Butler's department. Whatever may have been the open or secret influences at work,
or the reasoning based upon the facts, this was Grant's first decision, but it is to be observed
that the plan as adopted was afterwards fatally modified by permitting Butler, notwithstanding
his partiality for Smith, as shown by his recent request for his re-assignment to his department,
to take the field in person, with Smith commanding one of his army corps and Gillmore the other.
In other words, Grant was not altogether a free agent, though the government had ostensibly
given him a free hand. Of course, Smith knew that in any case he could not be permitted to
make all the plans, even if he held the first subordinate command, and it is always possible
that he had not specially endeared himself to the leading officers of the eastern armies, but
there can hardly be a doubt that he would have given efficient and loyal support to Grant without
reference to the plan of operations which it might be found necessary to adopt.

Without pausing here to recapitulate the arguments for and against the line and general plan
of operations actually selected by General Grant, or to consider further his choice of subordinate
commanders, it may he well to call attention to the fact that the organization and arrangements
made by him for the control and co-operation of the forces in Virginia, are now generally regarded
by military critics as having been nearly as faulty as they could have been. It will he remembered
that Meade, with a competent staff had immediate command of the Army of the Potomac, but was
followed closely wherever he went by General Grant and his staff. At the same time Burnside,
with the Ninth Corps, having an older commission than Meade, and having been once in command
of the Army of the Potomac, was for reasons which must be regarded as largely sentimental,
permitted to report directly to and receive his orders directly from Grant, while Butler with
two army corps operating at first at a considerable distance and later in a semi-detached and
less independent manner, made his reports to and received his instructions directly from Grant's
headquarters.

This arrangement, as might have been foreseen, was fatal to coherent and prompt co-operative
action, and the result was properly described by Grant himself as comparable only to the work
of a "balky team." It was in the nature of things impossible to make either the armies or the
separate army-corps work harmoniously and effectively together. The orders issued from the
different headquarters were necessarily lacking in uniformity of style and expression, and
failed to secure that prompt and unfailing obedience that in operations extending over so wide
and difficult a field was absolutely essential, and this was entirely independent of the merits
of the different generals or the peculiarities of their Chiefs of Staff and Adjutants General.
The forces were too great; they were scattered too widely over the field of operations; the
conditions of the roads, the width of the streams and the broken and wooded features of the
battle fields were too various, and the means of transport and supply were too inadequate to
permit of simultaneous and synchronous movements, even if they had been intelligently provided
for, and the generals had uniformly done their best to carry them out.

But when it is considered that Grant's own staff, although presided over by a very able man
from civil life, and containing a number of zealous and experienced officers from both the
regular army and the volunteers, was not organized for the arrangement of the multifarious
details and combinations of the marches and battles of a great campaign, and indeed under Grant's
special instructions made no efforts to arrange them, it will be apparent that properly co-ordinated
movements could not be counted upon. When it is further considered that Meade, Burnside, Butler,
Hunter and afterwards Sheridan, as well as the corps commanders, were left almost invariably
to work out the details for themselves, it will be seen that prompt, orderly, simultaneous
and properly co-operating movements on an extended scale, from different parts of the same
theatre of operations, and that properly combined marches and battle movements were almost
impossible. As a fact they rarely ever took place, and it is not to be wondered at that the
best officers of every grade in the armies operating in Virginia found much throughout the
campaign, from beginning to end, to criticise and complain of. Nor is it to be thought strange
that many of their best movements were successful rather because of good luck than of good
management, or failed rather because of their defective execution, than by the enemy's better
arrangements or superior generalship, though it is evident that the Confederates kept their
forces better in hand and operated more in masses than did the Union generals. Their organizations
were simpler and more compact, their generals were better chosen and better supported. Operating
generally on the defensive and fighting behind breastworks whenever it was possible, it was
all the more necessary to bring overwhelming forces to bear against them, in order to ensure
their final overthrow. In addition to the defective organization and inefficient staff arrangements
which have been mentioned, neither the Union government nor the Union generals ever made provisions,
or seemed to understand the necessity, for a sufficient preponderance of force, to neutralize
the advantages which the Confederate armies enjoyed, when fighting on the defensive, or to
render victory over them reasonably certain.

Looking back over the long series of partial victories, vexatious delays and humiliating failures,
and considering the inadequate organization and defective staff arrangements for which Grant
was mainly responsible, it is evident that the terrible losses in the Union army in the overland
campaign were due quite as frequently to the latter causes as to incompetency or lack of vigor
on the part of the subordinate commanders. The blind grapplings in the forests of the Wilderness
could not be helped, when both armies were marching through it, for they could not see each
other through the tangled underbrush till they were almost face to face, but it is now certain
that if the marches of the Union army corps had been properly timed and properly conducted,
they could have reached the open country before the Confederate corps could have engaged them.
But when the senseless assaults of fortified positions, which occurred in endless succession,
from Spottsylvania Court House to Petersburg are considered, it will be impossible to find
sufficient excuse for them. They were in nearly every case the direct result of defective staff
arrangements and the lack of proper prevision. In a few instances they were due to positive
incompetency on the part of subordinate commanders, while on several notable occasions there
was a woeful lack of responsible oversight and supervision on the part of those whose duty
it should have been to exercise both. Before the campaign was half over it had come to be an
axiom among both officers and men that a well-defended rifle trench could not be carried by
a direct attack without the most careful preparation nor even then without fearful loss. Such
undertakings were far too costly, and far too frequently ended in failure, to justify them
when they could be avoided. But no experience, however frequent or bloody, no remonstrance
however forcible, could eradicate the practice of resorting to them occasionally. Rawlins was
utterly opposed to them and never failed to inveigh against them but the advice of more than
one trusted and influential staff officer was uniformly in favor of assaulting fortified positions.
The favorite refrain at general headquarters is said to have been "Smash `em up! Smash `em up!"

It was with special reference to the application of this method of procedure at Cold Harbor,
that General Smith afterwards gave vent to his indignation in words of the bitterest criticism.
It will be remembered that the entire army confronting the enemy had advanced on that fatal
day in compliance with a general order to attack "all along the line," which was done in a
half-hearted, desultory manner, foreboding failure and defeat. Not a soul among the generals
or in the fighting line dreamed of success and not a commander from highest to lowest except
Smith and Upton, made any adequate preparation to achieve it. Officers and men alike felt that
they had been ordered to a sure defeat. Knowing intuitively what awaited them, they wrote their
names on scraps of paper and pinned them to their coats in order that their bodies might be
identified after the slaughter was over. This done they advanced in long and wavering lines
of blue against the enemy's bristling breastworks and rifle pits, and were mowed down like
ripe grain before the scythe. In almost as short a time as it takes to recount the useless
sacrifice, over twelve thousand Union soldiers were killed and wounded, without shaking the
enemy's position or inflicting serious injury upon him.

Smith and his gallant corps, did their part bravely in the futile attack. They were just back
from Butler's abortive movement to Bermuda Hundred, in which by good management on the part
of the General, and by steadiness on the part of the men, they had saved the expedition from
a disgraceful defeat. They were not only hungry and tired, but disgusted with the incompetency
of Butler and his abortive plans. The situation which confronted them was most discouraging.
They were on new and unknown ground, but they had not yet worn themselves out against Lee's
veterans and therefore they cheerfully took the position assigned them. Smith with his usual
foresight and deliberation made haste to examine the ground in his front, and by availing himself
of the advantages which his trained eye soon detected he was enabled to direct his main attack
along a sheltering depression against a weak point, where he reached and broke through the
enemy's line. He needed only the prompt and vigorous support that intelligent prevision and
co-operation would have given, to make his lodgement safe and his victory certain. But as no
one above him seems to have expected victory, no proper provision was made to ensure it. No
supports were at hand. Each corps commander was looking out for his own front only, and not
for his neighbor's. The Confederates were more wise and more alert, and seeing the danger which
threatened the continuity of their line, made haste to concentrate their forces against Smith
and of course hurled him back with terrible loss.

Smarting under this unnecessary disaster, and grieving over the useless loss and suffering
of his gallant men, it was but natural that he should vent his feelings in sharp and caustic
denunciation of all who were in any degree responsible for the blunder. He was especially outspoken
with Grant and Rawlins, whose confidence he had won in the Chattanooga campaign, and with whom
he had since been on terms of the closest intimacy and friendship. It is but just to note that
they did not at that time appear to consider his criticism as in any sense directed against
them nor did they rebuke or condemn it, but to the contrary they gave him every assurance of
sympathy and approval.

But Smith although one of the heaviest sufferers, was not the only or even the severest critic,
of the mismanagement or lack of management which characterized that disastrous day. The result
was most demoralizing to the army. Officers of every grade were unreserved in their condemnation.
The newspaper criticism was wide-spread and continuous.

It was with special reference to the useless slaughter at Cold Harbor that the gallant and
invincible Upton, then coming to be widely recognized as the best practical soldier of his
day, immediately wrote in confidence to his sister.

     "I am disgusted with the generalship displayed. Our men have
     in many instances been foolishly and wantonly sacrificed.
     Thousands of lives might have been spared by the exercise of
     a little skill; but as it is, the courage of the men is
     expected to obviate all difficulties. I must confess that so
     long as I see such incompetency, there is no grade in the
     army to which I do not aspire."

Later referring to the same battle, he adds:

     "On that day [at Cold Harbor] we had a murderous engagement.
     I say murderous, because we were recklessly ordered to
     assault the enemy's entrenchments knowing neither their
     strength nor position. * * * I am very sorry to add that I
     have seen but little generalship during the campaign. Some of
     our corps commanders are not fit to be corporals. Lazy and
     indifferent they will not even ride along their lines, yet
     without hesitancy they will order us to attack the enemy, no
     matter what their position or numbers."

As the assault on Cold Harbor was a general one, it follows of course that it must have been
ordered by someone higher in authority than either Smith of the Eighteenth or Upton of the
Sixth Corps.

It was doubtless in allusion to this and to similar instances that the veracious and outspoken
Humphreys, at that time Meade's Chief of Staff, and afterwards the peerless commander of the
Second Army Corps, wrote:

     "The incessant movements day and night for so long a period,
     the constant close contact with the enemy during all that
     time, the almost daily assaults upon intrenchments having
     entanglements in front and defended by artillery and musketry
     in front and flank, exhausted both officers and men."

Although all the orders which brought about this unfortunate condition of affairs must have
passed through Humphreys himself, it is obvious that they could not have originated with him,
but must have come from higher authority.

If the imperturbable and painstaking Smith, fresh from the triumphs and confidences of Chattanooga,
should have lost his patience under these distressing circumstances, and declared to General
Grant, frankly and fearlessly as he did as was clearly his duty, that "there had been a fearful
slaughter at Cold Harbor," surely it should not have been brought up against him later as one
of the reasons for relieving him from the command of the troops of the Department of the James,
to which he had been assigned after this criticism had been made. If in the same interview
Grant acknowledged, as it is credibly stated he did, "that there had been a butchery at Cold
Harbor, but that he had said nothing about it, because it could do no good," his remembrance
of the circumstance to the prejudice of Smith, must be regarded as an afterthought which had
its origin in some cause not yet fully explained.

It is altogether likely that Smith's criticism was repeated to others less entitled to speak
than himself and that it was exaggerated into a direct attack upon both Meade and Grant, which
could not be passed over lightly. Be this as it may, it must be apparent that it was fully
justified as a mere matter of military criticism and quite independent of both Smith and Upton,
it was generally approved both by the army and the country at large.

It was shortly after the assault in question, while I was commanding a division of cavalry,
that I visited Grant's headquarters. During the conversation which followed the Lieutenant
General asked me: "What is the matter with this army?" To which I replied:

     "It will take too long to explain, but I can tell you how to
     cure it. Give Parker [the Indian Chief] a tomahawk, a supply
     of commissary whiskey and a scalping knife and send him out
     with orders to bring in the scalps of general officers."

During this same visit and frequently afterwards Rawlins, in a white rage, inveighed against
the desperate practice of blindly assaulting fortified lines, and denounced in unmeasured terms
all who favored them or failed to make adequate preparation for success, where any just excuse
could be found for resorting to them. It is worthy of remark, without reference to the origin
of the practice, or to the persons who were responsible for it, that General Grant alone had
the power to stop it, and that later there was a noticeable change in the Army of the Potomac
in regard to that practice, although it should be noted that Sherman followed it as an example
in his desperate, but unsuccessful assault of the enemy's impregnable fortifications on Kenesaw
Mountain, for the purpose, as he frankly explained, of showing that his army could also assault
strongly fortified lines.

That such a costly practice could spring up and obtain imitation in our army is a striking
commentary upon the lack of intelligent supervision over the essential details of its daily
operations. It affords ample justification for again calling attention to the fact that in
this respect the Confederate Army was much better off and more fortunate than the Union Army.
Its generals, although not without fault, were much more careful in the management of their
military details than ours were. Jefferson Davis was himself an educated soldier of great capacity,
and selected none but educated and experienced military men for high command. While Lee's staff
was far from faultless in organization, he had supreme authority in the field, with no army
or independent corps commanders between him and the troops. His army corps were led by generals
of the first rank, who took their orders directly from him, and no unnecessary time was lost
in their transmission or execution, nor was there any uncertainty as to whose duty it was to
work out and superintend the details of attack and defence. But whatever may be said in further
elucidation of this important subject, I cannot help expressing regret that General Smith,
who had shown such rare talents in another field, for planning and executing the most complicated
movements, should not have had in this an opportunity to add to his fame, instead of being
sent out as a subordinate to a general who, however great his talents as a lawyer and a militiaman,
had developed no special aptitude as an army commander. In this connection the important fact
should he recalled that Generals Barnard and Meigs, officers of the highest training and distinction,
at the request of General Grant, shortly after the fiasco of Bermuda Hundred, had been sent
by the Washington authorities to make an investigation of General Butler's fitness for command
in the field, and had with due deliberation reported that while "General Butler was a man of
rare and great ability, he had not had either the training or experience to enable him to direct
and control movements in battle." It was doubtless the verification of this report to Grant's
satisfaction that caused him finally to relieve that General from duty in the field, and in
doing so to incur both his active and his covert hostility.

Meanwhile however valid and important, in either a military or a political sense, the considerations
may have been which sent Butler out in command of an army with such men as Smith and Gilmore,
both professional soldiers of the highest standing, as his subordinates, the arrangement was
unfortunate from beginning to end, and from its very nature it was foredoomed to failure. It
is to be observed that while these admirable soldiers were constantly with their troops moving
against or confronting the enemy, Butler was generally at Fortress Monroe, or at a more central
point some distance in the rear, and when his orders were not ill-timed or inapplicable to
the case in hand, they were not infrequently deemed impracticable, or at cross purposes with
the convictions of the generals whose duty it was to carry them into effect. The simple and
incontrovertible fact is that General Butler's presence with that army was from the start embarrassing
if not absolutely unnecessary. It interposed an intermediate commander between the generalissimo
and two entire army corps, and however good the intentions of that commander or great his abilities,
his principal influence was necessarily to derange and delay the orderly conduct and development
of the campaign. It was productive of no good whatever, and was besides in direct violation
of the rule of experience which teaches that better results are to be expected with one poor
commander in full authority than with two or more good ones liable to pull against each other.

The chief conclusion to be reached from these considerations, and from a study of the records,
in connection with the writings and unpublished memoirs of General Smith, is that his conduct
during the continuance, of the arrangement was not only natural and blameless, but that the
failure of Butler's army to play an important and decisive part, was due primarily, if not
entirely, to Butler's own misunderstanding or mismanagement of what was entrusted to him, or
the inherent defects in the organization and staff arrangements of the Union forces operating
in Virginia. Under the conditions as they actually existed, effective co-operation and control,
it has been shown, could not have been reasonably expected, and for this the verdict of the
military critic and historian must be that the Lieutenant General who had ample power, if he
chose to exercise it, was primarily responsible. Under the incontrovertible facts of the case
it is difficult to see how this conclusion can be avoided.

It will he recalled by those who have read "Butler's Book," that in addition to a number of
trivial derelictions of duty, General Smith was charged with the more serious one of having
failed through negligence and an untimely cessation of operations, to capture Petersburg, when
it was claimed that all the conditions were favorable to success. It should also be recalled
that several weeks after this failure had taken place and all the necessary explanations had
been made and considered, the President had, on Grant's recommendation, relieved Butler from
further service in the field and had assigned General Smith to the command of the Eighteenth
Corps which was composed of the troops from Butler's department, serving with the Army of the
Potomac. It should be remembered at the same time that before General Smith received this order
he had applied for and been granted leave of absence on account of illness, or as he explained,
"because of his old trouble with his head," and that while he was absent, the Lieutenant General
was by some means never fully or satisfactorily explained, induced to restore Butler to his
former command and to dispense entirely with the services of General Smith. In reply to a letter
from Smith, he authorized Colonel Comstock of his staff to inform him that he had been relieved
"because of the impossibility of his getting along with General Butler," who was his senior
in rank. But General Grant assured me about this time that it was with great regret that he
had taken this action; that he had tried in vain to utilize Smith's great talents; that he
had been too free in his criticisms, and that Smith himself had made it necessary that either
he should be relieved or that Meade, Burnside and Butler should he deprived of command and
sent out of the army. Some conversation followed, in which it was suggested that he should
have given the preference to the alternative as a means of simplifying the organization and
increasing the efficiency of the army, and it is a singular coincidence at least, that this
suggestion was partly carried into effect, with most excellent results, by the relief of both
Butler and Burnside, shortly afterwards, from the command of troops in that theatre of operations.
It has besides long been a question among military men whether still better results would not
have been obtained if Grant had at the same time relieved Meade, who was certainly a most competent
and loyal general, from the immediate command of the Army of the Potomac and placed him instead
at the head of an army corps.

It may not be out of place here to call attention to the fact that while no specific limitations
were ever put upon the responsibilities of Meade as an army commander, Grant thenceforth took
upon himself a closer supervision of the details of the campaign, while upon many occasions
during the final operations, he gave his orders directly to the corps commanders, instead of
sending them through the regular official channels. The result of this practice after it became
confirmed, was in every case beneficial, though it should he observed that it was far from
increasing the cordial relations between Grant and Meade or between their respective headquarters.

