It was a passing joke in the book that it was surprising that the butler, on discovering a
young couple kissing, did not say, "Allow me, madam."  N.H.

MORE ABOUT PIXIE

BY MRS. GEORGE DE HORNE VAIZEY

CHAPTER ONE.

A NEW NEIGHBOUR.

The night nurse was dusting the room preparatory to going off duty for the day, and Sylvia
was lying on her water-bed watching her movements with gloomy, disapproving eyes.  For four
long weeks--ever since the crisis had passed and she had come back to consciousness of her
surroundings--she had watched the same proceeding morning after morning, until its details
had become almost unbearably wearisome to her weak nerves.

First of all came Mary to sweep the floor--she went down on her knees, and swept up the dust
with a small hand-brush, and however carefully she might begin, it was quite, quite certain
that she would end by knocking up against the legs of the bed, and giving a jar and shock to
the quivering inmate.  Then she would depart, and nurse would take the ornaments off the mantelpiece,
flick the duster over them, and put them back in the wrong places.

It did not seem of the least importance to her whether the blue vase stood in the centre or
at the side, but Sylvia had a dozen reasons for wishing to have it in exactly one position
and no other.  She liked to see its graceful shape and rich colouring reflected in the mirror
which hung immediately beneath the gas-bracket; if it were moved to the left it spoiled her
view of a tiny water-colour painting which was one of her greatest treasures, while if it stood
on the right it ousted the greatest treasure of all--the silver-framed portrait of the dear,
darling, most beloved of fathers, who was afar off at the other side of the world, tea-planting
in Ceylon.

Sylvia was too weak to protest, but she burrowed down among the clothes, and moped to herself
in good old typhoid fashion.  "Wish she would leave it alone!  Wish people wouldn't bother
about the room.  Don't care if it is dusty!  Wish I could be left in peace.  Don't believe
I shall ever be better.  Don't believe my temperature ever will go down.  Don't care if it
doesn't!  Wish father were home to come and talk, and cheer me up. Boo-hoo-hoo!"

The tears trickled down and splashed saltly against her lips, but she kept her sobs under control,
for crying was a luxury which was forbidden by the authorities, and could only be indulged
in by stealth.

The night nurse thought that the patient had fallen asleep, but when she went off duty, and
her successor arrived, she cast a suspicious glance at the humped-up bedclothes, and turned
them down with a gentle but determined hand.

"Crying again?" she cried.  "Oh, come now, I can't allow that!  What are you crying about on
such a lovely, bright morning, when you have had such a good night's rest?"

"I had a horrid night.  I couldn't sleep a bit.  I feel so mum-mum- miserable!" wailed the
patient dolefully.  "I'm so tired of being in bed."

"You won't have very much longer of it now.  Your temperature is lower than it has ever been
this morning.  You ought to be in good spirits instead of crying in this silly way.  Come now,
cheer up!  I am not going to allow such a doleful face."

"I'm very cheerful when I'm well.  Ask Aunt Margaret if I'm not.  I've a most lively disposition.
Everyone says so," whined Sylvia dismally. "I'm tired of everything and everybody.  So would
you be if you'd been in bed for two months."

"Tired of me as well as the rest?"

"Yes, I am.  You are a nasty, horrid, strict, cross thing."  But a smile struggled through
the tears, and a thin hand stole out from beneath the clothes and pressed the white-sleeved
arms in eloquent contradiction. Whatever Sylvia was tired of, it was certainly not this gentle,
sweet- faced little woman who--humanly speaking--had brought her back from the verge of the
grave.  She snoodled her head along the pillow so as to lean it against the nurse's shoulder,
and said in weak, disconnected snatches, "I'm sorry--I'm so horrid.  I feel so cross and low-spirited.
I want--a change.  Can't you think--of something nice?"

"You are going to have some beautiful chicken-soup for your lunch.  It is in a perfect jelly."

"Hate chicken-soup!  Hate the sight of soup!  Want to have salmon and cucumber, and ice creams,
and nice rich puddings."

Nurse laughed complacently.

"So you shall--some day!  Glad you feel well enough to want them now. Would you like to be
carried to the sofa by the window for an hour this afternoon, while your bed is being aired
and made comfortable?  I think it would do you good to lie in the sunshine, and the doctor
could help me to carry you.  It would be quite exciting to see a glimpse of the outer world,
wouldn't it?"

"Rather!  I can't believe that everything is going on just the same. Are all the neighbours
alive still?  Is the old man at the corner alive? Has the little girl at Number Five grown-up
and put on long frocks?  I feel as if I had been lying here for years and years.  I believe
I have grown grey myself.  Give me a hand-glass, Whitey, and let me see how I look."

Whitey walked obediently across the room, and brought back the silver- backed glass from the
dressing-table.  She was accustomed to her nickname by this time, and was indeed rather proud
of it than otherwise. She had been known successively as "Spirit of the Day," and "The White
Nurse," during the hours of delirium, and the abbreviation had a natural girlish ring about
it, which was a herald of returning health.

"There, look at yourself, Miss Conceit!" she cried laughingly, and Sylvia held the glass erect
in both hands and stared curiously at her own reflection.  She saw a thin, clear-cut little
face, with arched eyebrows, large brown eyes, an aquiline nose, and full, pouting lips. The
cheeks showed delicate hollows beneath the cheek bones, and the eyes looked tired and heavy,
otherwise there was no startling change to record.

"I don't look as much older as I expected, but I've got a different expression, Whitey--a sort
of starved-wolf, haggard, tired-out look, just exactly like I feel.  Aren't I beautifully thin?
It's always been my ambition to be slim and willowy, like the people in fashion plates. I shall
be quite a vision of elegance, shan't I, Whitey?"

"Um!  Well," said Whitey vaguely, "you must expect to look very slight after lying in bed for
so long, but it doesn't matter about that.  You won't trouble about appearances, so long as
you feel well and strong again."

"Yes, I shall!" said the invalid stubbornly.  She turned her head on one side and stared intently
at the long plaits of hair which trailed over the pillow--her "Kenwigs" as she had dubbed them,
after Charles Dickens's immortal "Miss Kenwigses," who are pictorially represented in short
frocks, pantaloons, and tight plaits of hair, secured at the ends by bows of ribbon.

"My Kenwigs look very thin," she said anxiously.  "I used to have three thick coils.  People's
hair doesn't come out after typhoid fever, does it, Whitey?  I shall be furious if mine does."

"Oh, hair generally comes out a little in autumn," replied Whitey easily.  "Now you have looked
at yourself quite long enough.  I will put back the glass and prepare some food while your
aunt comes to see you, but I shall tell her not to talk too much, for the doctor won't let
you be moved if you are looking tired and exhausted."

Sylvia sighed to herself, for interviews with Aunt Margaret were a decided trial in these days
of convalescence, when every nerve seemed on edge and ready to be jarred.  She was nearly twenty-two,
and for the first year after leaving school the dear old dad had been in England, and she had
had the most delightful time travelling about with him.  He always declared that he was a poor
man, that tea was doing so disgracefully badly, that he expected to retire into the workhouse
in the course of the next year, but, all the same, he never appeared to be short of money,
and the travelling was done in the most comfortable and luxurious of fashions.  Sylvia was
his only child, and in his eyes was the most beautiful and accomplished creature in the world,
so that it was a trying experience to be domiciled with an elderly maiden aunt, whose ideas
were as early Victorian as her furniture, who had forgotten what it felt like to be young,
and was continually aggrieved because her niece had not learned to be old.

During the long year of idleness Sylvia had cherished the idea that her father would take her
back to Ceylon, when she would reign as Queen of the Bungalow, charm the hearts of the coolies
by her beauty and dignity, pay frequent visits to Kandy, and become one of the favourites of
society; but when it came to the point it appeared that he had no intention of the sort.  In
two or three years he hoped to be able to settle in England, and meantime his ambition for
his daughter demanded that she should remain at home and devote her time to music, for which
she showed an unusual talent.  If he had other reasons he kept them to himself, but as a matter
of fact he dreaded a possible marriage abroad, which would condemn the girl to a life of separation
from so much that is good and pleasant, and if any qualms arose as to the cheerfulness of the
home in which he was leaving her, he consoled himself by the reflection that he would be able
to make up for temporary deprivations in the years to come.

Mr Trevor sailed off to the East, and Sylvia took up her abode at Number 6 Rutland Road, in
an unfashionable suburb in the north of London, and settled down to being a "good industrious
girl" with what grace she might.  She did not understand Aunt Margaret, and Aunt Margaret felt
it a decided trial to have her sleepy home invaded by a restless young creature, who was never
so happy as when she was singing at the pitch of her voice, rushing up and down stairs, and
playing silly schoolboy tricks; but fate had ordained that they were to live together, and
they had jogged along more or less peacefully until that unlucky day when the girl had sickened
for her dangerous illness.  Then, indeed, Aunt Margaret realised that she had grown to love
her wayward charge, and all the manifold demands and inconveniences of illness were swallowed
up in anxiety during the first anxious weeks.  She allowed not only one, but two of "those
dreadful nurses" to take possession of her spare rooms, submitted meekly to their orders, and
saw her domestic rules and regulations put aside without a murmur of protest; but when the
crisis was safely passed, and recovery became only a matter of time, the old fussy nature reasserted
itself, and her eyes were open to behold the dire results of a long illness.

This bright October morning she came stooping into Sylvia's bedroom, a slight woman with a
narrow bent back, brown hair smoothed neatly down on each side of a withered, dried-up face,
with a patch of red on the cheek bones, and sunken brown eyes roving restlessly to right and
left.  She wore a black stuff dress, a satin apron with pockets and an edging of jet, and knitted
mittens over her wrists--a typical old lady of the ancient type.  Yet as she stood beside the
bed there was a curious likeness to be observed between her face and the one on the pillow;
and Sylvia recognised as much, and felt a thrill of dismay at the thought that some day she,
too, would be frail and bent, and wear a cap and mittens, and have rheumatic joints, and attacks
of bronchitis if by chance she was so imprudent as to go out without putting on goloshes, a
woollen "crossover," and a big silk muffler beneath her mantle.  To one- and-twenty it seemed
an appalling prospect, and one to be shunted into the background with all possible speed.

"Well, my love, and how are you this morning?  Much better, I hear.  A good drop in temperature,"
said Aunt Margaret, pecking her niece's cheek with her lips, and answering her own question
without waiting for a reply, as her custom was.  "Nurse tells me that you will soon be up again,
and I'm sure it is time.  This room needs a regular spring cleaning, and as for the new drugget
on the landing--three new spots of milk this morning, to say nothing of what has gone before!
If I had known you were going to be ill I would have made the old one last another year, for
it is sheer waste of money buying new things to have them ruined in six months.  The last one
was down thirteen years, and looked very little worse than this does now!"

"Father will buy you another.  You must put it down as one of the expenses.  He won't mind
so long as I get better," said the invalid wearily; whereupon Aunt Margaret drew herself up
with an air of wounded pride.

"Indeed, my dear, your poor father will have enough to do to pay all the doctors and nurses
without being called upon for extras.  I am willing to bear my own share, though I will say
my stair-carpets have had as much wear and tear in the last two months as in half a dozen years
before, and that Nurse Ellen is a most careless creature, she leaves everything in a muddle!
If you get up, my dear, you must wear my wadded jacket.  I had a young friend--she was the
cousin of Sarah Wedderburn, who lived in Stanhope Terrace, and married young Johnson of Sunderland.--You
have heard me speak of the Johnsons, who were at school with your Aunt Emma?"

Sylvia blinked her eyelids in a non-committal manner which might be taken either for assent
or denial.  She was afraid to confess ignorance of the Johnson family, lest Aunt Margaret's
love of biography should take a further flight in order to recall Sarah Wedderburn's cousin
to her remembrance.

"And what did she do?" she queried weakly.  "Don't tell me anything gruesome, please, aunt,
because I feel so low-spirited this morning that I can't bear anything depressing!"

"I should be very sorry to depress you, my dear.  Nothing is farther from my wishes, and if
she had been careful nothing need have happened. Her sister told me it was all her own fault
for not being sufficiently wrapped up.  I'll tell you the whole story another day when there
is more time, for now I must go out to do my housekeeping.  These meals will be the death of
me!  The cloth is never off the table.  I quite expect Mary will give notice at the end of
the month, and goodness knows what we shall do then, for it seems impossible to get hold of
respectable girls.  The milk-bill has just come in for the month. Ruinous!  Ruinous!  Now,
my love, you must really cheer up and try to look more like yourself.  Perhaps I shall find
you on the sofa when I come back.  Tell nurse not to use my best cushions; your own pillows
will do perfectly well."

She bustled out of the room, and Sylvia stared into space with a doleful face.

"It's all very well to ask me to be cheerful, when she tells me in the same breath that I am
ruining her, and her beloved furniture.  I'm sure I didn't want to be ill!  If dad were at
home he would never reproach me."  The tears were very near falling once more, but just at
that moment there came the sound of a manly footstep, and in walked the doctor, large, stout,
beaming, a very incarnation of health and good spirits.

"Well, and so nurse tells me you think of going to the seaside to-day! You are getting tired
of yourself, and want a change--eh?  I don't wonder at that.  You think you would enjoy having
a little peep at the world again?  Let me feel your pulse and see if I can allow it."

The pulse was quite satisfactory, so nurse and doctor promptly set to work to spread blankets
on the couch, draw forward screens to prevent possibility of draught, and bank up pillows to
allow a glimpse of the road beneath.  Then Sylvia clasped her arms tightly round the nurse's
neck, the doctor raised her feet, there was a moment's dizzy confusion, while her eyes swam
and her ears hummed, and there she lay on the sofa, as at the end of a long and arduous journey,
while her attendants wrapped her up in blankets and eiderdowns, and looked anxiously to see
how she had borne the exertion.  The little face was very white, but bright with pleasure and
excitement, and the offer of smelling salts and cordials was laughed aside with good-natured
contempt.

"No, no--I'm all right--just a little breathless after that whirl through space.  How funny
the room looks!  I've looked at it broadways so long that I can't recognise it from this point
of view.  Is that the water-bed?  What a strange-looking thing! just like a lot of hot bottles
joined together.  It is comfortable over here!  I'd like to stay all day.  Oh, oh, oh! here's
the butcher's cart!  How lovely it is to see the world again!"

The jovial-looking doctor shrugged his shoulders as he took his departure.  The poor child
must have been in sad straits indeed if she found the sight of a butcher's cart so exciting!
He would have enjoyed sitting beside her and listening to her rhapsodies, but was obliged to
hurry off to other patients, while Whitey seated herself beside the couch, and began hemming
strips of muslin to be made into those starched cap-strings which were tied so jauntily beneath
her chin.

"Oh, Whitey," cried Sylvia, "I feel better already!  It all looks so bright, and cheerful,
and alive!  I'm simply dying to go out for a drive, and to see the people walking about.  I
used to think this such a dull little road, but now it seems quite gay and fashionable.  I've
seen three perambulators already, to say nothing of the butcher's cart!  I wish the Number
Seven lady would go out for a walk, and let me see her autumn clothes.  She wears all the colours
of the rainbow, and looks like a walking kaleidoscope...  Whitey!  Oh, Whitey!"

The weak voice rose to a squeal of excitement, and the nurse bent forward curiously to discover
the reason of so much agitation.  To the ordinary eye, however, there was nothing to be seen,
for Sylvia's outstretched hand pointed to a semi-detached villa in no way distinguished from
the rest of the row.

"It's taken!" she cried--"Number Three is taken!  It has been empty for a year, and I have
simply longed for someone to come, for it is the most convenient house to watch, and I take
such interest in the neighbours. It's pretty lonely for me here, for I haven't a single girl-friend.
Father kept me at school in Brussels for the sake of learning the language, but almost all
the girls were French or American, and none of them live in London.  Aunt Margaret introduced
me to some `young friends' when I first arrived, but I thought they were horrid prigs, and
I suppose they thought I was mad, so the friendship didn't progress.  I amuse myself with my
music and in dreaming of the time when father comes home, but every time a house changes hands
I have a wild hope that there will be a girl in the family, who would be lively and jolly like
myself. I'm very nice when I'm well, Whitey--I am really!  You needn't laugh like that.  I
daresay you would be fractious yourself if you had to lie in bed for months and months, and
had an old griffin to mount guard over you, who made you eat against your will, and bullied
you from morning till night...  What was I talking about last?  Oh yes, I wanted to ask if
you had seen anything of these new people, and what they were like."

"I haven't had much time for looking out of the window, but I have seen a young lady and gentleman
going out and in.  I think they are a newly- married couple, for they look very juvenile and
affectionate.  He is dark and handsome, and she is fair, and I should say very pretty."

Sylvia's face clouded with disappointment.

"Bother the husband!  She won't want me or anyone else to interrupt the duet.  I do wish it
could have been a family with a daughter.  The curtains don't look newly-married, Whitey!"

"No, they don't.  I thought that myself.  The house doesn't look as smart and fresh as one
expects under the circumstances, but perhaps they are not well off, and had to be content with
what they could get.  You should not leap to the conclusion that she won't want you.  Brides
often feel very lonely through the day when their husbands are in the city, and I should think
she would be delighted to have a friend of her own age so near at hand.  We will watch and
see if we can get a glimpse of her.  She is almost sure to have gone out for a walk this fine
morning, and if so she will come home in time for lunch."

From that moment Sylvia's eyes were glued to the window, and every woman between the ages of
sixteen and sixty was in turn heralded as the bride, and scornfully laughed aside by the nurse.

"I told you that she was young and pretty!" she repeated laughingly.  "I didn't mean that she
was a schoolgirl, or a middle-aged woman.  If she is coming at all she will be here within
the next half-hour, so lie still and rest, and I'll play Sister Anne for you."

Ten minutes passed, twenty minutes, thirty minutes, and Whitey was beginning to hint at a return
to bed, when at last the longed-for figure hove in sight.  Sylvia raised herself on her pillows
and peered eagerly forward, her scarlet dressing-jacket making a brilliant patch of colour
against the background of white.  She saw a slight, graceful figure clad in a tightly fitting
black cloth costume, and a mass of flaxen hair beneath a sailor hat, and even as she looked
the girl raised her head and stared upward with eager interest.  She had a delicate, oval face
and grey-blue eyes beneath thoughtful brows, but at the sight of the invalid the whole face
flashed into sunshine, and the lips curled into a smile of such irrepressible rejoicing which
was more eloquent than words.  The next moment her head was lowered, and she walked demurely
up the path dividing the little gardens, while Sylvia lay back on her pillows a-quiver with
excitement.

"Oh, oh, the d-arling!  What a perfect duck of a darling!  Did you see her smile?  Didn't she
look glad to see me?  Whitey, why did she look so pleased?  What can she know about me?"

"My dear, she has seen the doctor's carriage drive up at all hours of the day, and two nurses
going in and out, to say nothing of the bark which was laid down on the road.  She must have
known that someone was seriously ill, and no doubt the servants have told her that it was a
young girl like herself.  Yes, it was delightful to see her.  You won't have any better congratulation
on your recovery than that smile!"

"Whitey, she is in black!  Brides don't wear black."

"They are obliged to wear it sometimes, dear.  You can't lay down a rule about such things."

"She looks too young to be married.  She ought to play about with me for a year or two first.
I hate that man for taking her from me!  That's the girl I should marry myself if I had a chance.
Do find out what her name is, Whitey.  Mary is sure to know, for she gossips with the other
servants while she is cleaning the steps.  Yes, I'll go back to bed now. I'm tired, and I don't
care to see anyone else.  I'll go to sleep and dream about that smile!"

CHAPTER TWO.

AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR.

"Aunt Margaret, can you tell me anything about the people who have come to Number Three?  I
saw the lady coming in just now while I was sitting up, and I do so want to know her.  Have
you been to call while I was ill?"

Miss Munns crossed her hands on her lap, and looked the image of dignified reproach.

"My dear, do you suppose I have had leisure for social engagements?  I know nothing about the
people, except that their blinds are invariably crooked, and every one drawn up to a different
length.  Most untidy the house looks!  A dear friend of mine used to say--Mary Appleford, whose
father was the clergyman in my old home in Leicestershire--charming old man who married Lady
Evelyn Bruce--most aristocratic family!--Mary always declared that she could judge a woman's
character by the appearance of her windows.  Judged from that standpoint, I should not feel
disposed to call on the mistress of Number Three."

"But you haven't seen her, aunt; if you did, you could not help loving her.  She looked so
delighted to see me sitting up, and gave me such a delicious smile!"

"Smiled at you, do you say?  A most unladylike thing to do!  The first advances should come
from our side, as she would know if she had any experience of society.  I hope, my dear, that
you were not so foolish as to respond.  One cannot be too careful about strangers in this big
wicked city.  I shall never forget my poor dear cousin telling me how she called on a most
superior-looking lady who came to live in the same terrace, and two months later the police
raided the house, and it turned out that the husband made false coins in the back kitchen,
and the wife circulated them among the tradesfolk.  So awkward for Maria!"

Sylvia brought her eyebrows together in a frown, and tossed about on her pillow.  She felt
irritated and disappointed, and that made her head ache, and the headache sent down her spirits
again, and eclipsed the brightness of the morning.  If Aunt Margaret refused to call, she could
not make the acquaintance of the fair unknown, and it would be a tantalising experience to
see her every day, and, yet be as far removed from friendship as if they lived a dozen miles apart!

During the weeks which followed, nurse and patient kept a close watch on the little house over
the road, and were rewarded by witnessing several interesting domestic scenes.

On Saturday afternoon, for instance, Edwin came home early to show himself in his turn.  He
was tall, dark, and handsome; dressed in the height of the fashion, and bore himself with such
an air of complacency and benign patronage towards his fellows, that he looked far more like
a prince of the blood than an ordinary city man.  He carried a little bunch of flowers in his
hand, and whistled as he drew near the gate in orthodox, newly-married fashion, and the pretty
girl flew to the door, and nodded her head at him in happy welcome.  He bent down to kiss her,
and she took the flowers and sniffed at them lovingly; then they walked together down the little
path to examine the growth of some sooty chrysanthemums and three struggling creepers placed
against the house.

Edwin shook his head after the inspection, as though it had been far from promising, and then,
instead of looking disappointed, they both laughed, turned round and round to look over their
twelve-yard domain, and laughed again as if it were the best joke in the world.  Then Angelina
said something in a low aside, whereupon Edwin strolled to the gate, and in the most casual
manner looked up the road and down the road, and then straight across at the window where the
invalid lay!

"She told him to look!" cried Sylvia breathlessly, and her pale cheeks flushed until they were
almost as red as the dressing-jacket itself. "He is very handsome, Whitey.  I don't dislike
him as much as I expected.  Oh dear, they look disgustingly happy!  I am sure they don't want
me a bit, and I want them dreadfully.  He doesn't seem the sort of man to coin false money,
does he?  Do please casually remark to Aunt Margaret how very nice and distinguished they look!
It's my one object in life at present to make her call upon them."

The next day the situation developed still further, for a form was seen seated at a window,
who must, of course, be Edwin; yet he looked strangely younger and fairer in colouring.  Nurse
and patient debated the point hotly, until presently the door opened and out came one, two,
three masculine creatures, all as like as peas in a pod, except for the difference in years
which divided Edwin from the handsome striplings on either side.  They stood together in the
tiny garden, obviously waiting for the mistress of the house, and when she did not appear,
the youngest of the three picked up pieces of gravel and threw them up at a bedroom window,
while the others whistled and beat upon the gate with their sticks.

Angelina strolled to the window in response to these demonstrations, and stood smiling at them
while she fastened on her hat, but she did not appear to hurry herself in the least, nor did
the brothers show any signs of annoyance at their long waiting.  When at long last she made
her appearance, there was great manoeuvring to get a place by her side, and away they trotted,
four abreast, pushing everyone else off the pavement, but apparently blissfully unconscious
of anything unusual in the proceeding.

Sylvia and Whitey watched until the last flutter of the black dress disappeared from sight,
then fell to work to settle the identity of the new actors in the drama.

"They are brothers--there is no doubt about that; but they can't live there, Whitey!  That
wouldn't be at all newly-married.  Do you suppose they are here for the day?  Perhaps they
are in rooms in town, and Angelina lets them come down over Sundays sometimes as a treat. 
They seem very fond of her, and quite at home.  I think that is the most likely explanation,
don't you?"

"I really think it is.  Or they might live in the country and have come up to pay a visit and
see the sights," said Whitey thoughtfully.

She was thankful to find a subject of interest in these long days of convalescence to keep
her patient's mind from dwelling on depressing topics.  Truth to tell, Sylvia was not getting
well so quickly as had been expected, and besides more serious drawbacks there were minor troubles,
trying enough to the girlish mind.  She had to learn to walk again, like a baby, her back ached
so badly that if she tried to stoop she screamed aloud with pain, and, worse than all, the
plaits of hair grew small and beautifully less, until there was hardly anything left to plait.
Sylvia had been proud of her hair, so she grew alarmed, and finally sent off in haste for her
special barber to give advice and consolation in the difficulty.  Consolation was not forthcoming,
however, and the advice offered was by no means acceptable.

"You can't do nothing--there's nothing will be a bit of good," the man said dolefully.  "Whatever
you do, it's bound to come.  The wisest thing would be to be shaved at once, and give it a start."

Sylvia fairly screamed with horror and consternation.

"Shaved!" she cried.  "I?  I go about with a bald head--a horrible, bare, shiny scalp!  I'd
rather die!  I'd rather--I'd rather--I'd rather anything in the world!  It's no use talking
to me, Whitey; I will--not-- be shaved!"

"Very well, dear," assented Whitey easily.  "Then you shan't.  We will just have a few inches
cut off, and get a lotion to rub in to help the growth.  I daresay the old hair will keep on
until the new appears, and then you need never have the horrible experience of seeing a bald head."

"I never should see it in any case.  I'd buy a wig and wear it night and day.  Nothing would
induce me to look in the glass when it was off.  I should never respect myself again.  And
oh, Whitey, even at the best the new hair will be ages growing, and it will be impossible to
do anything with it!"

"Not at all.  You can wear it short and curly.  It would look very pretty, and suit you so well."

Whitey was aggressively cheerful, but Sylvia refused to be comforted.

"It would be hateful.  I don't know anything more dejected-looking than to see the back of
a shorn head under a pretty hat.  I won't allow my hair to fall out, and that's the end of it!"

"Well, p'r'aps it won't, after all, miss!  We must 'ope for the best," said the barber cheerfully.

He and Whitey talked incessantly all the time the hair-cutting was proceeding, with the fond
hope of distracting the girl's attention; but in naughty mood she refused to listen, insisted
on sitting directly in front of her glass, and was rewarded for her pains by catching a glimpse
of a bald spot on the crown of her head, which put the finishing touch of depression.

When the doctor arrived for his morning visit, he found a most melancholy patient, and held
a serious consultation with nurse on the staircase before departing.

"She seems very low and listless this morning.  Can't you do something to cheer her up?  I
am afraid we are going to have trouble with that foot, and if she has to lie up again it will
never do for her to get in a melancholy condition.  You do your best, I know, but she needs
a change.  There is no reason why she should not see visitors.  Has she no young friends who
could come to have tea with her, and make her laugh?"

Whitey sighed, and leant against the banisters with a dejected air.  It is exhausting work
being cheerful for two, and no one would have welcomed a laughing stranger more heartily than
herself.  The question was,--where was she to be found?

"She was lamenting to me the other day that she had no girl-friends. She went abroad to school,
and has had little opportunity of making acquaintances since she came home.  Miss Munns is
very--conservative. She does not care to associate with her neighbours.  There is a charming
girl who has come to live opposite.  We watch her from the window, and Sylvia has been trying
to persuade her aunt to call for the last three weeks; but it is useless.  I'm sorry, for she
looks just the very person we want."

"Won't call, won't she?  We'll see about that.  I'm not going to have my patient thrown back,
after all the trouble I've had with her, for fifty old ladies and their prejudices.  You leave
it to me!" cried the jovial doctor, and tramped downstairs into the parlour to give his orders
forthwith.

A little diplomacy, a little coaxing, a few words of warning to revive affectionate anxiety,
a good big dose of flattery, and the thing was done; and, what was better still, Aunt Margaret
was left under the happy delusion that the projected visit was the outcome of her own inspiration.
She said nothing to the invalid, but at half-past three that afternoon she put on her woollen
crossover, and a black silk muffler, and her best silk dolman, and dear Aunt Sarah's sable
pelerine, and her Sunday bonnet, and new black kid gloves, two sizes too big, carried her tortoiseshell
card-case in one hand, and her umbrella in the other, and sailed across the road to call at
Number Three.

Sylvia had gone back to bed after lunch by her own request.  The hair- cutting ordeal had tired
her out, and there was, besides, a deep-seated wearing pain in one foot and ankle which made
her long to lie still and rest.  She tried to sleep, and after long waiting had just arrived
at that happy stage when thoughts grow misty, and a gentle prickling feeling creeps up from
the toes to the brain, when a patriotic barrel- organ began to rattle out the strains of "Rule,
Britannia" from the end of the road, and the chance was gone.  Then Whitey read aloud for an
hour, but the book had come to a dull, uneventful stage, and the chapters dragged heavily.

Sylvia longed for tea as an oasis in this desert of a day, and despatched nurse to bid Mary
bring it up half an hour before the usual time.  And then came a charming surprise!  Back came
Whitey all smiles and dimples, the tired lines wiped out of her face as by a miracle.  She
stood in the doorway, looking at her patient with dancing eyes.

"I've brought you something better than tea!" she cried.  "Just look what I have brought you!"
As she spoke she moved to the side, as if to make room for another visitor, and--was it a dream,
or could it really be true?--there stood the bride of Number Three, the sweet-faced Angelina,
in her black dress, her grey eyes soft with welcome.

"Oh!" cried Sylvia shrilly.  "Oh--oh!"  She sat up in bed and stretched out two thin little
hands, all a-tremble with excitement.  "It's you! Oh, how did you come?  What made you come?
How did you know I wanted you so badly?"

"I wanted you too!" said the girl quickly.  She had a delightful voice; soft, and deep, and
musical in tone, and she was prettier than ever, seen close at hand.  Best of all, she was
not a bit shy, but as frank and outspoken as if they had been friends of years' standing. 
"Your aunt called on me this afternoon," she went on, coming nearer the bed, and sitting down
on the chair which nurse placed for her.  "She invited me to come to see you some day, but
I've a dislike to waiting, if there's a good thing in prospect, so I asked if I might come
at once, and here I am!  I'm so glad you wanted to see me.  I have watched you from my window,
ever since you first sat up in your pretty red jacket."

"And you looked up and smiled at me!  I have watched you too, and wanted to know you so badly.
I've been ill for months, it seems like years, and was so surprised to see that your house
was taken.  You can't think how strange it is to creep back to life, and see how everything
has gone on while you have lain still.  It's conceited, of course, to expect a revolution of
nature, just because you are out of things yourself, but I didn't seem able to help it."

"I'm like that myself!" said the pretty girl pleasantly.  There was a soft gurgle in her voice
as of laughter barely repressed, and she pronounced her i's with a faint broadening of accent,
which was altogether quaint and delightful.

Sylvia mentally repeated the phrase as it sounded in her ears, "Oi'm like that meself!" and
came to an instant conclusion.  "Irish!  She's Irish.  I'm glad of that.  I like Irish people."
She smiled for pure pleasure, and the visitor stretched out a hand impulsively, and grasped
the thin fingers lying on the counterpane.

"You poor creature, I'm grieved for you!  Tell me, is your name Beatrice?  I'm dying to know,
for we had a discussion about it at home, and I said I was sure it was Beatrice.  I always
imagine a Beatrice dark like you, with brown eyes and arched eyebrows."

"I don't!  The only Beatrice I know is quite fair and fluffy.  No, I am not Beatrice!"

"But you are not Helen!  I do hope you are not Helen.  The boys guessed that, and they would
be so triumphant if they were right."

"No, I'm not Helen either.  I'm Sylvia Trevor."

"'Deed, you are, then!  It's an elegant name.  I never knew anyone living by it before, and
it suits you, too.  I like it immensely.  Did you,"--the grey eyes twinkled merrily--"did you
find a nickname for me?"

Sylvia glanced at Whitey and smiled demurely.

"We called you Angelina.  Oh, we didn't think that was really your name, but we called you
by it because you looked so happy and er--er affectionate, and pleased with everything.  And
we called your husband Edwin, to match.  Those are the proper names for newly-married couples,
you know."

The girl stared back with wide grey eyes, her chin dropped, and she sat suddenly bolt upright
in her chair.

"My what?" she gasped.  "My h--" She put her hands against her cheeks, which had grown quite
pink, and gurgled into the merriest, most infectious laughter.  "But I'm not married at all!
It's my brother.  He is not Edwin, he is Jack, and I'm Bridgie--Bridget O'Shaughnessy, just
a bit of a girl like yourself, and not even engaged."

Sylvia sank back in the bed with a great sigh of thanksgiving.

"What a relief!  I was so jealous of that husband, for I wanted you for myself, and if you
had been married you would have been too settled-down and domestic to care for me.  I do hope
we shall be friends.  I'm an only child, and my father is abroad, and I pine to know someone
of my own age."

"I know; your aunt told me.  We talked about you all the time, for I had been so interested
and sorry about your illness, that I had no end of questions to ask.  What a dear old lady
she is!  I envy you having her to live with.  I always think one misses so much if there is
no old person in the house to help with advice and example!"

The invalid moved restlessly on her pillows, and cast a curious glance at her companion.  The
grey eyes were clear and honest, the sweet lips showed not the shadow of a smile; it was transparently
apparent that she was in earnest.

Sylvia felt a pang of apprehension lest her new friend was about to turn out "proper," that
acme of undesirable qualities to the girlish mind. If that were so, the future would be robbed
of much of its charm; but the discussion of Aunt Margaret and her qualities must be deferred
until a greater degree of intimacy had shown Bridgie the difficulties, as well as the advantages,
of the situation.  In the meantime she was longing to hear a little family history, and judiciously
led the conversation in the desired direction.

"You are four young people living alone, then? for I suppose the two younger boys are brothers
also.  How fond they seem of you!"

"Why, of course.  They dote upon me," said Miss O'Shaughnessy, with an air of calm taking-for-granted
which spoke volumes for the character of the family.  Then she began to smile, and the corners
of her lips twisted with humorous enjoyment.  "I wouldn't be saying that we don't have a breeze
now and again, just to vary the monotony; but we admire one another the more for the spirit
in us.  And it's pleasant having an even number, for we can fight two against two, and no unfairness.
Maybe they are a bit more attentive than usual just now, for they have been without me most
of the winter, poor creatures!  We have had a troublous time of it these last two years.  My
dear father died the spring before last, and we had to leave our home in Ireland.  Then one
sister was married, and another went to Paris for her education, so there were two trousseaux
to prepare, and when all the fuss and excitement was over I was worn-out, and the doctor said
I must do nothing but rest for some months to come.  The boys went into lodgings, while I junketed
about visiting friends, and they are so pleased to get into a place of their own again, that
they don't know how to knock about the furniture enough, or make the most upset!"

It seemed to Sylvia an extraordinary manner of appreciating the delights of housekeeping, and
she attempted to condole with the young mistress, only to be interrupted with laughing complacency.

"'Deed, I don't mind.  Let them enjoy themselves, poor dears.  It's depressing to boy creatures
to have to think about carpets and cushions, and have no ease at their writing for fear of
a spot of ink.  I care far more about seeing them happy, than having the furniture spick and
span. What was it made for, if it wasn't to be used?"

Sylvia groaned heavily.

"Wait until you have been in our drawing-room!" she said.  "The chairs were originally covered
in cherry-coloured repp,--over that is a cover of flowered chintz,--over that is a cover of
brown holland,--over that is a capacious antimacassar,--over that, each night of the week,
is carefully draped a linen dust sheet.  The carpet is covered with a drugget, the ornaments
are covered with glass shades, the fire-screen is covered with crackly oilskin.  Even the footstools
have little hoods to draw on over the beadwork.  I have lived here for two years, and on one
occasion we got down as far as the chintz stratum, when Cousin Mary Robinson and dear Mrs MacDugal
from Aberdeen came to stay for the night, but my eyes have never yet been dazzled by the glory
of the cherry-coloured repp."

Bridgie lengthened her chin, and shook her head from side to side, with a comical air of humiliation.

"Ah, well, tidiness is a gift.  It runs in the family like wooden legs. Some have got it, and
others haven't, so they must just be resigned to their fate.  I'm going to see these repp covers,
though!  I'll wheedle and wheedle until one cover comes off after another, and never feel that
I have done credit to Old Ireland until I get down to the foundation." She rose from her chair,
and held out a hand in farewell.  "Nurse said I was to stay only a few minutes, as you were
tired already, but I may come to tea another day if you would like to have me."

"Oh, do, please!  Come often!  You can't think how I should love it. Will you come for a drive
with me some day, when it is bright and sunny?"

"I will.  We could have a nice chat as we went along.  I have not told you about my sisters
yet.  I have the dearest sisters in the world!" said Bridgie O'Shaughnessy.

CHAPTER THREE.

FAMILY PORTRAITS.

Bright and sunny days are not common in November, but the invalid managed to go out driving
in such fine blinks as came along, and in each instance "Angelina" was seated by her side.
The friendship was progressing with giant strides, and doctor and nurse looked upon Bridgie
O'Shaughnessy as their greatest assistant in a period of great anxiety.

Sylvia was now able to sit up and work and read; head and eyes had come back to their normal
condition, but the treacherous disease had left its poison in foot and ankle, and the pain
on movement became more and more acute.  It required all the cheer that the new friend could
give to hearten the invalid when once more she was sent back to counterpane land, with a big
cage over the affected part to protect it from the bedclothes, and all manner of painful and
exhausting dressings to be undergone.

Sylvia fumed, and grumbled, and whined; she grew sulky and refused to speak; she waxed angry
and snapped at the nurse.  Worst of all, she lost hope, and shed slow, bitter tears, which
scalded the thin cheeks.

"I shall never get better, Whitey," she sobbed miserably.  "I shan't try; it's too much trouble.
You might as well leave me alone to die in peace."

"It's not a question of dying, my dear.  It's a question of healing your foot.  If I leave
you in peace, you may be lame for life.  How would you like that?" said Whitey bluntly.  She
knew her patient by this time, and understood that while the idea of fading away in her youth
might appear sufficiently romantic, Miss Sylvia would find nothing attractive in the prospect
of limping ungracefully through life.  The dressings and bandagings were endured meekly enough
after that, but the girl's heart was full of dread, and the long dark days were hard to bear.

It became a rule that, instead of taking the meal alone, Bridgie O'Shaughnessy should come
across the road to tea, and sit an hour in the sick-room while Whitey wrote letters or went
out for a constitutional. She came with hands full of photographs and letters and family trophies,
to give point to her conversation, and make her dear ones live in Sylvia's imagination.

One day there was a picture of the old home--such a venerable and imposing building that Aunt
Margaret, beholding it, felt her last suspicions of counterfeit coining die a natural death,
and gave instructions to Mary that the second-best tea-things were to be taken upstairs whenever
Miss O'Shaughnessy was present.  Sylvia was impressed too, but thought it very sad that anyone
who had lived in a castle should come down to Number Three, Rutland Road.  She delicately hinted
as much, and Bridgie said--

"Yes, it would be hard if we took it seriously, but we don't.  It's just like being in seaside
lodgings, when the smallnesses and inconveniences make part of the fun.  We are going home
some day, when Jack has made his fortune, and until then my brother-in-law rents the Castle
from us, and we go over and stay with him once or twice in the year.  Esmeralda is mistress
of Knock, and is having it put in such terrible order that we can hardly recognise the dear
old tumbledown place.  There is not a single broken pane in the glass-houses!"  Bridgie spoke
in a tone of almost incredulous admiration, the while she drew a large promenade photograph
from its envelope.  "There, that's Esmeralda!  Taken in the dress in which she was presented."

Sylvia looked, and gasped with surprise.  Such a vision of beauty and elegance, such billows
of satin, such lace, such jewels and nodding plumes, were seldom seen in this modest suburban
neighbourhood.  She had never before had any connection with a girl who had been presented
at Court, and the face which looked out of the photograph was as young as her own--startlingly,
dazzlingly young.

"Your sister?  Really!  How per-fectly lovely and beautiful!  Is she really as pretty as that?
How old is she?  What is her husband like? Is she very happy?  She must be very rich to have
all those beautiful things."

"She has more money than she can spend.  Can you imagine that?  I can't!" said Bridgie solemnly.
"I asked Esmeralda what it felt like to be able to get whatever she liked without asking the
price, and she said it was very soothing to the feelings, but not nearly so exciting as when
she used to make up new hats out of nothing at all and a piece of dyed ribbon.  She is only
twenty--younger than I, and as beautiful as a picture.  Geoffrey adores her.  She has a dear
little baby boy to play with, and wherever she goes people turn round to look after her, so
that she walks about from morning till night in a kind of triumphal procession."

"How nice!" sighed Sylvia enviously.  "Just what I should like.  No one turns round to look
after me, and I feel a worm every time I walk down Bond Street among all the horrible creatures
who look nicer than I do myself.  People say--sensible old people, I mean--that it is bad for
the character to have everything that one wants.  Do you think it is so in your sister's case?
Is she spoiled by prosperity?"

Esmeralda's sister hesitated, loyally unwilling to breathe a word against a member of her family.

"She is just as loving and generous as she can be; thinks of every single thing that father
would have liked, and makes a perfect mistress of the old place.  The people adore her, and
are in wholesome awe of her, too--far more so than they ever were of me.  The boys get cross
sometimes because she expects us to do exactly what she wishes, and that immediately, if not
sooner, but it doesn't worry me.  I agree with all she says, and then quietly go my own way,
and the next time we meet she has forgotten all about it.  She is just the least in the world
inclined to be overbearing, but we all have our faults, and can't afford to judge each other.
She has been a dear sweet sister to me!"

Bridgie smoothed the tissue paper carefully over the portrait and put it back in its envelope.
Then she picked up a smaller photograph from the table, and her face glowed with tenderness
and pride.  "Now!" she cried, and her voice was as a herald's trumpet announcing the advent
of the principal character upon the stage.  "Now, here she comes!  Here's Pixie!  Here's our Baby!"

Sylvia sat up eagerly and held the photograph up to the light.  She looked at it, and blinked
her eyes to be sure she had seen aright.  She cast a swift look at Bridgie's face to assure
herself that she was not the victim of a practical joke.  She pressed her lips together to
repress an exclamation of dismay.  She had expected to behold a vision of loveliness--the superlative
in the scale in which the two elder sisters made positive and comparative, but what she saw
was an elf-like figure sitting huddled in the depths of an arm-chair, with tiny hands clasped
together, and large dilapidated boots occupying the place of honour in the foreground.  Lank
tails of hair fell to the shoulders, and while the nose was of the smallest possible dimensions,
the mouth seemed to stretch right across the face.  It seemed impossible that this comical
little creature could belong to such a handsome and distinguished-looking family, still more
so that her belongings should be proud of her rather than ashamed, yet there sat Bridgie all
beams and expectancy, her sweet lips a-tremble with tenderness.

"That's little Pixie!  Esmeralda gave her two shillings for unpicking some old dresses, and
she went into the village and got photographed for my birthday present.  There was a travelling
photographer down for a week, and it's wonderfully like her for eighteenpence.  The other sixpence
she spent on a frame--green plush, with shells at the corners. Esmeralda had remarks to make
when I put it on the drawing-room mantelpiece, and offered to give me a silver one instead."
Bridgie smiled and shook her head with an expression which showed that the price of the green
plush frame was above rubies.  "No, indeed!  It's not likely I will give up Pixie's present."

"She is not very like any of you!"  Sylvia said lamely.  She wanted to be pleasant and appreciative,
but could not think what on earth to say next.  "It must be--er--very nice to have a little
sister.  She is in Paris, you say.  Will she be away long?"

"She is coming home for good in January.  Geoffrey and Esmeralda are going over to bring her
back, and she will go on with finishing lessons at home.  We can't do without each other any
longer.  I feel quite sore with wanting her sometimes, and she is home-sick too.  I had a letter
from her this morning.  Would you like me to read it to you to show you what she is like?"

"Please do!" said Sylvia politely, but in reality she was rather bored by the prospect.

It was one of Aunt Margaret's peculiarities that she insisted upon reading aloud the letters
which she received from old-lady friends, and the incredible dulness of the epistles made them
a trial to the patience of her lively young niece.  She stifled a yawn as Bridgie straightened
the sheets of foreign note-paper, and cleared her throat with prospective enjoyment.

  "`Dearest, Darling People, especially Bridgie,--I was gladder than
  ever to get your letters this week, because it's been raining and
  dull, and the mud looked so home-like that it depressed my spirits.
  Therese has gone out for the day, so Pere and I are alone.  He wears
  white socks and a velvet jacket, and sleeps all the time.  He told me
  one day that he used to be very active when he was young, and that was
  why he liked to rest now.  "All the week I do nozzing, and on Sundays
  I repose me!"  I teach him English, but he doesn't like to talk it
  much, because it's so difficult to be clever in a foreign language.

  "`My dear, I never suffered more than when I first came here, and
  Therese telling everyone how amusing I was, and myself sitting as dumb
  as a mummy!  I can talk quite beautifully now, and wriggle about like
  a native.  I'll teach you how to shrug your shoulders, and you hold up
  your dress quite differently in France, and it's fashionable to be
  fat.  Last night Therese let me have two girls for souper.  They are
  called Marie and Julie, and wear plaid dresses, and combs in their
  hair.  I like them frightfully, but they are very rude sometimes,
  saying France is better than England, and that we have big teeth and
  ugly boots.  Then they got angry because I laughed, and said England
  always thought she was right, but that everyone else knew she was a
  cheat and a bully, and that she was the most disliked nation on earth!
  "And you are the politest," says I, quite composed, and at that they
  got red in the face, for I was all alone, and there were two of them
  in their own country.

  "`When they went away they kissed me, and said they were sorry, and
  that my teeth weren't big a bit, and I said France was an elegant
  country, but you couldn't wear high heels in Ireland, or you'd never
  be free of the bog.  It's a pity French people don't like us, and I
  don't think they always mean exactly what they say, but they make
  beautiful things to eat.

  "`Therese gives me cooking lessons out of school hours, and I've lost
  my taste for coffee with grounds in it, like we had at Knock.
  Everything is as clean as if it were quite new, and there is such a
  different smell in the houses--a lonely smell!  It makes me long for
  home and you, and a peat fire, and all the people in the streets
  speaking English, and never as much as thinking of the tenses of
  verbs.

  "`You are quite sure I may come home in January, aren't you, Bridgie?
  You are not saying it just to pacify me?  I'll tell you a secret!
  Once I thought of running away and coming back to you in London,
  because I couldn't bear myself any longer.  I said to Therese, just in
  a careless kind of way, as if I had only thought of it that moment:
  "Supposing now that a young girl was in Paris, and wanting to run away
  to her friends in England, how would she set about getting there?"

  "`And she never suspected a bit, for she said:--

  "`"Supposing that she lived in this suburb, it would be quite easy to
  manage.  She should rest tranquil until the family were in bed, and no
  one in the streets but thieves and robbers, and then slip out of the
  house and walk to the station.  There would be no voiture, but
  perhaps the thieves may not see her, and all of them do not care about
  kidnapping children.  When she reaches the station, she will take her
  ticket for England--it costs but a few sovereigns--and she has only to
  change twice, and get through the custom-house.  If all went well, she
  would be in London next morning, while the poor friends in Paris might
  cry as much as they liked--they could not bring her back."

  "`She seemed to think it quite easy, but I was afraid of the thieves,
  and had only three francs in my purse; and that afternoon they were
  both awfully kind to me, and Pere called me cherie, and Therese took
  me to the circus.  The clown is called August, but the principal one
  is English, because they are the best.  He made English jokes, and I
  laughed as loudly as I could, to show that I understood.  The other
  people smiled with their lips, don't you know--the way people do when
  they don't understand, but think it is grand to pretend.  I feel so
  stylish being English in France.  When I come home to London, I'll be
  French!

  "`Esmeralda sent me a book and some money for Christmas presents.
  Tell Jack to write me a funny letter with illustrations.  How is the
  poor girl with the bark on the road?  We haven't a single animal in
  the house, not even a cat.  I miss them frightfully.  Do you remember
  when my ferret died, and I filled up to cry, and the Major bought me a
  white rat for consolation?  Health, and tons of love, darling, from
  your own Pixie.'"

Sylvia chuckled softly from the bed.

"It's not a scrap like a letter," she said.  "It is just like somebody talking.  What a jolly
little soul!  She seems very young, doesn't she? Some girls of sixteen are quite young ladies."

"Pixie will always be a child," said Pixie's sister fondly.  "There is something simple and
trustful about her which will keep her young all her life.  She is so transparently honest,
that it never occurs to her that anyone else can be different; and she is the kindest, most
loving little creature that was ever created.  Don't you think she looks a darling in the photograph?"

It had come at last, the dreaded question, and Sylvia tried her best to combine truthfulness
with politeness.

"She has very sweet eyes.  It is difficult to judge when you have never seen a person.  She--she
isn't exactly pretty, is she?"

"Pretty--Pixie pretty!  I should think not, indeed!" cried Bridgie, with a heat of denial which
seemed singularly out of keeping with the occasion.  From the manner of her reply it was evident
that she considered Pixie's plainness a hundred times more distingue than Esmeralda's beauty.
"She's the quaintest-looking little creature that ever you set eyes on, with the dearest, funniest
face!  Father used to call her the ugliest child in Galway.  He was so proud of her, bless him!"

Bridgie sighed pensively, and Sylvia stared at her with curious eyes. So far she had made the
acquaintance of but one member of the O'Shaughnessy family, but it seemed as though they took
the various trials and vicissitudes of life in a very different spirit from the people with
whom she herself had associated.  Instead of moaning over the inevitable, they discerned the
humour of the situation, and in happy fashion turned the trial into a joke.

"I wonder," sighed Sylvia to herself, "I wonder where the joke comes in in losing your hair.
I suppose she would say it was so cool to be bald!"  Not even to herself would she put into
words the deeper, crueller dread which lay hauntingly in the background of her mind!

CHAPTER FOUR.

DREAD.

The foot refused to heal, and one morning a well-known surgeon followed Dr Horton into the
sick-room.  The very sound of his name was as a death-knell to the girl in the bed, but she
controlled herself by a mighty effort, and strained every nerve to watch the faces of her attendants
during the examination which followed.  She knew that they would keep up appearances in her
presence, and so long as possible hide the worst from her knowledge; but if she appeared unsuspicious
they would perhaps be less careful, and a stray word, an interchange of glances, might show
the direction of their thoughts.  She lay perfectly still, not even flinching with pain when
the diseased bone was touched, for the tension of mind was so great as to eclipse bodily suffering;
but the cool, business-like manner of the great surgeon gave no hint of his decision, while
Dr Horton was as cheerful, Whitey as serenely composed, as on ordinary occasions.

The cage was replaced over the foot, the bedclothes put in order, a few pleasant commonplaces
exchanged, and the trio adjourned for consultation.  Trained to their work of self-repression,
not one of them had given the slightest hint of what was feared, but their precautions were
undone by the thoughtless haste of the watcher outside.

Miss Munns was hovering about the landing awaiting the verdict, and trembling at the thought
of the news which she might have to send to her brother, when the door opened and the surgeon
came towards her.  Dr Horton and the nurse followed, and before the door was closed behind
them an eager whisper burst from her lips--

"Can you save it?  Must you ampu--"

Before the word was completed the surgeon's hand was over her lips, Whitey brought to the door
with a bang, and three pale faces stared at each other in consternation.  Had Sylvia heard?
Could she have overheard?  That was the question which was agitating every mind.  They strained
their ears for a cry from the sick-room, but no cry came. Whitey looked at the doctor and made
a movement towards the door, and he bent his head in assent.

"Yes!  Go in as if you had forgotten something.  She may have fainted. Poor child, it was enough
to make her!"

Tears of remorse were standing in Aunt Margaret's eyes, but she waited silently enough now
while Whitey re-entered the room and strolled across to the window to pick up the book in which
she wrote the daily report. She smiled at Sylvia as she passed, and Sylvia looked at her quietly,
quite quietly, and the dark eyes showed no signs of tears.  Whitey went back to the doctors
with lightened face, and eased their minds by a definite assurance.

"She heard nothing.  She is lying quite still and composed.  She cannot possibly have heard."

They turned and went downstairs to the dining-room.  Sylvia heard their footsteps die away
in the distance, the opening and shutting of the door.  The brown eyes shone with unnatural
brilliancy, the hot hands were clasped tightly together beneath the sheet.

"God," she was crying deep down in her soul, "do You really mean it? I've been very wicked
often, I've forgotten You and taken my own way, but I'm so young--only twenty-one--don't make
me lame!  I'll be good, I'll think of other people, I'll be grateful all my life.  Don't make
me lame!  Think what it means to a girl like me to lose her foot!  I have no mother, nor brothers,
nor sisters, and father is far-away.  It would be so dreadful to be shut up here and never,
never run about any more. Have pity on me.  Don't make me lame!"

It was a cry from the depths of her heart, very different from the formal prayers which she
was accustomed to offer morning and evening--a plea for help such as she would have addressed
to her dear earthly father in any of the minor difficulties of life, but in this great crisis
of her fate she must needs go straight to the fountain of comfort--the Great Physician who
was able to save the soul as well as the body.

All the rest of the day, as she lay so quietly on her pillows, she was talking to Him, pleading
for deliverance, setting forth pathetic girlish arguments why she should be spared the coming
trial.  When the thought arose of many others younger than herself who were leading maimed
lives, she thrust the memory aside as something which could not be faced, and her lips refused
to utter the words which she had been taught to affix to her petitions.  "`Nevertheless, not
my will, but Thine be done.'  I can't say it, Lord.  I can't mean it!" she cried tremblingly.
"Not yet! Forgive me, and be patient with me.  I'm so frightened!" and even as the prayer went
up, the assurance came into her soul that the Heavenly Father would understand, and show towards
her the divinest of sympathy and patience.

For some reason which she would have found difficult to explain to herself Sylvia felt an intense
disinclination to let her attendants know what she had overheard.  She perceived that they
were more than usually tender towards herself, and they on their part were puzzled by the quiet
of the once restless patient.  She grumbled no more about small unpleasantnesses--oh, how small
they seemed!  She was content to lie still and think her own thoughts, and seemed to have lost
all interest in the ordinary events of the day.

Only once in the twenty-four hours did a smile light up the set face, and that was when Bridgie
O'Shaughnessy appeared for her afternoon visit, and seated herself by the bedside.  On one
of these occasions, a week after the surgeon's first visit, Whitey went out for, her daily
walk, and Sylvia watched her go and peered anxiously round the screen to make sure that the
door was really shut.  Then she stretched out her hand, and gripped Bridgie by the wrist. 
It was a very thin, feeble- looking hand, but the grip had nothing feeble about it--it was
almost painful in its strength, and the brown eyes had a glazed misery of expression which
made Bridgie tremble at the thought of what was to come.

"Bridget O'Shaughnessy, you call yourself my friend.  Will you tell me the truth?"

"I'll not promise that, me dear.  I'll not deceive you about anything if I can help it, but
you are an invalid, and there are some questions which you should not ask me.  Only the doctor
should answer them."

But Sylvia went on with her story as if she had not heard the protest.

"The other morning Sir Alfred Heap came to see my foot.  He said very little about it to me,
and after examining it, went out of the room to consult with Dr Horton.  Aunt Margaret was
waiting for them on the landing, and they were not quick enough in shutting the door.  I heard
what she said.  To-morrow morning Sir Alfred is coming again. Bridgie,--is he going to cut
off my foot?"

"He is not, darling.  He is going to give you chloroform and do something to the bone to try
to make it sound and healthy again."

"And if that fails, will he cut it off then?"

"He will operate again, and go on trying as long as he dare."

"And if everything else fails, then--"

"Yes, Sylvia," said Bridgie gently.

Downstairs in the dining-room Miss Munns had been consulting with Whitey as to how the patient
was to be prepared for the ordeal of to-morrow, and by whom the news should be broken.  Whitey
had taken the task upon herself with the unselfish heroism of her profession, but her pretty
face was worn with the strain of this long anxious case, and Bridgie's heart had ached for
her in her painful task.  Now, in the midst of her own agitation, she felt a thrill of unselfish
joy that she had been able to take one burden at least from those heavily-laden shoulders.

Sylvia knew not only of the ordeal of the morrow, but also of that nightmare dread of what
might have to follow.  She had known it for a week past, and had lain quietly on her bed with
all the horror and misery of it locked up in her own heart.  Such restraint seemed almost incredible
to the outspoken Irish nature, but Bridgie's words of admiration brought an added shade over
the invalid's face.

"No, it was not bravery, it was cowardice!  I was like an ostrich hiding my head in the ground
for fear of what I might see.  I literally dare not ask until it came to the last moment. 
Oh, Bridgie, what a week it has been!  Going to sleep with the weight on my heart; waking up
and thinking, `What is it?  What is it?' and the shock of remembering afresh!  I lay and thought
it all out; never to be able to run, nor bicycle, nor skate, nor dance, nor even walk without
crutches, to dread going upstairs, to be cut off from girls of my own age because I could not
take part in their amusements, to hear people say `Poor thing!' and look pitifully at me as
I hobbled by.  I've tried to be resigned and take it like invalids in books, but--I can't!
I feel desperate. Bridgie, suppose it was you!  How would you feel?"

"I should cry myself ill for two or three days, and then brisk up and be thankful that if it
was one foot, it wasn't two!" said Bridgie quaintly. "That is, if I were quite certain about
it, but I never believe in disagreeable things until they have really happened.  Hope for the
best as long as you can.  You have clever doctors and nurses, and you will have a better chance
if you keep up your spirits."

Sylvia shook her head hopelessly.

"It's easy to be philosophic for someone else.  I could preach beautifully to you, Bridgie,
if you were lying here instead of me, but the suspense is so hard to bear!  I feel as if I
could not live through another week like the last.  Have you ever known what it was to drag
through the days with a nightmare of dread growing bigger and bigger, nearer and nearer, to
look ahead and see your life robbed of the things you care for most, to hope against hope,
while all the time your heart is sinking down--down--"

"Down--until it is just one great big ache clouding out the whole world? Yes, I know!" said
Bridgie quietly.  "I have never had a bad illness, but my trouble came to me in a different
way, Sylvia, and my time of suspense was not days, but weeks and months, I might almost say
years, except that even my hopes died out before that time arrived!"

The two girls looked at each other intently, and the blank depression on the invalid's face
gave place to one of anxious sympathy.

"You mean, of course, that it was a mental trouble.  Could you tell me about it, Bridgie, do
you think?  I don't want to force your confidence, but I am so interested in you, and it would
do me good to be sorry for someone beside myself.  Was it a--love affair?"

"I cared for him, but I am afraid he could not have liked me very much," said Bridgie sadly.
"I have never spoken of him except to Esmeralda and one other person, but I don't mind telling
you, dear, if it will be the least bit of help to you now.  We seem to know each other so well
that it seems absurd to think we had not met, two months ago.

"It was just someone I met one time when I was visiting, and when he was ordered abroad he
asked if he might write while he was away.  I was very happy about it, for I had never seen
anyone I liked so much, and we wrote to each other regularly for over a year.  They were not
love- letters; just quite ordinary, sensible, telling-the-news, but there was always one little
sentence in his which seemed to say more than the words, and to tell me that he cared a great
deal.  If a stranger had read it, he would not have understood, but I knew what he meant, and
I used to skim over the pages until I came to those few words, and they were the whole letter
to me.

"Looking back now I can see how I lived in expectation of mail day, but suddenly his letters
stopped.  When father was pronounced hopelessly ill, I sent him a hurried note, saying that
we should have to leave the Castle, for all the money was gone, and from that day to this I
have heard no more.  It was very hard coming just then, Sylvia!

"For the first few months I was not really uneasy, though very disappointed.  I knew that a
soldier's life is not always his own, and that he might have been ordered to a part of the
country where it was impossible to send off letters, but then I read his name as taking part
in some function in Bombay, and I knew that could be the case no longer. I would not tell Esmeralda
to depress her in the midst of her happiness, so I just sat tight and waited, and the time
was very long.

"When it came near mail day my hopes would go up, for it's my nature to be cheerful.  The postman
would knock at the door, and my heart would go head over heels with excitement, and it would
be a circular, or a bill wanting payment.  Another time he would not come at all, and that
was worse, for one went on drearily hoping and hoping, and pretending that the clock was fast.
Now I forget mail days on purpose, for it is nearly eighteen months since he wrote last, and
I have given up all hope of hearing."

Sylvia drew a deep sigh, and knitted her forehead.

"I can't believe that anyone could forget you when he had once cared. You are so different
from other girls.  It is most strange and mysterious.  Do you think that perhaps--you won't
mind my suggesting it--the money had some influence with him?  Perhaps he thought you were
an heiress--at any rate, that your people were rich and influential, and when he heard that
you were poor he may have changed."

"No!" said Bridgie decisively.  "No, I won't think it!  I won't let myself think so badly of
anyone for whom I have cared so much.  I don't know what his reasons were, and perhaps I never
shall, but I would rather believe the best.  Some people don't find it easy to remember when
they are far-away, and he might have a delicacy in writing to say that he had forgotten!

"If I had still been Miss O'Shaughnessy of Knock, I should have sent just one more letter to
ask if anything was wrong, but I had too much pride to obtrude myself as Bridgie of nowhere.
I have no reason to believe that my letter went astray, and even if it had, he would have written
again if he had wished to hear.  He is alive and well, I know so much, and I'm well too, and
very happy with my boys.  I had a bad time of it, and the suspense had more to do with making
me ill than the hard work of that summer; but now I have faced the worst, and have far too
much to do to be able to mope.  Boys are such cheering creatures!  They give you so much work.
The very darning of their socks is a distraction!"

"It would distract me in a very different way!" said Sylvia, with a smile.

CHAPTER FIVE.

AN INVITATION.

The operation was successful and unsuccessful--that is to say, the fear of amputation was removed;
but it became abundantly evident that it would be a very long time before Sylvia recovered
the power of walking about with ease.

A few weeks earlier she would have been heartbroken at the prospect of a spell of crippledom,
but the greater troubles eclipse the less, and compared with that other paralysing dread, it
was a passing inconvenience at which she could afford to smile.

Poor child! her first impulse on recovering from the chloroform had been to dive to the bottom
of the bed to feel if the foot were still there, and her elastic spirits went up with a bound
as she listened to the surgeon's reassuring report.  She was perfectly willing to lie on the
sofa and give up all idea of Christmas festivities, willing, in fact, in the relief and joy
of the moment, to promise anything and everything if only she might look forward to unimpaired
strength in the future.

As for Miss Munns, she rejoiced with grumbling, as her custom was, mingling thankful speeches
with plaints for her own deprivations, to the mingled distress and amusement of her hearers.
Christmas was drawing near, and there had been no time to prepare for the proper keeping of
the festival, for cook had been too much occupied with jellies and beef- teas to have any time
to spare.  There were no mince-pies in the larder, no plum-puddings in their fat cloth wrappings,
no jars of lemon cheese, no cakes, no shortbread, not so much as a common bun-loaf, and Aunt
Margaret hung her head, and felt that a blot had fallen upon her escutcheon.

"I can't fancy Christmas with bought mince-pies!" she said sadly.  "I've kept house for forty
years and never failed to make four plum-puddings-- one for Christmas Day, one for New Year,
one for company, and one for Easter.  Some people make them without eggs nowadays, but I keep
to the old recipe.  My mother's plum-puddings were quite famous among her friends.  Of course,
my dear, we have great cause for thankfulness, and I should have had no appetite if you had
lost your foot; but it really upsets me to look at that larder!  How many pounds of mincemeat
have you made, Miss O'Shaughnessy, may I ask?"

Sylvia was lying on the sofa in the drawing-room, to which she had been carried in time for
tea, and Bridgie was sitting beside her, looking with wondering eyes at the muffled splendours
which she now beheld for the first time.  She blushed as she heard the question, and adroitly
evaded an answer, for, to tell the truth, she bought her pies from the pastry-cook, and congratulated
herself on the saving of trouble.

"Oh, indeed, we get through a great deal, for the boys think nothing of three pies at a sitting.
I'd be obliged to you, Miss Munns, if you would lend me your recipe for the pudding, for my
cook is not the cleverest in the world, and, as Jack says, there is no monotony about her results.
If she does a thing well three times, there's all the more chance that it will be wrong the
fourth, when you are encouraged to ask a friend to dinner."

Aunt Margaret sawed the air with her mittened hands, and shook her cap in solemn denunciation.

"Method, my dear--method!  They won't take the trouble to measure the ingredients, but just
trust to chance, so what can you expect?  You shall have the recipe with pleasure, but if you
take my advice you will look after the weighing yourself.  Are you expecting any friends for
the day, or perhaps one of your sisters?"

"No--we shall be quite alone.  My married sister wanted us all to go to Ireland, but the boys
cannot spare the time, and I will not leave them." Bridgie sighed, and a shadow passed over
her face.  "It won't seem like Christmas to have no coming nor going, and Esmeralda and Pixie
so far- away.  I have been trying to think of a diversion for the boys, but I might spare myself
the trouble, for I've no money to pay for it if I had the idea."

"Straitness of means is a great curtailer of pleasure," said Miss Munns, gazing solemnly into
space over the edge of her spectacles.  "In my own family we have had sad experiences of the
kind.  My great-uncle was in most comfortable circumstances, and kept his own brougham and
peach- houses before the failure of the Glasgow Bank.  They removed to Syringa Villas after
that, and did the washing at home.  I shall never forget calling upon Emma the first Tuesday
that the clothes were hanging out to dry in the back garden, and finding her in tears, with
the blinds drawn down.  She had a great deal of family pride, had poor Emma, for her mother
belonged to the leading circles in Wolverhampton, and the steam of clothes in the boiler is
most depressing unless you have been brought up to it from a child.  George died soon after.
He never held up his head again, and Emmeline, the daughter, had a very good offer from a corn-broker.
She was a fine-looking girl, with black eyes and her poor father's nose.  She looked very well
in the evening, when she was dressed, and had a colour."

"And did she marry the corn-broker?" queried Bridgie eagerly.

Sylvia was flushed and frowning, more than half ashamed of the old lady's disclosures, fearful
lest they might affect her own importance in the estimation of a friend who had lived in a
Castle, and owned a sister who went to Court, and profoundly uninterested in Emmeline and her
destiny; but Bridgie was all animation and curiosity, her grey eyes wide with anxiety as to
the success of the corn-broker and his suit.  Here, indeed, was a listener worth having, and
Miss Munns warmed to her task with even more than the usual enjoyment.

"My dear, you would hardly believe the time poor Emma had with that girl!  She took a fancy
to a bank clerk on two hundred a year, and nothing would suit but she must be engaged to him.
He gave her a turquoise ring, I remember--a shabby thing that could not have cost more than
a sovereign, and Emma was quite mortified when people asked to see it.  They were engaged for
five years, and she lost all her looks, and he had a bicycling accident, and hurt his right
arm so badly that he could not write.

"Emma insisted that the engagement should be broken off, but the stupid girl would not listen
to reason.  She had a little legacy from her godmother about that time, and his father allowed
him something, so they were married, and went abroad to try a cure for his arm.  He is back
at work again, and they seem happy enough; but it was a poor match for her, and they can only
afford one servant.  The corn-broker said he could never look at a girl again, but he married
one of the Miss Twemlows within the year.  Perhaps you know the Twemlows?  They are a very
well- known family in their suburb."

No, Bridgie did not know them, but her expression seemed to denote that she was quite ready
to listen to their family history, in addition to those which she had already heard.  But this
was more than Sylvia could bear, and she hastened to interrupt the flow of her aunt's reminiscences.

"You have not heard from Aunt Emma lately--at least, you have not told me of her letters. 
I suppose you have not seen her while I have been ill?"

Miss Munns pursed up her lips in a manner which seemed to imply that she was in possession
of some weighty secret, but from motives of prudence was resolved to conceal it from the world.

"I have heard from her, my dear.  I have not seen her.  As I said in my reply, everything must
give way to illness, though I am very sorry indeed to think of her alone in the house.  Emmeline
can't leave the baby, so it is only natural that her mother should want some companionship
over Christmas.  I would have had her here instead, but the house is so upset that I am not
prepared for visitors.  It is very pleasant meeting from time to time, being contemporaries
as we are, and having gone through so many troubles together.  There is nothing I enjoy more
than talking them over with your Aunt Emma, and I am grieved to disappoint her.  Of course
I made up my mind from the first to say nothing about it to you."

Now it was Bridgie's turn to look blank, and Sylvia's to question anxiously.

"Do you mean that she invited you for Christmas, and that you refused because of me?  Oh, Aunt
Margaret, you must not do that!  You need a change, and it would be a relief to have all arrangements
taken off your hands.  Whitey and I could manage quite well by ourselves.  Do please change
your mind and write to say that you will go!"

"My love, I assure you that I considered the matter very carefully before I decided, and it
is impossible for me to leave home.  I have promised nurse that she shall spend two days with
her sister, coming round each morning to attend to your foot, and I should not like to disappoint
her.  It is only natural that she should wish to be with her own friends.  I sympathise with
her, but I don't complain.  It is not your fault that your illness has upset my plans, and
it is my duty to be resigned and cheerful."

Aunt Margaret testified to her sense of duty by heaving a sigh of funereal proportions, the
while Sylvia's brow became fretted with lines, and she turned a glance of despair upon her friend.

To be condemned to spend Christmas alone with Aunt Margaret in this mood of melancholy resignation;
to realise that she had deprived her of the happiness of talking over past troubles with poor
dear Emma; to listen from morning to night to her transparently-veiled repinings--this was
indeed a cheerful prospect for an invalid, who might naturally have expected to receive the
sympathy herself.

"Aren't you sorry for me?" the brown eyes asked Bridgie mutely.  But, lo!  Bridgie was radiant,
her face one sparkle of animation, her hands uplifted to hail the advent of a happy thought.

"The Diversion," she cried rapturously--"the Diversion!  I see it all, and it is perfectly
charming!  Sylvia shall be the diversion!  She shall stay over the New Year with us; Miss Munns
shall go to her friend and talk over old times; nurse shall visit her sister and have a rest
after her hard work; I will look after Sylvia, and Sylvia shall flirt with the boys, and keep
them happy.  It's a perfectly charming arrangement all round!"

"My dear!" cried Aunt Margaret in horrified protest against the last item on the programme.
But Sylvia gave a chuckle of cheerful complacency, and, so far from being overcome, looked
so much revived by the prospect that there could be no doubt as to the expediency of the proposed
visit, so far as health at least was concerned.

Miss Munns went through the form of protesting, but her objections were easily waved aside,
for to tell the truth she was only too ready to be persuaded, and her objections had no deeper
root than the belief that it was not polite to seize too eagerly on an invitation.

"I could not think of it, my dear!  Such an upset for you.  You don't know how much work an
invalid makes in the house!  She has to be carried up and down stairs, and waited on hand and
foot!"

"I have three big strong boys, and you have only women in the house. Pat could put her in his
pocket, and not know there was anything there!"

"My dear--how can you!  It would take up your spare room, too, and make so much ringing at
the bell with nurse coming in the morning and the doctor in the afternoon."

"But what a lesson it would be to me to see them attending to her!  So useful for the next
time the boys break their legs!  I love Whitey, and feel better for it every time I see her
sweet, kind face."

"If you had had to prepare meals at all hours of the night and day, you would be sick of the
sight of a nurse, however sweet she might look!  I don't see why you should be upset, my dear,
for the sake of my friend."

"Dear Miss Munns, I am thinking even more of my own friend.  It is selfishness which makes
me want to have Sylvia with me.  We would enjoy being together and talking over our troubles
just as you do.  Please let her come!"

"Troubles, my dear--troubles?  Has your cook given notice?" cried Miss Munns, her mind flying
at once to domestic matters, and dwelling thereon with accustomed enjoyment.  She had so many
stories to tell of cooks who had left their places immediately before Christmas, and of the
tragic consequences which followed, that the original subject of discussion took a secondary
position in her thoughts, and when Bridgie began placidly to discuss arrangements, she fell
into the trap with innocent alacrity.  Sylvia could hardly believe her ears.  It seemed quite
too good to be true.  The week's holiday held out glorious possibilities of enjoyment, and
she began at once to count the hours which must elapse before her departure.

CHAPTER SIX.

BRIDGIE'S PUDDING.

It was two days before Christmas, and Bridgie O'Shaughnessy enveloped herself in a white apron,
and pensively regarded the contents of the larder.  In a couple of hours Sylvia was expected
to arrive, and meanwhile Mary the cook had been seized with an irresistible craving to visit
an invalid mother, and had taken herself off for the afternoon, leaving the arrangements for
dinner in the care of the young mistress, and a still younger parlourmaid.

Mary's excuse for requesting leave of absence at so inconvenient a time was somewhat contradictory
and involved.  Her mother was failing fast, and as it was a custom in the family to die in
December, it was a daughter's duty to visit her as often as possible; the shops were all dressed-up
for Christmas, and it was hard that a body should not get a bit of pleasure sometimes, and
the steak was stewed, and could be "hotted up" at a moment's notice.  The invalid mother sat
up for a couple of hours in the afternoon only, so Mary must get to the house by three o'clock
at the latest, and would it matter if she were after eleven in returning, as Christmas came
but once a year?

Sweet Bridgie assented warmly to each proposition as it was put before her, urged a speedy
departure, and was rather inclined to think it would be wise to stay at home for the night.
She could never find it in her heart to deny a pleasure which it was in her power to grant,
and was gaily confident of managing "somehow" to prepare a palatable meal for her guest, indeed,
in the ardour of hospitality was rather pleased than otherwise to have a hand in the preparations.

On the principle of "first catch your hare, then cook it," she looked critically over the contents
of the cupboards to find some ingredients which commended themselves to her limited knowledge
of the culinary art. Gelatine had endless possibilities, but time was against her, and she
had the dimmest notions as to the quantity required; pastry was always attainable, but on the
one occasion when she had experimented in this direction, Jack had taken the nutcrackers to
divide his tartlet amidst the cheers of an admiring audience, so that there was plainly no
fame to be won in this direction.

Milk puddings were too painfully ordinary, but a bag of macaroni seemed to offer at once an
easy and a tasty alternative.  Bridgie felt herself quite capable of boiling the sticks into
tenderness, and scraping down cheese to add to the milky concoction, and a further search discovered
a dark yellow lump stowed away in the corner of a cupboard evidently destined for such an end.
It was wonderfully hard; Bridgie's fingers ached with the strain of cutting it, and she shook
her pretty head solemnly over the wastefulness of servants in not using up materials before
their freshness was lost.  She had intended to use the whole of the piece, but it took so long
to prepare that she stopped half-way, and to judge by the mellow brownness of the pudding when
she peeped at it in the oven, quality had more than made up for quantity.

Sylvia sniffed delicately as she limped over the threshold, for the pudding had a strangely
powerful smell, not exactly savoury perhaps, but distinctly fresh and wholesome.  Bridgie bridled
in proud consciousness of success the while she tucked up her guest on the drawing-room sofa.

"I've been making a pudding for you, dear.  Mind you enjoy it!  Mary is out, so you are to
excuse everything that goes wrong.  There's a pretty pink cushion to match your dress.  I never
saw that dress before!  You are wonderfully smart, Miss Sylvia Trevor!"

"It's for the boys," said Sylvia, laughing.  "I want to make a good impression, for I am dreadfully
afraid they mayn't like me.  I know nothing about young men.  They never penetrate into Number
Six, and Aunt Margaret thinks it is proper to ignore their existence between the ages of six
and sixty.  I thought if I put on the bright dress and my pet chiffon fichu, they might not
notice how thin my hair is at the top!"

"I'll tell them not to notice," said Bridgie gravely.  She crossed the room and poked the fire
with the best brass poker, a real, live coal fire and no wretched asbestos imitation, and knelt
on the rug holding out her hands to the blaze and scorching her cheeks with undisturbed complacency.

The room was mathematically the same in size and shape as the one across the road, but oh,
how different in appearance!  The one was a museum for the preservation of household gods,
the other a haven for rest and amusement, where comfort was the first consideration and appearance
the last.  Bridgie's mending-basket stood on the floor, Jack's pipe peered from behind a chimney-piece
ornament, and a bulky blotter and well- filled ink-bottle showed that the writing-table was
really and seriously meant for use.

There was a writing-table in Miss Munns's drawing-room also, on which were set out, in formal
order, a papier-mache blotter embellished with a view of York Minster by moonlight, a brass
ink-stand, which would have been insulted by the touch of ink, and a penholder with a cornelian
handle which had never known a nib.  Not the most daring of visitors had ever been known to
desecrate that shrine.  When the mistress of the house wished to write a letter, she spread
a newspaper over the dining- room table, and a sheet of blotting-paper over that, and carefully
unlocked the desk which had been a present from Cousin Mary Evans on her sixteenth birthday!

It is extraordinary what a complete change of air may be obtained sometimes by merely crossing
a road, or going into the house at the other side of a dividing wall!  Sylvia felt that she
might have travelled a hundred miles, so entirely different were the conditions by which she
found herself surrounded.

By and by the three brothers arrived in a body, letting themselves into the house with a latch-key,
and talking together in eager undertones in the hall.  Bridgie sat still with a mischievous
smile on her lips, and presently the drawing-room door was noiselessly opened for half a dozen
inches, and round the corner appeared a brown head, a white forehead, and a pair of curious
brown eyes.  Sylvia's cheeks were as pink as her dress by the time that those eyes met hers,
but she was the only person to show signs of embarrassment.

"Pat" came forward to shake hands with swift cordiality, followed in succession by Jack and
Miles, and the three big brothers stood beside the sofa, looking down on their guest with kindly
scrutiny.  Pat's twinkling smile was an augury for future friendship; Miles's air of angelic
sympathy was as good as a tonic; while the rapt gaze of Jack's fine eyes seemed to imply that
never, no never, had he beheld a girl who so absolutely fulfilled his ideal of womanhood! 
It was nothing that the conversation was most ordinary and impersonal, concerning itself mostly
with such matters as the weather, the trains from the city, and the Christmas traffic.

The atmosphere was full of subtle flattery, and Sylvia purred with satisfaction like a sleek
little kitten that stretches up its neck to meet an unaccustomed caress.  Nothing is so inspiring
as appreciation, and she was quite startled by the aptness and brilliancy of her own remarks
during the meal which followed.

Jack helped his guest in to dinner, and once again the pungent odour from the kitchen attracted
notice and remark, whereat Bridgie bridled complacently, and when the macaroni was brought
to table it did indeed look a most attractive dish to be the work of an amateur.  So brown
was it, so mellow of tint, with such promise of richness, that the general choice settled on
it in preference to its more modest neighbour.

Sylvia was naturally helped in advance, and the moment of swallowing the first spoonful was
momentous, and never to be forgotten.  What had happened she could not tell; the room swam
round her, the tears poured from her eyes.  She recovered from a paralysing shock of surprise
just in time to see Pat's mouth open wide to receive a heaped-up spoonful, to hear him roar
like a wounded bull, and make a dash from the room.

"What is the matter?" cried Bridgie in amaze, and Jack smoothed out the smoking macaroni on
his plate and replied cheerfully--

"Scalded himself as usual!  He is so impetuous with his food.  Do him good to have a lesson."
Then he in his turn partook of the dainty, and his eyes grew bigger and bigger, rounder and
rounder, the Adam's apple worked violently in his throat.  For one moment it seemed as though
he too would fly from the room, but presently the struggle was over, and he leaned back in
his chair, pale and dejected, his glance meeting Sylvia's with melancholy sympathy.

"What is the matter?" queried Bridgie once more, and this time there was a touch of testiness
in her voice, for it was trying to have her efforts treated with such want of appreciation,
and even if the dish were not all that could be desired, consideration for her feelings might
have kept her brothers silent before a stranger.  "Miles, you taste it!" she cried, and Miles
smacked his lips for a thoughtful moment, and pronounced sturdily--

"It's very good!"

Sylvia groaned involuntarily; she could not help it, and Jack gasped with incredulous dismay,
staring at his brother as if he could not believe his senses.

"Well, I always did say that there was nothing in this wide world which would quell your appetite,
but this beats everything!  Take another spoonful--I dare you to do it!"

"All right, here goes!  It's a very good mixture," said Miles complacently, swallowing spoonful
after spoonful, while his vis-a-vis looked on with distended eyes, and Pat stood transfixed
upon the threshold.  As for Bridgie, her face brightened with relief, and she smiled upon her
younger brother with grateful affection.

"That's right, Miles; never mind what they say!  You are the greatest comfort I have.  Some
people are so saucy there is no pleasing them. You and I will enjoy it, if no one else will."

So far she had prudently refrained from experimenting on her own account, but now she took
up her spoon, and there was a breathless silence in the room while she lifted it to her lips.
It fell back on the plate with a rattle and clang, and an agonised glance roamed round the
table from one face to another.

"Oh--oh--oh!  How p-p-p-perfectly awful!  What can have happened?  It was so nice when I left
it!  Has anyone"--the voice took a tone of indignation--"have any of you boys been playing
tricks on me?"

"How could we, now, if you think of it?  We have been upstairs or in the drawing-room ever
since we came back.  It's not the will that's wanting, but the opportunity!" cried the boys
in chorus; but it was not a time for joking, and Bridgie smote upon the table-gong with a determined
hand.

"Then it must be Sarah's fault.  She has done something to it.  It is too bad--I took such
pains!"  She looked pathetically at the red marks which still lingered on her fingers from
that painful cutting and scraping, and there was a distinct air of resentment in the voice
in which she questioned her assistant a moment later.

Sarah was a round-faced, vacant-looking damsel of sixteen summers, who had come straight from
an industrial home to serve in the O'Shaughnessy family.  She was scrupulously clean, admirably
willing, and so blindly obedient that in the bosom of the family she was known by the title
of "Casabianca."  She understood to a nicety how to dust and sweep, make beds and turn out
a room, but the manners and customs of gentlefolk had been an unknown science to her before
entering her present situation, and anything that Bridgie chose to do was, in her eyes, a demonstration
of what was right and proper.  She adored her young mistress, and trembled at the new tone
of severity in which she was addressed.

"Please, ma'am, I did nothing at it!"

"But something has happened to it, Sarah--that's quite certain.  Think now--think carefully
what you have done since I left the kitchen.  I am not angry, only anxious to find out what
has gone wrong."

It was really most embarrassing.  The three young gentlemen were watching her with laughing
eyes, the pretty young lady in the pink dress was staring at her plate and twisting her lips
to keep from smiling, the Missis sat up straight in her chair and looked so grave and masterful.
Like Topsy of old, Sarah tried hard to find something to confess, but failed to recall any
delinquencies.

"I took it out of the oven when you said, and put it on a plate.  I brought it into the room--"

"You are quite sure you didn't let anything fall into it by mistake?"

"Please, ma'am, there was nothing to fall.  I had tidied the things away before I touched it.
I put the macaroni sticks back in the bag and the beeswax along of the turpentine for to-morrow's
cleaning--all that you didn't use for the pudding."

"The--the--what?" gasped Bridgie breathlessly.

But the next moment a great burst of laughter all round the table greeted the solution of the
mystery.  Pat capered about the floor, Jack put his elbows on the table and peered at Sylvia
with dancing eyes, Miles undauntedly helped himself to another spoonful, and wagged his head
as who should say that, beeswax or no beeswax, he stuck to his favourable verdict on the "mixture."
Bridgie's soft, gurgling laugh was full of unaffected enjoyment.

"Did ever I hear the like of that?  It was a lump of beeswax, and I mistook it for cheese!
It looked just like it--so smooth, and yellow, and hard--too hard, maybe--but I was blaming
Mary for that, not the cheese, and thinking myself so good and economical to use it up! Beeswax
and macaroni!  Oh--oh--I'll never forget it while I live!"

"It's a very pretty nose you've got, dear, but it's not much use to you, I'm afraid," said
Jack teasingly.  "Did it never occur to you one moment that it was rather highly scented, and
the scent a little different from the ordinary common or garden cheese?" and Bridgie shook
her head in solemn denial.

"Never the ghost of a suspicion!  It shows how easily our senses are deceived when we get a
fixed idea in our heads; but indeed you were not much cleverer yourselves.  Every man of you
had something to say about the smell, but not a hint of what it was!"

"I thought it was rather spring-cleaningey," Sylvia said mischievously. "Never mind, Bridgie
dear--it has been a great success.  I do feel so much at home--more so than I should have done
after a dozen formal dinners where everything went right.  I shall always remember it too,
and how Mr Miles declared it was nice!"

"Don't call him `Mr,' please!  He is only seventeen, though he is the champion eater of the
world.  I wonder what exactly is the effect of beeswax taken internally!  You must tell us
all about it, Miles, if you live to the morning!"

"How pleased Pixie will be!" murmured Bridgie reflectively, leaving her hearers to decide whether
she referred to Miles's problematical disease or the latest culinary disaster, and once again
Sylvia admired the happy faculty of seizing on the humorous side of a misfortune which seemed
to be possessed so universally by the O'Shaughnessy family.

CHAPTER SEVEN.

A HAPPY INSPIRATION.

Mrs Geoffrey Hilliard stood in the long gallery of Knock Castle and drummed wearily on the
window-pane with a white, heavily-ringed hand. It had rained for a whole week without stopping,
and for the happiest girl in the world, as she proclaimed herself to be at least three times
a day, she came perilously near feeling shedding tears of depression.

Geoffrey was out shooting, and the old Castle seemed full of ghosts-- ghosts of the living,
not of the dead--of those dear, gay, loving, teasing, happy-go-lucky brothers and sisters who
had filled the rooms with echoes of song and laughter.  Geoffrey was the dearest of husbands,
but he had one great, insuperable failing--he was not Irish, and one phase of his wife's character
was even yet an inexplicable riddle in his eyes.  Why should she consider it monotonous to
have her meals served regularly at a stated hour; why should she find infinite enjoyment in
arranging a festivity in a rush and scramble, instead of making her plans with due leisure
and decorum; why should she wear the latest Paris fashions on a day when the thermometer pointed
to rain, and walk about in the sunshine in an ulster and deerstalker?--these, and many similar
questions, were as puzzling to him as the fact that she found it absolutely impossible to do
a thing twice over in the same way, or to master the very rudiments of method.

Geoffrey inherited the business instincts which had made his fathers successful above their
competitors, and when he had become temporary owner of Knock, he had striven hard to introduce
order and punctuality into the establishment, with more success in the servants' hall than
in those regions where the mistress reigned supreme.

Esmeralda was a devoted wife, who would have gone through fire and water to ensure his happiness;
she would have shared his poverty with a smiling face, and have worked her fingers to the bone
on his behalf, but she seemed quite incapable of replacing the match-box on his dressing- room
mantelpiece when she had borrowed it for her own use, or of refraining from taking his nail-scissors
downstairs and then forgetting where she had put them.

Geoffrey on his part adored his beautiful wife, and would have fought a dozen dragons on her
behalf, but when he groped in the dark for his matches, and knocked his pet ornaments off the
chimney-piece, and barked his knee against a chair, and tried vainly to get out of the room
through a blank wall--well, he was only a man after all, and he was not precisely lamb-like
in temper.

Some such incident had happened this afternoon when the husband had made a complaining remark,
and the wife had poured oil on the troubled waters by murmured allusions to people who were
not really men, but "finnicky old maids."  Geoffrey had stalked majestically from the room,
leaving Esmeralda to reflect sadly how very unsatisfactory it was to quarrel when your adversary
was dignified and English.  With either of her three brothers such an introduction would have
meant an enjoyable and lengthy wrangle; even "Saint Bridget" could snap on occasion, while
Pixie was capable of screaming, "It is not--it is not!" until her breath failed, for pure love
of contradiction.

Esmeralda yawned, and wondered what in the world she could do to while away the long afternoon.
As the wife of a millionaire, with a professional cook in the kitchen who tolerated her mistress's
incursions at stated hours only; with a wardrobe full of new clothes, and a French maid to
sew up every hole almost before it made an appearance; with a gardener who did not like interference,
and a patriarchal butler who said, "Allow me, madam!" if she dared to lift a hand for herself,
life was not really half so amusing as in the dear old days, when she could make potato cakes
for tea, re-trim old dresses, with Bridgie as model, and sit perched on one of the empty stages
in the conservatory, while Dennis confided his latest love experiences and the gossip of the
countryside.

Esmeralda had longed for riches all her life, and for the most part found the experience to
her taste, but there were occasions when she felt fettered by the golden chains.  When Bridgie
wrote of her experiences in that funny, cramped little house, of her various devices for making
sixpence do duty for a shilling, of excursions about London, when she rode with the boys on
the tops of omnibuses and dined luxuriously at an ABC, it was not pity, but envy, which filled
Esmeralda's bosom as she drove in state behind coachman and footman to pay dull, proper calls
on the county magnates.

It was cold and dark in the gallery this December afternoon, so she went downstairs into the
room which had been dedicated to lessons, when Miss Minnitt the governess tried to instil knowledge
into half a dozen ignorant heads.  It was now metamorphosed into a luxuriant little boudoir,
with pots of hothouse plants banked on the table, a couch piled with silken cushions taking
the place of the old horsehair sofa, a charming grate, all glowing copper and soft green tiles,
and beside it a deep arm-chair and a pile of books to while away an idle hour. Esmeralda yawned
and flicked over the pages of the topmost of the pile, looked at the beginning to see if it
promised excitement, peeped at the last sentence of all to make sure there was no heart-breaking
separation, finally sank down into the chair, and settled herself to read.

There was something wanting for perfect enjoyment, however, for in the old days she and Bridgie
had agreed that the charms of an interesting book could only be thoroughly appreciated to an
accompaniment of crisp sweet apples.  Esmeralda O'Shaughnessy had been wont to climb up into
the loft and bring down as many rosy baldwins as she could carry in the crown of her cap; but
Mrs Geoffrey Hilliard crept down her own passages like a thief, listened breathlessly at the
pantry door to make sure that Montgomery was absent, then abstracted an apple from each of
the two pyramids of fruit already prepared for dinner, and flew back to her room, aghast at
her own temerity.

The presence of the apples seemed to bring back other schoolgirl impulses, for instead of seating
herself in dignified, grown-up fashion, she stretched herself on the rug before the fire, her
back supported against the chair, her head drooping ever nearer and nearer the cushions, as
warmth and quiet wrought their usual work.  She slept and dreamt, and awoke with a start to
hear a voice observing, "Tea is served, madam!" and to see Montgomery the immaculate standing
over her with an unmoved expression, as if, in the many noble families in which he had served,
it was an invariable custom to find his mistress fast asleep on the floor, with a half-gnawed
apple in her hand!

Esmeralda crawled to her feet, trying vainly to look dignified, but she had no appetite for
muffins.  She felt like a child who has been found out, and blushed at the thoughts of her
embarrassment that evening when the fruit pyramid was handed for her selection.  Tea did not
taste half so nice out of the Queen Anne silver as when it had been poured from the old brown
pot, which had to be refilled so many times to satisfy clamorous appetites, and the longing
for companionship made her hurry through the meal, and run upstairs to a wide room overlooking
the park.

With the opening of the door came that sweet, flannely, soapy, violet- powdery smell which
is associated with a well-kept nursery, and there on the rocking-chair sat Mistress Nurse with
a bundle of embroidery on her knee, which purported to be O'Shaughnessy Geoffrey, the heir
of the Hilliards.

"Oh, I'm so glad you have come, ma'am!  I did so want you to see him. He has been so pert this
afternoon.  I don't know what to do with him, he is so pert!  I never saw such a forward child
for his age!"

Esmeralda's face softened to a beautiful tenderness as she turned down the Shetland shawl and
looked at her little son.  The pert child had a fat white face, with vacant eyes, a button
of a nose, and an expression of preternatural solemnity.  His head waggled helplessly from
side to side as his nurse held him out at arm's length, and stared fixedly into space, regardless
of his mother's blandishments.

"There now, isn't he pert?" repeated the triumphant nurse.  "You know your mammie, my precious--yes,
you do!  The cleverest little sing that was ever seen!  He will begin to talk, ma'am, before
he is many months old, I'm sure he will!  I was speaking to him just now, and he tried so hard
to copy me.  I said `Goo-oo!' and he said `Coo-oo!'  Oh, you would have loved to hear him!
He is a prince of babies, he is!  A beautiful darling pet!"

Esmeralda beamed with maternal pride.

"He is clever!" she cried.  "Fancy talking at three months old!  I must write and tell Bridgie.
And he looks so intelligent, too--doesn't he, nurse?  So wise and serious!  He stares at the
fire as if he knew all about it.  I believe his hair has grown since yesterday!  I do, indeed!"

"He has beautiful hair--so fine!  It's going to curl, too," declared the optimistic nurse,
holding the child's head against the light, when the faintest of downs could be dimly discerned
across the line of the horizon.  "He will smile in a moment if you go on talking to him, ma'am.
Perhaps you would like to sit down and take him for a bit?"

Yes, Esmeralda was only too willing, for it was only by act of grace and when Mistress Nurse
felt inclined for a gossip in the servants' hall that she was allowed to nurse her own baby.
She took the dear little soft bundle in her arms and rocked gently to and fro, studying the
little face and dreaming mother dreams of the days to come.

If God spared him, the tiny form would grow strong, the vacant face would become bright and
alert with life, the mite of a hand would be bigger than her own--a man's hand with a man's
work as its inheritance. There was something awful in the thought, and in her own responsibility
towards his future.  Esmeralda never felt so serious, so prayerful, so little satisfied with
herself, as when she sat alone with her baby in her arms.  She knew nothing about children--very
little, poor girl, of the wise training of father and mother, but the very consciousness of
her own defects added earnestness to the resolve to bring up this child to be wise, and strong,
and noble--a power for good in the world.

That was her resolve, renewed afresh from day to day, and after the resolve followed the relentless
conviction that the change must be wrought in herself before she would have power to teach
another.  It would need a noble mother to train a noble son, a mother who was mistress over
her own tongue to teach the lessons of self-control; a mother who had fought her own giants
of vanity and self-seeking before she could hand on the sword.  Esmeralda trembled and shrank
weakly from the conflict, but the baby turned its wondering eyes upon her and straightway she
was strong again.

"My son!" she murmured tenderly.  "My little son!  We shall love one another.  Oh, how we shall
love one another--you and I!"

The beautiful dark head bent low over the shapeless little bundle, and the croon of a cradle
song accompanied the regular rocking of the chair. It was the most peaceful and charming of
pictures, and the husband and father stood noiselessly on the threshold, almost unwilling to
speak and destroy the effect.

All the afternoon he had been regretting his hasty words, and reproaching himself for want
of forbearance towards his impetuous girl- wife.  It was unreasonable to expect the habit of
a lifetime to be outlived in a few short months, and at this season there were especial reasons
for judging her tenderly.  Poor darling!  She had suffered a bitter disappointment!

Bridgie and the boys had found it impossible to spend Christmas at Knock, and although Joan
had not confessed as much in words, the slackness of her preparations showed that she had lost
all zest in the season.  She had had a dull time of it since the birth of the boy, and it was
only natural that she should long for her own people, especially those two dear sisters whose
names were so constantly on her lips.  If it were only possible to indulge her--to hit upon
some plan by which Christmas could be made all she could desire!

Geoffrey knitted his brows in thought, then suddenly came the inspiration, and with it an exclamation
of satisfaction which brought Esmeralda's eyes upon him.  She smiled softly, and held up her
face to receive his kiss--such a different face from the one which he had seen two hours before,
with its curling lips and flushed, contemptuous smile! In its sweetness and subdued tenderness
it was a type of the youthful Madonna, and Geoffrey's own expression softened in sympathy.

"Well, my dearie!  Nursing your boy?"

Esmeralda turned back the shawl once more and held up the child for his father's inspection.

"There!  Isn't he splendid?  Nurse is quite excited about him this afternoon.  She says it
is wonderful how he gets on.  He has been so `pert,' as she calls it, that she hardly knew
how to manage him."

"H'm!"  The young father regarded the little face with amused, speculative eyes.  "`Pert' does
not commend itself to me as precisely the best word which could be found.  Solemn little beggar,
I call him! He seems quite oppressed by the wickedness of the world.  I say, that's rather
a peculiar mouth, isn't it?  Something funny about the upper lip!"

"It's exactly like yours--the image of it!" said Esmeralda firmly.  "You can't judge because
naturally you can't see yourself.  But it really is. Look at that old picture when you were
two years old."

Geoffrey stroked his moustache to one side, and regarded himself critically in the mirror.

"Oh, well, there's hope for him yet!" he pronounced complacently.  "I suppose babies are all
ugly in the beginning, but considering his parentage he ought to come out all right by and
by.  How long do you suppose it will be before he gets his hair, and begins to be intelligible?"

"He has hair now, and he is beginning to speak.  He said `Coo-oo!' this afternoon quite distinctly.
It's horrid of you, Geoff, to call him ugly!  Everyone says he is a beautiful boy and the image
of you!"

"Much more chance of being beautiful if he were like you, darling! Spoke, did he?  Well, I
take your word for it, but it's rather a stretch of imagination.  He is a jolly little chap,
anyway, and I'm very proud of him.  Here is nurse coming to take possession.  Hand him over
and come along with me.  I have something to tell you."

"Something nice, I hope!  I want a distraction," said Esmeralda wistfully.  She slid her hand
through her husband's arm as they walked down the corridor and peered up in his face.  "Somebody
was rather vicious this afternoon!  I'm sorry you put me in a temper.  It's stupid to quarrel
when we are so fond of one another.  You'll never do it again, will you?"

"Never, never!  It was all my fault, and I apologise abjectly to your temper for taking liberties
with it.  I ought to know by this time that it's in delicate health.  Never mind, I've planned
a delightful programme for you!  What would you like best for a Christmas present if you had
the choice?"

He was all radiant with smiles, but Esmeralda sighed, and a far-away expression came into her
beautiful grey eyes.

"I'd like--Oh, what's the use of speaking of it, Geoff?  They can't come, and that's all about
it!  I haven't thought of any present.  I don't seem to care about anything else."

"Whisper!" cried Geoffrey triumphantly.  "Whisper!"  He bent his head, and Esmeralda put her
ear to his lips, her face alight with expectation.

"Oh!" she cried rapturously, and again, "Oh!" and "Oh" in ever- ascending tones of delight.
"Do you mean it, Geoff--really--really? It's like a fairy-tale--so perfectly lovely and charming!
I shan't sleep a wink--I know I shan't!  Geoffrey, you darling, I do love you for thinking
of it!" and in an ecstasy of delight she threw her arms round his neck and kissed him rapturously.

"Any letters for the post, madam?" asked an even voice from the end of the corridor, and the
husband wrenched himself free, while the wife stared after the departing figure with gloomy eyes.

"He saw me kiss you!  The only marvel is he didn't offer to do it for me.  The strain of behaving
properly before that man will be the death of me, Geoffrey Hilliard!"

CHAPTER EIGHT.

A SURPRISE VISIT.

The next two days Jack came home early from the city, where a remarkable cessation of work
had happened simultaneously with the arrival of Miss Sylvia Trevor at Number Three, Rutland
Road.  Bridgie trotted about the house preparing for the festival on Thursday, and Sylvia lay
idly upon the couch, with nothing better to do than to listen, sympathise, and admire.

It was easy to listen, for in truth Jack gave her no opportunity to do anything else; it was
impossible to resist admiring, for he made a handsome figure, with his broad, muscular shoulders,
graceful carriage, and clean-shaven face; it had seemed at first sight as if sympathy were
not required, but Master Jack invented a fresh crop of imaginary woes every time that he met
a pretty girl, for the express purpose of receiving consolation.  Sylvia beheld in him an exile
from home and country, toiling at an uncongenial task, for the maintenance of his orphaned
brothers and sisters, and was vaguely given to understand that since meeting her, his poverty
had become an even more painful barrier to his hopes.  He confided in her details of business,
which she understood as well as a buried language, and asked her advice on knotty points in
such a flattering manner that she forgot to notice that he never paused for a reply, and when
at last he reluctantly rose to leave the room he sighed profoundly, and in a voice touched
with emotion declared that she had helped him as he had never before been helped!

"I cannot thank you enough for your sympathy and counsel, but I shall never forget what you
have said to me to-day.  It will help me through many a dark hour!" he declared, and Sylvia
blushed and gasped, and lay back on her cushions, all tremulous with excitement.  It was her
first experience of the art of flirtation, and she was pleased and flattered as it was natural
for a girl to be, but she was a sensible little woman, despite her hasty speeches, and her
vanity was not big enough to cloud either her judgment or a remarkably accurate memory.  She
carefully recalled to mind the late conversation, and found that her own share therein had
been limited to monosyllabic assents and denials; an occasional, "Really!" and three or four
exclamations of, "How sad!"

These, then, were the vaunted sympathy and counsel, these the eloquent words which Mr Jack
had vowed to treasure in deathless remembrance, and which were to strengthen him in hours of
trial!  Sylvia blushed once more, from mortification this time, and registered a vow to adopt
a new tone with this disciple of the Blarney stone, and put an end forthwith to sentimental
confidences.  She was still looking hot and flurried when Bridgie came into the room to prepare
for tea, and to rest after the day's labours.

"You look tired, dear!" she said anxiously.  "I hope Jack has not been talking too much.  He
just dotes upon romancing when he can get a listener, and I didn't like to interrupt when I
knew he had come home especially to see you.  Jack falls in love with every fresh girl he meets,
and they mostly fall in love with him too.  He has such lovely humbugging eyes!"

"Do they, indeed!  He shan't humbug me, that's one thing certain!" was Sylvia's mental comment.
Aloud she assented cordially.  "Most handsome eyes!  I call him unusually good-looking for
a man, and he has amused me very much, but I am more than ready for tea, and a little of your
society.  There's the clatter of the cups.  Welcome sound, it's music in my ears!  How I used
to long for it when I was ill!"

"I'll draw the curtains and make the room look cosy.  That is one good thing about a tiny house--you
can keep it warm.  We were frozen in the great draughty barns of rooms at Knock, and Pixie
used to look so quaint with her feet in snow-boots, and her hands in a muff, and her little
nose as red as a cherry.  It was so cold that it kept her awake at nights, until the Major
bought an elegant little egg-cosy at a bazaar in Dublin, and she slept in it regularly through
the frost.  We used to go to kiss her last thing every night, every man Jack of us, for the
pleasure of seeing her lying there, so peaceful, with the cosy perched over her nose!  Muffins,
dear?  I didn't make them, so you may eat them with an easy mind."

Jack came downstairs at the summons of the tea-bell, looking in languishing fashion at his
comforter as he entered the room, when, to his surprise, back came an answering glance, as
it were parodying his own, the sentimental attitude belied by twinkling eyes and mischievous
lips.  The blush and tremor of an hour ago were conspicuous by their absence, and the change
was by no means appreciated by the startled onlooker.  In vain he tried to return to the old
footing, accompanying the simplest remark with a hint of secret understanding, and waiting
upon her with a deference which seemed humbly to inquire the reason of the change.

Sylvia bluntly inquired, "What is it?" in reply to his appealing looks, kept him trotting to
and from the tea-table, and said, "How clumsy you are!" when his fingers touched her own over
the cake-basket.  Even Jack O'Shaughnessy found it impossible to continue flirting under these
conditions, and devoted himself to the consumption of muffins with a crestfallen air, while
Bridgie regarded him with fond commiseration from behind the tea-tray.

It was at this opportune moment that the clatter of wheels stopped at the door and the peal
of the bell rang through the house.  Sarah went to the door, and there was a movement and bustle
in the hall, at the sound of which Bridgie nodded complacently.

"The Parcels Delivery van!  I thought something must be coming.  Have you any change, Jack?
I've nothing smaller than sixpence, and the man will want a Christmas-box--a few coppers, perhaps."

"Oh, give the poor beggar half a crown.  Don't insult him with coppers," said Jack in his lordly
way, pulling a handful of silver from his pocket and selecting the largest coin of the number.
"I'll take it to him myself.  You might give him some tea if there is any left.  It is perishingly
cold outside!"

He stepped towards the door, but before he reached it, it was opened from without, a tall figure
precipitated itself into the room, and with two separate cries of rapture the sisters flew
to meet each other, and stood with locked arms, kissing, laughing, and questioning, with incredulous
delight.

"Esmeralda darling!  Is it really you?  You are not a dream, dear, are you?  I can't believe
it's true!"

"It was Geoff's doing!  He saw I was fretting for you, and suggested that we should come to
town and stay over the New Year at an hotel. There was not time to get the house ready.  A
whole week, Bridgie! Won't we talk!  There are such oceans of things to tell you.  Baby is
beginning to speak!"

"The precious mite!"  Bridgie disentangled one hand and held it towards her brother-in-law
in beaming welcome.  "I always did say you were a broth of a boy, Geoffrey, but you have eclipsed
yourself this time.  I am so happy I don't know how to bear it.  Now Christmas will be something
like Christmas, and--" she smiled encouragingly into Sylvia's embarrassed face,--"we have a
visitor staying with us to make things still more festive.  My new friend, Miss Sylvia Trevor,
who is recovering from a long illness."

Esmeralda wheeled round to face the sofa and stared at the stranger with haughty scrutiny.
Her flowing skirts seemed to fill the little room; her cloak was thrown back, showing a glimpse
of costly sable lining; her imperious beauty made her appear older than the gentle Bridgie,
a hundred times more formidable.  The formal bend of the head brought with it an acute sense
of discomfiture to the recipient.  For the first time since crossing that hospitable threshold
she realised that she was a solitary unit, a stranger set down in the midst of an affectionate
family party, and if it had not been for the crippling foot, she would have rushed away to
the haven of the room upstairs.  As it was, however, she was condemned to lie still and return
Esmeralda's commonplaces with what grace she might.

"I am pleased to see you," said Esmeralda's tongue.  "What a nuisance you are!" said the flash
of the cold grey eyes.  "Such a pleasure for Bridgie to have a friend."  "But now that I have
arrived, you are not wanted any longer, and are terribly in my way!"  One set of phrases were
as intelligible as the other to the sensitive invalid, and if Esmeralda's anticipations were
dashed by her presence, she herself abandoned all prospect of enjoyment, and only longed to
be able to return home forthwith.

Bridgie would not need her companionship any longer; she could be but a restraint and kill-joy
in the conferences of newly-united sisters.  She stared dismally at the floor, then looked
up to see Jack carrying the tea-table bodily across the room and setting it down by her couch.
Sarah had brought in fresh tea and cakes for the refreshment of the travellers, and he motioned
slightly towards his sisters, saying in an undertone,--"Bridgie will be incoherent for an hour.
Will you come to the rescue?  If we don't look after the tea, no one else will."

He smiled at her as he spoke, not sentimentally this time, but with a straightforward kindliness
which showed that he had understood and sympathised with her embarrassment.  Occupation for
hand and mind was the most tactful comfort which he could have administered, and Bridgie's
eager, "Oh, thank you, dear!  How good of you!" showed that she was indeed thankful to be relieved
of every duty but that of talking to her sister and watching her with adoring eyes.

Sylvia's post was no sinecure, for everyone started tea-drinking afresh to encourage the travellers,
and amidst the babble of voices Jack's sotto voce explanations made the conversation intelligible,
and took away the feeling of being left out in the cold.  At a touch of real sympathy the false
sentiment had disappeared, and her heart warmed towards the young fellow for his kindly concern
for her comfort.  It was a bond of union also to remember that he himself was apt to resent
the incursions of this domineering young matron, and she noted with delight that, while Bridgie
was apparently delighted to be trampled underfoot, he was ready and able to hold his own.

"We came over in a rush, and arrived only two hours ago.  I'm a disreputable object!" said
Esmeralda, glancing complacently over her sweeping skirts, and arranging the immaculate frills
at her throat. "Geoffrey was in such a hurry to get off that he gave me no time to make myself
decent."

"She had only an hour, poor thing, not a moment longer!  She sent me flying off to look for
trains and whistle for a hansom, and then kept me kicking my heels while she prinked before
the glass, putting on her best dress and the newest hat to impress you with her magnificence.
She is disappointed that you have not noticed them yet, that's why she pretends to be humble!"
explained Geoffrey in self-defence, whereat his wife grimaced at him in a manner singularly
undignified and eloquent.  Then she glanced hastily across the room at Sylvia, looking so girlish,
so abashed at having been discovered in her schemes, that Sylvia laughed involuntarily, and
forgot the old offence.

"Husbands are such blighting creatures; they are always telling the truth upon you!" sighed
Esmeralda sadly.  "I intend to bring up Bunting to agree with all I say, and then there will
be some chance of making an impression.  He is left at home, for he is too young to miss us,
and it was bad weather for moving a nursery.

"Now about to-morrow!  We have arranged for you to spend the day with us, and have lunch and
dinner in our private room.  The servants can eat up your turkey, or it can wait until the
next day.  You must come to us directly after church.  What train will you be able to catch?"

Bridgie knitted her brows and looked embarrassed and distressed.  The invitation could not,
of course, be accepted, and it was thoughtless of Esmeralda to have given it under existing
circumstances.  Had not Sylvia been introduced as a convalescent, and did not her position
on the couch prove that she was unable for a journey to town?  It would make the poor dear
so uncomfortable if she were cited as the obstacle; yet what other excuse could be made?

Esmeralda had travelled all the way from Knock for the pleasure of entertaining her brothers
and sisters, and would not be lightly turned from her plans.  Bridgie looked across the room,
and met Jack's eyes turned upon her with a flash of indignation in their clear depths.

"Well, Bridgie, you can do as you like, but I give you full notice that I stay at home!" he
said firmly.  "I have never yet eaten my Christmas dinner in an hotel, and I never shall so
long as I have a roof of my own to cover me.  Choose between Esmeralda and me; I am the head
of the family, and it is my privilege to play host on such occasions, but if the house is too
small--if we are not grand enough for Mrs Hilliard--"

"Jack!" cried Esmeralda sharply.  She pushed her cup on one side, and, springing across the
room to her brother's side, laid her hands on his shoulders and shook him vigorously to and
fro.  "Come down this minute from that high horse!  I won't be snubbed, when I've come all
the way over from Ireland to see you.  I thought you would like it, dear, because you enjoyed
dining with us so much before, and we should have been quite private in our own room; but I
don't mind where we are, so long as we are together.  We will come and dine with you if you
will ask us.  I would far rather have stayed here altogether if you could have put us up!"

"We could stow you away, but we can't manage the retinue.  Miss Trevor occupies the north-west
Tudor corridor, and there is only Pixie's little den at liberty," said Jack, laughing, and
recovering his complacency with wonderful quickness.  "The servants' hall accommodation is
also limited, and your maid and valet might not appreciate our menage.  We had a very stylish
pudding the other night.  You might give Esmeralda the recipe, Bridgie."

Esmeralda listened to the history of the beeswax and macaroni with a joy tempered by regret.

"We never have anything so nice as that!" she sighed.  "Never a bit of excitement as to how
things will turn out.  D'you remember the day when old Sukey mixed the lettuce with furniture
cream instead of salad- dressing, and Major Denny was so polite, with a crust of bread under
one end of his plate to let it drain down to the bottom, while he ate his meat high and dry
at the top!  'Twas bad luck that none of us fancied lettuce that day, but kept pressing him
to a second helping."

"Well, we will come here to-morrow morning, then.  Don't stay away from church, for, truthfully,
I would rather you were out when we arrived.  I have some rather--large--Christmas presents
which must be smuggled in unobserved.  I have some--er--preparations to make to-night, so we
can't stay very long."

Half an hour later husband and wife took their departure, and after seeing them off, Jack came
back into the drawing-room and stood by Sylvia's couch.

"Esmeralda invariably speaks before she thinks!" he said apologetically. "There's a lot of
pretence about her, but you will be astonished to find out what a good sort she is when you
know her better."

Sylvia smiled with a whimsical twist of the lips.  She thought that that prediction might apply
to more than one member of the O'Shaughnessy family, and cherished a pleasant conviction that
Jack's outburst of indignation had been more on her account than his own.  He was not the type
of man to stand on his dignity, and his quick glance into her face as Esmeralda gave her invitation
had been eloquent of understanding. His protest had saved her from a most distasteful position,
and once again she felt a debt of gratitude towards him.

CHAPTER NINE.

CHRISTMAS PRESENTS.

Christmas morning was heralded by the luxury of a late breakfast, when no one need hurry off
to town, and even Miles could satisfy the demands of appetite without casting a thought to
the time-table.  Porridge, bacon, eggs and sausages laid the foundation of his meal, before
he tackled marmalade, strawberry jam, fresh oranges and honey, accompanied by numerous draughts
of tea and coffee, and finally by a cup filled with the united drainings of both pots, which
he drank with obvious relish.

If it had been merry Pat who was so difficult to appease, there would have been no cause for
astonishment, but Miles's rapt eyes and ethereal expression seemed to bespeak no stronger diet
than moonbeams and mountain dew, and to hear him accompany his last mouthful with an eager,
"When's lunch?" was a distinct shock to the visitor.  Jack, too, had sustained a relapse into
sentiment, and was only awaiting opportunity to wax melancholy and confidential.  With a word
of encouragement he would have stayed away from church to bear her company, but Sylvia was
provokingly obtuse, and he went off looking unutterable reproaches with his "humbugging eyes."

Left to herself, Sylvia hobbled to the piano and sang Christmas hymns in a weak little voice,
which wavered suspiciously towards the close. Christmas is the day of all others when families
are united, and it seemed hard that when she possessed just one beloved relation, he should
be away off at the other end of the world.  The strange house, the unusual silence, and her
own inability to move about, added to the feeling of depression, and her thoughts turned towards
Aunt Margaret with unusual yearning.  The old lady was at times a sore trial to her niece's
patience, but at least they had a claim on each other's affection; she was the dear father's
sister, and her own legal guardian during his absence!

Sylvia wondered how the two ladies would pass their day--church in the morning as a matter
of course; early dinner and reminiscences of the brougham and peach-houses; arrival of the
postman with cards; renewed reminiscences and family histories of the various senders; one
arm-chair at each side of the fire; two white caps nodding sleepily forward; two pairs of cashmere
boots reposing on footstools.  Arrival of tea and exchange of recipes and household experiences.
Letters of thanks to valued friends for seasonable gifts.  Supper of cold turkey and cocoa,
with anecdotal references to Christmases of long ago.  Mutual exchange of compliments, bed,
nightcaps, and sleeping-socks.

Oh dear me!  It all seemed very flat to one-and-twenty, and why should one girl have health
and beauty, and brothers and sisters, and an adoring young husband into the bargain, and another
be a solitary unit, with no one to cosset her and help her to bear her manifold infirmities?

Sylvia's tears were still rather near the surface, and she mopped her eyes with her handkerchief,
and mopped them again, and then carefully dried them on a dry place, and craned forward to
look in the glass and see if they looked very red and tell-tale.  The bleared reflection had
a wonderfully calming effect, and she limped to her couch and read persistently to distract
her thoughts, until the peal of the bell announced the Hilliards' arrival.  From her corner
she could not see the doorway, but judging from the sounds of coming and going, of dragging
heavy weights, of scurrying along the passage, of whispered colloquies, and sudden explosions
of laughter, it was evident that some great mystery was in the air.

Then the cab drove away, the dining-room door closed with a bang, she heard the furniture being
dragged to and fro, and wondered how long it would be before the drawing-room was raided in
its turn.  For a quarter of an hour the conspirators remained shut up together, then Esmeralda
came sailing into the room, all smiles and amiability.

"A happy Christmas to you, Miss Trevor!  Excuse me for not coming in before, but I am so anxious
to arrange my presents before the others come home from church.  I want the easel from that
corner, and I want you to promise faithfully that you won't come into the dining-room before
you are allowed!"

"I can't walk so far without help.  You are quite safe so far as I am concerned," said Sylvia
regretfully, and Esmeralda looked at her with quick scrutiny.

"So bad as that!  I didn't know.  Is that why you have been crying?"

"No--oh no!  I am used to that now.  I felt a little lonely, that's all. I wanted my father."

The beautiful face changed suddenly, the lips tightened, the eyes grew large and strained.
There was a ring of pain in the clear voice.

"Is he dead?"

"No, no, only so far-away.  At the other end of the world, in Ceylon!"

"You will see him again!" said Esmeralda shortly.  She looked at the portrait of a handsome,
reckless face which hung on the wall above the sofa, and drew a fluttering sigh.  "That was
my father.  It is nearly two years since he had his accident, and I thought I could never be
happy again.  If I could write to him, if I could get his letters, and think that some day,
it might be in twenty years to come, he would be back among us again, I should feel as if there
was nothing else to wish for."

She sat down suddenly by the couch with an air of having forgotten all about the errand which
had brought her into the room, clasped her hands round her knee, and began a series of disconnected
childish memories, while Sylvia gazed spellbound at the beautiful, dreamy face, and wondered
how she could ever have thought it cold and unfeeling.

"We were always such chums, from the time that I was a mite in pinafores.  I remember his first
explaining to me what happened when people died--how their bodies were put into the grave,
while their souls went straight to heaven; but I didn't understand what a soul was, and I was
frightened and cried out, `Well, I won't go one step without my body!'  I used to play tricks
on him, and he would catch me up and carry me into his room, and say, `Will you rather be poisoned,
or buried alive?' and I would prefer the poisoning because it was chocolates out of the corner
cupboard.

"He used to wake me in the mornings coming battering at my door, and singing, `Come awake thee,
awake thee, my merry Swiss lass!' and when we were learning French fables from Miss Minnitt,
we used to take arms, Bridgie and I, and walk up and down before him reciting, `Deux compagnons
presse d'argent!'  It didn't make any difference whether he had the money or not--he always
gave it to us.

"One day we were going for a picnic, and he walked on with the men, leaving me to drive after
them in the cart with the provisions.  There was only one thing he told me to remember, and
that was just what I forgot--his camera, to take a special view which he'd wanted for an age.
Four miles from home it jumped into my mind, and I sat in misery the rest of the way.  The
Major laughed when I told him, and sympathised with me for my upset.  `You'll forget your own
head next, and it will be a pity,' he said, `for it's a very pretty one.'

"I hated to vex him just because he was so sweet about it.  No one ever understood me as well
as the Major, and when I was in a tantrum he would say, `Think it over till to-morrow, my girl.
If you are of the same mind then, we will discuss it together,' and, of course, I never did
think the same two days running.

"When he was ill he used to lie looking at me, and his face was quite different from that in
the picture--so sad and wistful.  `I've not done much in the way of training you, my girl,'
he would say, `but I've loved you a great deal.  Maybe that will do as well.  You are not one
to stand a bridle.'  He loved to have me with him; to the last he would stretch out his hand--"

Her voice quivered and stopped, and Sylvia sat with lowered eyes, murmuring incoherent condolences.
Esmeralda's love for her dead father was very sweet and touching, but to the more reserved
nature it seemed an extraordinary thing that she could speak so openly to a stranger, and in
the twinkling of an eye change her mood from gay to grave.

The hands of the clock were approaching the hour when the rest of the family might be expected
to return from church, yet there she sat dreaming over the past, and apparently absolutely
forgetful of the demands of the present.  Sylvia dare not risk a reminder which would seem
in the last degree unfeeling, but presently the door opened, and Geoffrey Hilliard appeared
on the threshold, looking round with anxious inquiry.

"Good morning, Miss Trevor.  The compliments of the season."  Then he looked at his wife, all
incredulous and aghast.  "My dear girl, what are you about?  Do you know that at any moment
Bridgie may be here?  I thought you had come for the easel."

Esmeralda leaped to her feet with a cry of dismay.  "Hurry! hurry!" she cried.  "Oh, what are
you waiting for?  Carry it for me.  Be quick! be quick!" and off she rushed with a swirl of
flounces, a rustle of silk, a wild waving of arms, while her husband chuckled with amusement,
and confided in Sylvia--

"That's the usual programme!  First keeps me waiting for hours, and then upbraids me for being
slow.  Keep Bridgie occupied if she comes in too soon, please, Miss Trevor.  This little surprise
needs a good deal of preparation."

What could it be?  Sylvia grew quite excited as once more peals of laughter echoed from the
dining-room.  Esmeralda was evidently sparing no pains to display her presents to the best
advantage, and, lucky girl, no want of money had hampered her choice of what would be appropriate
and welcome.

"I'm glad I gave Bridgie my minute offering this morning, so that it won't be shamed by contrast.
I shall be out of this distribution, so it doesn't matter, but I do hope they will ask me to
go in," said Sylvia to herself.  "I hated Esmeralda last night, but I rather love her this
morning.  She is like the little girl in the rhyme--when she is nice she is very, very nice;
but when she is bad she is--horrid!"

After all, the mysterious preparations were completed before the return of the church party,
for the service had been unusually lengthy, and Esmeralda was champing with impatience before
the latch-key clicked in the lock.  There was great kissing and hugging beneath the mistletoe,
and Bridgie was sent flying upstairs to take off her wraps, in preparation for the great exhibition.

"I have laid out our presents in the dining-room, and they take up all the table, so there
will be no dinner until they are distributed.  I've lighted the lamp, dear, to make it look
more festive.  Hope you don't mind?  It was just the least thought in the world gloomy in that
back room this morning."

"Anything you like, dear! anything you like!" cried Bridgie the docile; then she looked at
Sylvia, and beamed with satisfaction as Geoffrey offered his arm to support the invalid's halting
footsteps.

They led the way together, and she seated herself in state in an arm- chair, while the brothers
and sisters crowded in at the doorway, exclaiming volubly at the sight which met their eyes.

The table had been pushed lengthways against the window, the crimson curtains making an effective
background to its heaped-up treasures.  The lamp stood at the farther end of the room, casting
a subdued rosy light on the eager faces.  It was not exactly a "cheery" illumination, but it
was certainly becoming, and lent an air of mystery to the everyday surroundings.

"A new lamp-shade!  How lovely!  Pink silk and roses.  Wouldn't it make a sweet garden hat?"
exclaimed Bridgie rapturously.  "Is that my present, Joan?  How did you know I wanted a shade?"

"That's a present for the house; yours is over there in that round box; Geoffrey will hand
it to you.  There's a present for everybody, and one for you all together.  You'll see that last!"

At that every eye turned curiously at the curtained picture-frame which stood artfully supported
by boxes at the place of honour at the farther end of the table.  Evidently this was the grand
climax of the entertainment, but meantime there were half a dozen excitements in store, all
calling for rapturous acknowledgments.

Bridgie's round box was found to contain a muff of real Russian sable, on receiving which,
to use her own expressive phrase, she "nearly swooned with delight."  She sat purring over
it, and rubbing it fondly against her cheeks, while dandy Jack was presented with a dressing-case,
fitted with silver and ivory, Pat with a handsome camera, and Miles with a bicycle deftly wheeled
from behind the curtains.

Even the servants had been remembered, for there was a bulky parcel addressed to each name,
and Sylvia grew red with mingled pleasure and embarrassment as a casket of French bon-bons
was deposited on her knee. It was a delightful scene, and not the least delightful part of
it was the enjoyment of the young couple themselves, and their whole-hearted participation
in the pleasure of the recipients.

It is the custom of most donors to depreciate their gifts, but that was not Esmeralda's way.
Not a bit of it!  She was a capital show-woman, and if by chance any detail of perfection passed
unnoticed, she pointed it out forthwith, and dilated at length upon its virtues.  Jack turned
over the silver-topped bottles, and peeped at his reflection in the mirror; Miles tingled his
bicycle-bell, and balanced himself on the saddle; Sylvia handed round bon-bons and surreptitiously
fumbled to discover how many rows the box contained; and Pat demanded immediate orders for
family groups.  It took some little time to restore order, but Geoffrey stood patiently waiting
until he could make himself heard, his hand stretched out to uncover the curtained frame.

"Now for the general present!  With best wishes to the family circle, from Joan and myself.
Are you ready?  Very well, then, here you are! One, two, three!"

With the last word he whisked off the cloth, and a gasp sounded through the room, followed
by a silence more eloquent than words.

Sylvia stared with widened eyes at the picture of a girl's head, strangely like and yet unlike
that precious photograph which Bridgie had exhibited with so much pride.  It was Pixie--that
was quite evident--but an older, bigger, wonderfully smartened edition of the elf-like child.
The dark locks were rolled back in pompadour fashion over a high cushion, the plait turned
up in a queue, fastened at the nape of the neck by an enormous outstanding bow; the cheeks
were fuller in outline, and the disproportion between nose and mouth less marked.  She was
by no means pretty, yet there was a charm about the quaint little face which made the onlooker
smile involuntarily and feel a sudden outgoing of affection.

"P-pixie!" gasped Bridgie in a breathless whisper.  She rested her cheek against the muff,
and stared before her with rapt grey eyes.  "Pixie's portrait!  Oh, Esmeralda--what a lovely
thought!  You had it taken for us?  You sent to Paris for it?"

"Yes--yes!" cried Esmeralda gleefully.  "I knew it would please you more than anything else
to have her with us.  Do you like it?  Do you think it is good?  Is it quite like her?"

"It's like--yes, but not quite lifelike.  Does she really do her hair like that?  I can't imagine
Pixie looking so neat.  She looks grave, too--graver than she ever looked, except when she
was up to mischief.  I hope she is not fretting, poor child!  Oh, it makes me long for her
more than ever!  I could look at it all day long!"

Jack stroked his chin, and smiled contentedly.

"That's what I call something like a present!  It's a rattling good portrait of the Piccaninny,
judiciously flattered as portraits ought to be.  We can't see it, though, in this light.  Let
me put the lamp a little nearer, or take off the shade."

Esmeralda, however, was standing next the lamp, and refused to move aside.

"We arranged it to give the best light, so it's no use trying to improve it.  The best view
is from over there by the door," she said in her masterful fashion which would brook no contradiction.
"One can never see a picture to the best advantage by lamp-light, but you must make allowances
for that.  Do you think it is well done?  It is by a very good master!"

"Rather starry about the eyes!" said Pat critically.

"Laid on the red rather too thickly about the cheeks!" objected Miles.

Bridgie put down her muff, and went stooping across the room to get a nearer view.

"Is it oil or water-colour?  I seem to know the frame.  Oh, it is like her, Esmeralda--oh,
so like!  Pixie, Pixie, my little Pixie!"

"Bridgie!" cried an answering voice.  The picture swayed, rocked forward, and fell on its face
on the table; a little figure stood squeezed in between the table and the window.  It was no
picture, but a reality.  Pixie herself stood among them in warm, living flesh and blood!

CHAPTER TEN.

PIXIE'S REMINISCENCES.

It is wonderful what money can do--in conjunction with generous impulse and ingenious brain.
Esmeralda hung on to Bridgie's arm relating in breathless accents how, being herself unable
to go abroad until after the New Year, the happy inspiration had occurred to Geoffrey of despatching
the French maid to her native city to bring back the dear living Christmas present which now
stood before them; how the travellers had arrived on the previous evening, afire with delight
at their own share in the conspiracy; how she herself had conceived the idea of presenting
Pixie in the form of a portrait, and had brought the frame from home, and tacked across it
a piece of black gauze to heighten the picture-like effect.

"And I put the lamp as far-away from it as possible, and covered it over so that she might
not have to keep still too long.  Oh, if you could only have seen yourselves staring at her,
and taking it all in grim earnest!  I never, never enjoyed anything so much in my days!"

"Is it oil colours I am, or water?  I'm flattered, ain't I, as a portrait ought to be?  Ye
couldn't imagine I could be so neat!" cried Pixie tauntingly, as she pirouetted to and fro
on the top of the table, to which she had lightly sprung at the first moment of discovery.
She looked like a big French doll, as she swung from side to side, her hands outheld, her shoulders
raised, her tiny feet twinkling to and fro.  Her pink frock was marvellously smart, the flounces
stood out in jaunty fashion around the ankles, the sash encircled a tiny waist, and the brothers
and sisters stood looking on, joy, incredulity, amaze written upon their faces.

Bridgie's arms kept stretching out and falling back to her side with automatic regularity,
and still the little figure pranced, and gesticulated, and blew kisses to right and left, at
one moment a merry Irish vagabond, at the next a French marionette--all smirks and bows and
shrugging shoulders.

"We got the better of you that time, I'm thinking!  Oh, la-la! how it was droll to hear you
all making your pleasantries upon me while I kept still--so still!  I have never been so still
but when I am up to mischief.  If ye could have seen under the table, I was shaking like a
jelly, but Esmeralda said, `I'll pack ye back as quick as ye came if you spoil it on me, after
all me trouble!'"

"Figure it to yourselves; I was sitting so triste by myself in the salon, thinking of you all
at home, and the fun ye'd have without me, and the slices of plum-pudding fried up the next
day the way I like them best, and never a bite to come my way, when behold I the door opened,
and there enters to me Marie, all smiles and complaisance.  Everything is altered, she bears
a letter from Madame Hilliard--I must pack my box, and say my farewells, and be ready to start
by the train next day. Fortunately all is ready.  Therese has already prepared for my return.
There was nothing to do but lay the things in the box and drive away."

"And what did Therese say to it all?  How did she and Pere like parting from you in such a hurry?"

"They wept!" said Pixie tragically.  Her shoulders approached her ears in eloquent gesture.
"But how they wept!  I also wept to see them weep, and Marie wept to leave her dear Paris."
She paused, and the solemn expression gave place to a broad smile of enjoyment.

"There wasn't a dry rag between the four of us, and Pere took snuff to console himself, and
that started him crying harder than ever.  I was so flurried I couldn't tell which was the
topmost, joy or sorrow, until we had ham and eggs for breakfast this morning, and I felt I
was at home. It's an awful thing to live in a country where there's never a bite of solid food
to cheer your spirits in the morning!  Many's the time me heart would bleed, thinking of Miles
if he'd been there.  Are ye glad to see me, boys, now you know that I'm real?"

There was no doubt about that.  When at last the little sister condescended to step down from
her perch, she was passed from one to another in a series of bear-like hugs, from which she
emerged flushed and complacent, to step briskly towards Sylvia and kiss her effusively upon
the cheek.

"How d'ye do, me dear, and how's your illness?  I've heard so much about it that I expected
to see you worse.  You look too pretty to be an invalid!"

"Hear, hear!" muttered Jack softly.

Sylvia blushed and gripped the little hand which lay so confidingly in her own.

"Thank you very much.  I am getting better, but I don't feel at all pretty.  I'm lame, and
have to limp about wherever I go, and my hair is tumbling out.  I have the greatest difficulty
to make it look respectable.  I shall be bald soon!"

Pixie craned forward and examined her head with sorrowful candour.

"It is thin!  Ye can see the scalp shining through like shot silk. You'll look like an old
man with a bald head; but never mind!  Think of the saving in the morning!  It will be so easy
to do your hair!"

There was a burst of laughter from brothers and sisters, while Sylvia covered her face with
her hands and rocked to and fro in mock despair.

"You need never be unduly elated by a compliment from Pixie, Miss Trevor," said Geoffrey Hilliard
meaningly.  "She is the most transparently truthful person I ever encountered, and favoured
me with several character sketches of my wife before we were engaged, which might have warned
me of my fate if I'd been a sensible fellow.  I have remembered them, Pixie, many a time since
then, and I'm glad to find your foreign experiences have not affected your candour.  There's
another thing that is not much altered, so far as I can hear--and that's your brogue, my dear!
It sounds to me almost as pronounced as in the old days when you were running wild at Knock."

"But it's got a French accent to it now--that's better than English!" cried Pixie eagerly.
"I was learning to speak quite elegantly in Surbiton, but Therese wouldn't listen to a word
of English out of my mouth, and if you'll believe me, me dears, my very dreams are in French
the last few months.  There was a jeune fille in Paris who used to promenade with us sometimes
for the benefit of hearing me talk English. She said the words didn't sound the same way as
when they taught them to her at school.  Helas le miserable!  The brogue of her put shame on
me own before I came away."

The shoulders went up again, and a roguish smile lit up the little face. Bridgie watched it
with rapt, adoring eyes; her Pixie, her baby, was now a big girl, almost grown-up, transformed
from the forlorn-looking elf to a natty little personage, more like the pictures of jeunes
filles on the back of French pattern plates than she could have believed possible for Irish
flesh and blood.  Imitative Pixie had caught "the air," and the good Therese had evidently
taken immense pains with the costume in which her pupil should make her reappearance in the
family circle.

Bridgie gazed at the buckled, high-heeled shoes peeping from beneath the flounces, and wondered
if it could really be that they held the same little feet which used to patter about, buttonless,
and down at heel; she looked at the jaunty, outstanding bow which tied back the hair, and contrasted
it with the wisp of ribbon twisted to the proportions of a tape, and knotted like a cat-o'-nine-tails,
which used to bind together the straggly locks, and as she looked, she felt--shall it be confessed?--a
pang of longing and regret for the days that were no more. It passed in a moment, for whatever
her external appearance might be, Pixie was transparently the same at heart, and quick to note
the faintest shadow on the face of the dear mother-sister.  She swung round to face Bridgie,
the grey eyes bent upon her in earnest scrutiny.

They saw something written there that had not been visible two years before--the outward marks
of an inward, and very bitter struggle, and Bridgie flushed beneath the scrutiny of that clear-seeing,
childlike gaze, and trembled at the thought of what was to come.

"Has anyone been unkind to ye, Bridgie?" asked Pixie in deep, full- throated tones.  She put
up her hand and stroked the soft cheek with a tenderness of pitying love which was more eloquent
than words.  "There are dips in your cheeks, like Miss Minnitt's when she was getting over
the fever, and your eyes look tired.  What has happened to worry ye, me dear, and take the
colour out of your face?"

"She has enough colour to satisfy you at the moment, hasn't she?"  Jack said, laughing, and
Pixie nodded with ruthless candour.

"Because she is blushing.  What are you blushing for, you silly girl? It isn't as if I had
asked about a heart affair.  The girls in France were always talking of heart affairs, and
asking if you were fiancee. They thought you were very old, and must be going to coif Saint
Catherine.  That means that you are going to be an old maid.  I said yes, of course you were,
because you were needed at home.  Esmeralda was no use, but we could not get on without Bridgie!"

"You miserable, ungrateful child!  This is my reward for all I have done for you!" declaimed
Esmeralda with dramatic emphasis, but Bridgie's face lit up with a smile of whole-hearted satisfaction.

Thank God!  Whatever her personal disappointment might be, she could never feel that she was
alone in the world--that among all its teeming millions there was no human being whose happiness
depended upon her presence; she had been spared that worst trial to a woman's heart, and Pixie's
calm taking-for-granted that she was indispensable to the family circle was the greatest comfort
which she could have given.

"No, I shan't leave you, darling.  I have too much to do looking after you and those three
big boys, and when you fly away to nests of your own, Sylvia and I have all sorts of plans
for enjoying ourselves together.  I have promised faithfully to wheel her about in her Bath-
chair."

"And I will make your caps.  I'm clever at millinery," said Sylvia, pretending not to hear
Jack's murmurs of protest, and looking very pretty and animated as she sat erect in her chair
and gesticulated with her thin little hands.  "You shall have one with pearl dangles for high
days and holidays, and nice, stiff little black bows for ordinary wear. We will knit socks
and mittens, and play cribbage in the evening, and talk over the days of our youth.  It's almost
a pity we know each other now, for we shan't be able to romance as much as we would like!"

"Perhaps the romance will come in in some other way!  Perhaps a husband may interfere with
the claims of Saint Catherine!" said Geoffrey, putting into words the language of Jack's eyes,
and everybody stared at Sylvia's face with embarrassing curiosity.

"I shall never marry!" she said obstinately.  Not that she meant it in the least, for she did
not, but she was one of the girls who foolishly think it the right thing to protest in public,
and who are mistaken enough to feel a trifle ashamed of the natural womanly longing for someone
to love and to protect them, which God Himself has put in their hearts.  A few girls there
may be who honestly mean such a decision, but they are very few indeed, while their hearers
are invariably sceptical.

Not one of the O'Shaughnessys seemed in the least impressed by Sylvia's disclaimer, and it
was disconcerting to hear Pixie's sympathetic, "Did no one ever ask ye?  Never mind!  They
may still.  You are not so very old!"

Sylvia made up her mind there and then that it was better to say exactly what one meant in
the presence of Miss Pixie O'Shaughnessy!

CHAPTER ELEVEN.

ESMERALDA CHECKMATED.

Three days after Christmas, Esmeralda and her husband returned to Ireland, scattering invitations,
severally and in bulk, to all the inhabitants of Number Three, Rutland Road.  Even Sylvia found
herself invited for a long visit, and was the more surprised at this mark of favour because
Mrs Hilliard's demeanour towards her was tinged with jealousy and uneasy suspicion.  She was
willing enough to play Lady Bountiful, present offerings of fruit and flowers, and be gushingly
sympathetic, but she liked to monopolise the whole attention of her sisters, and was not well
pleased when they in their turn hung about the invalid's couch.  She had not been an hour in
the same room, moreover, before she had intercepted one of Jack's most melting glances, and
the stare of the great grey eyes left no doubt as to the disapproval with which she viewed
the flirtation.

Sylvia's annoyance converted her into a very hedgehog of dignity, and the prickly quills kept
the young fellow at such a distance that he lost faith in his own fascinations for the first
and only time in his career. He bade Esmeralda an affectionate farewell, but was in truth well
resigned to her departure--a fact which she was quite sharp enough to discover.

"Jack is pleased that I am going away!" she said to Bridgie as the two sisters sat together
for the last confidential chat.  "He knows that I watch him flirting with Sylvia Trevor, and
thinks he will get on better without me.  You really ought to be careful, Bridgie, and not
let them be too much together!"

"Does he flirt with her?  Not more than he does with every other girl," said Bridgie leniently.
"I don't see why I should worry myself about it.  Sylvia is a sensible girl, who is not given
to fancying that every man is in love with her, and Jack is just a dear, soft-hearted boy,
who can't help making pretty speeches, but he would never make serious love if he did not mean
it, and if he did--well, why not Sylvia as well as anyone else?"

But Mrs Geoffrey Hilliard was not to be so easily appeased.  She threw back her haughty head,
lowered languid eyelids, and drawled out--

"My dear Bridgie, remember whom you are speaking about!  Jack is the head of the family--he's
O'Shaughnessy of Knock!  Eventually, as we hope and believe, he will go back to take up his
own position, and, thanks to Geoff, the property will be in a very different condition from
what it was when he left.  He must make a marriage which will be a help, not a hindrance. 
And who is she?  Answer me that!  What do you know about her?"

"She is a dear girl!  She is very attractive!  Her father is abroad. She lives with an old aunt."

"Exactly!  A pleasant girl in a London suburb!"  Esmeralda's voice was full of ineffable condescension.
"There are thousands of them, and no doubt they are charming in their way, but not for Jack.
He owes a duty to the family as well as himself, and you ought to tell him as much. You really
ought, Bridgie!  Speak to him at once, before it goes too far!"

"Suppose you speak to him yourself!  When you are so hot upon it, it's a pity to leave it to me."

"No, I'd rather not.  Jack is so stupid about taking advice.  He would snap my nose off if
I said anything."

"I really don't see why my nose is not as valuable as yours!  Why should I do your disagreeable
work for you?" retorted Bridgie with spirit. "You did not know that Geoffrey was a rich man
when you promised to marry him, and it's the last thing I would think of myself, so why should
we expect any more of Jack?  I am not going to interfere, whatever happens, and if you take
my advice you won't mention Sylvia's name to him!"

"I don't intend to, but--"

Esmeralda shut her lips tightly over an unspoken determination.  There are more ways than one
of nipping in the bud an incipient love affair, but she did not care about confiding her latest
inspiration to any hearer, least of all to Bridgie, who would have given up her most cherished
plans rather than hurt the feelings of a fellow-creature.  She changed the subject, and talked
lightly on impersonal topics until the moment of parting drew near, when there came a sudden
softening over the beautiful face, and she said in gentle, diffident tones--

"I didn't like to ask before, but I can't leave without knowing, darling.  Have you heard?"

Bridgie shook her head mutely, and the lines which Pixie had noticed deepened round her eyes
and mouth, but the eyes smiled still--a brave, steady smile.

"I never shall hear now, Joan.  I've made up my mind to that."

"I don't know how you bear it!  I can't think how you manage to be so composed and cheerful!
If Geoff had treated me like that, it would have soured me for life.  You were never sour from
the first, and now you seem quite happy.  Yet, as Pixie says, you have a pathetic look which
shows that you have not really forgotten.  You still care, Bridgie dear?"

"I shall always care," said Bridgie quietly.  "There's an ache at the back of my heart, but
there are so many things at the front that it gets crowded out.  Besides, you know, Esmeralda
darling, I don't want to seem to praise myself, but it's a trouble which God has sent me, and
I ask Him every night to help me to bear it in the right way.  It wouldn't be the right way
to let the shadow of it darken other lives besides my own. If I moped and grizzled, everyone
in the house would be uncomfortable, and they have their own worries, poor creatures, without
suffering for mine!  I made an excellent rule for my own benefit--to laugh downstairs and cry
in my own room, and it answers beautifully, for I'm so tired when I get to bed that I've no
sooner begun repining than I wake up and find it's morning.  You try it, dear, when you've
got a worry.  You'll find it splendid!"

Esmeralda shook her head.

"Not for me!  What I feel I must show, and sooner than I feel it, if that is possible.  If
I tried to bottle up my feelings it would make me ill, and the explosion would be all the greater
when it did come.  My only chance is to get it over as soon as possible, but in your case it
is a long slow suspense, which is worse than any definite trouble.  You are an angel, dear,
to bear it as you do!  It's mysterious that it should have come to you and not me, for you
didn't need discipline, and I, who was always the naughty one, have got all that I want--Geoffrey,
and home, and the dear little boy.  You must come soon, Bridgie, to see the boy.  He will be
getting teeth and all sorts of luxuries, and his godmother ought to be there to look after him."

Esmeralda rose and strolled over to the glass to arrange her hat and pin on a filmy veil. 
"I must go downstairs now, and say good-bye to Miss Trevor.  Don't hurry, dear, if you have
anything to do.  We don't leave for a quarter of an hour still."

Unsuspecting Bridgie trotted away to the kitchen to give some orders, while Esmeralda sailed
into the drawing-room, all smiles and amiability. A peal of laughter greeted her ears as she
entered, and there sat Pixie perched on the end of the sofa, with her hands clasped round her
knees, and her chin poked forward, enjoying to the full the discovery of a new audience, who
was apparently as much interested in the sayings and doings of the O'Shaughnessy family as
she was herself.

Both girls looked up as the rustle of silks heralded Mrs Hilliard's approach, but while the
younger remained serenely composed, Sylvia's lips tightened, and her eyes gave out an ominous
flash.  It was as if she felt an antagonistic spirit in the air, and braced herself for the
conflict.  Yet nothing could have been more friendly than Esmeralda's smile--more cordial than
her voice.

"I told Bridgie I must really have ten minutes for a farewell chat with you before I go.  It
has been so pleasant to have you here, and I hope we shall soon meet again.  Has Pixie been
amusing you while we were upstairs?  Come down from that couch, child!  You must be quite cramped.
I am here, so you need not mount guard any longer."

"I'm very comfortable where I am," said Pixie easily.  She laid her head on one side, and stared
at her sister with large, innocent eyes, which seemed strangely disconcerting to that young
lady's composure.  She frowned, and snapped a bracelet together with quite a vicious snap.

"But you are too old for such inelegant positions.  You are almost grown-up now, and must learn
how to behave.  For goodness' sake get up before Geoff sees you!  He is so very particular
about nice behaviour in girls."

"'Twas a bad relapse for him when he married you!" muttered Pixie beneath her breath.  She
straightened herself slowly and let her feet slip to the ground, but Esmeralda realised that
nothing but a direct request would convince her of the extraordinary fact that her absence
was for once more desired than her presence.  For obvious reasons such a request could not
be made, and as the time was quickly passing nothing remained but to clothe her hints even
more circumspectly than she had intended.

"I am so glad that your foot is really getting better," she said graciously to Sylvia.  "Bridgie
says the nurse is so pleased with its progress the last few days.  You will be able to walk
about soon, and then if you feel inclined for a change we shall be so pleased if you will come
over to visit us.  It is quiet at Knock, but I would drive you about, and the air is so delightful
that I am sure it would do you good. You will hear all about the place from Pixie, so that
it would not feel strange to you when you arrived, and we have a few nice friends within driving
distance.

"She would like Mollie Burrell, wouldn't she, Pixie?  That's a young girl who lives seven miles
from us at Knock, but we think nothing of that distance in the country.  She was always over
at the Castle before Jack went away, and we used to say she felt like another sister.  You
remember how he used to drive over in the cart, and bring her back to surprise us?"

"I do so!  And the afternoon when she went shopping into the post-office as they drove through
the village, and Tim Hegan came up and began bidding for the old grey mare, and with that Jack
took him into the cart and drove over to the farm, and never a thought of poor Mollie until
the evening, when she cut him dead limping home through the mud.  'Twas a cruel thing to do,
and the poor creature putting on new boots for the occasion to do him honour, and says Jack,
`I've done for myself this time!  It would take a cleverer man than myself to twist that into
a compliment!'"

"Oh, that's an old-world story!" cried Esmeralda, with her head in the air.  Her cheeks had
flushed despite her efforts for composure, and she was uncomfortably conscious that Sylvia
was trying to restrain a smile at this most open contradiction of the implied attachment between
Jack and his Irish neighbour.  Her irritation urged her to stronger measures, and she said
testily--

"It proves how little dependence can be placed upon Jack's promises.  If he could forget Mollie,
it is no wonder that he changes his mind every other day.  But they made up that quarrel ages
ago, and he was over there shooting in September and squiring her all over the county.  You
should not tell tales out of school, Pixie!"

"Was it me?  I thought it was yourself.  You began saying that they were such friends, and
I thought maybe it would amuse Sylvia to hear--"

"So it does, Pixie.  It amuses me extremely," assented Sylvia with an intentional emphasis,
which made Esmeralda wince once more, for, however innocent the little sister might be, she
felt convinced that Sylvia Trevor thoroughly understood her implied warning, and was by no
means docile in her manner of receiving it.  She sat up stiff and erect, smiling into space
with an expression of scornful superiority which filled the beholder with unwilling admiration.
In just such a spirit would she herself have accepted interference from the lips of a stranger.
She recognised a kindred spirit, and realised that, putting Jack out of the question, Miss
Sylvia Trevor would be a friend after her own heart.

The repeated invitation had in it a note of sincerity which had been wanting in the earlier
rendering, but Sylvia only murmured, "Thank you!" in a politely non-committal manner, and shrank
back so decidedly from the proffered kiss that there was no choice but to substitute a formal
handshake in its stead.

The sisters drove off together to the station, and Sylvia was left alone to relieve pent-up
irritation by making one impetuous resolve after another, to replace each the following moment
by one diametrically different.

"Thank goodness, she has gone at last!  I can't think how I ever could have liked her!  I think
I dislike her more than anyone I ever met.  How dare she interfere with me!  How dare she imply
that I want to monopolise her precious brother!  I shall never speak to him again as long as
I live!  I shall go home to-morrow, and take good care that I never come across when he is
likely to be at home.  Perhaps she has warned him too, as if he were not conceited enough already!
He is worth a dozen of her all the same, and is far nicer than I thought at first. It's perfectly
absurd to think a man and a girl cannot be in the same house for a week without falling in
love with each other.  I won't condescend to take the faintest notice of her insinuations.
I shall be as nice as I like, and give up snubbing him from this minute.  He can be engaged
to fifty Mollie Burrells if he likes; that's no reason why I should not treat him civilly!"

In the hours which elapsed before the return of the sisters she had had time to change her
mind a dozen times over, to write letters to Aunt Margaret and burn them in the fire, to invent
scathing sarcasms by which poor Jack was to be reduced to a condition of hopeless subjection,
and rehearse melting scenes when her womanly sympathy would soothe ruffled spirits and restore
him to calm.

All uncertainty as to her conduct was, however, removed by the first glance at Jack's face
when he returned home in the evening, for it bore the unmistakable marks of real anxiety, and
the weary sigh with which he sank into his chair was something new to his vigorous manhood.

Bridgie bustled in with the tea which always awaited his coming, kissed him lightly, and hurried
away to finish some letters.  Pixie sat hunched up before the fire devouring a book, and Jack
pushed his chair nearer Sylvia's couch, staring at her in a dumb, melancholy fashion which
had in it something singularly beguiling.  Despite his great height and muscular form, he looked
so helpless and appealing, like a nice child who has lost a toy, or a big collie dog which
turns pathetic eyes towards his master's face.

Sylvia smiled involuntarily, but it was a very friendly smile, and her voice had lost its mocking
tone as she inquired--

"Well--what's the trouble?"

Jack put his cup on the table and leant towards her, his elbows resting on his knees, his chin
supported on clasped hands.  Pixie read on undisturbed, soft gurgles of laughter marking her
enjoyment of sensational passages.

"I've had a blow," said Jack, "a ghastly disappointment!  This is the day when the firm announces
the various arrangements for the year, increases in salary and so on.  I quite understood that
I should come in for a substantial rise, if not a junior partnership.  It was talked about
when I joined four years back, and as nothing was done last January I made a certainty of it
coming off now.  Instead of that, I get nothing--nothing!  No advance at all upon the payment
of the last two years.  I had it out with the partners this afternoon, and they seemed to think
I had done unusually well.  They implied that it was a piece of pure imagination on my part
to have expected to be taken into the firm."

"But--I know nothing about business except what I have read--but is it not usual to have something
written--a definite agreement which settles things without the possibility of argument?  If
you joined this firm with the idea of being made a partner, was not an agreement written down
in black and white?"

Jack waved his hand in airy dissent.

"No, there was nothing definite, but we talked it over.--The old fellow certainly held out
hopes for the future!  I made so sure of a partnership that we took this house in the prospect
of being able to pay for it out of my increased earnings.  It's too expensive as it is for
people brought up as we have been.  I'm the most practical of the bundle, and with care and
attention can make half a crown go almost as far as an Englishman's shilling; but Bridgie,
bless her! wears herself out saving pennies, and throws away pounds with the best.  In my father's
time there was never any money to trouble about, so she got into the way of ordering things
without thinking what they would cost, and it's a difficult plan to forsake.  She's done her
best, poor creature!  I wouldn't blame her for the world."

"And--and will you have to leave the house?"  Sylvia's heart sank drearily at the prospect.
What if the O'Shaughnessys flitted away to a suburb at the opposite end of the city, and Number
Three, Rutland Road was deserted once more, or tenanted by an ordinary, commonplace family,
such as inhabited every other villa in the neighbourhood!  After the sweet friendship of Bridgie,
the fascinations of Jack, the audacities of the two boys, the witcheries of Pixie, and last
but not least, the incursions of Esmeralda, exasperating, but to the last degree romantic and
beautiful, Sylvia felt a shudder of distaste at the thought of a stout mamma and papa, one
baby in a perambulator, another in a mail- cart, and a graduated line of school-boys and girls
sallying forth daily to their appointed tasks.  "Oh, I'm so sorry you will have to leave!"
she sighed, and Jack smiled at her in grateful acknowledgment of her regret.

"I'm glad you are sorry, but I don't intend to leave.  We have been here only four months,
and I can't face another removal for--many reasons! We will have to squeeze along somehow until
things look up.  A crop of bills have come in during the last few days to make matters worse,
and I will have to talk things over with Bridgie to-night.  I hate to worry her, but there
must be some system, or we shall find ourselves in the workhouse some fine day.  And now there
is the child to think of.  She will be an extra expense!"

Sylvia glanced quickly across the room at the figure in the depths of the arm-chair.  She sat
motionless, her head bent over her book, but Pixie was one of those intensely alive little
creatures who seem to infect their very surroundings with vitality.  It seemed to Sylvia that
the pages fluttered in agitated fashion, the bow of ribbon holding back her hair seemed of
a sudden to stand out at attention, the knotted ends looked like two alert, curious ears at
the back of her head.

How much had Pixie heard?

CHAPTER TWELVE.

A FAMILY COUNCIL.

That night after dinner Jack broke the news of his disappointment to the assembled family,
who bore the shock with surprising resignation.  Pat whistled, and said, "Just our luck!  Ah,
well, if it's no better, let's be thankful it's no worse!"  Miles suggested cheerfully, "Why
don't you chuck it and keep a shop?  Then we should get all our food for nothing." And Bridgie's
sigh turned into a smile as she cried, "What a blessing we took this house when we did!  Now
we should not have been able to afford it, and we should never have known you, Sylvia dear!
It's funny, isn't it, to think that this little crib is too big for us?"

"Oh, awfully funny!" said Jack drily.  He had opened the topmost drawer in the writing-table
and taken out half a dozen red-backed books and a bundle of bills.  "The fact remains that
we shall have to spend at least a hundred a year less than we calculated if we want to keep
out of the Bankruptcy Court.  I don't know how it is, but I seem to have given the money for
half these bills, and yet here they are again!  I was perfectly horrified to see them.  This
coal bill, for instance,--I remember distinctly giving you two sovereigns one morning just
as I was starting for town--"

Sylvia sat up hastily and fumbled for the stick by which she supported herself about the house.
It seemed to her impossible that such intimate family affairs could be discussed before a stranger,
but at the first movement Jack inquired eagerly where she was going, and both he and Bridgie
laughed to scorn the idea of privacy.  The presence of a stranger seemed indeed to whet their
interest in the forthcoming discussion, which was conducted throughout with a cheerfulness
and composure which contrasted strangely with Miss Munns's weekly lamentations over her tradesmen's
accounts.

"'Deed, I remember quite well!" said Bridgie, referring to the money which had been given to
her in settlement of the coal bill.  "It was the morning the cat got lost in the oven, and
all of us searching the house over because of the piteous mews of it.  It crept in, Sylvia,
when the door was open, after the bacon came out, and Sarah pushed it to as she passed, so
the poor creature had a fine Turkish bath of it before we found her.  Did I not pay the bill,
after all?  I suppose I was short of money for something else.  It's wonderful the way it slips
away when you are keeping house!"

Jack sighed and took up another paper from the table.

"There's another here.  I know I gave you ten shillings to settle this ironmonger fellow. 
Eight and threepence!  It's ridiculous running on bills for little sums like this."

"I paid it!  I paid it!" cried Bridgie triumphantly.  "I distinctly remember, because there
is such a funny little man in the shop who says, `What is your next pleasure, madam?' when
you buy a box of tacks.  I remember distinctly going in and paying something."

"Very well, then, you must have the receipt.  Where have you put the receipt?"

Bridgie looked vaguely round the room, turned out the contents of her writing-pad, peeped into
a drawer under the table, searched the bottom of the stocking-basket, the pocket of her dress,
then stroked her chin meditatively, and said--

"Perhaps I was paying for something else!  I remember now that I did buy a saucepan."

Jack sighed again, and paced up and down the floor, but he showed no signs of anger or even
surprise, and his voice was quite apologetic as he said--

"I'm afraid you will have to be more methodical, dear, if we stay on in this house.  We shall
never know how we stand if bills keep coming in when we think they are settled.  We had better
hold a cabinet council and decide how much we can afford to spend in housekeeping and other
departments, and cut our coat according to our cloth.  It will be difficult after the way things
went on at Knock, but it's our only chance.  I tried to put down my private expenses this afternoon,
and was horrified to find how heavy they were."

Bridgie cast an admiring glance upon him, and turned to Sylvia with an air of pride.

"Isn't he splendid, now, at his age, talking like an old man for wisdom and prudence!  You
may well say things are different from what they were at home, for there, if the worst came
to the worst, you could always fall back on the pigs and the vegetables that grew for nothing
at your door.  The idea of paying fourpence for a cauliflower takes me heart out of me every
time I go marketing, and the bacon is no sooner bought, than it is eaten.  Well, I'm willing
enough to learn method, but who's to teach me?  Saving your presence, Jack, you're just a beginner
yourself!"

Sylvia chuckled mischievously, and her eyes danced with amusement.

"There is a mistress in the art at your very door!  Aunt Margaret would be enchanted to instruct
you, and her housekeeping is a marvel of accuracy.  She could tell you exactly how much she
spent last year on soft soap, and the reason why it was more in ninety-six than in ninety-
seven.  She could walk about the house in the dark and put her hand on the blue-bag and the
list of last week's washing.  She makes lists of everything she possesses, from household linen
to the Christmas cards which she sends out and receives.  Her dresses last for best for four
years before they are turned for afternoon wear, and two years later they are re-dipped for
mornings.  They have histories, like her relations, and make valuable Christmas presents to
the charwoman on their eighth birthday.  She thinks I am recklessly extravagant because my
dresses are worn-out in a year!"

"I'll ask her to teach me at once!  I'll begin making lists this very afternoon!  I'll practise
shutting my eyes and searching for the blue- bag," cried Bridgie ardently.  "Jack dear, I'll
be a model housekeeper, and save so much money that we shall be quite rich."

She was all smiles and complaisance, and sat down for the cabinet council with an unruffled
brow, but, as we all know, it is more difficult to face one or two definite difficulties than
an army of shadowy deprivations, and when the division of the family income made it necessary
to subtract considerably from her housekeeping allowance, and to saddle her in addition with
several outside expenses, Mistress Bridget sighed and showed signs of rebellion.

"Such a lot of trouble for such a trifling saving!  'Twill destroy me altogether to be fussing
over every halfpenny.  What would it matter if we were a trifle in debt at the end of the year?
Geoffrey would pay a hundred pounds without knowing it, and be proud to do it into the bargain!"

"But I won't accept it.  He has done quite enough as it is.  He has paid for Pat's training,
and will give him the agency as soon as he is ready to take it, and he paid for Pixie's lessons
in Paris.  I could not refuse what was good for them, but I'll keep my own house, or give it
up altogether!" said Jack proudly, and Sylvia nodded her head in emphatic approval from her
place of vantage on the sofa.

Pat and Miles also applauded the declaration of independence, and accepted their own share
in the contemplated economies with unperturbed serenity, while Pixie sat solemnly in a corner,
turning her eyes on the face of each speaker in turns, her shoulders heaving with suppressed
emotion.  Of all the members of the family it was evident that she took the present difficulty
most seriously, and Sylvia was strengthened in the conviction that she had heard and taken
to heart the reference to herself which had been made in the afternoon.

She made no reference to the subject, but three times over the next day Sylvia entered a room
in time to hear a hurried rustle and scramble, and behold Pixie gazing into the fire with an
air of elaborate unconsciousness--the newspaper rolled into a ball beneath her chair.  It was
always open at the advertisement sheet, moreover, so that the onlooker had not much difficulty
in guessing the character of the letters which were inscribed with such deep-breathed earnestness
in the afternoon.

They were posted in the pillar-box at the corner of the road, and Pixie marched back to the
house and sat herself down with an air of mysterious importance.  Her head was held proudly
erect, her lips pressed tightly together as if nothing, no nothing, would induce her to put
her secret into words, and Sylvia smiled to herself, and from the experiences of a week's acquaintance,
gave her exactly five minutes in which to divulge the whole story.

"If you were threatened with a danger--a hidjus danger--what should you think would be the
best way to avoid it?" asked Pixie earnestly, at the expiration of two minutes and a half.

Sarah had that moment brought in the lamp and brushed up the fire, and the little room looked
wonderfully cheerful and cosy.  It was just the time and opportunity for a confidential chat,
and Sylvia sat herself down in the arm-chair with a pleasant sense of expectancy.  She was
allowed to sit up for an hour or two in the day, and that in itself was a cheering circumstance.

"If I were threatened with a danger, how should I try to avoid it?  I really don't know, Pixie.
What do you advise yourself?" she asked smilingly, and Pixie smote her fists together, and
stamped on the floor with dramatic emphasis.

"Ye ought to march straight out and meet it!  That's what Therese has been teaching me all
these years, for, says she, `Bridgie, the dear, is so soft-hearted that she'll never believe
but that everything will come right if ye sit still and look pleasant.'  The last thing but
one that she said to me before parting was that I must look after the family and keep them
out of trouble; so I've been reading over the papers to see how I can make some money, and
it's wonderful the choice you can have! I thought at first about taking a situation, but it's
better that I should stay at home to look after Bridgie, and teach her how to use up the scraps
as they do in France.  Me dear, the most elegant soup made out of nothing at all but the scraps
ye would throw to the hens! There's one advertisement which says a lady like meself can earn
a handsome income in her own home, without interfering with present duties.  It sounds so light
and pleasant that it quite struck my fancy; and only two shillings for samples and directions!"

"Oh, Pixie, did you really send it?  I'm so sorry you did that without telling me first.  I'm
afraid it's a hoax, dear!  It sounds too good to be true!"

"But it says so plainly in those very words.  I'll show it to you if you like.  It's printed!"
cried Pixie in a tone of shocked reproof which silenced the protests on Sylvia's lips.  If
her suspicions were correct, time would teach the lesson that even printed advertisements were
not always accurately truthful, but she had not the heart to dilate on the perfidiousness of
mankind in the presence of such innocent trustfulness. She murmured apologetic phrases, and
Pixie beamed once more and continued her story.

"There's another gentleman wants you to go round and sell books.  I've written to him, but
I'd rather do things at home.  Did you ever hear of anyone making a fortune by addressing envelopes?
They want someone to do that too, but I write so slowly meself, and it's only a shilling a
thousand.  A literery lady is wanted to correct proofs.  That would be nice, because they might
be stories.  How do you spell `literery', Sylvia?"

"L-i-t-e-r-a-r-y!"

"Not `e-r-y?'  You are quite sure?"

"Absolutely sure!"

"I put `literery'!" said Pixie, with a sigh.  Perhaps it will prejudice him against me!  Spelling
was never my strong point, but that was worse than ignorance--with the paper lying beside me
for reference!  The best of all is a shop that wants you to colour photographs.  I love painting
pictures, and the scrap-books I've done for hospitals would fill a museum.  Of course, these
would have to be done carefully, but I've seen Therese sketching at Versailles, and artists
painting in the Louvre, and I'm quick at imitating.  They wanted three shillings to sell you
the paints and brushes, and it will be cheap if it brings in pounds a week. "Twas a good thing
Esmeralda gave me a sovereign before she left, and I could get the stamps without anyone being
the wiser.  I thought, you see, it would be so nice to keep it a secret until I could go to
Bridgie with my earnings in my hand.  You will promise truly and faithfully not to tell?"

"If you will promise not to send any more money without asking my advice.  I think you ought
to do that, Pixie!"

"I shan't need to, me dear.  I'll earn enough as it is.  Will I get the replies to-morrow,
do you think?  The letters ought to be delivered to- night!"

Sylvia felt doubtful whether answers would ever be received, but as events proved, she was
wrong, and Pixie was right, for her inquiries were answered by return of post, and on the first
opportunity handed over for inspection.  The philanthropist who provided remunerative work
for gentlewomen at their own homes without interfering with present duties, forwarded samples
as promised, the which Pixie spread out on the table with an air of depression.  They consisted
of a two-inch length of a simple stamping-off pattern, a fragment of black net, and a few dozen
common jet beads, wrapped in a paper.

"You iron off the pattern on the net, and then you sew round it with the beads, and then ye
cut off the scallops, and then it's jetted lace!" she explained anxiously.  "And when it's
jetted lace, ye go out and sell it to the shops."  She sighed deeply, and turned over the patterns
with her fingers.  "How much a yard is jetted lace, Sylvia?"

"I don't know exactly, but I should think a narrow width like this could not be over a couple
of shillings at the most."

"And it would take me months to do, and be puckered at that!  It's such wobbly stuff to sew.
Even if I did a lot, I'm afraid the shops would never buy it."

"I'm afraid not, Pixie.  I wouldn't waste your time trying, dear!"

Pixie sighed again and carefully replaced the fragments in their envelopes.

"It was very kind of them to send them so soon, and if I was clever with my fingers, it would
be a fine idea, but I know quite well it would be puckered.  Will I send back the patterns,
do you think?  They might be useful for someone else."

"I think whoever sent them can very well afford to send another selection to the next inquirer.
I should not dream of wasting a stamp on them," replied Sylvia drily, and as she spoke she
pulled Pixie nearer to her, and kissed her with a fervour which was somewhat startling to the
recipient.

"Are ye sorry for me?" she queried.  "Ye needn't be, because I shall have so much to do with
the photographs that I am not disappointed a bit.  They have sent me one to paint, and if I
do it to their satisfaction they can keep me in constant work.  They don't say anything about
paying, but I expect that will be settled next week.  Here's the paints, and here's the lady!"

Sylvia looked, and beheld half a dozen cheap paints such as are found in a child's sixpenny
box, a thick and a thin brush, equally common, and a photograph of a buxom lady with a mop
of tousled hair, swinging in a hammock-chair under some trees, while a flight of marble steps
led up to a palatial mansion in the background.  She read the letter, and found that Pixie
had accurately described its contents.  It appeared that the firm was in pressing need of outside
help, and had practically unlimited work to bestow upon ladies "with artistic tendencies."

Judging from the note-paper, the handwriting, and the style of the photograph itself, the critics
could not be very severe, and for a moment Sylvia found herself wondering if by chance Pixie
had indeed found some work within her scope.  She herself knew little about painting, but after
a long discussion of the different features of the photograph, she succeeded in dissuading
the youthful artist from a somewhat violent scheme of colour, and in extracting a promise that
the completed picture should be brought across the road for her inspection before it was despatched,
for by this time Miss Munns was once more settled at home, and the last evening of the happy
visit had arrived.

Sylvia tried not to allow herself to think how quiet and dull the days would seem with only
Aunt Margaret as a companion; how hard it would be to sit contentedly playing cribbage in the
evenings, while across the road, within a stone's-throw from the window, was this dear, bright,
homey room, full of young creatures like herself.  She told herself that she had had a happy
holiday, and ought to go home refreshed and cheered. She made noble resolutions to be more
patient and considerate, and pretended that she was really quite relieved to be leaving Jack
O'Shaughnessy, for it was far more difficult to withstand the humbugging eyes now that she
knew what a dear kind fellow he was at heart, and he on his part seemed quite embarrassingly
sorry to say good-bye!

"You have not been half so nice to me lately as you were the first few days," he said plaintively
in the privacy afforded by the strains of a comb orchestra vigorously conducted at the end
of the room.  "I must have offended you without meaning it; clumsy fellow that I am!"

"Oh dear no, not at all.  It is only that I am getting better, and my natural bad temper is
asserting itself.  Most people are mild when they are ill," she replied lightly, but Jack was
not so easily silenced.

"That's not the reason.  Saving your presence, you are better tempered, not worse, but there's
a difference all the same.  I suppose you don't like me so well now that you know me better?"

"On the contrary, I like you infinitely more."  Sylvia hesitated a moment, then added with
sudden resolution, "I thought you were a very agreeable flirt; you amused me, and I enjoyed
being flattered; but now I think you are a real good friend, and I treat you in a different
way. One gets tired of compliments, but friendship grows better and better all the time."

Jack coloured, and was silent.  Sylvia wondered if he were offended by the plainness of her
words, but when he turned to her again, there was the frank, manly expression in his eyes which
she liked most to see.

"May I come and call upon you sometimes in the evening?  I shall have no chance of seeing you
in the daytime."

"I should like it very much, but it is not my house, remember, and Aunt Margaret is not fond
of young men."

"But I am terribly partial to old ladies, and I never met the one yet that wasn't wrapped up
in me before we parted.  I've got a way with old ladies!" said Jack complacently.  "There was
an old dear in Ireland who managed everyone for miles around, but she was as soft as putty
in my hands.  The poor girl, her daughter, was not allowed to join in any of the fun that was
on hand, and when there was anything special coming on, she'd write pitiful letters and ask
me to lunch.  I always went--she had very good eyes of her own!--and she'd meet me in the drive,
and put me up to what she wanted.  By the time the old lady had told me all about her hens,
and her servants, and her latest quarrel with her neighbours, and I'd flattered her by saying
her rheumatism was the pick of any in the county, she'd be ready to eat out of my hand.  And
I'd fix up to call for Mollie, and see her safely home after the show was over."

"Mollie?  A pretty name!  Is it common in Ireland?"

"It is so.  We knew a stack of them at Knock, but Mollie Burrell was the best of the bundle."

Sylvia smiled, but her lips felt stiff, and the effort was not a success.  A little weight
of depression settled over her spirits.  She felt anything but sympathetic for the deprivations
of Miss Mollie Burrell.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

BARGAIN-HUNTING.

Two days after Sylvia's return home, Pixie took the tinted photograph across the road for inspection.
She had toiled at it with conscientious effort, but, alas! the result was pathetically bad,
the paint being laid on in uncertain daubs, while carmine cheeks and scarlet lips laid the
buxom lady under suspicion of sickening for fever or some other deadly complaint.  Pixie herself
was vaguely disquieted by the general effect, but, as she earnestly explained, you "got used
to it after a bit, and it didn't look so bad.  And even if it was only half price this time,
it would be encouraging to the family!"

Sylvia refrained from criticism, but helped to pack the work of art between two sheets of cardboard
in readiness for the post, and after that was done, took her visitor downstairs to be introduced
to Miss Munns.

The old lady was sitting darning stockings, with a newspaper spread over one half of the table
and a little bowl standing ready to receive the snippings of worsted.  On the baize cloth at
the other end stood an indiarubber plant and four little artificial ferns.  A gas fire flickered
in the grate, a wire blind shut out the view, the chairs stood ranged in mathematical order
against the walls, the very newspaper was folded into an accurate square and put away in the
rack, and Pixie looked round with awed eyes the while she was introduced.

"This is Bridgie's youngest sister, Aunt Margaret--Pixie O'Shaughnessy."

"I hope you are quite well, my dear," said Miss Munns.

"Good morning, madame!" said Pixie in her most Parisian manner, not attempting to shake hands,
but bowing with an air of gracious effusion from half-way across the room.

Aunt Margaret let the stocking drop in her lap and stared over her spectacles, shaking her
head solemnly as Sylvia related how the new- comer had just returned from Paris, where she
had been living under the charge of an old governess.

"That accounts for it!" she said darkly, when the explanations were finished.  "I never can
understand why people want to go abroad when there are so many good schools at their door.
When I was a girl I went to Miss Banks at Peckham, and it was most select.  Every girl over
fifteen wore a bonnet; mine was white Dunstable, with check ribbons, blue and white.  I wore
it with a dress with silk pipings, and it was very much admired.  My cousin Gertrude went to
Paris, because her father had business on the Continent, and she never got over it for years.
They gave her dreadful food, and when she could not eat it, it was put aside and brought up
meal after meal.  She told me as a solemn fact that they used to put fruit in the soup, and
there was something dreadful made of cabbages.  Did they give you cabbages, my dear?"

"Mais oui, madame!" returned Pixie, involuntarily returning to the language of the place of
which they were speaking.  "But they were delicious, those cabbage!  Mademoiselle has without
doubt had an unhappy experience.  The cabbage of France is a most excellent cabbage.  He resembles
himself absolutely to an English cabbage, but he is more well prepared."

"Speak English, my dear, for pity's sake!  I never could understand that gibberish.  My poor
father paid extra for me to learn under a native, but it seemed as if I always turned against
it.  Well, I don't understand about the cabbages; Gertrude certainly said they were quite sour,
and mixed with all manner of horrible things!"

"Perhaps you mean sauerkraut, Aunt Margaret.  She would hardly have that in Paris.  Are you
quite sure it was not Germany where she was at school?"

"Berlin, was it?  Berlin!" said Miss Munns, meditating with her finger to her lip.  "Yes, I
think it was, because I remember I always associated it with the wool.  All these foreign schools
are alike. Nothing comes of them but bowing and scraping.  Give me a good sound English education!"

Miss Munns threaded her needle through the heel of the black stocking with an expression which
seemed to imply that the last word was spoken on that subject, and Pixie put on her most engaging
manner as she replied, as if anxious to prove that she was not altogether ruined by her Continental
experiences--

"Madame is without doubt so clever that she does not need to be taught. Sylvia has told us
that you could teach Bridgie better than anyone else. She is the best meaner in the world,
is Bridgie, but it comes natural to her to forget.  Sylvia said it was wonderful the way you
managed the house.  You could find the blue-bag in the dark!"  What do I want with it in the
dark?  The blue-bag!  Why should I look for the blue-bag?" cried Miss Munns, all anxiety to
fathom the meaning of this perplexing statement.

The most elaborate explanations on Sylvia's part failed to solve the mystery, and she kept
on reiterating, "Why blue-bag?" in tones of baffled curiosity, while Sylvia lay back in her
chair and sighed, and raised her eyebrows and stared hopelessly at the corner of the ceiling.
It was a trying moment, but Pixie entered gallantly into the breach, and succeeded in diverting
attention into another channel.

"It was just to shame us beside you, because we couldn't find it in the light.  The sugar-basin
would have done just as well.  My family had gone on spending money when there was none to
spend, until now at last it's all gone, and Jack says we must begin to be careful.  Bridgie
thought maybe if you would give her a hint it would be useful, as she has no one to teach her."

"I never earned a sovereign in my life, but I should be afraid to say how many I have saved!"
said Miss Munns complacently.  "There is nothing wasted in my house, my dear, and I should
be only too thankful to tell your sister the way your servants behave when her back is turned.
The light is flaring in their bedroom until after eleven at night, and I've seen them myself
running after the grocer's lad to give him extra orders.  Does your sister allowance them in
butter and sugar?  Depend upon it, if she doesn't, they eat twice as much as they should.

"If she brings her books over to me, I will tell her exactly what quantities she ought to order.
It's hard on a young man like your brother to have to provide for such a long family.  I suppose
you will be doing something for yourself in a couple of years when you are old enough to go
about alone.  You will be able to turn your education to account, and give lessons in the French
language.  You look more French than English, as it is, and have just their way of twisting
yourself about as you talk."

"Aunt Margaret!" cried Sylvia reproachfully, but Pixie's eyes brightened as at a sudden suggestion,
and she cried eagerly--

"Do I?  Do I really?  Oh, I'm so glad!  If you saw me in the street, would you think I was
a Parisian?  Oh, thank you so much for saying so!"

"Humph!  You're easily pleased.  I should not take it as a compliment if anyone said that to
me.  I'm an Englishwoman, and a good subject of Queen Victoria, and I'm thankful to say I look
it.  No one would mistake me for a French madam!"

"No, they wouldn't.  You are a different shape," said Pixie truthfully, whereupon Miss Munns
sent a sharp inquiry over the edge of her spectacles, but the glance which met hers was so
guileless that no suspicions could live in its presence.  So she said, "Humph!" once more,
and that ended the discussion.

Pixie renewed her study of the newspapers with fresh interest after this conversation, and
made marks against quite a number of advertisements, which, however, she took no active steps
to answer, pending the verdict from the photographic company.  It came at last, and proved
to be a judicious mingling of praise and blame.

The painting of the photograph, said the critic, displayed great taste and artistic promise,
though unfortunately the execution did not quite come up to the high standard of excellence
required by the firm.  No doubt this deficiency was largely caused by a lack of proper materials,
and he would strongly recommend further expenditure of five shillings, for a complete artist's
outfit, given which, and a little more practice, he had no doubt whatever of being able to
send a constant supply of work, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera.

Sylvia was shown this missive in due course, and tossed it from her with impatient hand.

"You must not send it, Pixie!  You must not dream of sending it.  Don't you see, dear, they
only want to get money from you instead of giving it themselves?  You have already sent three
shillings, and now they want five more, and probably next time there would be another excuse
for getting some more.  You can't afford to throw away money like that, especially without
Bridgie's knowledge or consent.  Give it up, dear, and have no more to do with them."

"I will!" said Pixie sadly; "but you mustn't blame them, poor creatures, for it's my own fault.
It's the truth that I was short of paints, for the ones they sent were so dry I could hardly
get them to mark, and the colours wouldn't seem to come right.  It's very kind of them to promise
me work, but I must give it up, for I can't do better without taking lessons, and where would
be the profit in that?  I took hours, and hours, and hours painting that lady, and ye saw yourself
she looked more like a beetroot than a human creature.  Don't you say a word to Bridgie, and
I'll promise you faithfully I won't send another penny.  I've a new idea in my head, which
maybe will turn out best of all."

She refused to say anything more explicit on the subject, but hinted that definite information
might be forthcoming on the following evening, and Sylvia wondered what new web for the unwary
had caught this most innocent little fly in its meshes.  She concluded that Pixie must be expecting
another prospectus, but next day the two sisters came across the road for a few minutes' chat
en route for a shopping expedition, and all the time that the elder was speaking, the younger
stood in the background, rolling her eyes and mouthing unintelligible messages, evidently intended
to convey the information that some great issue was at stake.

"Don't you envy me, me dear?  I am going to buy new clothes!" announced Bridgie, beaming. 
"Esmeralda gave me a five-pound note before she left, and, `For pity's sake,' she said, `buy
yourself a decent gown!  You're a disgrace to be walking about the streets, and with Pixie
so smart as she is, too.  Now's your chance to get something cheap at the sales!' and with
that you should have heard her groan to think she'd lost all the pleasure of hunting for bargains
through marrying a rich man!  I want a dress, and a jacket, and a hat, and a blouse or two
for the house, and gloves, and--"

"Don't you wish you may get them!" cried Sylvia mockingly.  She watched the two girls walk
down the road, and noted that Pixie was arrayed in her very best clothes to do honour to the
mysterious errand, whatever it might be.  Her felt hat was tilted at an extraordinary angle;
the smart little jacket looked quite different from the ordinary bulky winter garments which
one was accustomed to see; her boots were of patent leather, and her muff was decorated with
a huge rosette, and ends of ribbon.

Miss Munns might have truthfully declared that she looked French this morning, and there was
a suggestion of a strut in her walk which seemed to speak of personal satisfaction in her appearance.
Bridgie did indeed look shabby beside her, but then no clothes, however poor, could ever make
the sweet thing look anything but a lady, and she too held up her head in triumphant fashion,
for was she not going shopping with five bright golden sovereigns in her purse?

When Oxford Street was reached, the novices eagerly examined the windows of a famous drapery
establishment, in which the most thrilling bargains were displayed to decoy the passers-by,
and on the happy Irish principle of placing the pleasantest duty first on the list, elbowed
their way upstairs to the millinery department.  The room was blocked with a throng of excited
females all engaged in lifting hats from their pegs and trying them on before the various mirrors.
Sometimes two of the number would set their affections on the same treasure, and then the one
who had been unsuccessful in obtaining possession would stand gloomily by ready to pounce upon
it the moment her adversary laid it down.  Two or three assistants stood at bay trying to answer
a dozen questioners at once, and experienced bargain-hunters were turning over the contents
of the drawers with one hand, and grasping four or five bonnets in the other.

For a few moments the new-comers were too much bewildered to know what to do first, but the
spirit of plunder soon laid hold of them in their turn, and they began to pounce upon the most
fascinating of the spoils and to try them on in breathless excitement.

Bridgie looked charming in all, her small head and cloud-like hair making her an easy person
to suit, but, alas! the prices still seemed ruinous to her innocent mind, and she sadly turned
her attention to the more simple of the models.  These were by no means so becoming as their
predecessors, and Pixie's criticisms were as usual strictly truthful as she regarded them.

"Ye look a fright.  Ye look old enough to be your own mother.  It takes all the colour out
of your face.  You look quite yellow!"

Bridgie tore the hat from her head, and seized upon a modest brown toque which lay close at hand.

"Is that better, then?  Is that dowdy enough to suit you?"

"It's hidjus!" cried Pixie with emphasis.  "It's uglier than the other. I wouldn't have it
given to me as a present.  You look an object from the side!"

"But it's useful--it is useful!" sighed Bridgie dejectedly.  Buying hats was not so exciting
as she had imagined if she were obliged to abjure the pretty ones, and buy the useful in which
she appeared to such painful disadvantage.  "And I expect it is cheap, Pixie.  Very cheap!
I have, to think of that, remember!"

She tilted the hand-glass to the side to study the effect which had been condemned, and as
she did so, a sepulchral voice said grimly in her ear, "When you have quite finished with my
hat!" and she turned to behold a severe-looking, elderly lady staring fixedly at her headgear,
and holding out her hand to claim it as her own.  Poor Bridgie! her cheeks flamed for the next
hour.  She was so hot, and breathless, and agitated that she would have rushed straightway
from the department, but Pixie stood her ground and remained serenely unperturbed.

"'Twas true!" she cried.  "'Twas only the truth she heard. 'Twas hidjus, and no words of yours
would make it pretty.  And as for cheap, she ought to take that for a compliment, seeing the
pains she's taking to get another like it!  Somebody must be trying on your own hat, I'm thinking.
It was lying over the rail of that chair where the fat lady is resting.  You'd better be asking
her what she's done with it."

Bridgie walked forward and put an anxious Inquiry, whereupon the fat lady leapt up in alarm,
and there against the back of the chair lay a poor flattened object, with battered crown and
crestfallen bows--all that was left of Bridgie's very best hat!  She was horrified at the sight,
but the fat lady was more horrified still, and so lavish in her apologies that it was impossible
to cherish anger against her.  She insisted upon herself smoothing out the ribbons and moulding
the crown into something like the original shape, and in doing so bestowed the information
that there was another millinery department downstairs, where there might possibly be less
crowd and more chance of attention.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

"A FRENCH LADY."

The sisters agreed to adjourn forthwith, but just at the moment of departing a hat was discovered
which was in every way what was required, so they proceeded straight to the remnant counter
where a mountain of material was being tossed about hither and thither by a crowd of purchasers
three rows deep.

"First catch your hare, then cook it," so runs the old proverb, and in this case the adventure
was by no means concluded when the selection was made.  It was necessary to pay for what you
had bought, and that necessitated a wait of a long half-hour before anyone could be induced
to receive the money.  The glove department was, if possible, still more crowded, and it was
a relief to see through a doorway a vista of a great hall filled with cases of beautiful ready-made
dresses, where, despite the presence of a goodly number of customers, there was still enough
room to move about, without pushing a way with your elbows.

"Let us come in here and breathe again!" cried Bridgie.  "I don't think I was ever so tired
during my life, but I'm enjoying myself terribly. It's so exciting, isn't it, Pixie?--and those
blouse lengths are quite elegant.  They will take a lot of making, though.  Wouldn't it be
nice if I could buy a dress all ready, and be spared the work?"

"It would!" agreed Pixie.  "Tell one of the ladies what you're wanting, and maybe she'll have
the very thing.  Here is one coming this way. Speak to her."

Bridgie cleared her throat nervously as she made her request, for the show-woman was a most
impressive figure, tall, incredibly slight, with elaborately arranged hair, satin skirts sweeping
the ground, and a manner that was quite painfully superior.  She swept a scrutinising glance
over the sisters as she listened to the request for a simple house dress, volunteered the information
that, "Our cheapest costumes are in this stand!" in a blighting tone, and began pulling out
the skirts and exhibiting them in professional manner.

"That is a very nice little dress, madam, very neatly made--quite in the latest style!  Too
light?  We are selling a great many light shades this season.--Do you care for this colour?
This is a very well-cut gown. Too dark?  I am afraid I have not many medium shades.--Here is
a pretty gown, very much reduced.  Quite a simple little gown, but it looks very well on. 
This embroidery is all hand-done.  The bodice is prettily made."

Bridgie privately thought the simple little gown a most elaborate creation, but her hopes went
up as she heard that "very cheap," and she asked the price with trembling hope, whereupon the
show-woman referred to the little ticket sewn on the belt, and said airily,--"Eight and a half
guineas, madam.  Reduced from twelve.  It really is quite a bargain."

"Ye might as well say a thousand pounds!" said Bridgie hopelessly, relapsing into a deep, musical
brogue in the emotion of the moment, and, wonder of wonders, the bored superiority of the great
lady's manner gave place to a smile of sympathetic amusement.

She was accustomed to customers who asked the prices of a dozen dresses in succession, and
then floated away declaring that they would "think it over," never, as she knew well, to return
again; but not one in a thousand was honest enough to make a confession of poverty!  She lived
in an atmosphere of vanity and affectation, and put on her haughty manners every morning with
her black satin dress; but at night she was only a poor, tired, working woman, going home to
a dingy lodging, and dividing her earnings with an invalid mother and a family of struggling
brothers and sisters.  Her heart went out to this other girl who was so evidently a lady despite
her poverty, and when Bridgie mentioned a ludicrously small sum as the limit to which she was
prepared to go, she showed neither surprise nor the thinly-veiled contempt which is usual under
the circumstances, but volunteered some really useful information in its place.

"You will not be able to buy any ready-made costume for that price, madam, but there will be
a special sale of dress materials on Tuesday next.  If you could be here quite early in the
morning, and go straight to the counter under the clock, you would find some wonderful bargains.
I should advise you to leave it until then, but perhaps there is some other department to which
I could direct you."

"Thank you, I'm dreadfully tired.  Could we go somewhere, and have a cup of tea?"

The way was pointed out, and the sisters mounted the stairs once more, took possession of a
little table in a corner, and leant back wearily in their chairs.  The room was crowded like
the others, but it was comparatively quiet, for the ladies were resting after the fray, stifling
surreptitious yawns, and sipping tea with languid enjoyment.

It was a long time before Bridgie could find anyone to attend to her wants, and meantime the
temptation of the parcels lying before her was too great to be resisted.  "I really must look
at those gloves and the lace ties that are wrapped up with them!  I never had so many new pairs
in my life, but they were so cheap that I hadn't the heart to leave them.  'Twill be a refreshment
to gloat over them until the tea comes!" She untied the string and complacently folded back
the paper, but, alas! what was then revealed was the reverse of refreshing, for, in some mysterious
manner, the gloves and laces had disappeared, and in their place lay a fragment of dull, prosaic
flannel, at which the poor bargain-hunter stared with dilated eyes.

"F-flannel!" she gasped.  "Flannel!  It was gloves when it was made up. What's the matter with
it--is it witchcraft?"

"I'd call it stupidity, if you asked my opinion," said Pixie calmly. "You've stolen a poor
creature's parcel, and perhaps she wanted to make a poultice with it.  It will be awful for
her when she goes home, and her husband groaning in agony, and nothing to relieve him but two
lace ties!  I pity her when she finds it out."

"She has stolen my gloves.  I'm not sorry for her at all, and if she is an honest woman she
will bring them back at once and hand them in to the office.  I shall take the wretched flannel
there the moment we go downstairs, but I've a conviction that I'll never see my parcel again.
I suppose they got changed at one of those crowded counters.  I don't think I care for sales
very much, Pixie; they are too expensive.  We will go straight home after we have had tea."

"We will so, and make haste about it.  I wanted specially to be back by four o'clock."

To Bridgie's surprise, however, ten minutes before the omnibus reached the corner at which
they were wont to alight, Pixie beckoned to the conductor to stop, and announced her intention
of walking the rest of the way.  There was no time to discuss the point, and as she herself
was too tired to walk a step farther than she was obliged, she sat still and watched the little
figure affectionately until the omnibus rounded a corner and it was hidden from sight.

She would have been astonished if she had seen the sudden energy with which Pixie immediately
turned right about face and walked away in the opposite direction, taking a crumpled square
of newspaper from her pocket, and reading over a certain advertisement with eager attention.

"`Wanted a French lady.'--I'm not whole French, but I'm half.  Haven't I been in their country
nearly two years?  `To amuse two children.'--I'd amuse a dozen, and never know I was doing
it!  `And perfect them in the language for a couple of hours every morning.'  Look at that,
now, it's better than the jetted lace!  Two hours wouldn't interfere with me one bit, for I've
all the day to do nothing.  `Apply personally between four and six at Seven, Fitzjames Crescent.'
Only ten minutes' walk from me own door, as if it had been made on purpose to suit me!  And
quite a good-looking house it is, with real silk curtains in the windows."

She tripped undauntedly up the steps and pressed the electric bell, and, all unseen to her
eyes, the little god of fate peered at her from behind the fat white pillars of the portico,
and clapped his little hands in triumph.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

PIXIE SCORES A SUCCESS.

A butler came to the door, a solemn-looking butler, with a white tie and immaculate black clothes,
but he seemed rather stupid for his age, for he asked twice over before he could grasp the
fact that Pixie had called in answer to the advertisement, and then stared fixedly at her all
the time he was escorting her to the room where the other lady applicants were waiting their turns.

Pixie gasped as she looked round and saw ladies, ladies everywhere, on the row of leather chairs
ranged along by the wall, on the sofa, on the two easy-lounges by the fireside,--old ladies,
young ladies, middle-aged ladies, elderly ladies, shabby and dressy, fat and thin, but all
distinctly past their first youth, and all most obviously French.  They gaped at the new-comer,
even as the butler had done, and she bowed graciously from side to side, and said, "Bon jour,
mesdames!" in her most Parisian manner, then squeezed herself into a little corner by the window
and listened entranced to the never-ending stream of conversation.

A room full of Englishwomen would under the circumstances have preserved a depressed and solemn
silence, but these good ladies chattered like magpies, with such shruggings of shoulders, such
waving of hands, such shrillness of emphasis, that Pixie felt as if she were once more domiciled
in the Avenue Gustave.

The lady in the plaid dress, who occupied the next chair, asked her with frank curiosity to
recount then how she found herself in such a position, and, being assured that she was indeed
applying for the situation, prophesied that it would never march!  She turned and whispered
loudly to her companion, "Behold her, the poor pigeon!  One sees well that she has the white
heart!"  But the companion was less amiable, and enraged herself because there were already
applicants enough, and with each new-comer her own chance of success became less assured.

At intervals of five or ten minutes the butler returned and marshalled the next in order to
the presence of the lady of the house, but, short as were the interviews, it was a weary wait
before it came to Pixie's turn, and she wondered fearfully whether Bridgie had taken fright
at her absence, and was even now searching the streets in a panic of alarm. The hands of the
clock pointed to ten minutes to six before the butler gave the longed-for signal, and she smiled
at him in her most friendly manner as she crossed the room towards him.  Without any exchange
of words she divined that he took more interest in herself than in any of the other applicants,
and also that for some mysterious reason he was sorry for her, and imagined that she was making
a mistake, and the smile was meant at once as thanks and reassurement.

They walked together down the slippery floor, such a slippery, shiny floor, that one felt as
if skates would be almost more in keeping than boots, and finally arrived at a cosy little
room at the back of the house, where a tired-looking gentleman and a bored-looking lady stood
ready to receive her.  They looked at each other, they looked at the butler, they looked again
at the little pig-tailed figure, with short skirts and beaming, childlike face, and their faces
became blank with astonishment.

"Bon jour, mademoiselle!" began the lady uncertainly.

"Good day to ye!" said Pixie in response, and at that the bewilderment became more marked than
ever.  The lady sat down and drew a long, weary sigh.  She was handsome and young, but very,
very thin, and looked as if she had hardly enough energy to go through any more interviews.

"Then--then you are not French after all?"

"I forgot!" sighed Pixie sadly.  She sat down and hitched her chair nearer the fire in sociable
fashion.  "It's just like me to make up me mind, and then forget at the right moment!  I intended
to let you hear me speak French, before I broke it to you that I'm Irish and all my people
before me."

"I almost think I should have discovered it for myself!" said the lady, looking as if she were
not quite sure whether to be amused or irritated. "But if that is so, what is your business
here?  I advertised for a French lady."

"You did.  I read the advertisement, but if I'm not French I'm just as good, for I've just
last month returned from Paris, and the lady where I was staying was most particular about
my accent.  Over in Ireland I was so quick in picking up the brogue that I had to be sent to
England to get rid of it, and I was just as handy with another language.  If I'd remembered
to answer you in French, you would never have known the difference between me and those old
ladies who came in first."

"Old ladies, indeed!  I'll never advertise again if this is what it means!" sighed the lady
sotto voce.  She looked across the room, met a gleam of amusement in her husband's eyes, and
said in a tolerant voice, "Well, then, let me hear you now!  I am a pretty good French scholar
myself, so you won't find me easy to deceive!"

"Perfectly, madam, perfectly!" cried Pixie, gesticulating assent.  She found none of the difficulty
in settling what to talk about which handicaps most people under similar circumstances, but
poured forth a stream of commonplaces in such fluent, rapid French as showed that she had good
reason for boasting of proficiency.  When she finished, the lady looked at her husband with
a triumphant air, and cried--

"There!  It shows how important it is for children to learn a language while they are still
young.  It can never be mastered so well if it is left until they are grown-up."

Then turning to Pixie--

"Yes, indeed, you speak French charmingly.  I congratulate you, and hope you may find it very
useful.  You are so young that you cannot have finished your own education.  Perhaps you are
going to school in England?"

"'Deed I am not.  I want to teach instead.  My brother is a very grand gentleman, but he's
in difficulties.  He has a fine estate in Ireland, but it is let, and he's over in London trying
to make enough money to get back again, and that's none too easy, as you may know yourself,
and if I can earn some money it will keep me from being a burden on me friends.  I've answered
quite a lot of advertisements, but there was nothing really to suit me until I saw your own
yesterday morning."

"I see!  May I ask if your mother knows what you are doing--if you are here with her consent?"

Pixie sighed at that, and shook her head in melancholy fashion.

"I've no mother.  She died when I was young, and the Major's horse threw him two years ago,
and I've been an orphan ever since.  There's only Bridgie now!"

"Poor child!"  The lady looked at the quaint figure with a kindly glance, thinking of the two
little girls upstairs, and picturing them starting out to fight the world when they should
still have been safe within the shelter of the schoolroom.  "I'm sorry to hear that. Bridgie,
I suppose, is your sister?  Does she know what you are doing? Would she be willing for you
to apply for a situation in this manner?"

"Maybe not at first, but I'd beguile her.  I'm the youngest, and I always get my own way. 
I told Sylvia Trevor, who was staying with us, and she was very kind, giving me good advice
not to do it, but it is to be a surprise for Bridgie to help her to pay the bills.  If ye want
money, what else can you do than try to earn it?"

"But not at your age, dear!  You are too young yet awhile!"  Mrs Wallace crossed the room and
seating herself in a chair by Pixie's side, laid a hand on her shoulder with quite affectionate
pressure.  "I appreciate your kindly intention, but I am afraid it will be a good many years
before you are ready to take a governess's place.  You saw yourself what a difference there
was between yourself and the other ladies who came to see me to-day!"

"I'm more amusing!  Ye wouldn't believe how amusing I can be when I try! At school there was
a prize which was given to the girl who was nicest to the other girls, and they all voted for
me, and I've got it now and could bring it to show you if you liked.  I'm not exactly clever,
and there was no chance for anyone else at the bottom of the class, but you didn't say a word
about teaching, except French, and I could talk that all day long!"

"Yes!  I should be quite satisfied if my girlies spoke as well as you do.  Your accent is charming,
and you have just the air, but--but you are so young--so ridiculously young!"

"So are the children.  They'd like me best!" maintained Pixie sturdily, and at that Mr Wallace
burst into a laugh.  His eyes had been twinkling for some time past, and he had been stroking
his moustache as if to conceal his amusement, but now he made no more disguise, but laughed
and laughed again, as if he were thoroughly enjoying himself.

"Upon my word, Edith, I believe she is right!  If you consider the children's feelings, there
is no doubt how they would decide.  If you want them kept happy and bright, now's your chance!
After our earlier experiences this is really quite refreshing, and I am beginning to think
your advertisement has been of some use after all.  How would it be if you interviewed Miss
Bridgie--I didn't catch the second name--and if she is agreeable, you might perhaps make some
temporary arrangement!"

"O'Shaughnessy.  It's Irish!  I'm sure Bridgie would say yes, for it would be occupation for
me in the mornings, and so near that I could come by myself.  We live in Rutland Road, but
the house is so small ye would hardly notice it if you passed by.  Jack says if he could get
London rents in Ireland, he'd never do another honest day's work while he lived.  You could
put the whole place down in the hall at Knock Castle, and never know it was there, and Bridgie
says she knows every blade of grass in the garden.  We had the loveliest grounds at Knock,
all the flowers coming up anyway, and volunteers drilling in the park, and the glass-houses
full of ferrets and white mice, and tomatoes, and everything you can think of.  If I could
make some money we should be able to go back sooner than we thought, and Bridgie would be so
pleased. When shall I say you are coming to see her?"

"I have not promised to come at all.  You must not leap at conclusions. It is a most ridiculous
scheme, but really--"

Mrs Wallace laughed in her turn, and going up to where her husband stood, exchanged a few whispered
confidences, some scattered words of which reached the listener's ear.  "Typically Irish! 
Preposterous!  No harm trying.  What about Viva?  So difficult to manage."

The discussion was still progressing when from above sounded a sudden piercing cry, mounting
ever higher and higher, the note sustained in evident but determined effort.  Footsteps raced
across the floor, followed by a bang as of some heavy wooden structure, a murmured protest,
and two distinct sets of shrieks, each warring against the other.

Mr Wallace pressed his hands to his head, Mrs Wallace sighed, "Oh dear, dear, dear!" in tones
of hopeless distress, but Pixie cried eagerly--

"Will I run upstairs and try what I can do?  Will I make them stop, and laugh instead?"

"You'd deserve the Victoria Cross!" the father declared, while the mother hurried to the door,
and led the way with rapid footsteps.

"They have been brought up by an Indian ayah, and this English nurse doesn't understand them
a bit.  They have trying tempers, there is no use denying it, but they are dear little creatures
if rightly managed. Oh dear, dear, dear! these dreadful shrieks!  They go through my head."

"Let me go in alone.  They will listen better if they don't see you," said Pixie, and walked
undauntedly on to the field of battle.  In this instance it was represented by a remarkably
handsome and well-filled nursery, and the belligerents took the form of two little girls of
four and five, who were seated on the floor, dry-eyed, but crimson-faced from the effort to
sustain their shrieks.  A box of bricks lay scattered by the window, and an anaemic nurse leant
against the wall in an attitude of despair.

Pixie walked forward, seated herself on the floor immediately in front of the children, and
gazed at them with benign curiosity.  There was no anger in her face, no warning of punishment
to come, her expression was in such striking contrast with that which they were accustomed
to behold on such occasions, that from pure amazement they stopped crying to stare at her in
their turn.  The moment was hers, and she lost no time in using it.

"The fat one," she said, pointing gravely to the younger of the sisters, "the fat one shouts
higher, but the thin one,"--the eloquent finger was turned towards the maid with the golden
locks,--"the thin one keeps on longer.  You have both won!  The prize is that I tell you a
story about the Spoopjacks, when they went to fight the Bobityshooties in the Christmas holidays!"

Silence.  Viva laid her head on one side and considered the project. Inda pouted her lower
lip, and burst into the story of her woes.

"An' I was jest finishin' ze house, and ze chimbleys was getting ready, and she comed against
me, an' I pinched her leg, and she throwed it down, an' it was all spoiled, an' the dolls was
going to live in it, an'--"

"The Spoopjacks live in the lamp-posts.  There are seven of them, and they have tin whiskers,
and they went to war with the Bobityshooties because they ate all the muffins, and there were
none left for tea.  So Nicholas Spoopjack bought six rolling-pins and a watering-cart, and
melted down his whiskers for guns, and they put on red gaiters and clean pinafores, and marched
across the park.  The Bobityshooties were resting under the trees, and all the little birds
were eating up the muffin crumbs.  The Bobityshooties really live in the pantry cupboard, so
that was how they found the muffins, but they were spending the day in the country, and Selina
Bobityshooty said to her mother--"

"Is that in a book?" queried the elder Miss Wallace suddenly.  She was an exceedingly precocious
young lady, and quick to note the unusual style of the narrative.  Sometimes the stories in
books were about good little girls with whom she had no sympathy, and even if the heroine were
naughty to begin with, she invariably improved at the end, and never, never knocked down her
sister's bricks.  The Spoopjacks and Bobityshooties were new acquaintances and promised well,
but she wished to be reassured as regards the moral.  "Is that written in a book?"

"No, it's out of my head.  There are billions and billions of little girls in the world, and
not one of them has ever heard what Selina said to her mother.  If you will kiss your sister
and say you're sorry, I'll tell you as a secret.  It's awful exciting!"

"All right, I'm sorry, only you pinched me too--go on about Selina!" cried Viva in a breath.
She kissed her sister on the cheek, and fat little Inda smiled complacently, and repeated,
"Go on 'bout S'lina!"

Outside in the passage father and mother looked at each other with sparkling eyes.

"My dear, she is worth a fortune to us!" cried Mr Wallace rapturously. "She understands children,
and they understand her; the girlies will be as good as gold under her care.  I'll tell Spencer
to bring round the carriage and send her home in state, and to-morrow afternoon without fail
you must strike a bargain with Mistress Bridgie!"

CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

VIVA'S STORY.

Pixie drove home in state, so puffed up with her own importance that it was a distinct blow
to find the curtains comfortably drawn, and hear the echo of laughter from the drawing-room.
In all the books which she had ever read, candles were left burning in the windows to guide
the footsteps of wanderers from the fold, to say nothing of bellmen parading the streets, and
anxious relatives rushing from one police station to another.  Here, however, all was peace
and contentment, and, incredible as it appeared, no one seemed to have been the least agitated
about her prolonged absence.

Bridgie was perched on a stool in the centre of the fire rug, relating the history of the day's
shopping to the three brothers, and she nodded cheerily at the little sister as she entered,
and saluted her with unconcerned composure.

"Well, dear, here you are!  Tired after your long day?"

Pixie sank down on the corner of the sofa, and yawned with a nonchalant air.  If there was
one thing which she loved above everything else in the world, it was to make an impression
and be the centre of attraction, and it was not likely that she was going to let slip such
an opportunity as the present.

"'Deed I'm not tired," she said genially.  "Carriage exercise was always more to my fancy than
walking about the streets.  If we'd been meant to walk, wouldn't we have had four legs the
same as the horses, and if we haven't, doesn't it show that they were meant to do it for us?
So when he said the butler should get me the carriage, it wasn't likely I was going to refuse,
and up I drove to the very door!"

Jack stopped short in the middle of crossing the room, Pat peered round the corner of his chair
and twinkled with mischievous enjoyment, Bridgie's eyes opened as wide as saucers.

"Which door?  What carriage?  What romance are ye telling me?  Haven't you been with Sylvia
since I left you?"

"'Deed I have not.  What made you fancy I had?"

"There was nowhere else to go, and you had not come home.  I made certain you were with Sylvia!"

"It's a bad thing to be certain about what you don't know.  If any mischief had happened to
me, it would be annoying to you to remember how you were laughing with your back to the fire,
while I was run over in the street, and having my legs sawed off at the hospital."

Jack frowned at that, and put a quick question.

"Have you been walking about by yourself?  I won't have it at this hour of the night.  You
can find your own way about the neighbourhood in the daytime, but I won't have you going into
town by yourself, or even across the road in the dark.  London is not Knock, remember, and
it would be the easiest thing in the world to get lost.  Don't let her roam about without you,
Bridgie!"

"'Twas only a step, and barely four o'clock!"  Bridgie's forehead was fretted with anxious
lines, but Pixie nodded back cheery reassurement.

"Don't you repine about me, for I got on famously, and Mrs Wallace is coming herself to see
you in the afternoon.  I've engaged myself as a French lady to amuse the children, and you
shall have the money to pay the bills.  It was an advertisement in the paper, and you had to
call between four and six, so I didn't want you to know before everything was settled.  I don't
know how much it will be, but Mr Wallace said I was worth a fortune, because I made them stop
howling.  There are only two, but outside the door you would think they were a dozen, and I
made them laugh, and they sent me home in a carriage."

"What is she talking about?"  Bridgie and Jack exchanged bewildered glances, and stared in
incredulous silence at the little figure on the sofa.  She had pulled off her hat, and with
it the bow of ribbon, and the loosened hair hung down her back; her hands were crossed on her
lap, there were dark shadows under her eyes.  She looked so small and frail and childlike that
Bridgie felt a lump rising in her throat at the thought of help coming from this strange and
most unexpected quarter. She rose, and, going over to the sofa, took Pixie's hand between her own.

"Is it the truth that you are telling us?"

"It is, then!  The solemn truth!  Every word of it."

"What made you think there was any need for you to disturb yourself? What put it in your head
to answer an advertisement at all?"

"Because I didn't want to be a burden to ye, my dear, after all the money you've spent on me
education!"

"A little midget like you to speak of being a burden!  No one would guess you were there if
you weren't so upsetting!  It's no use fifty Mrs Wallaces coming to see me.  Some other French
lady will have to amuse her children.  This one is wanted at home!"

Pixie smiled composedly, and squeezed the clinging hands.

"I knew you'd say `No' at the start.  So did she.  She was first cross, and then she laughed,
and said it would be a long, long time before I was ready to teach.  But she didn't really
want teaching, only someone to be funny in French, and when she heard me telling tales, and
the little girls both laughing, she began to think she would love to have me.  You remember
the stories you used to tell me, Jack, about the Spoopjacks and the Bobityshooties?  I made
up a new bit, and they simply loved it.  It's two hours every morning, and only ten minutes'
walk, and Therese says it's no use beginning to be proud till you've paid your bills.  You
would like me to help you, wouldn't you, Jack?"

"Shades of Mrs Hilliard!" muttered Jack, and shrugged his shoulders recklessly.  "She will
have a few volumes to write to me if I say `Yes!' You are bound to help me, Piccaninny, whatever
you are about, but I can't bind myself to allow you to go out governessing before you are out
of short frocks.  It is Saturday to-morrow, so I shall be home in the afternoon, and see this
Mrs Wallace for myself.  It's a bad scheme on the face of it, but it's just possible it may
be more feasible than it sounds."

That was all the length which he would go for the moment, and Pixie was content to drop the
subject, secure in her conviction that time and Mrs Wallace would win the victory.  She was
petted and fussed over to her heart's content for the rest of the evening, and the story of
her various efforts to retrieve the family fortunes was heard with breathless attention.  She
wondered why the listening faces wore such tender, pitiful expressions, why lazy Pat flushed,
and Bridgie went over to her desk and spent a whole half-hour sorting out her bills.  It never
occurred to her that her earnest effort to take her own share of responsibility was a more
eloquent stimulus than twenty lectures!

Next afternoon at three o'clock the two sisters and Sylvia Trevor stationed themselves in positions
of vantage behind the curtains, and looked out eagerly for the advent of Mrs Wallace.  Bridgie
could not divest herself of a suspicion that the promise might have been given as the easiest
way out of a difficulty, but before the half-hour struck a well-appointed carriage turned the
corner of the road, the coachman glanced at the number on the door, and drew up his horses,
when a fluffy head peered out of the window, and Pixie cried excitedly--

"That's the thin one!  That's Viva!  I expect she howled, and they could not keep her away.
That's Mrs Wallace!  Isn't it an elegant hat?"

Bridgie peeped and grew quite pink with excitement, for, truth to tell, mother and daughter
made a charming picture as they came up the little path.  Mrs Wallace looked almost like a
girl herself in her becoming hat and veil, while the golden-haired child wore a white coat
and cap edged with fluffy swan's-down.  Sylvia retreated to the dining-room.

Pixie ran to meet the visitors at the door, and the voice that exclaimed, "Bon jour, Mamzelle
Paddy!" was in itself an augury of friendship.  The next moment they were in the drawing-room,
and Mrs Wallace was smilingly explaining the title.

"I am sure you must have been very much surprised to hear of yesterday's interview, Miss O'Shaughnessy!
`mamzelle Paddy,' as my husband has named your small sister, has made quite a conquest of my
little girls, and Viva refused to be left behind when she heard where I was going.  I hope
you were not very anxious about her absence yesterday?"

"Indeed I was not, for I took it for granted she was with some friends near by.  Please sit
down, and get warm.  'Twas a ridiculous idea of the child's to suppose for one moment that
she could fulfil your requirements; but she's the baby of the family, and has never been thwarted,
and such a kind little creature that she must try to help if there is any difficulty.  It is
good of you to take the trouble to come and explain, but indeed we have decided already that
it is quite, quite impossible!"

Mrs Wallace gave a start of consternation, and the smile faded from her lips.  She looked first
at Bridgie, then across the room to where Viva stood on tiptoe dragging at Pixie's sleeve,
and reiterating, "Mamzelle! Mamzelle Paddy, will you come again to my nursery?  Will you tell
me more stories about those peoples in the lamp-posts?"

"Oh, don't say it is impossible!" she said softly.  "I want her to help me too, and I am so
troubled about my children.  Could she--could they both go into another room for a few minutes,
while we talk it over together?"

"Certainly they could!"  Bridgie raised her voice a tone higher.  "Pixie dear, go to Sylvia
in the dining-room and take the little girl with you. Show her some of your treasures!"

"I like cake!" remarked Viva pointedly.  She skipped to the door, and stared round the hall
with curious eyes.  "You do live in a poky little house, don't you?  My mamma's house is much
bigger than your house. Where does the dining-room live?  Is there a cupboard in it that you
keep cake in?  Is Sylvia your 'nother sister?  Who is the man?"

The man was none other than handsome Jack himself, who was enjoying the rare luxury of a tete-a-tete
with Sylvia Trevor, and was not too well pleased by this speedy interruption.  He frowned when
he heard the opening of the door, but when he turned round and saw the vision of pink and white
and gold, he smiled in spite of himself, as most people did smile at the sight of Viva Wallace,
and held out his hand invitingly.

"Hallo, whom have we here?"

"Quite well, thank you.  How are you?" replied Viva fluently.  She paid no attention to Sylvia
at the other side of the fireplace, but leant confidingly against Jack's chair, staring at
him with rapt attention. His eyes looked as if they liked you very, very much; his moustache
had sharp little ends which stood out stiff and straight, there was a lump in his throat which
moved up and down as he spoke--altogether he was a most fascinating person, and quite deserving
of attention.  "Are you the papa?" she asked enviously.  "My papa has got a brown face with
lines in it.  He is very old.  My muzzer is old too.  She is talking to the lady in the 'nother
room, and she said I was to be amused.  You are to amuse me!"

"No, no, quite a mistake.  You must amuse me!" said Jack solemnly.  "I have been out all day,
and am tired and sleepy, so you must do something to cheer me up.  What can you suggest, now,
that would be really lively and entertaining?"

Viva reflected deeply.

"I'm learning the `Pied Piper of Hamelin'!"

"You don't say so!"

"Yes, I am.  I'll say it to you now, from the beginning right to the very miggle!"

"Thanks awfully.  I should be delighted--another time.  Not to-day, I think, if you don't mind.
I have rather a sore throat."

Viva opened her eyes and stared at the Adam's apple which showed above the white necktie. 
She was trying to puzzle out the connection between Mr O'Shaughnessy's throat and the Pied
Piper, but the difficulty was too great.  She heaved a sigh, and hazarded another suggestion.

"You tell me a story!"

"That would never do.  I should be entertaining you, and it ought to be the other way about."

"I'll tell you a story!"

"That's better.  Go ahead, then.  What is it to be about?  Fairies?"

"No, it's not going to be about fairies,--fairies is silly.  Giants are more sensibler than
fairies, because there was a giant once.  There was Golosher!"

"I beg your pardon?"

"Golosher!"

"Don't know the gentleman."

"Oh, you naughty!  And David killed him in the Bible.  I'll tell you a story about giants."

"I don't think I am interested in giants."

"Princesses, then, beautiful princesses, and cruel people trying to be unkind to them, and
princes running away and marrying them, and living happily ever afterwards."

"That's the style for my money!  Fire away, and let us have plenty of adventure.  I'll lean
back in this chair and listen to you."

Viva moistened her lips, swallowed rapidly once or twice, and began her story in a shrill,
high-pitched voice.

"Once upon a long, long time ago, there was a princess, and she was the most beautiful princess
that was ever born.  Everyone said so, and her face was as white as snow, and her hair as yellow
as--"

"Excuse me--brown!"

"No, it wasn't brown.  Bright, curly, golden, down to her--"

"Then she couldn't have been the most beautiful princess in the world, because I've seen the
lady and her hair is brown."

Jack stroked his moustache with a look of lamb-like innocence, and Sylvia could have shaken
herself with annoyance because she could not help blushing and looking stupid and self-conscious.
Pixie's melodious gurgle sounded from the background, and Viva cried severely--

"You couldn't have seen her, because she lived hundreds and hundreds of years ago, when you
were a teeny baby.  Golden hair down to her feet, and her teef were like pearls, and all the
godfathers and godmuzzers came to the christening and gave her nice presinks, only one wicked
old mugian who--"

"Pardon me!  One wicked old--?"

"Mugian!  He's a man what does things.  They always have them in stories--that the mamma had
forgotten to ask, so he was angry and said she should tumble downstairs when she was grown-up
and be lame ever after till a beautiful prince made her better.  Oh, but I shouldn't have told
you that jest now.  You must pitend that you forget I have told you.  So then the beautiful
princess--her true name was Mabel, but only I call her Norah because her hair was gold--"

Now it was Jack's turn to gasp and search in vain for the connection between Norah and golden
hair!  It proved as impossible to discover as that between a sore throat and the Piper of Hamelin,
but there was another allusion in the story which was too fortunate to be allowed to pass unnoticed.

"The princess was lame, was she? and no one could make her better but the prince?  That's very
interesting.  Could you tell me, now, how he managed the cure?  It might be useful to me someday."

"Was your princess a lame princess?"

"I think you had better go on with your story, Viva!"  Jack said hurriedly.  "Your mother may
call you away before it is finished, and I should be disappointed.  When did the prince arrive
on the scene?"

"It doesn't get to that yet.  So the princess lived in a house where there were no stairs.
Only one day when she was walking through the wood, there was a little house and she went in,
and she said, `Oh, what funny things!' and she went up them, and she tumbled down, and her
foot was underneaf, so she was lame.  An' she lay on the sofa, and the queen- mamma cried,
and the godfathers and the godmuzzers came flying up, only they could do nothing, and the king
said anyone should have the land who made her better, an' thousands an' thousands tried, an'
at last the prince came riding along on a white horse, an' he looked froo the window--"

"Jack dear, will you please come to the drawing-room?  We want to consult you!"  Bridgie's
head peered round the corner of the door, her cheeks quite pink, her eyes shining with excitement.
She gripped her brother's arm as he came to meet her, and whispered, "It's the most extraordinary
thing--she really means it!  She is charming, Jack, charming; I can't say `No' to her.  Come
and try what you can do!"

But Jack was not a good hand at saying "No," least of all to charming ladies, and Mrs Wallace
took his measure at once, and felt that she had gained a friend.

"I am trying to persuade Miss O'Shaughnessy to lend your little sister to me for a short time
every day, to help me with my children," she said, smiling at him under lifted brows.  "I understand
that you knew nothing about her application, and when I first saw her I felt, as you must have
done, that the idea was preposterous, but Viva and Inda fell desperately in love with her,
and have talked of nothing else since she left.  I think I followed their example, and I am
quite sure my husband did.  He thinks Mamzelle Paddy would be the solution of all our nursery
troubles, if you could be induced to spare her to us.  I would be very careful of her; I promise
you that!"

Jack looked at Bridgie; Bridgie looked at Jack.

"I'd be delighted that she should help you, and it would be an amusement to her to play with
the dear little girls.  If she might come as a friend--"

"Oh, Miss O'Shaughnessy, how cruel of you, when her great idea was to help you!  She would
be a most welcome friend, but I could not consent to using her time without paying for it."

Mrs Wallace had approached this question before, and had discovered that Bridgie was no more
embarrassed by a reference to her poverty than had been Mamzelle Paddy herself.  "We should
think any sum cheap which ensured our little girls being happy and occupied, instead of crying
and quarrelling, as I am sorry to say they do now for the greater part of the day.  They are
too young for regular lessons, but they already know French fairly well, and would soon be
able to speak fluently."

"I can't judge of Pixie's French, but her English is so Irish that it was a stroke of genius
to offer herself in the character of a foreigner!" said Jack, stroking his moustache, and smiling
to himself in whimsical fashion.  "Of course, she is quite confident that she could do all
you require, but you must not listen to her own account of herself. If you offered Pixie the
command of the Channel Fleet, she'd accept without a qualm!  If you want the kindest-hearted,
most mischievous little ignoramus in the world, Mrs Wallace, it would be waste of time to search
any farther, for you have found her already!  She will keep your children happy, and never
say a word that they wouldn't be the better for hearing, but it won't be the orthodox training!
I fancy Pixie was a big surprise to the English boarding-school when she first arrived."

"But she left with the prize for being the most popular and unselfish of the girls!  Your sister
has just shown me the books with the touching inscription.  If she can teach my girlies to
be as sweet and helpful, I shall not mind a few eccentricities.  Two hours in the morning would
not take her away too much from home, and she would have plenty of time left for her own music.
Her ambition seemed to be to pay for her own lessons, so if I gave her thirty pounds, she could
go to a really good master without feeling that she was overtaxing you.  It would be such a
pleasure to me too, Miss O'Shaughnessy.  I feel sure your brother will agree, if you consent.
Please say `Yes'!"

So it was left to Bridgie to make the final decision, and in after years she used to wonder
what would have happened if she had refused her consent!  It was a difficult problem, for to
her old-fashioned notions it was a trifle infra dig for a girl to work for herself, and it
hurt her tender heart that the Piccaninny of all others should be the one to go out into the world.

What would the dear dead mother have said to such a project?  What would the Major have said?
What would Esmeralda think now, and, thinking, say, with all the impassioned eloquence of which
she was mistress? Bridgie reflected earnestly on the questions, while Mrs Wallace watched her
face with anxious eyes.

The dear mother had never been able to resign herself to the happy-go- lucky Irish customs,
and had died before her time, worn-out with the strain of trying to make both ends meet.  When
she looked down from heaven with those clear angel eyes, would it seem more noble to her that
her baby should preserve a puny social distinction at the cost of a purposeless life, or that
she should use the talents which had been given to her for her own good and the good of others?

There could be little doubt how the mother would have decided, and as for the Major, Bridgie
smiled with indulgent tenderness as she pictured, one after the other, the swift stages of
his behaviour if he had been present to-day.  Horror and indignation at the possibility that
the Piccaninny should be in subjection to anyone but himself; irritated impatience that the
O'Shaughnessys should be expected to pay for what they desired, like any ordinary, commonplace
family; chuckling delight over the smartness of the child; and finally an even greater inability
than his sons to say "No" to a charming woman!  Storm he never so wildly, the Major would undoubtedly
have ended by consenting to Mrs Wallace's plea, while Esmeralda's wrath would be kept within
bounds by Geoffrey's strong common sense.

Bridgie sighed and looked across the room to where Jack sat.

"If it is left to me," she said slowly, "if I am to decide, I think I will say `Yes'!  She
shall come to you for a month on trial, Mrs Wallace, and we can see how it works."

Mrs Wallace beamed with relief and satisfaction.

"That's very kind!" she said.  "I am truly grateful.  I realise that your decision is unselfish,
but believe me, you shall never regret it!"

And Bridgie remembered that prophecy, and smiled over it many times in the happy years to come.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

JACK'S DISCOVERY.

Pixie received the intelligence that she was to begin her new duties on the following Monday
with the unruffled composure of one who has expected no other decision.  She asked eagerly
what salary she was to receive, and was a trifle depressed to find that it did not run to three
figures.  Thirty pounds sounded very little, though she had only the vaguest notion of its
purchasing value, but her ambition had been to supply the whole additional sum which was needed
for the support of the household.

Innocent Bridgie had no idea as to what might be expected under the circumstances, but Miss
Munns, who knew everything, declared that the offer was a handsome one, and ten pounds in excess
of the ordinary rate of payment.  Still, as she sagely remarked, one could never tell! People
sometimes seemed very generous and pleasant-spoken at first, and then turned out everything
that was exacting and unreasonable.  Several young friends of her own had gone out as governesses,
and met with tragic adventures.  Marianne Summers, the cousin of Summers' Celebrated Snowflake
Soap, was with a family at Rochester, and nursed a little boy all through scarlatina, and when
she had toothache herself the lady said it was most inconvenient because a dinner-party was
coming.  No consideration whatever, and the food very poor.  She was never so much as asked
to have a second helping!

"Maybe the lady had so many to help that she forgot to ask her. Couldn't she ask herself? 
It would have been more friendly than grumbling behind her back," said Pixie severely.  "When
I go out to meals with people I make myself at home.  I went to dejeuner with some friends
in Paris, and I was so much at home that when they had cabbage, I remarked that I wished it
had been cauliflower.  They smiled, and looked quite pleasant!"

Miss Munns looked over her spectacles, and grunted to herself.  She considered Pixie O'Shaughnessy
a most uncomfortable girl, and was never at ease in her society.  She asked embarrassing questions,
stared with unconcealed curiosity, while her innocence had a trick of developing into quite
remarkable shrewdness at sudden and inappropriate moments. Miss Munns recalled several incidents
when the gaze of the childlike eyes had filled her with a most unpleasant embarrassment, and
declared that not for fifty thousand pounds would she have that child living in her house!

Bridgie was different.  She was invariably anxious to hear further anecdotes concerning relations
and friends, and was such a docile pupil in domestic matters, that the old lady had the felicity
of practically ruling two households instead of one.  In the fervour of her resolve to turn
over a new leaf, Bridgie had made no reservations, but had placed herself and her accounts
in Miss Munns's hands, and from that moment there was no drawing back.  The weekly orders were
supervised and cut down, the accounts carefully checked and paid to the hour, the receipts
were endorsed and filed, so that they could be produced at a moment's notice; extras were faithfully
entered into the housekeeping ledger at the end of each day, and the whole account balanced
to a laborious penny.  When the penny was very difficult to find, Bridgie pleaded hard to be
allowed to supply it from her private purse, and could never be quite brought to see that the
result would not be the same, but it was a proud moment when Jack surveyed the ledger on Saturday
evenings and wrote, "Examined, and found correct!" with a big flourish underneath the final
addition.  Then he would stroke his moustache and twinkle at her with amused eyes, as he said--

"Bravo, Bridgie, right to a fraction!  I'll ask Miss Munns to take me in hand next--since she
has scored such a triumph out of you.  Evening classes two or three times a week, with Sylvia
to sit by me and sharpen my pencils--that would be a happy way of combining instruction and
amusement for the winter evenings, wouldn't it?" and--shades of Esmeralda!--Bridgie smiled,
and ejaculated, "You naughty boy!" in a tone as far removed from fault-finding as it is possible
to imagine.

Sylvia Trevor, however, being a young woman of spirit, was by no means disposed to provide
amusement for Master Jack or any other masculine flirt.  If any man wished to win her, she
was worth wooing seriously, so she told herself with a tilt of the pretty dark head, but when
Jack said one thing with his lips, beseeching Miss Munns to take pity on his ignorance, and
put him on the path whereon he should walk, and another with his eyes, mutely inviting her
to stay and flirt with him the while he pretended to listen--then her pride was roused, and
she determined to teach him a wholesome lesson.  She waited until Miss Munns had produced half
a dozen ledgers to demonstrate the elaborate system of book-keeping by which she conducted
her miniature establishment--until Jack had seated himself by her side and was irrevocably
victimised for the evening; then she rose from her chair and said amiably--

"I mustn't disturb you.  You will like to be quiet, so I'll run across and chat to Bridgie
for an hour, while you are away!"

The "running" was a polite fiction, for in spite of massage and the most careful doctoring
it would be many months before Sylvia could run again. By walking very deliberately she could
just conceal her limp, and now as she turned towards the door she had a good view of Jack's
petrified glare of disgust.

The picture of him sitting by the old lady's side, while she prepared to teach him what he
himself knew a dozen times better than herself, was too much for Sylvia's composure, and around
the corner of the door, where her aunt could not see her, she doubled up with silent laughter
and cast on him a glance of such mocking triumph, such sparkling, dimpling, deliciously girl-like
derision, as was more eloquent than a thousand gibes.

Jack leapt to his feet; at that moment he would have given half he possessed to have rushed
after the tantalising creature, to have stood over her, and watched her self-confidence give
place gradually to embarrassment, and the pink flush rise to the pale cheeks as it had a trick
of doing under his scrutiny, but, alas! the door was shut, and Miss Munns's voice inquired
soberly--

"Do you want the lamp?  Put it on the mat, please.  You can't be too careful of lamps.  If
the oil gets on the cloth, nothing will take it out!"

"'Twill be a lesson to me while I live!" sighed Jack sorrowfully to himself.  He was smarting
with annoyance and impatience, but he managed, as not one man in a hundred could have done,
to keep his irritation to himself, and be absolutely amiable and courteous to his instructress.
Miss Munns thought him a most well-disposed young man, and did not discover one of the anxious
glances at the clock, nor the yawns so dexterously hidden beneath strokings of the moustache.

When three-quarters of an hour had passed by, Jack felt as if the interview had lasted a fortnight,
but fate was kinder to him than he deserved, and sent relief in the person of the widow occupant
of Number Ten, who arrived to pay an evening call, cribbage-board in hand.  Then Mr Jack departed,
and paced up and down the road smoking cigarettes, and meditating on revenge.  He caught the
echo of girlish laughter from within his own threshold, and could easily picture the scene
within--the two sisters huddling over the fire, Sylvia seated in state in the grandfather chair,
Pat, her devoted admirer, perched on the end of a table, and placidly maintaining his position
in spite of repeated injunctions to run away.

He pictured Sylvia's face also as he had often seen it--the sharply-cut little features, the
suspicion of pride and self-will in aquiline nose and firmly-moulded chin, the short, roughened
hair, which was such a cross to its owner, but which gave her a gallant, boyish air, which
one spectator at least found irresistibly piquant.  He saw the firelight play upon the pretty
pink dress and the rings on the restless hands, saw the brown eyes sparkle with laughter, and
grow suddenly soft and wistful.  It seemed to him that they were turned towards himself, that
her thoughts were meeting his half-way, that she was already repenting, and dreading the result
of her hasty flight.

Jack O'Shaughnessy stopped short in his pacings up and down, and stood staring before him with
a strange, rapt expression.  Out there in the prosaic street the greatest discovery of his
life had come to him, and the wonder of it took away his breath.  Young men often imagine themselves
in love with half a dozen pretty faces before they have reached five-and-twenty, but to most
of them there comes at last, in the providence of God, the one woman who is as far removed
from the passing fancies of an hour as the moon from her attendant stars.  She has appeared,
and for him thenceforth there is no more doubt or change; his life is, humanly speaking, in
her hands, and her influence over him is the greatest of all the talents which has been entrusted
to her care. Too often he is careless about religious matters, if not actively antagonistic,
and her light words may confirm him in a life of indifference; but, on the other hand, his
heart is never so tender and ready to be influenced as at the moment when she has given her
life into his charge, and this golden opportunity is hers to seize and turn to lasting good.
In the best sense of the word she is his Queen and he is her knight, who will perform noble
and gallant deeds at her behest.

Jack of the humbugging eyes, handsome, happy-go-lucky Jack O'Shaughnessy, had been what he
called "in love" since the days when he wore pinafores and little round collars with frills
at the edge, but he had never known what love meant until this winter evening, when at the
vision of Sylvia's face his heart leapt with painful violence, and he stood still appalled
by the strength of his own emotions.

He had known Sylvia Trevor for one month, four short weeks in all, yet now here she was occupying
the foremost position in his thoughts, making the past years seem blank and empty, blocking
the gate of the future with her girlish figure.  Jack felt dazed and bewildered, a trifle alarmed,
too, at the extent of the journey which he had travelled so unthinkingly, but he never attempted
to deny its reality.  He loved Sylvia--that was an established truth; the only question which
remained concerned the next step in the drama.

When a man loved a girl, when a girl blushed when he appeared, and, despite all her little
airs of superiority, could not hide her pleasure in his society, it was generally easy enough
to prophesy a speedy engagement and marriage, but what if Providence had made other ties for
the man before the Queen's appearance?  What if, though unmarried, he was still master of a
household, a bread-winner to whom brothers and sisters looked for support?

Jack's thoughts drifted longingly towards a little home of his own, where Sylvia reigned as
mistress, and cast pretty, saucy glances at him from the other side of the table, but he knew
all the time that it was the veriest castle of dreams.  He could not keep a wife who was hard
pressed to fulfil his present obligations; marriage was out of the question until the boys
were self-supporting, and the girls either settled in homes of their own, or comfortably portioned
off.  That being so, it was plainly the duty of an honourable man to keep out of the girl's
way, to make no attempt to win her affections, but to hide his love both from her and those
at home, who would otherwise be made to feel themselves in the way.

Jack turned and renewed his pacings up and down.  There was a heavy weight of depression on
his spirits, but he never flinched from the right path, nor did it occur to him that there
was anything heroic in this simple accepting of a hard duty.  Family affection was very strong
among the O'Shaughnessys, and not even the glamour of first love could make him grudge anything
to Bridgie and Pixie, or the two big boys who looked up to him with such touching confidence.
His first duty was to them, and it would be "caddish" to let them suspect any sacrifice in
its fulfilment.  A poor, commonplace word, which it is safe to say would have a nobler translation
in the Great White Book, wherein are written the records of men's lives!

Sylvia blushed as she heard the key turn in the latch, and cast an apprehensive glance at the
door.  Would Jack be angry?  How would he look?  What would he say?  The first glance showed
him graver than usual, but with no shadow of offence in look or bearing, and for some unaccountable
reason her spirits sank as she met his unclouded smile. He sat down and held out his hand to
Pixie, who promptly seated herself on the arm of his chair, and amused herself by trying the
effects of various arrangements of the curling brown hair.  Parted in the middle, it gave a
ridiculously dandified expression to the handsome face; pulled forward in shaggy locks over
the forehead, the dandy died a sudden death, and Pat of the cabin and clay pipe appeared in
his stead; combed upward by ten little fingers until it stood erect above the forehead, nationality
underwent an even more startling change.

"Voila, Adolph!" cried Pixie triumphantly.  "Me I have seen a hundred men, but a hundred, all
the same as thou every day I promenade me in Paris!"  And Jack smiled and, to Bridgie's surprise,
allowed himself to be disfigured without a protest--a surprising thing when a pretty girl was
among the spectators.

When the hairdressing operations were concluded, he held Pixie's hand in his own, as if unwilling
to let her go, and turned towards Sylvia with a smile.

"I think your aunt quite enjoyed giving me a lesson, and I was very much interested in her
original system of book-keeping.  What a wonderful old dear she is, so energetic and full of
interest in her fellow-creatures! I must go to see her again, and have a game of cribbage,
which appears to be her pet dissipation.  I'm fond of old people, but I daresay they get a
little trying if you have no variety.  If I relieve guard sometimes, it will set you free to
have a chat with the girls!"

Was he sarcastic?  Was he paying her back in her own coin?  Sylvia stared dumbly, but could
see no hidden meaning in the glance which met hers so frankly.  "Thanks awfully.  You are kind!"
she cried with enthusiasm, but in her heart she thought the kindness the most cruel treatment
she had ever experienced.  As soon as she could leave naturally she rose to say good-bye, and
then came a fresh blow, for, instead of escorting her across the road as he had insisted on
doing hitherto, Jack kept his arm round Pixie's shoulder, and deputed Pat to take his place.

"Now, then, you lazy fellow, get your hat, and see Miss Trevor home!"

Pat was delighted, and after all it was natural enough that Jack should not care to turn out
in the cold so soon after coming in, and yet--and yet--Sylvia stood at her bedroom window looking
at the lights across the road, and as she looked they grew strangely dull and faint.  Triumphs
are dearly won sometimes, and her mood to-night was the reverse of victorious.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

AT THE CIRCUS.

Mamzelle Paddy began and continued her work in the Wallace nursery with complete satisfaction
to all concerned.  Esmeralda, it is true, had surpassed herself in violence of diction in the
letter which came in answer to the one breaking the news; but while Bridgie shed tears of distress,
and Jack frowned impatience, the person against whom the hurricane of invective was hurled,
received it with unruffled and even sympathetic composure.

As Pixie read over the crowded sheets her eye flashed approval of dramatic points, she set
her lips, and wagged her head, entering so thoroughly into the spirit of the writer that she
unconsciously adopted her manner when aroused, and when the concluding words were read, heaved
a deep sigh of satisfaction.  "She'll feel a lot better after that!" she remarked tersely,
and the prophecy could not fail to be comforting to those who knew Mrs Hilliard's temperament.

After such an outburst, repentance might be expected to set in even more speedily than usual,
and a peace-offering in the shape of a hamper crowded with good things could be confidently
looked for in the course of the next few days.  Esmeralda disliked formal apologies, and from
the boys' point of view, at least, turkeys and game made a more eloquent amende.

Viva and Inda Wallace were loving and lovable children, but possessed with a nervous restlessness,
an insatiable curiosity, and with such easily-roused tempers as would have reduced an ordinary
adult governess to despair within a very short period.  Their delicate mother was occupied
with many social duties, and the father, though devoted to his pretty daughters, had little
patience with their vagaries, while the frequent screaming attacks which sounded through the
house had a trying effect on nerves already strained by long residence abroad.

Parents and servants alike breathed sighs of relief when each morning punctually as the clock
struck ten, Mamzelle Paddy came running upstairs primed with half a dozen thrilling devices
for amusement and occupation. Viva, as ringleader and rebel-in-chief, had flatly refused to
speak, or listen to, a word of French, but when it was presently revealed to her that the Spoopjacks
understood no other language, there was no course left but to withdraw her opposition.  The
Bobityshooties were English, and stupid at that, but by the time that Nicholas Spoopjack had
succeeded in teaching them how to address him with propriety, the two unsuspicious listeners
to the conversation had themselves mastered the lesson without once suspecting what they were
about.

The adventures which those two enterprising and admirable families went through, were as varied
as they were endless, and each day brought a thrilling development of the situation.  Nicholas
Spoopjack thought nothing of going out in a diving-bell in the morning, and a balloon in the
afternoon, while the Bobityshooties entertained royalty to dinner in the kitchen cupboard,
and feasted luxuriously on the cruets, and the pinked-out paper which covered the shelves.

"She don't teach us nuffin': we only plays!" was little Inda's summing up of the situation;
but a moment later she would repeat a dialogue which had taken place between the rival factions
during the morning, reproducing, with the wonderful imitative faculty of children, the very
accent and gesture with which it had been delivered, and her parents would look at each other
with delighted appreciation.

Mamzelle Paddy was a grand institution, and being generously disposed people, Mr and Mrs Wallace
endeavoured to show their gratitude by including her in the many amusements which were arranged
for the children's benefit.  She accompanied them on sight-seeing expeditions, organised games
at evening parties, and on one memorable occasion paid a visit to the circus.  Pixie had always
cherished a passion for clowns, and when in Paris had appreciated nothing more than an evening
at the "Nouveau Cirque," where Auguste the Frenchman played a secondary part to his English
brother, and the performance concluded with a play in which the British tourist played a large
part, conspicuous in plaid suits, sailor hats, and thick-soled shoes.  She was all eagerness
to see the London circus, and nearly as much excited as her pupils, as they drove up to the
door, and took their seats on the red velvet chairs.

Inda sat by her mother and stared solemnly around, but Viva insisted upon being next her dear
Mamzelle, and pranced up and down in a manner which augured ill for future comfort.  Once she
began to fidget, adieu to all hope of peace for her companions.  Once she began to ask questions,
it was safe to predict that she would go on until despair seized those who were obliged to
answer.  Pixie recognised signs of the coming attack, and managed an adroit change of places
which would leave Mrs Wallace free to enjoy the afternoon, and punctually at three o'clock
the performance began.

The ring-master walked in and cracked his whip; the clown tumbled head over heels into the
arena, and cried, "Here we are again!" the lady rider jumped through paper hoops, and blew
kisses to the audience. Viva's cheeks grew a vivid pink, and at each change in the performance
she adopted a change of position.  When the hook of her jacket had been extricated from the
hair of the lady in front, she perched herself on the arm of her own chair; when she had applauded
herself backward into Pixie's arms, she leant against the supercilious-looking gentleman in
the next seat, and tickled his cheeks with her fluffy hair.  Then the first wonder wore away,
and she found her tongue.

"Why does the clown look like that?"

"It's a way they have in the family.  They always have those funny eyes, and red and white faces."

"Did he always look like that?"

"He did--all the time he has been a clown."

"Is it the same clown that was here before?"

"It says on the paper it's a new one for the occasion."

"Then why does he say he is here again?"

"I'll ask him next time we meet!  Hush now, and listen to what he is saying.  See how they
are all laughing!"

"Does the clown sleep in the circus?"

"'Deed he does not, poor creature!  There are no beds, and the seats are too hard."

"Where does he sleep, then?  What is his true home?"

"Number Seven, Poplar Gardens, corner of Phillamore Park--the corner house with the red curtains!"

Pixie understood her pupil's love of detail by this time, and Viva put her head on one side
and stared at her with gratified admiration.  If she had asked her mother, she would have looked
tired and sighed, and said, "My dear child! how should I know?  Don't ask ridiculous questions,"
but Mamzelle Paddy knew better than that.

Her face assumed an expression of radiant satisfaction as she pondered on that house in Poplar
Gardens.  Big and grey, with flower boxes in the windows and little clowns looking out of the
nursery windows. Delightful!  She was silent for several minutes, and the supercilious gentleman
took advantage of the pause to examine the party with curious eyes.  The elegant-looking woman
was plainly the mother of the little girls, but who was this, who was scarcely more than a
child herself, who was addressed as "Mamzelle" and spoke with a strong Irish accent?  He stared
at her, and Viva discovering his glance turned round with her back to the ring, and stared
back with leisurely enjoyment.

At first her face expressed nothing but curiosity, but gradually her features became twisted,
the lips down drawn, the eyebrows elevated to an unnatural height, until the beholder realised
with horror that she was experimenting on his own expression, and endeavouring to copy it on
her own small visage.  Many a long year had passed since he had known what it meant to blush,
but he blushed then, and hitched round in his seat to hide his scarlet face from view, while
Viva once more turned her attention to the ring.

The white-skirted lady had disappeared and another was cantering round, clad in a riding habit
and gentleman's hat.  The horse was black, and shone like satin; he pawed the ground with dainty,
cat-like tread; the ring-master followed him as he went, and cracked his whip in encouraging
fashion.  Viva planted one foot on Pixie's toe, and jumped up and down to attract attention.

"Is the gentleman really angry, that he cracks his whip?  Does he pitend to be angry?  If he
pitends to be angry, why do all the others pitend that they think he doesn't pitend, but only,--Why
does the gentleman crack his whip?"

"Maybe he hears you talking!  I saw him cast his eye upon you," replied Pixie sagely, and the
supercilious gentleman pointed the sentence with a sigh, and privately resolved to remove his
seat at the first opportunity.

The threat of the whip, however, had the effect of quietening Miss Viva for a good two minutes,
and in the meantime Fate sent an unexpected deliverance.  Certain portions of the auditorium
were portioned off into squares, which did duty for private boxes, and into the nearest of
these there now entered a party of ladies and children, in whom he recognised some intimate
friends.  To advance towards them and beg the use of a vacant chair was the work of a moment,
when he proceeded to pour the story of his woes into the ear of the young lady by his side.
She was fair and pretty, charmingly dressed, and almost as supercilious in expression as he
was himself.

"Little wretch!  How impossible of her!" she ejaculated, and bent forward to examine the wretch
forthwith.

Viva had climbed on the empty seat, and was craning her little face to right and left to discover
where the deserter had fled.  With her great blue eyes and rose-leaf complexion set in a frame
of golden hair, she looked like an angel from heaven, or one of the sweet-faced cherubs who
float in space at the top of Christmas cards and valentines.

But it was not on Viva that the young lady's attention was riveted, but upon the figure by
her side--Mamzelle Paddy in all the glory of a French hat, wearing the very biggest hair-ribbon
in her possession, in honour of the occasion.  At sight of the profile the young lady started
and cried, "It is!  It must be!"  Then she dodged backwards, saw the hat, and became filled
with doubt.  "No, it can't be!  It's much too smart!"

Finally Pixie turned round to apostrophise Miss Viva, who was in the act of striding the back
of her chair, and immediately a flash of recognition leapt from eye to eye.  The French hat
nodded until the feathers fairly quivered with the strain, and the face beneath became a beam
of delight, in which eyes disappeared and the parted lips stretched back to a surprising distance.
The fair-haired young lady had more respect to appearance in her recognition, but all the same
she grew quite pink with pleasure, and cried eagerly--

"It's my dearest friend!  We were at school together, but she has been in Paris finishing her
education, and I have not heard from her since her return.  I must speak to her in the interval--I
really must!  You can't think what a fascinating little creature she is when you get to know her."

"Ah, really!  She looks distinctly--er--out of the common," drawled the supercilious man lazily.
"Rather interesting-looking woman, the children's mother.  Some relation of your friend, I
suppose?"

"Oh, I suppose so!  The O'Shaughnessys are a very good family.  Very well connected.  Beautiful
old place in Ireland," drawled the young lady in her turn, and in the intervals of the performance
she proceeded to expatiate on the grandeur of the O'Shaughnessy family, the beauty of Esmeralda,
and the riches of her husband, until her companion looked forward with increased interest to
the coming introduction.

At the first interval Pixie came forward in response to eager beckonings, and stood leaning
against the side of the box talking to her friend, with superb disregard of the more extended
audience.

"Fancy, now, the two of us meeting without knowing that we were here! You look quite old, Lottie,
with your hair done up.  Turn your head and let me see the back!  D'you still curl it with
slate-pencils, like you did at school?  I came home at Christmas, and I've thought of writing
ever since, but I've been too busy.  I suppose you're busy too, now you are grown-up and living
at home.  Have you come out, and gone to dances in low necks?  We had an old servant at Knock,
and one day a friend came to lunch and she says to Bridgie, `That's a fine, handsome young
lady!' `She is,' says Bridgie.  `She's just come out!'  `Out of w'ere?' says Molly, staring."

Pixie darted a quick glance round the box to enjoy the general appreciation of her joke, then
gave a low chuckle of satisfaction. "Ye'll never guess what I'm doing!"

"No," said Lottie Vane complacently.  She too had noticed the smiles of the audience, and was
anxious to encourage her friend in her reminiscences.  In society people were always grateful
for being amused, and if in her recital Pixie let fall further references to the standing and
importance of her family, why, so much the better for all concerned.

"What mischief are you up to now, you funny little thing?"

"I'm in service!" said Pixie proudly.

The shocked amaze of Lottie's expression, the involuntary rustle of surprise which went round
the box, were as so many tributes to the thrilling nature of the intelligence, and she waited
a moment to enjoy it before pointing unabashed in the direction of the two children, and condescending
to further explanations.

"Me pupils!  I've been with them now for over a month."

"What do you mean?  How absurd you are, Pixie!" cried Lottie irritably. "In service--you! 
I never heard such nonsense.  As if you were a servant!  I don't know what you are talking about!"

"I get wages, anyhow, and that's all I care about.  They are my pupils, I tell you, and I've
brought them here with their mother for a little diversion.  I've the training of them every
morning for a couple of hours, and thirty pounds a year paid every month.  Jack and I make
enough between us to support the family."

"You don't really mean it?" gasped Lottie, horrified.  Her cheeks were scarlet, and it was
evident that she was profoundly uncomfortable, but as she met the triumphant eyes her face
softened, and she made a valiant effort to retain composure.  "You mean to say you have turned
into a governess at sixteen--you who were always at the bottom of the class, and couldn't get
a sum right to save your life!  Poor little girls, I pity their education!  How did you ever
persuade the mother to take you?"

Mamzelle Paddy tossed her head with complacent pride.

"'Deed, me dear, the room was packed with them, and natives at that, and she chose me before
the whole bunch.  I'm not supposed to teach them anything but French, and I don't teach that
except by playing games. But I keep them from crying and quarrelling, and ye don't need to
be head of your class for that!  'Twasn't cleverness she took me for, as she told me plainly
the first day I went; 'twas m'influence!"

A smothered laugh went round the box at the sound of this curious compound word, uttered in
tones of complacent pride; but Lottie Vane did not laugh, and her hand stretched out involuntarily
and clasped the little fingers which lay on the side of the box.  Her face lost its supercilious
expression, and grew sweet and womanly.

"Dear little Pixie," she said softly, "I don't pity the pupils after all.  I think they are
very well off.  May I come over and be introduced to them and their mother?  She must be a
very wise woman."

The two girls walked forward together towards the spot where Mrs Wallace was sitting, and the
supercilious man looked after them with thoughtful eyes.  He had always admired Miss Lottie
Vane, though he had privately sneered at her snobbish tendencies, but it occurred to him to-
day that he had been over-hasty in judgment.  How sweet she had looked as she answered her
little friend, how kindly had been the tones of her voice!  He felt his heart thrill with the
beginning of a new and deeper interest.

CHAPTER NINETEEN.

A TEA-PARTY.

Jack kept his resolve of avoiding dangerous tete-a-tetes with Sylvia Trevor, and kept it in
so pleasant and friendly a manner that no one suspected his motives save the person most concerned.
She knew only too well that a wall of division had suddenly risen between them, but though
her heart ached she carried her proud little head more erect than ever, and was so very, very
lively and pleasant that Jack in his turn was deceived, and believed that she was relieved
by his absence.  When they met, as meet they did from time to time, they laughed and joked,
and teased each other about little family jokes, and Bridgie listened delightedly, and told
herself that it did Jack all the good in the world to meet Sylvia, for he was growing so much
quieter, and seemed so worried over that horrid old business.  Miss Munns, however, had the
same complaint to make about her niece, and delivered herself of many homilies on the subject.

"Extremes," she said, "extremes, my dear, ought always to be avoided. To be constantly running
from one extreme to another shows an unbalanced character.  A medium path is the wisest which
one can choose, and one should show neither undue elation nor foundless depression at the events
of life.  I remember a proverb which we used to quote as children: `Laugh in the morning, cry
before night!'--and there is a great deal of truth in it, too.  High spirits are bound to be
brought low before very long."

"Well, I think it's a horrid proverb and a very wicked one into the bargain!" cried Sylvia
hotly.  "It sounds as if God disliked seeing one happy, and I believe He loves it and means
it, and tries to teach us that it is a duty!  He made the world as bright as He could for us
to live in, with the sunshine and the flowers, and He made all the little animals skip and
bound, and play games among themselves, so it stands to reason that He expects men and women
to be happy too, especially young ones."

"Exactly!  Precisely!  Just what I say!  I was just pointing out to you, my love, that it is
over an hour since you made a remark, and that such depression of spirits was very trying to
me as your companion," cried Miss Munns, with an air of triumph.  "After the long period of
anxiety through which I have passed, I think I am entitled to expect some cheering society."

"But then, you see, I might cry before evening!" retorted Sylvia pertly, and had the satisfaction
of feeling that she had been rude to her elders, and put herself hopelessly in the wrong, as
Miss Munns took up her stocking-bag and began to darn, drooping her eyelids with an air of
stony displeasure.

Sylvia glanced at her from time to time during the next half-hour, and felt ashamed of herself,
and wished she were sweet-tempered like Bridgie, and thought how nice it would be if she could
learn to think before she spoke, and be cautious and prudent, and never say what she was sorry
for afterwards.  She also wished that Aunt Margaret would not look so particularly old and
frail this morning of all others.  How thin she was!  What great big hollows she had in her
cheeks!  It was rather dreadful to be old like that, and have no one to love and care for one
best of all, no one but a thoughtless girl, who was never so grateful as she ought to be, and
sometimes even really impertinent.  The wave of penitence could not be repressed, and she jumped
from her seat with her characteristic impetuosity, and threw her arms round her aunt's shoulders.

"I'm sorry I answered you back, auntie; it was horrid of me.  I've been a great trouble to
you this winter, but I really am awfully grateful for all your goodness.  Do give me a kiss,
and say you forgive me!"

"Well, well, well, my dear child, don't be so impetuous!  You have nearly pulled the cap off
my head.  Extremes, as I said before, always extremes!  Do please try to exercise some self-control.
I quite understand that you are troubled about your foot, but as the doctor says it is only
a question of time, and if you are patient for a month or two more, you will be able to go
about as well as ever.  There is no necessity to brood about it as you do, no necessity at all!"

Sylvia was not brooding about her foot, but she did not choose to say so to Miss Munns, and
her silence being accepted as a sign of submission, the old lady became so mollified as to
suggest that the two Miss O'Shaughnessys should be invited to tea forthwith.

Afternoon tea under Miss Munns's regime was a more formal meal than is usually the case, and
also a trifle more solid, for it was followed by no dinner, but a supper of cocoa and potted
meat served at nine o'clock. This arrangement was one of Sylvia's minor trials in life, but
Pixie O'Shaughnessy saw great compensations in a tea where you really sat up to the table,
and had jam in a pot, and a loaf, and scones, and eggs. It fascinated her to see how the table
was laid, with a white cloth spread diamond-wise under the tea-tray, and the different viands
dotted about on the green baize.

Miss Munns boiled her own water, and ladled the tea out of a little silver caddy, and dipped
the bottom of each cup in water before it was filled to prevent slippings on the saucer.  She
had a kettle-holder worked in cross-stitch--red wool roses on a black wool background--and
a cosy ornamented with a wreath of bead flowers.  The eggs were boiled to order, hard or soft,
just as you liked, in a silver pot filled with methylated spirits out of a fascinating, thimble-like
measure.  Pixie watched the various preparations with rapt attention, while the two elder girls
chatted together at the end of the table.

"I want you to give me Whitey's address," Bridgie said, "so that I can send her some flowers.
Esmeralda sent me a hamper this morning, so I am rather rich and would like to share my goad
things.  You said she was nursing a case in the city, so she probably has no flowers, and it's
cheery to have boxes coming in as a surprise.  It's so hard for nurses to live in a constant
atmosphere of depression and sickness.  When one is ill for a long time, as you were, one gets
so bored and wearied by the monotony of the sick-room, and it's such bliss to be free again,
and speak at the pitch of your voice, and be done with medicines, and pulses, and temperatures,
and tiresome rules and regulations, but the nurse never gets free.  Just when things are beginning
to get cheerful, she goes away to another darkened room and another anxious household, and
the whole programme begins over again.  They love their work, of course, but it must be very
hard sometimes.  Don't you think so?"

"I--I--" Sylvia pursed up her lips and elevated her eyebrows in deprecatory fashion.  "I never
thought of it!  It does sound horrid when you put it like that, but I'm afraid I just took
it for granted that it was their work.  Whitey never grumbled.  She left that to me, and was
always cheerful, though I found out afterwards that she had been awfully anxious about her
sister.  I wish I had thought of sending her flowers!"

"Send these--do!" cried Bridgie eagerly.  "She will like them better from you, and I don't
mind a bit so long as she gets them.  I'll send over the box, and you shall address it and
put in a little note.  Yes, you must, because I felt rather mean about not bringing some for
yourself, but there were not very many, and as I was going into town I couldn't resist taking
some to the woman in the waiting-room."

"The woman in the-- What do you mean?"

Bridgie laughed easily.

"At London, of course.  There are several waiting-rooms at our station, but I go to the dullest
of all, where there is hardly a gleam of light, and one day I saw the woman staring so longingly
at some flowers which a lady was carrying.  Since then I have generally taken her a little
bunch when I go up to town, and it is quite pathetic the way she grabs them. She knows me now,
and looks so pleased to see me!"

That was an easy thing to imagine.  Sylvia pictured to herself the long, monotonous day in
that dreary little room, the constant hope which reached its fulfilment when the door swung
open and Bridgie's face smiled a greeting, leaving behind her the fragrant blossoms to sweeten
the hours with their own perfume, and the remembrance of another's care. Such a simple thing
to do!  Such an easy thing!  Why had she never thought of it herself?  She would have done
it gladly enough if it had occurred to her mind: it was not heart that was wanted, but thought!
Oh, what a number of lives might be brightened, what an army of good deeds would be accomplished
if people would only "think!"

"Well, my dear, I only hope she was a decent woman, and worthy of your kindness," said Miss
Munns primly.  "A lazy life, I call it.  I've no opinion of people who make their living by
sitting still all day.  I had occasion to wait at a station some little time ago, and entered
into conversation with the woman in charge.  She said she was a widow, and I advised her to
use my furniture-polish, for the woodwork was in a disgraceful condition, and she answered
me back in a most unbecoming manner.  I have done a great deal of charitable work in my day,
and am on three committees at the present moment, so I am not easily taken in.

"I have been investigating cases for relief this very afternoon, and if you'll believe me in
one house where they asked for help there was a musical-box upon the table!  The woman said
it was given to her by an old mistress, and that it amused the children while she did her work.
I told her we did not undertake to relieve cases who could afford to keep musical instruments.
I don't know what the poor are coming to in these days.  She must dispose of it before I can
have anything to do with her."

"But 'twas a present to her!  It's not polite to give away presents. Who do you want her to
give it to?" queried Pixie, with the wide-eyed stare which always made Miss Munns feel so hot
and discomposed.  She frowned and fidgeted with the kettle, while Pixie continued to discuss
the situation.  "I know what it is to have children about when there's something to do.  Mrs
Wallace gave me a book the other day, and the schemes I made to get time to look at the pictures!
I was supposed to have gone out for a walk, and they were to prepare a surprise for me when
I got back.  And 'twas a surprise!  They'd pretended to be savages, and pulled all the feathers
out of my hat to stick in their hair!"

"Very ill-mannered and impertinent I call it!  I hope you gave them a good scolding?"

"I did not," said Pixie calmly.  "I don't like scolding meself, and it makes me worse.  I merely
remarked that it was a pity, as I'd have to sew them back again instead of playing games. 
'Twas dull work watching me sew, and I didn't disturb myself with hurrying.  Ye couldn't bribe
them within yards of me hat this last week!"

"Humph!  When I was a child I was whipped when I did wrong, and that was the end of it.  But
things have changed since then, and time will prove which was the best system.  Another cup
of tea, Miss Bridgie?  I hope you have good news of your sister and the little boy?"

"Yes, thank you, Miss Munns.  They are both well, and we are hoping to see them quite soon.
They come up to their town house at the beginning of May, and we expect to have quite a gay
time.  Esmeralda is bringing a house-party of old Irish friends with her, and it will be delightful
to meet again.  She always loved entertaining, and was clever in devising novelties, and now
that she has plenty of money she can do as she likes without thinking of the cost.  You must
get your fineries ready, Sylvia. There will be lots of invitations for you next month."

Sylvia's smile was less whole-hearted than it would have been if one sentence had been omitted
from Bridgie's announcement.  "Old friends from Ireland" would of a surety include Miss Mollie
Burrell, and Esmeralda would see that Jack made the most of his opportunity.  It would not
be exactly pleasure to accept invitations for the sake of seeing other people flirting together,
while she herself sat alone in a corner.

"I shan't go!" she told herself.  "If she asks me I shall refuse.  I don't care to be patronised
at Park Lane or anywhere else.  I'd rather stay at home and play cribbage in Rutland Road."
But all the same in the depths of her heart she knew well that when the time came she would
not have enough resolution to say no.  The temptation to obtain a glimpse of the fashionable
world of which she had read so much and seen too little would be too great to be resisted;
she would go even if it were to have her heart stabbed with a fresh pain, and to come home
to weep herself to sleep!

"My dear, your sister will have plenty of friends to ask without thinking of Sylvia.  She won't
find it plain sailing looking after a big house like that.  I should advise her to engage a
housekeeper if she doesn't want to be cheated right and left.  I know what servants are when
the mistress is never in the kitchen to look after the scraps.  I daresay I might be able to
help her to find a suitable woman in connection with our different agencies.  I'll inquire
for you if you think she would like it."

"Dear Miss Munns, how kind of you!  I'll write to Esmeralda at once, and I daresay she would
be most grateful.  You make me quite ashamed of myself when I think of all the work you do,
and how lazy and useless I am in comparison!" cried Bridgie earnestly.  Her grey eyes were
fixed on Miss Munns's face with the sweetest, most unaffected admiration, and Sylvia looked
at them both and thought many thoughts.

Miss Munns did indeed give both time and strength to charitable work, and withal a generous
share of her small income, but her interest was of the head, not of the heart, and she was
sublimely ignorant of her failure to help or comfort.  Bridgie thought she was not helping
at all, and was ashamed of herself because she was on no committees, and knew nothing of authorised
agencies.  Her ignorance was so sweet that it would be a sin to enlighten it, but there was
something in Sylvia's expression which aroused her friend's curiosity.

"What are you thinking of, Sylvia?" she asked.  "Something nice?"

"Very nice!" said Sylvia, smiling.  She had just recalled a quotation which seemed as though
it might have been written to describe Bridgie O'Shaughnessy--

  "Sweet souls without reproach or blot,
  Who do God's will and know it not!"

CHAPTER TWENTY.

A LUNCHEON BASKET.

Esmeralda announced her arrival in town on the first of May, a week in advance of her house-party,
so that she might have leisure to visit her brothers and sisters, and put the final touches
to her own preparations. She did not mention the hour of her arrival, but this was easily calculated,
and at home in Rutland Road, Bridgie and Pixie held eager committee meetings as to the best
method of welcome.  It was decided not to go to the station, as Esmeralda did not appreciate
being taken unawares, and would of a certainty be annoyed if her son and heir were beheld at
a disadvantage.

"Babies are bound to be cross at the end of a journey, and his little frock would be soiled
and crumpled, and she will want him to look his very, very best.  No! we will go straight to
Park Lane," Bridgie decided, "and arrive an hour after they are due, so that they will have
had time to get tidy.  The house will be upset, of course, for it has been closed for so long,
and we may be able to help.  I shall never forget the day we came here--all the furniture piled
in the middle of the rooms, and nowhere to sit down, and nothing to eat, and my poor back aching
as if 'twere broken.  That's another thing I was thinking about. We'll take lunch with us all
ready prepared--a cold chicken, I think, and some fruit for dessert, and enjoy it together,
we three girls, if we have to sit on the floor to eat it.  How lovely it will be to meet again!
It seems too good to be true."

Pixie was delighted at the idea of the luncheon basket, and when the eventful day arrived one
little extra after another was added to the original list, until the weight became quite formidable,
but Bridgie declared that an omnibus ran to within but a short distance of their destination,
and the two girls set off in high spirits, each holding a handle of the basket, and swinging
it gaily to and fro.  Curious glances were cast towards it en route, whereat Pixie beamed with
pride.  It looked so like a picnic basket, with the top bulging from the sides, allowing glimpses
to be seen of the fruit bags, and the white linen serviette enfolding the chicken; she was
convinced that the beholders were consumed with envy and curiosity!

Arrived at Park Lane, Pixie was much concerned to realise that Esmeralda's much vaunted town
residence was situated in this dull and narrow street!  In vain Bridgie represented that the
site was famous the world over; the little sister smiled quietly, and retained her own opinion.
Bridgie as usual was making the best of the situation, but it was evident that Geoffrey's riches
had been much exaggerated, since this was the best he could do for his wife.

Poor Esmeralda! how disappointed she would be!  What a good thing it was that they had brought
the cold chicken to take off the first edge of disappointment!  The house itself looked dark
and gloomy, but there were a great many windows, and looking upwards Pixie espied a glimpse
of a graceful head inside the line of one of the curtains.  The travellers had indeed arrived,
and in another moment the three sisters would be reunited, after four months' separation.

"Ring again, darling!  I can't.  This basket weighs me down!" said Bridgie, straining at the
heavy handle, and then came surprise number one, for even as she spoke the door was flung back,
and there appeared on the threshold one immaculate-looking man-servant, while farther down
the hall stood two more in attitudes of attention.  Three whole men to open one door!  This
was indeed a height of luxury to which the simple Irish mind had never soared; and where was
the upset and confusion which had been expected, where the signs of recent arrival, where the
smallest, most trifling evidence of confusion?  The stately hall looked as if it had been undisturbed
from immemorial ages, and the butler stared at the two girls and their basket with lofty disdain.

"Not at home, madam!"

Bridgie gasped, and looked blank dismay, but Pixie's shrill protest could not be restrained.

"Not at home, when I saw her meself not a second ago looking out of the window?"

What would have happened it is difficult to say, but at that moment a voice sounded from afar,
an eager voice repeating two names over and over again in tones of rapturous welcome.  The
man stepped aside, and Bridgie pressed the basket into his hands and raced along the hall,
past the staring footmen to the bend of the stairs, where Esmeralda stood with arms stretched
wide.  Pixie was only a step aside, and Esmeralda escorted the two girls upstairs to her own
room, talking breathlessly the while.

"Of course he said I was not at home!  We arrived only an hour ago, so I can hardly be ready
for visitors yet, but I saw the top of your hats from the nursery windows.  You must come this
very minute and see the boy.  He is sweeter than ever.  Everyone says he is a perfect beauty.
Oh, me dears, how glad I am to see you!  How sweet of you to come!"

"Of course we came; we thought perhaps we might be able to--help!" Bridgie said, looking around
the gorgeous staircase with pensive regret. "We imagined you in such an upset, dear, with the
carpets up, and the furniture covered with dust-sheets, and we thought we could dust, and put
things straight as we used to do at Knock.  You told us you were coming to open the house!"

"You didn't expect I was going to work myself?" drawled Esmeralda, her impetuous manner changing
suddenly to one of drawling affectation.  "The servants have been here for a week, getting
ready for our arrival.  I have nothing to look after but a few frocks, and preparations for
the fray next week!  Did you expect to see me in an apron, with a duster over my head?"

"It makes no difference to me what you wear!" said Bridgie quietly, and at that Esmeralda laughed,
and became herself once more.

"It does to me, though.  The best of everything is good enough for me, nothing less!  You dear
old thing, it's like old times to have you looking at me with that solemn face.  No one keeps
me in order now. Geoff tries occasionally, but it's such an evident effort that it doesn't
have much effect.  It will be quite good for me to have some family snubbings once more.  This
is the way to the nursery--this door! Now, my beauty, come to mother.  She's brought two new
aunties to see you!"

The beauty regarded his relations in stolid silence for a moment, then hung his lower lip and
began to howl.  His mother walked him up and down the room, striving by various blandishments
to win him back to smiles, but he kept turning his head over his shoulder to gaze at his new
relatives with an expression of agonised incredulity, as though loath to believe that such
monsters could really exist on the earth.  He was very fat and very bald, and, if the truth
were told, not a beauty at all, but Esmeralda made a fascinating mother, and was so happily
deluded about his charms that it would have been cruel to undeceive her.

Even Pixie managed for once to preserve a discreet silence, while Bridgie's ejaculations of
astonishment at size and weight passed muster as admiration with the complacent mother and nurse.

"You shall see him again later on," Esmeralda announced, as though anxious to soften the pain
of separation, as she led her sisters from the room.  "I must show you over the house before
lunch.  Geoffrey had the drawing-rooms redecorated before we were married, but this is the
first time I have been able to entertain.  I wish you could come and stay here, Bridgie, but
I suppose nothing would make you desert the boys.  Never mind, you will be here every time
that there is anything going on, and it is not much fun preparing when one has a houseful of
servants.  Do you remember how we used to be making jellies and creams all the day before,
and running about arranging the house until a few minutes before the time when the people arrived?
That's all over now, and I do nothing but give orders and grumble.  This way!  There!  What
do you think of that for an imposing vista?"

It was indeed very imposing, for one long yellow room opened into another decorated in palest
blue, which in its turn showed a glimpse of a conservatory gay with flowers.

The rooms were so huge, so lofty in stature, that Pixie was puzzled to understand how the unimposing
exterior could contain such surprises, while Esmeralda strutted about displaying one treasure
after another, giving detailed descriptions of exactly how the rooms were to be arranged for
the contemplated entertainments, and glancing complacently at her own reflection in the long
mirrors.  She looked ridiculously young to be the mistress of this fine establishment, and
despite occasional affectations, there was more of the schoolgirl than of the woman of the
world, in her happy voice and eager gestures.

From the reception-rooms the sisters adjourned to the dining-room, a big, somewhat gloomy apartment
facing the street, very handsome, very severe, and evidently dedicated to one purpose only,
and never by any chance entered from the time one meal ended until another began.  The butler
was arranging dishes on the sideboard, the table was spread with a glittering profusion of
glass and silver, and an array of cold dainties, at sight of which Bridgie blushed, and stared
at the floor. She waited, trembling, to hear Pixie's exclamation, but none came, and as they
adjourned towards the library she slipped her hand through Esmeralda's arm, and said, half
laughing, half nervous--

"I don't understand the ways of grand ladies yet, Joan dear!  I shall have to get into them
by degrees.  You wrote that you were coming to open the house, and I imagined you in the same
sort of confusion which we were in at Rutland Road, only of course ten times worse, as your
house is so big.  We thought you would be tired and hungry, and perhaps have nothing to eat
but sandwiches or biscuits, and we--we brought some lunch for you and ourselves!"

Esmeralda threw back her head and laughed with much enjoyment.

"You funny dear, I never heard of anything so quaint!  It was sweet of you all the same, and
I'm ever so grateful.  But, oh dear! what would the servants say if they knew!  They would
think my relations had come out of the Ark.  And where in the world have you put the provisions?"

"I--I--" Bridgie looked round for Pixie, but she had lingered behind, and there was no one
to help her out of her plight.  "I had the basket in my hand, and we were standing at the door,
and I heard you calling and I rushed in.  I gave it to someone.  I was in such a hurry I hardly
noticed who it was.  I think it was the man in the dining-room now!"

"Montgomery!" echoed Esmeralda blankly.  She stood staring at Bridgie with horrified eyes.
"Bridgie, how could you?  What do you mean by it?  What did you bring, and how was it made up?"

"A chicken, and pies, and apples, and a tin of toffee.  Everything you liked--and some little
rolls and a pot of butter.  They were in a basket--a big basket with a serviette over the top!"
cried Bridgie, with desperate candour, determined to tell the worst at once and get it over.

At home at Rutland Road it had seemed such a simple and natural thing to do, but ten minutes'
experience of Park Lane had shown clearly enough how unnecessary had been her anxiety, how
ridiculous it must seem in the estimation of the household!  She looked at Esmeralda with troubled
eyes, and Esmeralda flushed, and cried testily--

"A basket of provisions, and you handed it to Montgomery!  He would think, of course, that
it was his duty to open it, and-- Oh, Bridgie, how could you?  He will tell the story in the
servants' hall, and they will all laugh and make fun.  It's too tiresome!  I can't think how
you can have made such a mistake!"

"I thought of you, you see, and not of the servants.  It never occurred to my mind that you
could be ashamed of me, whatever I did!" said Bridgie quietly.

"I'm not in the least ashamed of you, I'm ashamed of the basket!  You ask Jack when you go
home, and he'll tell you 'twas a foolish thing to do, and you walking, too, and not driving
to the door.  We won't talk about it any more, or we shall both get angry, and it's done now
and can't be helped.  What do you think of this room?  Geoffrey is quite proud of his books,
and we mean to make this our private little den, and retire here when we are tired of living
in public.  Here's the electric light, you see, switched on to these movable lamps, so that
one can read comfortably in any position!"

"Very nice!  So convenient!  It looks most comfortable!"

Bridgie's voice sounded formal and ill-at-ease, and both sisters felt the position a trifle
strained, and were unaffectedly relieved to see Pixie strolling towards them at this critical
minute.

She was smiling to herself as at a pleasant remembrance, and lost no time in entering into
conversation.

"I don't know how it is about butlers--they all love me!" she announced thoughtfully.  "The
Wallace one turns his back to the sideboard when I talk, and the vegetable-dishes wobble when
he hands them round.  He tries hard not to laugh, because it's rude for servants to see a joke,
but he really appreciates them frightfully much.  Your one has whiskers, too, and isn't he
pleasant to talk to?  Not half as proud as he looks. We have just been talking about the basket,
because he'd got chickens already, and he asked what he should do with ours.  I said we'd take
it back, of course, because it would be a treat to us to-night.  That was quite right, wasn't
it, Bridgie?"

"Yes, darling, perfectly right!" said Bridgie.

Esmeralda frowned, bit her lip, and finally succumbed, even as the butler had done before her,
and laughed with a good grace.  She hugged Pixie, and Pixie hugged her back, and chattered
away so freely and naturally that it was impossible for restraint to live in her presence.

Esmeralda as usual avoided a formal apology, but when Geoffrey arrived and the little party
were seated round the luncheon-table, she made the amende honorable by telling him of the basket
incident in the presence of three men-servants with as much unction as if it had given her
the most unmitigated delight.

"Thank you, Bridgie, you are a brick!  How jolly of you to have taken so much trouble!  If
I'd known of that chicken before I began lunch, nothing would have induced me to eat anything
else!" cried Geoffrey heartily.

There was no snobbishness about him at any rate, and to judge from the glance which his wife
cast upon him it was evident that she was quite able to appreciate a quality that was lacking
in her own composition.

They seemed very happy together, this young husband and wife, and as Bridgie saw them smile
at one another across the table, for no other reason than pure happiness and content in each
other's presence; when Esmeralda announced "Geoffrey says," as the definite conclusion of any
argument, and Geoffrey said quietly, "Esmeralda likes it!" as though the fact debarred all
further discussion--when she heard and saw all this, the pain which was so bravely buried in
Bridgie's heart seemed to take a fresh lease of life, and stab her with the memory of dead hopes.

It was not that she envied Esmeralda her happiness--Bridgie had none of the dog in the manger
in her composition--but she felt suddenly oppressed by loneliness and a sense of want, which
the quiet home-life failed to satisfy.  Once she had imagined that this happiness would be
hers in the future, but that hope was dead, and it did not seem possible that it could ever
come to life again.  Even if by chance she met Dick Victor in the future, what explanation
could he have to offer which would wipe away the reproach of that long silence?  Bridgie hoped
they might never meet; it would be too painful to see her idol dethroned from his pedestal.

"Are they worth a penny, dear?  I've asked you the same question twice over!" cried Esmeralda
mischievously, and Bridgie came back to the present with a shock of remembrance.

"I was wool-gathering again.  So sorry!  What did you want to know?"

"I was talking about our invitations.  Do you want any cards for friends?  Is there anyone
whom you would like me to ask?"

"Lottie Vane, please, and Mr and Mrs Wallace," cried Pixie eagerly, and Esmeralda smiled at
the first name, and frowned at the second.  She remembered having seen the Vanes at a school
festival, and being favourably impressed by their appearance, but the name of Wallace was still
repugnant to her ears, and could not be heard unmoved.

She did not care, however, to appear ungracious in Geoffrey's presence, and reflected that
it might be judicious to impress Pixie's employers with the grandeur of the O'Shaughnessy family,
and thus nip in the bud any ideas of patronage.  A moment later she was thankful that she had
made no objections, as Sylvia Trevor's name from Bridgie's lips convinced her that here at
least a stand must be made.

"Oh, my dear, it is no use asking Miss Trevor.  She is lame, and I shall have enough to do
without looking after invalids."

"She would come with us, and we would take care of her.  The boys are so fond of Sylvia.  They'd
think it a pleasure!" pleaded innocent Bridgie, all unconscious of the fatal nature of her
argument, and Esmeralda frowned again and said impatiently--

"She'd much better stay at home.  Crowded rooms are no place for people who need such care."

"No, but that is all the more reason why she should get what enjoyment she can.  She would
love one of the receptions you spoke of, when you will have music and other entertainments,
and her limp can scarcely be noticed now.  She would be no trouble to you.  You asked her to
visit you in Ireland, Esmeralda!"

"'Deed I did, and she snubbed me for my pains.  I don't like Miss Trevor, and I don't mean
to give her the chance of refusing any more invitations."

Bridgie looked aghast, as well she might, and made no attempt to hide her discomfiture.

"But--but I told her you would!  I made quite sure of it, and told her she would have such
a good time.  The poor girl is counting upon it."

"And she is Bridgie's friend.  Bridgie wants to bring her.  That settles the question surely!"
said Geoffrey quietly.  He looked across the table with uplifted brows, and, wonder of wonders,
Esmeralda blushed, and murmured vaguely about being "much pleased."

"What a mercy it was that Geoffrey was at home!  But oh, if you love me, Pixie, never, never
let Sylvia guess that we had to plead for her invitations!" pleaded Bridgie earnestly, as the
two sisters made their way home an hour later on.

CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

AN "AT HOME."

Fortunately or unfortunately as the case may be, there is no hall mark of sincerity to distinguish
one invitation from another, and the printed cards which were in due time received by Sylvia
Trevor differed in no respect from those sent to the most favoured of Esmeralda's guests. Fortunately
also the remarks with which invitations are received are not overheard by the prospective hostess,
else might she often feel her trouble wasted, and repent when it was too late.

Mrs Hilliard's fashionable acquaintances yawned when they received her cards, and exclaimed,
"Another engagement for Thursday!  We shall have to accept, I suppose, but it's a dreadful
nuisance!  We can just look in for a quarter of an hour on our way to Lady Joan's dance;" and
unfashionable Sylvia pursed up her lips and remarked to herself, "Humph! I suppose she wants
to dazzle me with the sight of her splendours. Much `pleasure' my company will give her!  I
shall go, of course.  I don't think I could stay quietly at home and play cribbage, and know
that Bridgie and the boys were driving away, and that I might have been with them.  Yes, I'll
go, and I will get a new dress for the occasion--a beauty!  Dad said I might be extravagant
once in a way, without emptying the exchequer; and he would like me to look nice.  Perhaps
Bridgie will go to town with me and help me to choose.  It is nice to have some excitement
to look forward to.  What with typhoid and--Jack,--this has been the dullest winter I ever knew."

The advent of the Hilliards did indeed make a great difference to the two quiet households
in Rutland Road.  Esmeralda was too much occupied with her guests to pay many visits in person,
but she appeared at intervals, leaning back against the cushions of the carriage, and looking
like some wonderful princess out of a fairy-tale, and as far removed as possible from the good
ladies of the neighbourhood.

The coachman would draw up before the door of Number Three, the footman would throw open the
door, and Mistress Esmeralda would saunter up the little garden, dragging yards of chiffon
and lace in her train, and acutely, delightfully conscious of the heads peering from behind
the curtains on either side of the road.  Acknowledged beauty as she was, her advent caused
a greater sensation in this suburban district than among her own associates, and though she
affected to despise its demonstrations, they were yet very dear to her vain little heart.

Sometimes the two sisters were spirited away to lunch or a drive in the Park, and on their
return would adjourn into Number Six, and entertain Miss Munns and her niece with the story
of their adventures.  There was a party every single day at Park Lane--titled creatures, and
"men who did things," as Pixie eloquently explained, and Miss Munns recognised every name as
it was repeated, and inquired anxiously concerning clothes, if the celebrity were of the female
sex, concerning manner and choice of eatables, if he were a man.

Once, too, before the date of the formal invitation, Sylvia herself was invited to accompany
her friend to an afternoon reception, when she beheld the fabled glories with her own eyes.
Never before had she entered such a house, or met so distinguished a company, but not for worlds
would she have allowed her surprise to be visible to Esmeralda's eyes.  The fashionable expression,
she noticed, was one of bored superiority, so she looked bored and superior too, refused offers
of refreshments which she was really longing to accept, and lounged from one room to another
with an abstracted air, as if unconscious of her surroundings.  All the same she felt very
lonely and out of her depth, for Bridgie was helping her sister to receive her guests, and
Pixie as usual roaming about in search of adventure.

It is very difficult to sit alone in a crowd and keep up an appearance of dignity, and Sylvia
was grateful when a girl of her own age took possession of the chair by her side, and began
to talk without waiting for the formality of an introduction.  She was a pleasant-looking,
much- freckled damsel, with a wholesome, out-of-door atmosphere, which distinguished her from
the other ladies present, and she seemed for some reason quite interested in Sylvia Trevor.

All the time that they talked the honest blue eyes--studied the little clear-cut face of her
companion, and though Sylvia was puzzled to account for the scrutiny, she was quite conscious
of its presence, and anxious that the decision should be in her favour.  She dropped her artificial
airs and graces, and talked simply and naturally, asking questions about the different people
present, and listening to the biographical sketches which were given in return, with much greater
interest than was vouchsafed to her aunt's more humble reminiscences.

It was so interesting to meet a celebrated author in flesh and blood, and find that she talked
about the weather like any ordinary stupid person; a statesman in whose hands lay the destiny
of a nation, yet could discuss with seriousness whether he should choose pink cakes or white.
So extraordinary to discover that this gorgeously-attired lady was plain Mrs Somebody, while
the funny, shabby-looking old woman in black was a celebrated Duchess, whose name was a household
word.

