I hired two men and set them to work to dig a gravel-pit. They made excavations at several
places, and very soon found what they declared to be a very fine quality of road-gravel. I
ordered them to dig on until they had taken out what they believed to be enough to cover all
my roads. When this had been done, I would have it properly spread and rolled. As this promised
to be a very good job, the men went to work in fine spirits and evidently made up their minds
that the improvements I desired would require a vast deal of gravel.

When they had dug a hole so deep that it became difficult to throw up the gravel from the bottom,
I suggested that they should dig at some other place. But to this they objected, declaring
that the gravel was getting better and better, and it would be well to go on down as long as
the quality continued to be so good. So, at last, they put a ladder into the pit, one man carrying
the gravel up in a hod, while the other dug it; and when they had gone down so deep that this
was no longer practicable, they rigged up a derrick and windlass and drew up the gravel in
a bucket.

Had I been of a more practical turn of mind I might have perceived that this method of working
made the job a very long and, consequently, to the laborers, a profitable one; but no such
idea entered into my head, and not noticing whether they were bringing up sand or gravel I
allowed them to proceed.

One morning I went out to the spot where the excavation was being made and found that the men
had built a fire on the ground near the opening of the pit, and that one of them was bending
over it warming himself. As the month was July this naturally surprised me, and I inquired
the reason for so strange a performance.

"Upon my soul," said the man, who was rubbing his hands over the blaze, "I do not wonder you
are surprised, but it's so cold down at the bottom of that pit that me fingers is almost frosted;
and we haven't struck any wather neither, which couldn't be expected, of course, a-diggin'
down into the hill like this."

I looked into the hole and found it was very deep. "I think it would be better to stop digging
here," said I, "and try some other place."

"I wouldn't do that just now," said the other man, who was preparing to go down in the bucket;
"to be sure, it's a good deal more like a well than a gravel-pit, but it's bigger at the top
than at the bottom, and there's no danger of its cavin' in, and now that we've got everything
rigged up all right, it would be a pity to make a change yet awhile."

So I let them go on; but the next day when I went out again I found that they had come to the
conclusion that it was time to give up digging in that hole. They both declared that it almost
froze their feet to stand on the ground where they worked at the bottom of the excavation.
The slow business of drawing up the gravel by means of a bucket and windlass was, therefore,
reluctantly given up. The men now went to work to dig outward from this pit toward the edge
of the bluff which overlooked my little dell, and gradually made a wide trench, which they
deepened until--and I am afraid to say how long they worked before this was done--they could
walk to the original pit from the level of the dell. They then deepened the inner end of the
trench, wheeling out the gravel in barrows, until they had made an inclined pathway from the
dell to the bottom of the pit. The wheeling now became difficult, and the men soon declared
that they were sure that they had quite gravel enough.

When they made this announcement, and I had gone into some financial calculations, I found
that I would be obliged to put an end to my operations, at least for the present, for my available
funds were gone, or would be when I had paid what I owed for the work. The men were very much
disappointed by the sudden ending of this good job, but they departed, and I was left to gaze
upon a vast amount of gravel, of which, for the present at least, I could not afford to make
the slightest use.

The mental despondency which had been somewhat lightened during my excavating operations now
returned, and I became rather more gloomy and downcast than before. My cook declared that it
was of no use to prepare meals which I never ate, and suggested that it would save money if
I discharged her. As I had not paid her anything for a long time, I did not see how this would
benefit me.

Wandering about one day with my hat pulled down over my eyes and my hands thrust deep into
my pockets, I strolled into the dell and stood before the wide trench which led to the pit
in which I had foolishly sunk the money which should have supported me for months. I entered
this dismal passage and walked slowly and carefully down the incline until I reached the bottom
of the original pit, where I had never been before. I stood here looking up and around me and
wondering how men could bring themselves to dig down into such dreary depths simply for the
sake of a few dollars a week, when I involuntarily began to stamp my feet. They were very cold,
although I had not been there more than a minute. I wondered at this and took up some of the
loose gravel in my hand. It was quite dry, but it chilled my fingers. I did not understand
it, and I did not try to, but walked up the trench and around into the dell, thinking of Agnes.

I was very fond of milk, which, indeed, was almost the only food I now cared for, and I was
consequently much disappointed at my noonday meal when I found that the milk had soured and
was not fit to drink.

"You see, sir," said Susan, "ice is very scarce and dear, and we can not afford to buy much
of it. There was no f reezin' weather last winter, and the price has gone up as high as the
thermometer, sir, and so, between the two of 'em, I can't keep things from spoilin'."

The idea now came to me that if Susan would take the milk, and anything else she wished to
keep cool in this hot weather, to the bottom of the gravel-pit, she would find the temperature
there cold enough to preserve them without ice, and I told her so.

The next morning Susan came to me with a pleased countenance and said, "I put the butter and
the milk in that pit last night, and the butter's just as hard and the milk's as sweet as if
it had been kept in an ice-house. But the place is as cold as an ice-house, sir, and unless
I am mistaken, there's ice in it. Anyway, what do you call that?" And she took from a little
basket a piece of grayish ice as large as my fist. "When I found it was so cold down there,
sir," she said, "I thought I would dig a little myself and see what made it so; and I took
a fire-shovel and hatchet, and, when I had scraped away some of the gravel, I came to something
hard and chopped off this piece of it, which is real ice, sir, or I know nothing about it.
Perhaps there used to be an ice-house there, and you might get some of it if you dug, though
why anybody should put it down so deep and then cover it up, I'm sure I don't know. But as
long as there's any there, I think we should get it out, even if there's only a little of it;
for I can not take everything down to that pit, and we might as well have it in the refrigerator."

This seemed to me like very good sense, and if I had had a man I should have ordered him to
go down to the pit and dig up any lumps of ice he might find and bring them to the house. But
I had no man, and I therefore became impressed with the opinion that if I did not want to drink
sour milk for the rest of the summer, it might be a good thing for me to go down there and
dig out some of the ice myself. So with pickaxe and shovel I went to the bottom of the pit
and set myself to work.

A few inches below the surface I found that my shovel struck something hard, and, clearing
away the gravel from this for two or three square feet, I looked down upon a solid mass of
ice. It was dirty and begrimed, but it was truly ice. With my pick I detached some large pieces
of it. These, with some discomfort, I carried out into the dell where Susan might come with
her basket and get them.

For several days Susan and I took out ice from the pit, and then I thought that perhaps Tom
Burton might feel some interest in this frozen deposit in my terminal moraine, and so I wrote
to him about it. He did not answer my letter, but instead arrived himself the next afternoon.

"Ice at the bottom of a gravel-pit," said he, "is a thing I never heard of. Will you lend me
a spade and a pickaxe?"

When Tom came out of that pit--it was too cold a place for me to go with him and watch his
proceedings--I saw him come running toward the house.

"Walter," he shouted, "we must hire all the men we can find and dig, dig, dig. If I am not
mistaken something has happened on your place that is wonderful almost beyond belief. But we
must not stop to talk. We must dig, dig, dig; dig all day and dig all night. Don't think of
the cost. I'll attend to that. I'll get the money. What we must do is to find men and set them
to work."

"What's the matter?" said I. "What has happened?"

"I haven't time to talk about it now; besides I don't want to, for fear that I should find
that I am mistaken. But get on your hat, my dear fellow, and let's go over to the town for men."

The next day there were eight men working under the direction of my friend Burton, and although
they did not work at night as he wished them to do, they labored steadfastly for ten days or
more before Tom was ready to announce what it was he had hoped to discover, and whether or
not he had found it. For a day or two I watched the workmen from time to time, but after that
I kept away, preferring to await the result of my friend's operations. He evidently expected
to find something worth having, and whether he was successful or not, it suited me better to
know the truth all at once and not by degrees.

On the morning of the eleventh day Tom came into the room where I was reading and sat down
near me. His face was pale, his eyes glittering. "Old friend," said he, and as he spoke I noticed
that his voice was a little husky, although it was plain enough that his emotion was not occasioned
by bad fortune--"my good old friend, I have found out what made the bottom of your gravel-pit
so uncomfortably cold. You need not doubt what I am going to tell you, for my excavations have
been complete and thorough enough to make me sure of what I say. Don't you remember that I
told you that ages ago there was a vast glacier in the country which stretches from here to
the mountains? Well, sir, the foot of that glacier must have reached further this way than
is generally supposed. At any rate a portion of it did extend in this direction as far as this
bit of the world which is now yours. This end or spur of the glacier, nearly a quarter of a
mile in width, I should say, and pushing before it a portion of the terminal moraine on which
you live, came slowly toward the valley until suddenly it detached itself from the main glacier
and disappeared from sight. That is to say, my boy"--and as he spoke Tom sprang to his feet,
too excited to sit any longer--"it descended to the bowels of the earth, at least for a considerable
distance in that direction, Now you want to know how this happened. Well, I'll tell you. In
this part of the country there are scattered about here and there great caves. Geologists know
one or two of them, and it is certain that there are others undiscovered. Well, sir, your glacier
spur discovered one of them, and when it had lain over the top of it for an age or two, and
had grown bigger and bigger, and heavier and heavier, it at last burst through the rock roof
of the cave, snapping itself from the rest of the glacier and falling in one vast mass to the
bottom of the subterranean abyss. Walter, it is there now. The rest of the glacier came steadily
down; the moraines were forced before it; they covered up this glacier spur, this broken fragment,
and by the time the climate changed and the average of temperature rose above that of the glacial
period, this vast sunken mass of ice was packed away below the surface of the earth, out of
the reach of the action of friction, or heat, or moisture, or anything else which might destroy
it. And through all the long procession of centuries that broken end of the glacier has been
lying in your terminal moraine. It is there now. It is yours, Walter Cuthbert. It is an ice-mine.
It is wealth, and so far as I can make out, it is nearly all upon your land. To you is the
possession, but to me is the glory of the discovery. A bit of the glacial period kept in a
cave for us! It is too wonderful to believe! Walter, have you any brandy?"

It may well be supposed that by this time I was thoroughly awakened to the importance and the
amazing character of my friend's discovery, and I hurried with him to the scene of operations.
There he explained everything and showed me how, by digging away a portion of the face of the
bluff, he had found that this vast fragment of the glacier, which had been so miraculously
preserved, ended in an irregularly perpendicular wall, which extended downward he knew not
how far, and the edge of it on its upper side had been touched by my workmen in digging their
pit. "It was the gradual melting of the upper end of this glacier," said Tom, "probably more
elevated than the lower end, that made your dell. I wondered why the depression did not extend
further up toward the spot where the foot of the glacier was supposed to have been. This end
of the fragment, being sunk in deeper and afterward covered up more completely, probably never
melted at all."

"It is amazing--astounding," said I; "but what of it, now that we have found it?"

"What of it?" cried Tom, and his whole form trembled as he spoke. "You have here a source of
wealth, of opulence which shall endure for the rest of your days. Here at your very door, where
it can be taken out and transported with the least possible trouble, is ice enough to supply
the town, the county, yes, I might say, the State, for hundreds of years. No, sir, I can not
go in to supper. I can not eat. I leave to you the business and practical part of this affair.
I go to report upon its scientific features."

"Agnes," exclaimed, as I walked to the house with my hands clasped and my eyes raised to the
sky, "the glacial period has given thee to me!"

This did not immediately follow, although I went that very night to Mr. Havelot and declared
to him that I was now rich enough to marry his daughter. He laughed at me in a manner which
was very annoying, and made certain remarks which indicated that he thought it probable that
it was not the roof of the cave, but my mind, which had given way under the influence of undue
pressure.

The contemptuous manner in which I had been received aroused within me a very unusual state
of mind. While talking to Mr. Havelot I heard not far away in some part of the house a voice
singing. It was the voice of Agnes, and I believed she sang so that I could hear her. But as
her sweet tones reached my ear there came to me at the same time the harsh, contemptuous words
of her father. I left the house determined to crush that man to the earth beneath a superincumbent
mass of ice--or the evidence of the results of the ownership of such a mass--which would make
him groan and weep as he apologized to me for his scornful and disrespectful utterances and
at the same time offered me the hand of his daughter.

When the discovery of the ice-mine, as it grew to be called, became generally known, my grounds
were crowded by sightseers, and reporters of newspapers were more plentiful than squirrels.
But the latter were referred to Burton, who would gladly talk to them as long as they could
afford to listen, and I felt myself at last compelled to shut my gates to the first.

I had offers of capital to develop this novel source of wealth, and I accepted enough of this
assistance to enable me to begin operations on a moderate scale. It was considered wise not
to uncover any portion of the glacier spur, but to construct an inclined shaft down to its
wall-like end and from this tunnel into the great mass. Immediately the leading ice company
of the neighboring town contracted with me for all the ice I could furnish, and the flood-gates
of affluence began slowly to rise.

The earliest, and certainly one of the greatest, benefits which came to me from this bequest
from the unhistoric past was the new energy and vigor with which my mind and body were now
infused. My old, careless method of life and my recent melancholy, despairing mood were gone,
and I now began to employ myself upon the main object of my life with an energy and enthusiasm
almost equal to that of my friend, Tom Burton. This present object of my life was to prepare
my home for Agnes.

The great piles of gravel which my men had dug from the well-like pit were spread upon the
roadways and rolled smooth and hard; my lawn was mowed; my flower-beds and borders put in order;
useless bushes and undergrowth cut out and cleared away; my outbuildings were repaired and
the grounds around my house rapidly assumed their old appearance of neatness and beauty.

Ice was very scarce that summer, and, as the wagons wound away from the opening of the shaft
which led down to the glacier, carrying their loads to the nearest railway station, so money
came to me; not in large sums at first, for preparations had not yet been perfected for taking
out the ice in great quantities, but enough to enable me to go on with my work as rapidly as
I could plan it. I set about renovating and brightening and newly furnishing my house. Whatever
I thought that Agnes would like I bought and put into it. I tried to put myself in her place
as I selected the paper-hangings and the materials with which to cover the furniture.

Sometimes, while thus employed selecting ornaments or useful articles for my house, and using
as far as was possible the taste and judgment of another instead of my own, the idea came to
me that perhaps Agnes had never heard of my miraculous good fortune. Certainly her father would
not be likely to inform her, and perhaps she still thought of me, if she thought at all, as
the poor young man from whom she had been obliged to part because he was poor.

But whether she knew that I was growing rich, or whether she thought I was becoming poorer
and poorer, I thought only of the day when I could go to her father and tell him that I was
able to take his daughter and place her in a home as beautiful as that in which she now lived,
and maintain her with all the comforts and luxuries which he could give her.

One day I asked my faithful cook, who also acted as my housekeeper and general supervisor,
to assist me in making out a list of china which I intended to purchase.

"Are you thinking of buying china, sir?" she asked. "We have now quite as much as we really need."

"Oh, yes," said I, "I shall get complete sets of everything that can be required for a properly
furnished household."

Susan gave a little sigh. "You are spendin' a lot of money, sir, and some of it for things
that a single gentleman would be likely not to care very much about; and if you was to take
it into your head to travel and stay away for a year or two, there's a good many things you've
bought that would look shabby when you come back, no matter how careful I might be in dustin'
'em and keepin' 'em covered."

"But I have no idea of traveling," said I. "There's no place so pleasant as this to me."

Susan was silent for a few moments, and then she said: "I know very well why you are doing
all this, and I feel it my bounden duty to say to you that there's a chance of its bein' no
use. I do not speak without good reason, and I would not do it if I didn't think that it might
make trouble lighter to you when it comes."

"What are you talking about, Susan; what do you mean?"

"Well, sir, this is what I mean: It was only last night that my daughter Jane was in Mr. Havelot's
dining-room after dinner was over, and Mr. Havelot and a friend of his were sitting there,
smoking their cigars and drinking their coffee. She went in and come out again as she was busy
takin' away the dishes, and they paid no attention to her, but went on talkin' without knowing,
most likely, she was there. Mr. Have-lot and the gentleman were talkin' about you, and Jane
she heard Mr. Havelot say as plain as anything, and she said she couldn't be mistaken, that
even if your nonsensical ice-mine proved to be worth anything, he would never let his daughter
marry an ice-man. He spoke most disrespectful of ice-men, sir, and said that it would make
him sick to have a son-in-law whose business it was to sell ice to butchers, and hotels, and
grog-shops, and pork-packers, and all that sort of people, and that he would as soon have his
daughter marry the man who supplied a hotel with sausages as the one who supplied it with ice
to keep those sausages from spoiling. You see, sir, Mr. Havelot lives on his property as his
father did before him, and he is a very proud man, with a heart as hard and cold as that ice
down under your land; and it's borne in on me very strong, sir, that it would be a bad thing
for you to keep on thinkin' that you are gettin' this house all ready to bring Miss Havelot
to when you have married her. For if Mr. Havelot keeps on livin', which there's every chance
of his doin', it may be many a weary year before you get Miss Agnes, if you ever get her. And
havin' said that, sir, I say no more, and I would not have said this much if I hadn't felt
it my bounden duty to your father's son to warn him that most likely he was workin' for what
he might never get, and so keep him from breakin' his heart when he found out the truth all
of a sudden."

With that Susan left me, without offering any assistance in making out a list of china. This
was a terrible story; but, after all, it was founded only upon servants' gossip. In this country,
even proud, rich men like Mr. Havelot did not have such absurd ideas regarding the source of
wealth. Money is money, and whether it is derived from the ordinary products of the earth,
from which came much of Mr. Havelot's revenue, or from an extraordinary project such as my
glacier spur, it truly could not matter so far as concerned the standing in society of its
possessor. What utter absurdity was this which Susan had told me! If I were to go to Mr. Havelot
and tell him that I would not marry his daughter because he supplied brewers and bakers with
the products of his fields, would he not consider me an idiot? I determined to pay no attention
to the idle tale. But alas! determinations of that sort are often of little avail. I did pay
attention to it, and my spirits drooped.

The tunnel into the glacier spur had now attained considerable length, and the ice in the interior
was found to be of a much finer quality than that first met with, which was of a grayish hue
and somewhat inclined to crumble. When the workmen reached a grade of ice as good as they could
expect, they began to enlarge the tunnel into a chamber, and from this they proposed to extend
tunnels in various directions after the fashion of a coal-mine. The ice was hauled out on sledges
through the tunnel and then carried up a wooden railway to the mouth of the shaft.

It was comparatively easy to walk down the shaft and enter the tunnel, and when it happened
that the men were not at work I allowed visitors to go down and view this wonderful ice-cavern.
The walls of the chamber appeared semi-transparent, and the light of the candles or lanterns
gave the whole scene a weird and beautiful aspect. It was almost possible to imagine one's
self surrounded by limpid waters, which might at any moment rush upon him and ingulf him.

Every day or two Tom Burton came with a party of scientific visitors, and had I chosen to stop
the work of taking out ice, admitted the public and charged a price for admission, I might
have made almost as much money as I at that time derived from the sale of the ice. But such
a method of profit was repugnant to me.

For several days after Susan's communication to me I worked on in my various operations, endeavoring
to banish from my mind the idle nonsense she had spoken of; but one of its effects upon me
was to make me feel that I ought not to allow hopes so important to rest upon uncertainties.
So I determined that as soon as my house and grounds should be in a condition with which I
should for the time be satisfied, I would go boldly to Mr. Havelot, and, casting out of my
recollection everything that Susan had said, invite him to visit me and see for himself the
results of the discovery of which he had spoken with such derisive contempt. This would be
a straightforward and business-like answer to his foolish objections to me, and I believed
that in his heart the old gentleman would properly appreciate my action.

About this time there came to my place Aaron Boyce, an elderly farmer of the neighborhood,
and, finding me outside, he seized the opportunity to have a chat with me.

"I tell you what it is, Mr. Cuthbert," said he, "the people in this neighborhood hasn't give
you credit for what's in you. The way you have fixed up this place, and the short time you
have took to do it, is enough to show us now what sort of a man you are; and I tell you, sir,
we're proud of you for a neighbor. I don't believe there's another gentleman in this county
of your age that could have done what you have done in so short a time. I expect now you will
be thinking of getting married and startin' housekeepin' in a regular fashion. That comes just
as natural as to set hens in the spring. By the way, have you heard that old Mr. Havelot's
thinkin' of goin' abroad? I didn't believe he would ever do that again, because he's gettin'
pretty well on in years, but old men will do queer things as well as young ones."

"Going abroad!" I cried. "Does he intend to take his daughter with him?"

Mr. Aaron Boyce smiled grimly. He was a great old gossip, and he had already obtained the information
he wanted. "Yes," he said, "I've heard it was on her account he's going. She's been kind of
weakly lately, they tell me, and hasn't took to her food, and the doctors has said that what
she wants is a sea voyage and a change to foreign parts."

