"This day has been a godsend to us both," he said to Marian, as they sat together in the library
before retiring. "The draft has begun quietly, and no disturbances have followed. I scarcely
remember an evening when the murmur of the city was so faint and suggestive of repose. I think
we can both go to the country soon, with minds comparatively at rest. I must admit that I expected
no such experience as has blessed us to-day. We needed it. Not until this respite came did
I realize how exhausted from labor and especially anxiety I had become. You, too, my little
girl, are not the blooming lassie you were a year ago."

"Yet I think I'm stronger in some respects, papa."

"Yes, in many respects. Thank God for the past year. Your sympathy and companionship have made
it a new era in my life. You have influenced other lives, also, as events have amply proved.
Are you not satisfied now that you can be unconventional without being queer? You have not
been a colorless reflection of some social set; neither have you left your home for some startling
public career; and yet you have achieved the distinct individuality which truthfulness to nature
imparts. You have simply been developing your better self naturally, and you have helped fine
fellows to make the best of themselves."

"Your encouragement is very sweet, papa. I'm not complacent over myself, however; and I've
failed so signally in one instance that I'm vexed and almost saddened. You know what I mean."

"Yes, I know," with a slight laugh. "Merwyn is still your unsolved problem, and he worries you."

"Not because he is unsolved, but rather that the solution has proved so disappointing and unexpected.
He baffles me with a trait which I recognize, but can't understand, and only admit in wonder
and angry protest. Indeed, from the beginning of our acquaintance he has reversed my usual
experiences. His first approaches incensed me beyond measure,--all the more, I suppose, because
I saw in him an odious reflection of my old spirit. But, papa, when to his condescending offer
I answered from the full bitterness of my heart, he looked and acted as if I had struck him
with a knife."

Her father again laughed, as he said: "You truly used heroic surgery, and to excellent purpose.
Has he shown any conceit, complacency, or patronizing airs since?"

"No, I admit that, at least."

"In destroying some of his meaner traits by one keen thrust, you did him a world of good. Of
course he suffered under such a surgical operation, but he has had better moral health ever since."

"Oh, yes," she burst out, "he has become an eminently respectable and patriotic millionnaire,
giving of his abundance to save the nation's life, living in a palace meanwhile. What did he
mean by his passionate words, 'I shall measure everything hereafter by the breadth of your
woman's soul'? What have the words amounted to? You know, papa, that nothing but my duty and
devotion to you keeps me from taking an active part in this struggle, even though a woman.
Indeed, the feeling is growing upon me that I must spend part of my time in some hospital.
A woman can't help having an intense conviction of what she would do were she a man, and you
know what I would have done, and he knows it also. Therefore he has not kept his word, for
he fails at the vital point in reaching my standard. I have no right to judge men in Mr. Merwyn's
position because they do not go to the front. Let them do what they think wise and prudent;
let them also keep among their own kind. I protest against their coming to me for what I give
to friends who have already proved themselves heroes. But there, I forgot. He looks so like
a man that I can't help thinking that he is one,--that he could come up to my standard if he
chose to. He still seeks me--"

"No, he has not been here since he heard Blauvelt's story."

"He passed the house once, hesitated, and did not enter. Papa, he has not changed, and you
know it. He has plainly asked for a gift only second to what I can give to God. With a tenacity
which nothing but his will can account for, perhaps, he seeks it still. Do you think his distant
manner deceives me for a moment? Nor has my coldness any influence on him. Yet it has not been
the coldness of indifference, and he knows that too. He has seen and felt, like sword-thrusts,
my indignation, my contempt. He has said to my face, 'You think me a coward.' He is no fool,
and has fully comprehended the situation. If he had virtually admitted, 'I am a coward, and
therefore can have no place among the friends who are surpassing your ideal of manly heroism,'
and withdrawn to those to whom a million is more than all heroism, the affair would have ended
naturally long ago. But he persists in bringing me a daily sense of failure and humiliation.
He says: 'My regard for you is so great I can't give you up, yet not so great as to lead me
to do what hundreds of thousands are doing. I can't face danger for your sake.' I have tried
to make the utmost allowance for his constitutional weakness, yet it has humiliated me that
I had not the power to enable him to overcome so strange a failing. Why, I could face death
for you, and he can't stand beside one whom he used to sneer at as 'little Strahan.' Yet, such
is his idea of my woman's soul that he still gives me his thoughts and therefore his hopes;"
and she almost stamped her foot in her irritation.

"Would you truly give your life for me?" he asked, gently.

"Yes, I know I could, and would were there necessity; not in callous disregard of danger, but
because the greater emotion swallows up the less. Faulty as I am, there would be no bargainings
and prudent reservations in my love. These are not the times for half-way people. Oh think,
papa, while we are here in the midst of every comfort, how many thousands of mutilated, horribly
wounded men are dying in agony throughout the South! My heart goes out to them in a sympathy
and homage I can't express. Think how Lane and even Strahan may be suffering to-night, with
so much done for them, and then remember the prisoners of war and the poor unknown enlisted
men, often terribly neglected, I fear. Papa, won't you let me go as a nurse? The ache would
go out of my own heart if I tried to reduce this awful sum of anguish a little. He whose word
and touch always banished pain and disease would surely shield me in such labors. As soon as
danger no longer threatens you, won't you let me do a little, although I am only a girl?"

"Yes, Marian," her father replied, gravely; "far be it from me to repress such heaven-born
impulses. You are now attaining the highest rank reached by humanity. All the avenues of earthly
distinction cannot lead beyond the spirit of self-sacrifice for others. This places you near
the Divine Man, and all grow mean and plebeian to the degree that they recede from him. You
see what comes of developing your better nature. Selfishness and its twin, cowardice, are crowded
out."

"Please don't praise me any more. I can't stand it," faltered the girl, tearfully. A moment
later her laugh rang out. "Hurrah!" she cried, "since Mr. Merwyn won't go to the war, I'm going
myself."

"To make more wounds than you will heal," her father added. "Remember the circumstances under
which you go will have to receive very careful consideration, and I shall have to know all
about the matron and nurses with whom you act. Your mother will be horrified, and so will not
a few of your acquaintances. Flirting in shadows is proper enough, but helping wounded soldiers
to live--But we understand each other, and I can trust you now."

The next morning father and daughter parted with few misgivings, and the latter promised to
go to her mother in a day or two, Mr. Vosburgh adding that if the week passed quietly he could
join them on Saturday evening.

So they quietly exchanged their good-by kiss on the edge of a volcano already in eruption.

An early horseback ride in Central Park had become one of Merwyn's habits of late. At that
hour he met comparatively few abroad, and the desire for solitude was growing upon him. Like
Mr. Vosburgh, he had watched with solicitude the beginning of the draft, feeling that if it
passed quietly his only remaining chance would be to wring from his mother some form of release
from his oath. Indeed, so unhappy and desperate was he becoming that he had thought of revealing
everything to Mr. Vosburgh. The government officer, however, might feel it his duty to use
the knowledge, should there come a time when the authorities proceeded against the property
of the disloyal. Moreover, the young man felt that it would be dishonorable to reveal the secret.

Beyond his loyal impulses he now had little motive for effort. Marian's prejudices against
him had become too deeply rooted, and her woman's honor for the knightly men her friends had
proved too controlling a principle, ever to give him a chance for anything better than polite
tolerance. He had discovered what this meant so fully, and in Blauvelt's story had been shown
the inevitable contrast which she must draw so vividly, that he had decided:--

"No more of Marian Vosburgh's society until all is changed.  Therefore no more forever, probably.
If my mother proves as obdurate as a Southern jailer, I suppose I'm held, although I begin
to think I have as good cause to break my chains as any other Union man. She tricked me into
captivity, and holds me remorselessly,--not like a mother. Miss Vosburgh did show she had a
woman's heart, and would have given me her hand in friendship had I not been compelled to make
her believe that I was a coward. If in some way I can escape my oath, and my reckless courage
at the front proves her mistaken, I may return to her. Otherwise it is a useless humiliation
and pain to see her any more."

Such had been the nature of his musings throughout the long Sunday whose quiet had led to the
belief that the draft would scarcely create a ripple of overt hostility. During his ride on
Monday morning he nearly concluded to go to his country place again. He was growing nervous
and restless, and he longed for the steadying influence of his mountain rambles before meeting
his mother and deciding questions which would involve all their future relations.

As with bowed head, lost in thought, he approached the city by one of the park entrances, he
heard a deep, angry murmur, as if a storm-vexed tide was coming in. Spurring his horse forward,
he soon discovered, with a feeling like an electric shock, that a tide was indeed rising. Was
it a temporary tidal wave of human passion, mysterious in its origin, soon to subside, leaving
such wreckage as its senseless fury might have caused? Or was it the beginning of the revolution
so long feared, but not now guarded against?

Converging from different avenues, men, women, and children were pouring by the thousand into
a vacant lot near the park. Their presence seemed like a dream. Why was this angry multitude
gathering here within a few rods of rural loveliness, their hoarse cries blending with the
songs of robins and thrushes? It had been expected that the red monster would raise its head,
if at all, in some purlieu of the east side. On the contrary its segregate parts were coming
together at a distance from regions that would naturally generate them, and were forming under
his very eyes the thing of which he had read, and, of late, had dreamed night and day,--a mob.

