We smile sadly now to think of the grand aspirations, noble visions, and brave words of those
young advocates, each of whom thought himself a very Epaminondas, or Gracchus, though M. Darpent,
on looking back, had to confess that his most enthusiastic supporters were among the younger
brothers, or those with less fortunate fathers, for whom the Paulette had never been paid,
or who felt it very hard to raise.  He himself brought sincere ardour for his own part, and
was full of soaring hope and self-devotion, though I suspect his father would soon have silenced
him if the poor man had been able to think of anything beyond his own sick-chamber.

The real absurdity, or rather the sadness, of it was, as we two saw, that the fine folk in
whom the Parliament put its trust merely wanted to spite the Cardinal, and cared not a rush
for the Parliament, unlike my Lord Essex, and our other Roundhead noblemen, who, right or wrong,
were in honest earnest, and cared as much about the Bill of Rights and all the rest of their
demands as Sir Harry Vane or General Cromwell himself, whereas these were traitors in heart
to the cause they pretended to espouse.  Even the Coadjutor, who was the prime mover of all,
only wanted to be chief of a party.

One part of his comedy, which I should like to have seen, was the conducting the Duchesses
of Longueville and Bouillon along the Greve to the Hotel de Ville to ask protection, though
I do not know what for.

However, there they were, exquisitely dressed, with Madame de Longueville's beautiful hair
daintily disheveled, on foot, and each with a child in her arms.  Crowds followed them with
shouts of ecstasy, and the Coadjutor further gratified the world by having a shower of pistoles
thrown from the windows of the Hotel de Ville.

It was good sport to hear Sir Andrew Macniven discourse on the sight, declaring that the ladies
looked next door to angels, and kenned it full well too, and that he marvelled what their gudemen
would have said to see them make a raree show of themselves to all the loons in Paris!

The streets soon became as quiet as they ever were, and we could go about as usual, except
when we had warning of any special cause for disturbance.  We were anxious to know how poor
little Madame d'Aubepine was getting on, and, to our surprise, we found her tolerably cheerful.
In truth, she had really tamed the Croquelebois! As she said afterwards in her little pathetic
tone, so truly French, when they both so truly loved Monsieur le Comte (wretch that he was)
how could they differ?  You see he was not present to cause jealousies, and when Madame Croquelebois
found that Cecile never blamed him or murmured she began to be uneasy at his neglect and unkindness.

Though, of course, at that moment he was out of reach, being in the army that was blockading
us.  Not that we should ever have found out that we were blockaded, if we could have got any
letters from any one, except for the scarcity of firewood.  My mother wanted much to get to
our own Queen, but the approaches to the Louvre were watched lest she should communicate with
the Regent; and we were cut off from her till M. Darpent gave his word for us, and obtained
for us a pass. And, oh! it was a sad sight to see the great courts and long galleries left
all dreary and empty.  It made me think of Whitehall and of Windsor, though we little knew
that at that very time there was worse there than even desolation.

And when at last we reached our poor Queen's apartments, there was not a spark of fire in them.
She was a guest there.  She had no money, and all the wood had either been used up or pillaged;
and there we found her, wrapped in a great fur cloak, sitting by the bed where was the little
Lady Henrietta.

When my mother cried out with grief that the child should be ill, the poor Queen replied with
that good-humoured laugh with which she met all the inconveniences that concerned herself alone:
'Oh, no, Madame, not ill, only cold!  We cannot get any firewood, and so bed is the safest
place for my little maid, who cares not if she can have her mother to play with her!  Here
is a new playfellow for thee, ma mie. Sweet Nan will sit by thee, and make thee sport, while
I talk to her mother.'

So the child made the big four-post bed, all curtained round, into a fortress, and I besieged
her there, till she screamed with glee, while the Queen took my mother's arm, and they paced
the rooms together, sadly discussing the times and the utter lack of news from home, when the
last tidings had been most alarming.  Poor lady!  I think it was a comfort to her, for she
loved my mother; but we could not but grieve to see her in such a plight.  As we went home
we planned that we would carry a faggot in the carriage the next day, and that I would take
it upstairs to her.  And so I actually did, but the sentry insisted on knowing what I was carrying
hidden in a cloak, and when he saw it, the honest man actually burst into tears that the daughter
of Henri IV. should be in such straits.  The Queen kissed me for it, and said I was like the
good girl in Madame d'Aulnoy's tales, and she would fain be the benevolent fairy to reward
me.  And then the little Princess insisted that I was Capuchon Rouge, and that she was my Grandmother
Wolf, and after making her great eyes at me, she ate me up with kisses over and over again!
Ah! how happy children can be.  It was strange to remember that this was the way King Charles's
little daughter spent that 30th of January!

We had told M. Darpent of the condition in which we found the Queen, and he told the Coadjutor,
who went himself to see her, and then stirred up the Parliament to send her regular supplies
both of firing and provisions, so that she never suffered again in the same way.

Each day increased our anxiety for His Sacred Majesty.  Lord Jermyn made his way into Paris,
and came to consult with my mother, telling her that he had little doubt that the iniquitous
deed had been consummated, and between them, by way of preparing the unhappy Queen, they made
up a story that the King had been led out to execution, but had been rescued by the populace.
I could not see that this would be of much use in softening the blow; in fact, I thought all
these delicate false-hoods only made the suspense worse, but I was told that I was a mere downright
English country lass, with no notion of the refinements such things required with persons of
sensibility.

So I told them, if ever I were in trouble, all I asked of them was to let me know the worst
at once.  One great pleasure came to the Queen at this time in the arrival of the Duke of York,
who made his way into Paris, and arriving in the midst of dinner, knelt before his mother.
He knew no more of his father than we did, and the Queen's urgent entreaty, undertook to go
to St. Germain with a letter from her, asking what Queen Anne had heard from England.

The siege was not so strait but that unsuspected persons could get in and out, but after all,
the poor Queen's anxiety and suspense were such that Lord Jermyn was forced to disclose the
truth to her before Sir Andrew came back with the letters.  She stood like a statue, and could
neither move nor speak till night, when the Duchess of Vendome came and caressed her until
at last the tears broke forth, and she sobbed and wept piteously all night.  The next day she
retired into the Carmelite convent in the Faubourg St. Jaques, taking my mother with her. 
As, according to French fashion, I was not to be left to keep house myself, my mother invited
Sir Francis and Lady Ommaney to come and take charge of me, and a very good thing it was, for
we at least had food enough, and my dear good friends had very little.

