"Cruel to the last, Guy--cruel to the last! Surely the few hours between this and that of death,
are too precious to be employed in bitterness. Were not prayer better--if you will not pray,
Guy, let me. My prayer shall be for you; and, in the forgiveness which my heart shall truly
send to my lips for the wrongs you have done to me and mine, I shall not altogether despair,
so that you join with me, of winning a forgiveness far more important and precious! Guy, will
you join me in prayer?"

"My knees are stiff, Ellen. I have not been taught to kneel."

"But it is not too late to learn. Bend, bow with me, Guy--if you have ever loved the poor Ellen,
bow with her now. It is her prayer; and, oh, think, how weak is the vanity of this pride in
a situation like yours. How idle the stern and stubborn spirit, when men can place you in bonds--when
men can take away life and name--when men can hoot and hiss and defile your fettered and enfeebled
person! It was for a season and a trial like this, Guy, that humility was given us. It was
in order to such an example that the Savior died for us."

"He died not for me. I have gained nothing by his death. Men are as bad as ever, and wrong--the
wrong which deprived me of my right in society--has been as active and prevailing a principle
of human action as before he died. It is in his name now that they do the wrong, and in his
name, since his death, they have contrived to find a sanction for all manner of crime. Speak
no more of this, Ellen; you know nothing about it. It is all folly."

"To you, Guy, it may be. To the wise all things are foolish. But to the humble heart there
is a truth, even in what are thought follies, which brings us the best of teachings. That is
no folly which keeps down, in the even posture of humility, the spirit which circumstances
would only bind and crush in every effort to rise. That is no folly which prepares us for reverses,
and fortifies us against change and vicissitude. That is no folly which takes away the sting
from affliction--which has kept me, Guy, as once before you said, from driving a knife into
your heart, while it lay beating against the one to which yours had brought all manner of affliction.
Oh, believe me, the faith and the feeling and the hope, not less than the fear, which has made
me what I am now--which has taught me to rely only on the one--which has made me independent
of all things and all loves--ay, even of yours, when I refer to it--is no idle folly. It is
the only medicine by which the soul may live. It is that which I bring to you now. Hear me,
then--Guy, hear the prayer of the poor Ellen, who surely has some right to be heard by you.
Kneel for me, and with me, on this dungeon floor, and pray--only pray."

"And what should I pray for, and what should I say--and whom should I curse?"

"Oh, curse none!--say anything you please, so that it have the form of a prayer. Say, though
but a single sentence, but say it in the spirit which is right."

"Say what?"

"Say--'the Lord's will be done,' if nothing more; but say it in the true feeling--the feeling
of humble reliance upon God."

"And wherefore say this? His will must be done, and will be done, whether I say it or not.
This is all idle--very idle--and to my mind excessively ridiculous, Ellen."

