"But that does not prove that Eileen mentioned it to me," answered Linda quietly; "so you must
find your places from the cards I could prepare in a hurry."

This same preparation of cards at the round table placed Eileen between the architect and the
author, Marian between the author and John Gilman, and Linda between Gilman and the architect,
which added one more tiny gale to the storm of fury that was raging in the breast of white-faced
Eileen. The situation was so strained that without fully understanding it, Marian, who was
several years older than either of the Strong sisters, knew that although she was tired to
the point of exhaustion she should muster what reserve force she could to the end of making
the dinner party particularly attractive, because she was deeply interested in drawing to the
valley every suitable home seeker it was possible to locate there. It was the unwritten law
of the valley that whenever a home seeker passed through, every soul who belonged exerted the
strongest influence to prove that the stars hung lower and shone bigger and in bluer heavens
than anywhere else on earth; that nowhere could be found air to equal the energizing salt breezes
from the sea, snow chilled, perfumed with almond and orange; that the sun shone brighter more
days in the year, and the soil produced a greater variety of vegetables and fruits than any
other spot of the same size on God's wonderful footstool. This could be done with unanimity
and enthusiasm by every resident of Lilac Valley for the very simple reason that it was the
truth. The valley stood with its steep sides raying blue from myriad wild lilacs; olives and
oranges sloped down to the flat floor, where cultivated ranches and gardens were so screened
by eucalyptus and pepper trees, palm and live oak, myriads of roses of every color and variety,
and gaudy plants gathered there from the entire girth of the tropical world, that to the traveler
on the highway trees and flowers predominated. The greatest treasure of the valley was the
enthusiastic stream of icy mountain water that wandered through the near-by canyon and followed
the length of the valley on its singing, chuckling way to the ocean. All the residents of Lilac
Valley had to do to entrance strangers with the location was to show any one of a dozen vantage
points, and let visitors test for themselves the quality of the sunshine and air, and study
the picture made by the broad stretch of intensively cultivated valley, walled on either side
by mountains whose highest peaks were often cloud-draped and for ever shifting their delicate
pastel shades from gray to blue, from lavender to purple, from tawny yellow to sepia, under
the play of the sun and clouds.

They had not been seated three minutes before Linda realized from her knowledge of Eileen that
the shock had been too great, if such a thing might be said of so resourceful a creature as
Eileen. Evidently she was going to sulk in the hope that this would prove that any party was
a failure at which she did not exert herself to be gracious. It had not been in Linda's heart
to do more than sit quietly in the place belonging by right to her, but when she realized what
was going to happen, she sent Marian one swift appealing glance, and then desperately plunged
into conversation to cover Eileen's defection.

"I have been told," she said, addressing the author, "that you are looking for a home in California.
Is this true, or is it merely that every good Californian hopes this will happen when any distinguished
Easterner comes our way?"

"I can scarcely answer you," said Peter Morrison, "because my ideas on the subject are still
slightly nebulous, but I am only too willing to see them become concrete."

"You have struck exactly the right place," said Linda. "We have concrete by the wagon load
in this valley and we are perfectly willing to donate the amount required to materialize your
ideas. Do you dream of a whole ranch or only a nest?"

"Well, the fact is," answered Peter Morrison with a most attractive drawl in his slow speech,
"the fact is the dimensions of my dream must fit my purse. Ever since I finished college I
have been in newspaper work and I have lived in an apartment in New York except while I was
abroad. When I came back my paper sent me to San Francisco and from there I motored down to
see for myself if the wonderful things that are written about Los Angeles County are true."

"That is not much of a compliment to us," said Linda slowly. "How do you think we would dare
write them if they were not true?"

This caused such a laugh that everyone felt much easier. Marian turned her dark eyes toward
Peter Morrison.

"Linda and I are busy people," she said. "We waste little time in indirections, so I hope it's
not out of the way for me to ask straightforwardly if you are truly in earnest, about wanting
a home in Lilac Valley?"

"Then I'll have to answer you," said Peter, "that I have an attractive part of the 'makin's'
and I am in deadly earnest about wanting a home somewhere. I am sick in my soul of narrow apartments
and wheels and the rush and roar of the city. There was a time when I ate and drank it. It
was the very breath of life to me. I charged on Broadway like a caterpillar tank charging in
battle; but it is very remarkable how quickly one changes in this world. I have had some success
in my work, and the higher I go, the better work I feel I can do in a quiet place and among
less enervating surroundings. John and I were in college together, roommates, and no doubt
he has told you that we graduated with the same class. He has found his location here and I
would particularly enjoy having a home near him. They tell me there are well-trained servants
to look after a house and care for a bachelor, so I truly feel that if I can find a location
I would like, and if Henry can plan me a house, and I can stretch my purse to cover the investment,
that there is a very large possibility that somewhere within twenty miles of Los Angeles I
may find the home of my dreams."

"One would almost expect," said Marian, "that a writer would say something more original. This
valley is filled with people who came here saying precisely what you have said; and the lure
of the land won them and here they are, shameless boosters of California."

"Why shameless?" inquired Henry Anderson.

"Because California so verifies the wildest statement that can be made concerning her that
one may go the limit of imagination without shame," laughed Marian. "I try in all my dealings
to stick to the straight and narrow path."

"Oh, kid, don't stick to the straight and narrow," broke in Linda, "there's no scenery."

Eileen laid down her fork and stared in white-lipped amazement at the two girls, but she was
utterly incapable of forgetting herself and her neatly arranged plans to have the three cultivated
and attractive young men all to herself for the evening. She realized too, from the satisfaction
betrayed in the glances these men were exchanging among each other, the ease with which they
sat, and the gusto with which they ate the food Katy was deftly serving them, that something
was happening which never had happened at the Strong table since she had presided as its head,
her sole endeavor having been to flatter her guests or to extract flattery for herself from them.

"That is what makes this valley so adorable," said Marian when at last she could make herself
heard. "It is neither straight nor narrow. The wing of a white sea swallow never swept a lovelier
curve on the breast of the ocean than the line of this valley. My mother was the dearest little
woman, and she used to say that this valley was outlined by a gracious gesture from the hand
of God in the dawn of Creation."

Peter Morrison deliberately turned in his chair, his eyes intent on Marian's earnest face.

"You almost make me want to say, in the language of an old hymn I used to hear my mother sing,
'Here will I set up my rest.' With such a name as Lilac Valley and with such a thought in the
heart concerning it, I scarcely feel that there is any use in looking further. How about it,
Henry? Doesn't it sound conclusive to you?"

"It certainly does," answered Henry Anderson, "and from what I could see as we drove in, it
looks as well as it sounds."

Peter Morrison turned to his friend.

"Gilman," he said, "you're a lawyer; you should know the things I'd like to. Are there desirable
homesites still to be found in the valley, and does the inflation of land at the present minute
put it out of my reach?"

"Well, that is on a par with the average question asked a lawyer," answered Gilman, "but part
of it I can answer definitely and at once. I think every acre of land suitable for garden or
field cultivation is taken. I doubt if there is much of the orchard land higher up remaining
and what there is would command a rather stiff price; but if you would be content with some
small plateau at the base of a mountain where you could set any sort of a house and have--say
two or three acres, mostly of sage and boulders and greasewood and yucca around it."

"Why in this world are you talking about stones and sage and greasewood?" cried Linda. "Next
thing they'll be asking about mountain lions and rattlesnakes."

"I beg your pardon," said Gilman, "I fear none of us has remembered to present Miss Linda as
a coming naturalist. She got her start from her father, who was one of the greatest nerve specialists
the world ever has known. She knows every inch of the mountains, the canyons and the desert.
She always says that she cut her teeth on a chunk of adobe, while her father hunted the nests
of trap-door spiders out in Sunland. What should I have said when describing a suitable homesite
for Peter, Linda?"

"You should have assumed that immediately, Peter,"--Linda lifted her eyes to Morrison's face
with a sparkle of gay challenge, and by way of apology interjected--"I am only a kid, you know,
so I may call John's friend Peter--you should have assumed that sage and greasewood would simply
have vanished from any home location chosen by Peter, leaving it all lacy blue with lilac,
and misty white with lemonade bush, and lovely gold with monkey flower, and purple with lupin,
and painted blood red with broad strokes of Indian paint brush, and beautifully lighted with
feathery flames from Our Lord's Candles, and perfumy as altar incense with wild almond."

"Oh, my soul," said Peter Morrison. "Good people, I have located. I have come to stay. I would
like three acres but I could exist with two; an acre would seem an estate to me, and my ideas
of a house, Henry, are shriveling. I did have a dream of something that must have been precious
near a home. There might have been an evanescent hint of flitting draperies and inexperienced
feet in it, but for the sake of living and working in such a location as Miss Linda describes,
I would gladly cut my residence to a workroom and a sleeping room and kitchen."

"Won't do," said Linda. "A house is not a house in California without a furnace and a bathroom.
We are cold as blue blazes here when the sun goes down and the salty fog creeps up from the
sea, and the icy mist rolls down from the mountains to chill our bones; and when it has not
rained for six months at a stretch, your own private swimming pool is a comfort. This to add
verisimilitude to what everyone else in Lilac Valley is going to tell you."

"I hadn't thought I would need a fire," said Peter, "and I was depending on the ocean for my
bathtub. I am particularly fond of a salt rub."

So far, Eileen had not deigned to enter the conversation. It was all so human, so far from
her ideas of entertaining that the disapproval on her lips was not sufficiently veiled to be
invisible, and John Gilman, glancing in her direction, realized that he was having the best
time he had ever had in the Strong household since the passing of his friends, Doctor and Mrs.
Strong, vaguely wondered why. And it occurred to him that Linda and Marian were dominating
the party. He said the most irritating thing possible in the circumstances: "I am afraid you
are not feeling well this evening, Eileen."

Eileen laughed shortly.

"The one perfect thing about me," she said with closely cut precision, "is my health. I haven't
the faintest notion what it means to be ill. I am merely waiting for the conversation to take
a I turn where I can join in it intelligently."

"Why, bless the child!" exclaimed Linda. "Can't you talk intelligently about a suitable location
for a home? On what subject is a woman supposed to be intelligent if she is not at her best
on the theme of home. If you really are not interested you had better begin to polish up, because
it appeals to me that the world goes just so far in one direction, and then it whirls to the
right-about and goes equally as far in the opposite direction. If Daddy were living I think
he would say we have reached the limit with apartment house homes minus fireplaces, with restaurant
dining minus a blessing, with jazz music minus melody, with jazz dancing minus grace, with
national progress minus cradles."

"Linda!" cried Eileen indignantly.

"Good gracious!" cried Linda. "Do I get the shillalah for that? Weren't all of us rocked in
cradles? I think that the pendulum has swung far and it is time to swing back to where one
man and one woman choose any little spot on God's footstool, build a nest and plan their lives
in accord with personal desire and inclination instead of aping their neighbors."

"Bravo!" cried Henry Anderson. "Miss Linda, if you see any suitable spot, and you think I would
serve for a bug-catcher, won't you please stake the location?"

"Well, I don't know about that," said Linda. "Would it be the old case of 'I furnish the bread
and you furnish the water'?"

"No," said Peter Morrison, "it would not. Henry is doing mighty well. I guarantee that he would
furnish a cow that would produce real cream."

"How joyous!" said Linda. "I feel quite competent to manage the bread question. We'll call
that settled then. When I next cast an appraising eye over my beloved valley, I shan't select
the choicest spot in it for Peter Morrison to write a book in; and I want to warn you people
when you go hunting to keep a mile away from Marian's plot. She has had her location staked
from childhood and has worked on her dream house until she has it all ready to put the ice
in the chest and scratch the match for the living room fire-logs. The one thing she won't ever
tell is where her location is, but wherever it is, Peter Morrison, don't you dare take it."

"I wouldn't for the world," said Peter Morrison gravely. "If Miss Thorne will tell me even
on which side of the valley her location lies, I will agree to stay on the other side."

"Well there is one thing you can depend upon," said the irrepressible Linda before Marian had
time to speak. "It is sure to be on the sunny side. Every living soul in California is looking
for a place in the sun."

"Then I will make a note of it," said Peter Morrison. "But isn't there enough sun in all this
lovely valley that I may have a place in it too?"

"You go straight ahead and select any location you like," said Marian. "I give you the freedom
of the valley. There's not one chance in ten thousand that you would find or see anything attractive
about the one secluded spot I have always hoped I might some day own."

"This is not fooling, then?" asked Peter Morrison. "You truly have a place selected where you
would like to live?"

"She truly has the spot selected and she truly has the house on paper and it truly is a house
of dreams," said Linda. "I dream about it myself. When she builds it and lives in it awhile
and finds out all the things that are wrong with it, then I am going to build one like it,
only I shall eliminate all the mistakes she has made."

"I have often wondered," said Henry Anderson, "if such a thing ever happened as that people
built a house and lived in it, say ten years, and did not find one single thing about it that
they would change if they had it to build over again. I never have heard of such a case. Have
any of you?"

"I am sure no one has," said John Gilman meditatively, "and it's a queer thing. I can't see
why people don't plan a house the way they want it before they build."

Marian turned to him--the same Marian he had fallen in love with when they were children.

"Mightn't it be," she asked, "that it is due to changing conditions caused by the rapid development
of science and invention? If one had built the most perfect house possible five years ago and
learned today that infinitely superior lighting and heating and living facilities could be
installed at much less expense and far greater convenience, don't you think that one would
want to change? Isn't life a series of changes? Mustn't one be changing constantly to keep
abreast of one's day and age?"

"Why, surely," answered Gilman, "and no doubt therein lies at least part of the answer to Anderson's
question."

"And then," added Marian, "things happen in families. Sometimes more babies than they expect
come to newly married people and they require more room."

"My goodness, yes!" broke in Linda. "Just look at Sylvia Townsend--twins to begin with."

"Linda!" breathed Eileen, aghast.

"So glad you like my name, dear," murmured Linda sweetly.

"And then," continued Marian, "changes come to other people as they have to me. I can't say
that I had any fault to find with either the comforts or the conveniences of Hawthorne House
until Daddy and Mother were swept from it at one cruel sweep; and after that it was nothing
to me but a haunted house, and I don't feel that I can be blamed for wanting to leave it. I
will be glad to know that there are people living in it who won't see a big strong figure meditatively
smoking before the fireplace and a gray dove of a woman sitting on the arm of his chair. I
will be glad, if Fate is kind to me and people like my houses, to come back to the valley when
I can afford to and build myself a home that has no past--a place, in fact, where I can furnish
my own ghost, and if I meet myself on the stairs then I won't be shocked by me.

"I don't think there is a soul in the valley who blames you for selling your home and going,
Marian," said Linda soberly. "I think it would be foolish if you did not."

The return to the living room brought no change. Eileen pouted while Linda and Marian thoroughly
enjoyed themselves and gave the guests a most entertaining evening. So disgruntled was Eileen,
when the young men had gone, that she immediately went to her room, leaving Linda and Marian
to close the house and make their own arrangements for the night. Whereupon Linda deliberately
led Marian to the carefully dusted and flower-garnished guest room and installed her with every
comfort and convenience that the house afforded. Then bringing her brushes from her own room,
she and Marian made themselves comfortable, visiting far into the night.

"I wonder," said Linda, "if Peter Morrison will go to a real estate man in the morning and
look over the locations remaining in Lilac Valley."

"Yes, I think he will," said Marian conclusively.

"It seems to me," said Linda, "that we did a whole lot of talking about homes tonight; which
reminds me, Marian, in packing have you put in your plans? Have you got your last draft with you?"

"No," answered Marian, "it's in one of the cases. I haven't anything but two or three pencil
sketches from which I drew the final plans as I now think I'll submit them for the contest.
Wouldn't it be a tall feather in my cap, Linda, if by any chance l I should win that prize?"

"It would be more than a feather," said Linda. "It would be a whole cap, and a coat to wear
with it, and a dress to match the coat, and slippers to match the dress, and so forth just
like 'The House That Jack Built.' Have you those sketches, Marian?"

Opening her case, Marian slid from underneath the garments folded in it, several sheets on
which were roughly penciled sketches of the exterior of a house--on the reverse, the upstairs
and downstairs floor plans; and sitting down, she explained these to Linda. Then she left them
lying on a table, waiting to be returned to her case before she replaced her clothes in the
morning. Both girls were fast asleep when a mischievous wind slipped down the valley, and lightly
lifting the top sheet, carried it through the window, across the garden, and dropped it at
the foot of a honey-dripping loquat.

Because they had talked until late in the night of Marian's plans and prospects in the city,
of Peter Morrison's proposed residence in the valley, of how lonely Linda would be without
Marian, of everything concerning their lives except the change in Eileen and John Gilman, the
two girls slept until late in the morning, so that there were but a few minutes remaining in
which Marian might dress, have a hasty breakfast and make her train. In helping her, it fell
to Linda to pack Marian's case. She put the drawings she found on the table in the bottom,
the clothing and brushes on top of them, and closing the case, carried it herself until she
delivered it into the porter's hands as Marian boarded her train.

CHAPTER IV. Linda Starts a Revolution

The last glimpse Marian Thorne had of Linda was as she stood alone, waving her hand, her cheeks
flushed, her eyes shining, her final word cheery and encouraging. Marian smiled and waved in
return until the train bore her away. Then she sat down wearily and stared unseeingly from
a window. Life did such very dreadful things to people. Her girlhood had been so happy. Then
came the day of the Black Shadow, but in her blackest hour she had not felt alone. She had
supposed she was leaning on John Gilman as securely as she had leaned on her father. She had
learned, with the loss of her father, that one cannot be sure of anything in this world least
of all of human life. Yet in her darkest days she had depended on John Gilman. She had every
reason to believe that it was for her that he struggled daily to gain a footing in his chosen
profession. When success came, when there was no reason that Marian could see why they might
not have begun life together, there had come a subtle change in John, and that change had developed
so rapidly that in a few weeks' time, she was forced to admit that the companionship and loving
attentions that once had been all hers were now all Eileen's.

She sat in the train, steadily carrying her mile after mile farther from her home, and tried
to think what had happened and how and why it had happened. She could not feel that she had
been wrong in her estimate of John Gilman. Her valuation of him had been taught her by her
father and mother and by Doctor and Mrs. Strong and by John Gilman himself. Dating from the
time that Doctor Strong had purchased the property and built a home in Lilac Valley beside
Hawthorne House, Marian had admired Eileen and had loved her. She was several years older than
the beautiful girl she had grown up beside. Age had not mattered; Eileen's beauty had not mattered.
Marian was good looking herself.

She always had known that Eileen had imposed upon her and was selfish with her, but Eileen's
impositions were so skillfully maneuvered, her selfishness was so adorably taken for granted
that Marian in retrospection felt that perhaps she was responsible for at least a small part
of it. She never had been able to see the inner workings of Eileen's heart. She was not capable
of understanding that when John Gilman was poor and struggling Eileen had ignored him. It had
not occurred to Marian that when the success for which he struggled began to come generously,
Eileen would begin to covet the man she had previously disdained. She had always striven to
find friends among people of wealth and distinction. How was Marian to know that when John
began to achieve wealth and distinction, Eileen would covet him also?

Marian could not know that Eileen had studied her harder than she ever studied any book, that
she had deliberately set herself to make the most of every defect or idiosyncrasy in Marian,
at the same time offering herself as a charming substitute. Marian was prepared to be the mental,
the spiritual, and the physical mate of a man.

Eileen was not prepared to be in truth and honor any of these. She was prepared to make any
emergency of life subservient to her own selfish desires. She was prepared to use any man with
whom she came in contact for the furtherance of any whim that at the hour possessed her. What
she wanted was unbridled personal liberty, unlimited financial resources.

Marian, almost numbed with physical fatigue and weeks of mental strain, came repeatedly against
the dead wall of ignorance when she tried to fathom the change that had taken place between
herself and John Gilman and between herself and Eileen. Daniel Thorne was an older man than
Doctor Strong. He had accumulated more property. Marian had sufficient means at her command
to make it unnecessary for her to acquire a profession or work for her living, but she had
always been interested in and loved to plan houses and help her friends with buildings they
were erecting. When the silence and the loneliness of her empty home enveloped her, she had
begun, at first as a distraction, to work on the drawings for a home that an architect had
made for one of her neighbors. She had been able to suggest so many comforts and conveniences,
and so to revise these plans that, at first in a desultory way, later in real earnest, she
had begun to draw plans for houses. Then, being of methodical habit and mathematical mind,
she began scaling up the plans and figuring on the cost of building, and so she had worked
until she felt that she was evolving homes that could be built for the same amount of money
and lived in with more comfort and convenience than the homes that many of her friends were
having planned for them by architects of the city.

To one spot in the valley she had gone from childhood as a secret place in which to dream and
study. She had loved that retreat until it had become a living passion with her. The more John
Gilman neglected her, the more she concentrated upon her plans, and when the hour came in which
she realized what she had lost and what Eileen had won, she reached the decision to sell her
home, go to the city, and study until she knew whether she really could succeed at her chosen
profession.

Then she would come back to the valley, buy the spot she coveted, build the house of which
she dreamed, and in it she would spend the remainder of her life making homes for the women
who knew how to hold the love of men. When she reached the city she had decided that if one
could not have the best in life, one must be content with the next best, and for her the next
best would be homes for other people, since she might not materialize the home she had dreamed
for John Gilman and herself. She had not wanted to leave the valley. She had not wanted to
lose John Gilman. She had not wanted to part with the home she had been reared in. Yet all
of these things seemed to have been forced upon her. All Marian knew to do was to square her
shoulders, take a deep breath, put regrets behind her, and move steadily toward the best future
she could devise for herself.

She carried letters of introduction to the San Francisco architects, Nicholson and Snow, who
had offered a prize for the best house that could be built in a reasonable time for fifteen
thousand dollars. She meant to offer her plans in this competition. Through friends she had
secured a comfortable place in which to live and work. She need undergo no hardships in searching
for a home, in clothing herself, in paying for instruction in the course in architecture she
meant to pursue.

Concerning Linda she could not resist a feeling of exultation. Linda was one of the friends
in Lilac Valley about whom Marian could think wholeheartedly and lovingly. Sometimes she had
been on the point of making a suggestion to Linda, and then she had contented herself with
waiting in the thought that very soon there must come to the girl a proper sense of her position
and her rights. The experience of the previous night taught Marian that Linda had arrived.
She would no longer be the compliant little sister who would run Eileen's errands, wait upon
her guests and wear disreputable clothing. When Linda reached a point where she was capable
of the performance of the previous night, Marian knew that she would proceed to live up to
her blue china in every ramification of life. She did not know exactly how Linda would follow
up the assertion of her rights that she had made, but she did know that in some way she would
follow it up, because Linda was a very close reproduction of her father.

She had been almost constantly with him during his life, very much alone since his death. She
was a busy young person. From Marian's windows she had watched the business of carrying on
the wild-flower garden that Linda and her father had begun. What the occupation was that kept
the light burning in Linda's room far into the night Marian did not know. For a long time she
had supposed that her studies were difficult for her, and when she had asked Linda if it were
not possible for her to prepare her lessons without so many hours of midnight study she had
caught the stare of frank amazement with which the girl regarded her and in that surprised,
almost grieved look she had realized that very probably a daughter of Alexander Strong, who
resembled him as Linda resembled him, would not be compelled to overwork to master the prescribed
course of any city high school. What Linda was doing during those midnight hours Marian did
not know, but she did know that she was not wrestling with mathematics and languages--at least
not all of the time. So Marian knowing Linda's gift with a pencil, had come to the conclusion
that she was drawing pictures; but circumstantial evidence was all she had as a basis for her
conviction. Linda went her way silently and alone. She was acquainted with everyone living
in Lilac Valley, frank and friendly with all of them; aside from Marian she had no intimate
friend. Not another girl in the valley cared to follow Linda's pursuits or to cultivate the
acquaintance of the breeched, booted girl, constantly devoting herself to outdoor study with
her father during his lifetime, afterward alone.

For an instant after Marian had boarded her train Linda stood looking at it, her heart so heavy
that it pained acutely. She had not said one word to make Marian feel that she did not want
her to go. Not once had she put forward the argument that Marian's going would leave her to
depend entirely for human sympathy upon the cook, and her guardian, also administrator of the
Strong estate, John Gilman. So long as he was Marian's friend Linda had admired John Gilman.
She had gone to him for some measure of the companionship she had missed in losing her father.
Since Gilman had allowed himself to be captivated by Eileen, Linda had harbored a feeling concerning
him almost of contempt. Linda was so familiar with every move that Eileen made, so thoroughly
understood that there was a motive back of her every action, that she could not see why John
Gilman, having known her from childhood, should not understand her also.

She had decided that the time had come when she would force Eileen to give her an allowance,
however small, for her own personal expenses, that she must in some way manage to be clothed
so that she was not a matter of comment even among the boys of her school, and she could see
no reason why the absolute personal liberty she always had enjoyed so long as she disappeared
when Eileen did not want her and appeared when she did, should not extend to her own convenience
as well as Eileen's.

Life was a busy affair for Linda. She had not time to watch Marian's train from sight. She
must hurry to the nearest street car and make all possible haste or she would be late for her
classes. Throughout the day she worked with the deepest concentration, but she could not keep
down the knowledge that Eileen would have things to say, possibly things to do, when they met
that evening, for Eileen was capable of disconcerting hysteria. Previously Linda had remained
stubbornly silent during any tirade in which Eileen chose to indulge. She had allowed herself
to be nagged into doing many things that she despised, because she would not assert herself
against apparent injustice. But since she had come fully to realize the results of Eileen's
course of action for Marian and for herself, she was deliberately arriving at the conclusion
that hereafter she would speak when she had a defense, and she would make it her business to
let the sun shine on any dark spot that she discovered in Eileen.

Linda knew that if John Gilman were well acquainted with Eileen, he could not come any nearer
to loving her than she did. Such an idea as loving Eileen never had entered Linda's thoughts.
To Linda, Eileen was not lovable. That she should be expected to love her because they had
the same parents and lived in the same home seemed absurd. She was slightly disappointed, on
reaching home, to find that Eileen was not there.

"Will the lady of the house dine with us this evening? she asked as she stood eating an apple
in the kitchen.

"She didn't say," answered Katy. "Have ye had it out about last night yet?"

"No," answered Linda. "That is why I was asking about her. I want to clear the atmosphere before
I make my new start in life."

"Now, don't ye be going too far, lambie," cautioned Katy "Ye young things make such an awful
serious business of life these days. In your scramble to wring artificial joy out of it you
miss all the natural joy the good God provided ye."

"It seems to me, Katy," said Linda slowly, "that you should put that statement the other way
round. It seems that life makes a mighty serious business for us young things, and it seems
to me that if we don't get the right start and have a proper foundation life Is going to be
spoiled for us. One life is all I've got to live in this world, and I would like it to be the
interesting and the beautiful kind of life that Father lived."

Linda dropped to a chair.

"Katy," she said, leaning forward and looking intently into the earnest face of the woman before
her, "Katy, I have been thinking an awful lot lately. There is a question you could answer
for me if you wanted to."

"Well, I don't see any raison," said Katy, "why I shouldn't answer ye any question ye'd be
asking me."

Linda's eyes narrowed as they did habitually in deep thought She was looking past Katy down
the sunlit spaces of the wild garden that was her dearest possession, and then her eyes strayed
higher to where the blue walls that shut in Lilac Valley ranged their peaks against the sky.
"Katy," she said, scarcely above her breath, "was Mother like Eileen?"

Katy stiffened. Her red face paled slightly. She turned her back and slowly slid into the oven
the pie she was carrying. She closed the door with more force than was necessary and then turned
and deliberately studied Linda from the top of her shining black head to the tip of her shoe.

"Some," she said tersely. 

"Isn't this very sudden?"

"Laws, yes, Bishop, powerful suddint an' onprecedented.

'Pears 's if I couldn't git myself to b'lieve it, nohow. Yes'day ev'nin' she wuz chipper's
evah, out pickin' pine buds; an' this mahnin' she woked me up, an' says she, 'I reckon you'd
better fix the cyoffee yo'self, Demming, I feel so cu'se,' says she. An' so I did; an' when
I come to gin it ter her, oh, Lordy, oh, Lordy!--'scuse me, Bishop,--she wuz cole an' dead! Doctor
cyouldn't do nuthin', w'en I brung 'im. Rheumatchism o' th' heart, he says. It wuz turrible
suddint, onyhow. 'Minded me o' them thar games with the thimble, you know, Bishop,--now ye see
it, an' now ye don'; yes, 's quick 's thet!"

The Bishop opened his eyes at the comparison; but Demming had turned
away, with a quivering lip, to bury his face in his hands, and the
Bishop was reproached for his criticism of the other's naif phraseology.

Now, to be frank, he had approached Demming prepared to show severity,
rather than sympathy, because of the cracker's last flagrant wrong-doing;
but his indignation, righteous though it was, took flight before grief.

Forgetting judgment in mercy, he proffered all the consolations he
could summon, spiritual and material, and ended by asking Demming
if he had made any preparations for the funeral.

"Thet thar's w'at I'm yere for," replied the man, mournfully.

"You know jes' how I'm fixed. Cyoffins cost a heap; an' then thar's the shroud, an' I ain't
got no reg'lar fun'al cloze, an' 'pears 's ef 't 'ud be a conserlation
t' have a kerridge or two.

She wuz a bawn lady, Bishop; we're kin ter some o' the real aristookracy o' Carolina,--we are,
fur a fac'; an' I'd kin' o' like ter hev her ride ter her own fun'al, onyhow."

"Then you will need money?"

"Not frum you, Bishop, not a red cent; but if you uns over thar," jerking his thumb in the direction
of the white pine towers,--"if you all 'd kin' o' gin me a small sum, an' ef you'd jes' start
a paper, as 'twere, an' al-so ef you yo'self 'ud hev the gre't kin'ness ter come out an' conduc'
the fun'al obskesies, it 'ud gratify the corpse powerful. Mistress Demming'll be entered[A] then
like a bawn lady.

Yes, sir, thet thar, an' no mo', 's w'at I'm emboldened ter ax frum you."

[Footnote A: It is supposed that Mr. Demming intended to say "interred."]

The Bishop reflected. "Demming," said he, gravely, "I will try to help you. You have no objection,
I suppose, to our buying the coffin and other things needed.

We will pay the bills."

Demming's dejected bearing grew a shade more sombre: he waved his hand, a gesture very common
with him, and usually denoting affable approval; now it meant gloomy assent. "No objection 't all,
Bishop," he said.

"I knows my weakness, though I don' feel now as ef I'd evah want
ter go on no carousements no mo'.

I'm 'bliged ter you uns jes' the same.

An' you won't forget 'bout the cloze? I've been a right good frien' to th' Norf in Aiken, an'
I hope the Norf'll stan' by me in the hour o' trubbel. Now, Bishop, I'll be gwine 'long. You'll
fin' me at the cyoffin sto'. Mose Barnwell--he's a mighty decent cullud man--lives nigh me;
he's gwine fur ter len' me his cyart ter tek the cyoffin home. Mahnin', Bishop, an' min', I
don' want money outen you. No, sir, I do not!"
Then, having waved his hand at his hat, the cracker slouched away.
The Bishop had a busy morning. He went from friend to friend, until
the needed sum was collected. Nor did money satisfy him: he gathered
together a suit of clothes from the tallest Northerners of benevolent
impulses. Talboys was too short to be a donor of clothes, but he gave
more money than all the others united,--a munificence that rebuked
the Bishop, for he had sought the young Boston man last of all and
reluctantly; somehow, he could not feel acquainted with him, notwithstanding
many meetings in many places.

Linda stopped as if dazed. The wonderment in which she looked at Eileen was stamped all over
her. A surprised braid of hair hung over one of her shoulders. Her hands were surprised, and
the skirt of her dress, and her shoes flatly set on the floor.

"Well, I'll be darned!" she ejaculated, and then walked to where she could face Eileen, and
seated herself without making any attempt to conceal her amazement.

"Linda," said Eileen sweetly, "you would stand far better chance of being popular and making
a host of friends if you would not be so coarse. I am quite sure you never heard Mama or me
use such an expression."

For one long instant Linda was too amazed to speak. Then she recovered herself.

"Look here, Eileen, you needn't try any 'perfect lady' business on me," she said shortly. "Do
you think I have forgotten the extent of your vocabulary when the curling iron gets too hot
or you fail to receive an invitation to the Bachelors' Ball?"

Linda never had been capable of understanding Eileen. At that minute she could not know that
Eileen had been facing facts through the long hours of the night and all through the day, and
that she had reached the decision that for the future her only hope of working Linda to her
will was to conciliate her, to ignore the previous night, to try to put their relationship
upon the old basis by pretending that there never had been a break. She laughed softly.

"On rare occasions, I grant it. Of course a little swear slips out sometimes. What I am trying
to point out is that you do too much of it."

"How did you ever get the idea," said Linda, "that I wanted to be popular and have hosts of
friends? What would I do with them if I had them?"

"Why, use them, my child, use them," answered Eileen promptly.

"Let's cut this," said Linda tersely. "I am not your child. I'm getting to the place where
I have serious doubt as to whether I am your sister or not. If I am, it's not my fault, and
the same clay never made two objects quite so different. I came up here to fight, and I'm going
to see it through. I'm on the warpath, so you may take your club and proceed to battle."

"What have we to fight about?" inquired Eileen.

"Every single thing that you have done that was unfair to me all my life," said Linda. "Since
all of it has been deliberate you probably know more about the details than I do, so I'll just
content myself with telling you that for the future, last night marked a change in the relations
between us. I am going to be eighteen before so very long, and I have ceased to be your maid
or your waitress or your dupe. You are not going to work me one single time when I have got
brains to see through your schemes after this. Hereafter I take my place in my father's house
and at my father's table on an equality with you."

Eileen looked at Linda steadily, trying to see to the depths of her soul. She saw enough to
convince her that the young creature in front of her was in earnest.

"Hm," she said, "have I been so busy that I have failed to notice what a great girl you are
getting?"

"Busy!" scoffed Linda. "Tell that to Katy. It's a kumquat!"

"Perhaps you are too big," continued Eileen, "to be asked to wait on the table any more."

"I certainly am," retorted Linda, "and I am also too big to wear such shoes or such a dress
as I have on at the present min. ute. I know all about the war and the inflation of prices
and the reduction in income, but I know also that if there is enough to run the house, and
dress you, and furnish you such a suite of rooms as you're enjoying right now, there is enough
to furnish me suitable clothes, a comfortable bedroom and a place where I can leave my work
without putting away everything I am doing each time I step from the room. I told you four
years ago that you might take the touring car and do what you pleased with it. I have never
asked what you did or what you got out of it, so I'll thank you to observe equal silence about
anything I choose to do now with the runabout, which I reserved for myself. I told you to take
this suite, and this is the first time that I have ever mentioned to you what you spent on it."

Linda waved an inclusive hand toward the fully equipped, dainty dressing table, over rugs of
pale blue, and beautifully decorated walls, including the sleeping room and bath adjoining.

"So now I'll ask you to keep off while I do what I please about the library and the billiard
room. I'll try to get along without much money in doing what I desire there, but I must have
some new clothes. I want money to buy me a pair of new shoes for school. I want a pair of pumps
suitable for evenings when there are guests to dinner. I want a couple of attractive school
dresses. This old serge is getting too hot and too worn for common decency. And I also want
a couple of dresses something like you are wearing, for afternoons and evenings."

Eileen stared aghast at Linda.

"Where," she inquired politely, "is the money for all this to come from?"

"Eileen," said Linda in a low tense voice, "I have reached the place where even the BOYS of
the high school are twitting me about how I am dressed, and that is the limit. I have stood
it for three years from the girls. I am an adept in pretending that I don't see, and I don't
hear. I have got to the point where I am perfectly capable of walking into your wardrobe and
taking out enough of the clothes there and selling them at a second-hand store to buy me what
I require to dress me just plainly and decently. So take warning. I don't know where you are
going to get the money, but you are going to get it. If you would welcome a suggestion from
me, come home only half the times you dine yourself and your girl friends at tearooms and cafes
in the city, and you will save my share that way. I am going to give you a chance to total
your budget, and then I demand one half of the income from Father's estate above household
expenses; and if I don't get it, on the day I am eighteen I shall go to John Gilman and say
to him what I have said to you, and I shall go to the bank and demand that a division be made
there, and that a separate bank book be started for me."

Linda's amazement on entering the room had been worthy of note. Eileen's at the present minute
was beyond description. Dumbfounded was a colorless word to describe her state of mind.

"You don't mean that," she gasped in a quivering voice when at last she could speak.

"I can see, Eileen, that you are taken unawares," said Linda. "I have had four long years to
work up to this hour. Hasn't it even dawned on you that this worm was ever going to turn? You
know exquisite moths and butterflies evolve in the canyons from very unprepossessing and lowly
living worms. You are spending your life on the butterfly stunt. Have I been such a weak worm
that it hasn't ever occurred to you that I might want to try a plain, everyday pair of wings
sometime myself?"

Eileen's face was an ugly red, her hands were shaking, her voice was unnatural, but she controlled
her temper.

"Of course," she said, "I have always known that the time would come, after you finished school
and were of a proper age, when you would want to enter society."

"No, you never knew anything of the kind," said Linda bluntly, "because I have not the slightest
ambition to enter society either now or then. All I am asking is to enter the high school in
a commonly decent, suitable dress; to enter our dining room as a daughter; to enter a workroom
decently equipped for my convenience. You needn't be surprised if you hear some changes going
on in the billiard room and see some changes going on in the library. And if I feel that I
can muster the nerve to drive the runabout, it's my car, it's up to me."

"Linda!" wailed Eileen, "how can you think of such a thing? You wouldn't dare."

"Because I haven't dared till the present is no reason why I should deprive myself of every
single pleasure in life," said Linda. "You spend your days doing exactly what you please; driving
that runabout for Father was my one soul-satisfying diversion. Why shouldn't I do the thing
I love most, if I can muster the nerve?"

Linda arose, and walking over to a table, picked up a magazine lying among some small packages
that Eileen evidently had placed there on entering her room.

"Are you subscribing to this?" she asked.

She turned in her hands and leafed through the pages of a most attractive magazine, Everybody's
Home. It was devoted to poetry, good fiction, and everything concerning home life from beef
to biscuits, and from rugs to roses.

"I saw it on a newsstand," said Eileen. "I was at lunch with some girls who had a copy and
they were talking about some articles by somebody named something--Meredith, I think it was--Jane
Meredith, maybe she's a Californian, and she is advocating the queer idea that we go back to
nature by trying modern cooking on the food the aborigines ate. If we find it good then she
recommends that we specialize on the growing of these native vegetables for home use and for
export--as a new industry."

"I see," said Linda. "Out-Burbanking Burbank, as it were."

"No, not that," said Eileen. "She is not proposing to evolve new forms. She is proposing to
show us how to make delicious dishes for luncheon or dinner from wild things now going to waste.
What the girls said was so interesting that I thought I'd get a copy and if I see anything
good I'll turn it over to Katy."

"And where's Katy going to get the wild vegetables?" asked Linda sceptically.

"Why you might have some of them in your wild garden, or you could easily find enough to try--all
the prowling the canyons you do ought to result in something."

"So it should," said Linda. "I quite agree with you. Did I understand you to say that I should
be ready to go to the bank with you to arrange about my income next week?"

Again the color deepened in Eileen's face, again she made a visible effort at self-control.

"Oh, Linda," she said, "what is the use of being so hard? You will make them think at the bank
that I have not treated you fairly."

"I?" said Linda, "I will make them think? Don't you think it is YOU who will make them think?
Will you kindly answer my question?"

"If I show you the books," said Eileen, "if I divide what is left after the bills are paid
so that you say yourself that it is fair, what more can you ask?"

Linda hesitated.

"What I ought to do is exactly what I have said I would do," she said tersely, "but if you
are going to put it on that basis I have no desire to hurt you or humiliate you in public.
If you do that, I can't see that I have any reason to complain, so we'll call it a bargain
and we'll say no more about it until the first of the month, unless the spirit moves you, after
taking a good square look at me, to produce some shoes and a school dress instanter."

"I'll see what I can do," answered Eileen.

"All right then," said Linda. "See you at dinner."

She went to her own room, slipped off her school dress, brushed her hair, and put on the skirt
and blouse she had worn the previous evening, these being the only extra clothing she possessed.
As she straightened her hair she looked at herself intently.

"My, aren't you coming on!" she said to the figure in the glass. "Dressing for dinner! First
thing you know you'll be a perfect lady."

CHAPTER VI. Jane Meredith

When Eileen came down to dinner that evening Linda understood at a glance that an effort was
to be made to efface thoroughly from the mind of John Gilman all memory of the Eileen of the
previous evening. She had decided on redressing her hair, while she wore one of her most becoming
and attractive gowns. To Linda and Katy during the dinner she was simply charming. Having said
what she wanted to say and received the assurance she desired, Linda accepted her advances
cordially and displayed such charming proclivities herself that Eileen began covertly to watch
her, and as she watched there slowly grew in her brain the conviction that something had happened
to Linda. At once she began studying deeply in an effort to learn what it might be. There were
three paramount things in Eileen's cosmos that could happen to a girl: She could have lovely
clothing. Linda did not have it. She could have money and influential friends. Since Marian's
going Linda had practically no friend; she was merely acquainted with almost everyone living
in Lilac Valley. She could have a lover. Linda had none. But stay! Eileen's thought halted
at the suggestion. Maybe she had! She had been left completely, to her own devices when she
was not wanted about the house. She had been mingling with hundreds of boys and girls in high
school. She might have met some man repeatedly on the street cars, going to and from school.
In school she might have attracted the son of some wealthy and influential family; which was
the only kind of son Eileen chose to consider in connection with Linda. Through Eileen's brain
ran bits of the conversation of the previous evening. She recalled that the men she had intended
should spend the evening waiting on her and paying her pretty compliments had spent it eating
like hungry men, laughing and jesting with Linda and Marian, giving every evidence of a satisfaction
with their entertainment that never had been evinced with the best brand of attractions she
had to offer.

Eileen was willing to concede that Marian Thorne had been a beautiful girl, and she had known,
previous to the disaster, that it was quite as likely that any man might admire Marian's flashing
dark beauty as her blonde loveliness. Between them then it would have been merely a question
of taste on the part of the man. Since Marian's dark head had turned ashen, Eileen had simply
eliminated her at one sweep. That white hair would brand Marian anywhere as an old woman. Very
likely no man ever would want to marry her. Eileen was sure she would not want to if she were
a man. No wonder John Gilman had ceased to be attracted by a girl's face with a grandmother
setting.

As for Linda, Eileen never had considered her at all except as a convenience to serve her own
purposes. Last night she had learned that Linda had a brain, that she had wit, that she could
say things to which men of the world listened with interest. She began to watch Linda. She
appraised with deepest envy the dark hair curling naturally on her temples. She wondered how
hair that curled naturally could be so thick and heavy, and she thought what a crown of glory
would adorn Linda's head when the day came to coil those long dark braids around it and fasten
them with flashing pins. She drew some satisfaction from the sunburned face and lean figure
before her, but it was not satisfaction of soul-sustaining quality. There was beginning to
be something disquieting about Linda. A roundness was creeping over her lean frame; a glow
was beginning to color her lips and cheek bones; a dewy look could be surprised in her dark
eyes occasionally. She had the effect of a creature with something yeasty bottled inside it
that was beginning to ferment and might effervesce at any minute. Eileen had been so surprised
the previous evening and again before dinner, that she made up her mind that hereafter one
might expect almost anything from Linda. She would no longer follow a suggestion unless the
suggestion accorded with her sense of right and justice. It was barely possible that it might
be required to please her inclinations. Eileen's mind worked with unbelievable swiftness. She
tore at her subject like a vulture tearing at a feast, and like a vulture she reached the vitals
swiftly. She prefaced her question with a dry laugh. Then she leaned forward and asked softly:
"Linda, dear, why haven't you told me?"

Linda's eyes were so clear and honest as they met Eileen's that she almost hesitated.

"A little more explicit, please," said the girl quietly.

"WHO IS HE?" asked Eileen abruptly.

"Oh, I haven't narrowed to an individual," said Linda largely "You have noticed a flock of
boys following me from school and hanging around the front door? I have such hosts to choose
from that it's going to take a particularly splendid knight on a snow-white charger--I think
'charger' is the proper word--to capture my young affections."

Eileen was satisfied. There wasn't any he. She might for a short time yet cut Linda's finances
to the extreme limit. Whenever a man appeared on the horizon she would be forced to make a
division at least approaching equality.

Linda followed Eileen to the living room and sat down with a book until John Gilman arrived.
She had a desire to study him for a few minutes. She was going to write Marian a letter that
night. She wanted to know if she could honestly tell her that Gilman appeared lonely and seemed
to miss her. Katy had no chance to answer the bell when it rang. Eileen was in the hall. Linda
could not tell what was happening from the murmur of voices. Presently John and Eileen entered
the room, and as Linda greeted him she did have the impression that he appeared unusually thoughtful
and worried. She sat for half an hour, taking slight part in the conversation. Then she excused
herself and went to her room, and as she went she knew that she could not honestly write Marian
what she had hoped, for in thirty minutes by the clock Eileen's blandishments had worked, and
John Gilman was looking at her as if she were the most exquisite and desirable creature in
existence.

Slowly Linda climbed the stairs and entered her room. She slid the bolt of her door behind
her, turned on the lights, unlocked a drawer, and taking from it a heap of materials she scattered
them over a small table, and picking up her pencil, she sat gazing at the sheet before her
for some time. Then slowly she began writing:

It appeals to me that, far as modern civilization has gone in culinary efforts, we have not
nearly reached the limits available to us as I pointed out last month. We consider ourselves
capable of preparing and producing elaborate banquets, yet at no time are we approaching anything
even to compare in lavishness and delicacy with the days of Lucullus. We are not feasting on
baked swans, peacock tongues and drinking our pearls. I am not recommending that we should
revive the indulgence of such lavish and useless expenditure, but I would suggest that if we
tire with the sameness of our culinary efforts, we at least try some of the new dishes described
in this department, established for the sole purpose of their introduction. In so doing we
accomplish a multiple purpose. We enlarge the resources of the southwest. We tease stale appetites
with a new tang. We offer the world something different, yet native to us. We use modern methods
on Indian material and the results are most surprising. In trying these dishes I would remind
you that few of us cared for oysters, olives, celery--almost any fruit or vegetable one could
mention on first trial. Try several times and be sure you prepare dishes exactly right before
condemning them as either fad or fancy. These are very real, nourishing and delicious foods
that are being offered you. Here is a salad that would have intrigued the palate of Lucullus,
himself. If you do not believe me, try it. The vegetable is slightly known by a few native
mountaineers and ranchers. Botanists carried it abroad where under the name of winter-purslane
it is used in France and England for greens or salad, while remaining practically unknown at
home. Boiled and seasoned as spinach it makes equally good greens. But it is in salad that
it stands pre-eminent.

Go to any canyon--I shall not reveal the name of my particular canyon--and locate a bed of
miner's lettuce (Montia perfoliata). Growing in rank beds beside a cold, clean stream, you
will find these pulpy, exquisitely shaped, pungent round leaves from the center of which lifts
a tiny head of misty white lace, sending up a palate-teasing, spicy perfume. The crisp, pinkish
stems snap in the fingers. Be sure that you wash the leaves carefully so that no lurking germs
cling to them. Fill your salad bowl with the crisp leaves, from which the flowerhead has been
plucked. For dressing, dice a teacup of the most delicious bacon you can obtain and fry it
to a crisp brown together with a small sliced onion. Add to the fat two tablespoons of sugar,
half a teaspoon of mustard; salt will scarcely be necessary the bacon will furnish that. Blend
the fat, sugar, and mustard, and pour in a measure of the best apple vinegar, diluted to taste.
Bring this mixture to the boiling point, and when it has cooled slightly pour it over the lettuce
leaves, lightly turning with a silver fork. Garnish the edge of the dish with a deep border
of the fresh leaves bearing their lace of white bloom intact, around the edge of the bowl,
and sprinkle on top the sifted yolks of two hard-boiled eggs, heaping the diced whites in the
center.

Linda paused and read this over carefully.

"That is all right," she said. "I couldn't make that much better."

She made a few corrections here and there, and picking up a colored pencil, she deftly sketched
in a head piece of delicate sprays of miners' lettuce tipped at differing angles, fringy white
with bloom. Below she printed: "A delicious Indian salad. The second of a series of new dishes
to be offered made from materials used by the Indians. Compounded and tested in her own diet
kitchen by the author."

Swiftly she sketched a tail piece representing a table top upon which sat a tempting-looking
big salad bowl filled with fresh green leaves, rimmed with a row of delicate white flowers,
from which you could almost scent a teasing delicate fragrance arising; and beneath, in a clear,
firm hand, she stroked in the name, Jane Meredith. She went over her work carefully, then laid
it flat on a piece of cardboard, shoved it into an envelope, directed it to the editor of Everybody's
Home, laid it inside her geometry, and wrote her letter to Marian before going to bed.

In the morning on her way to the street car she gaily waved to a passing automobile going down
Lilac Valley, in which sat John Gilman and Peter Morrison and his architect, and as they were
driving in the direction from which she had come, Linda very rightly surmised that they were
going to pick up Eileen and make a tour of the valley, looking for available building locations;
and she wondered why Eileen had not told her that they were coming. Linda had been right about
the destination of the car. It turned in at the Strong driveway and stopped at the door. John
Gilman went to ring the bell and learn if Eileen were ready. Peter followed him. Henry Anderson
stepped from the car and wandered over the lawn, looking at the astonishing array of bushes,
vines, flowers, and trees.

From one to another he went, fingering the waxy leaves, studying the brilliant flower faces.
Finally turning a corner and crossing the wild garden, to which he paid slight attention, he
started down the other side of the house. Here an almost overpowering odor greeted his nostrils,
and he went over to a large tree covered with rough, dark green, almost brownish, lance-shaped
leaves, each branch terminating in a heavy spray of yellowish-green flowers, whose odor was
of cloying sweetness. The bees were buzzing over it. It was not a tree with which he was familiar,
and stepping back, he looked at it carefully. Then at its base, wind-driven into a crevice
between the roots, his attention was attracted to a crumpled sheet of paper, upon which he
could see lines that would have attracted the attention of any architect. He went forward instantly,
picked up the sheet, and straightening it out he stood looking at it.

"Holy smoke!" he breathed softly. "What a find!"

He looked at the reverse of the sheet, his face becoming more intent every minute. When he
heard Peter Morrison's voice calling him he hastily thrust the paper into his coat pocket;
but he had gone only a few steps when he stopped, glanced keenly over the house and lawn, turned
his back, and taking the sheet from his pocket, he smoothed it out, folded it carefully, and
put it in an inside pocket. Then he joined the party.

At once they set out to examine the available locations that yet remained in Lilac Valley.
Nature provided them a wonderful day of snappy sunshine and heady sea air. Spring favored them
with lilac walls at their bluest, broken here and there with the rose-misted white mahogany.
The violet nightshade was beginning to add deeper color to the hills in the sunniest wild spots.
The panicles of mahonia bloom were showing their gold color. Wild flowers were lifting leaves
of feather and lace everywhere, and most agreeable on the cool morning air was a faint breath
of California sage. Up one side of the valley, weaving in and out, up and down, over the foothills
they worked their way. They stopped for dinner at one of the beautiful big hotels, practically
filled with Eastern tourists. Eileen never had known a prouder moment than when she took her
place at the head of the table and presided over the dinner which was served to three most
attractive specimens of physical manhood, each of whom was unusually well endowed with brain,
all flattering her with the most devoted attention. This triumph she achieved in a dining room
seating hundreds of people, its mirror-lined walls reflecting her exquisite image from many
angles, to the click of silver, and the running accompaniment of many voices. What she had
expected to accomplish in her own dining room had come to her before a large audience, in which,
she had no doubt, there were many envious women. Eileen rayed loveliness like a Mariposa lily,
and purred in utter contentment like a deftly stroked kitten.

When they parted in the evening Peter Morrison had memoranda of three locations that he wished
to consider. That he might not seem to be unduly influenced or to be giving the remainder of
Los Angeles County its just due, he proposed to motor around for a week before reaching an
ultimate decision, but in his heart he already had decided that somewhere near Los Angeles
he would build his home, and as yet he had seen nothing nearly so attractive as Lilac Valley.

CHAPTER VII. Trying Yucca

On her way to school that morning Linda stopped at the post office and pasted the required
amount of stamps upon the package that she was mailing to New York. She hurried from her last
class that afternoon to the city directory to find the street and number of James Brothers,
figuring that the firm with whom Marian dealt would be the proper people for her to consult.
She had no difficulty in finding the place for which she was searching, and she was rather
agreeably impressed with the men to whom she talked. She made arrangements with their buyer
to call at her home in Lilac Valley at nine o'clock the following Saturday morning to appraise
the articles with which she wished to part.

Then she went to one of the leading book stores of the city and made inquiries which guided
her to a reliable second-hand book dealer, and she arranged to be ready to receive his representative
at ten o'clock on Saturday.

Reaching home she took a note book and pencil, and studied the billiard room and the library,
making a list of the furniture which she did not actually need. After that she began on the
library shelves, listing such medical works as were of a technical nature. Books of fiction,
history, art, and biography, and those books written by her father she did not include. She
found that she had a long task which would occupy several evenings. Her mind was methodical
and she had been with her father through sufficient business transactions to understand that
in order to drive a good bargain she must know how many volumes she had to offer and the importance
of their authors as medical authorities; she should also know the exact condition of each set
of books. Since she had made up her mind to let them go, and she knew the value of many of
the big, leather-bound volumes, she determined that she would not sell them until she could
secure the highest possible price for them.

Two months previously she would have consulted John Gilman and asked him to arrange the transaction
for her. Since he had allowed himself to be duped so easily--or at least it had seemed easy
to Linda; for, much as she knew of Eileen, she could not possibly know the weeks of secret
plotting, the plans for unexpected meetings, the trumped-up business problems necessary to
discuss, the deliberate flaunting of her physical charms before him, all of which had made
his conquest extremely hard for Eileen, but Linda, seeing only results, had thought it contemptibly
easy--she would not ask John Gilman anything. She would go ahead on the basis of her agreement
with Eileen and do the best she could alone.

She counted on Saturday to dispose of the furniture. The books might go at her leisure. Then
the first of the week she could select such furniture as she desired in order to arrange the
billiard room for her study. If she had a suitable place in which to work in seclusion, there
need be no hurry about the library. She conscientiously prepared all the lessons required in
her school course for the next day and then, stacking her books, she again unlocked the drawer
opened the previous evening, and taking from it the same materials, set to work. She wrote:

Botanists have failed to mention that there is any connection between asparagus, originally
a product of salt marshes, and Yucca, a product of the alkaline desert. Very probably there
is no botanical relationship, but these two plants are alike in flavor. From the alkaline,
sunbeaten desert where the bayonet plant thrusts up a tender bloom head six inches in height,
it slowly increases in stature as it travels across country more frequently rain washed, and
winds its way beside mountain streams to where in more fertile soil and the same sunshine it
develops magnificent specimens from ten to fifteen and more feet in height. The plant grows
a number of years before it decides to flower. When it reaches maturity it throws up a bloom
stem as tender as the delicate head of asparagus, thick as one's upper arm, and running to
twice one's height. This bloom stem in its early stages is colored the pale pink of asparagus,
with faint touches of yellow, and hints of blue. At maturity it breaks into a gorgeous head
of lavender-tinted, creamy pendent flowers covering the upper third of its height, billowing
out slightly in the center, so that from a distance the waxen torch takes on very much the
appearance of a flaming candle. For this reason, in Mexico, where the plant flourishes in even
greater abundance than in California, with the exquisite poetry common to the tongue and heart
of the Spaniard, Yucca Whipplei has been commonly named "Our Lord's Candle." At the most delicate
time of their growth these candlesticks were roasted and eaten by the Indians. Based upon this
knowledge, I would recommend two dishes, almost equally delicious, which may be prepared from
this plant.

Take the most succulent young bloom stems when they have exactly the appearance of an asparagus
head at its moment of delicious perfection. With a sharp knife, cut them in circles an inch
in depth. Arrange these in a shallow porcelain baking dish, sprinkle with salt, dot them with
butter, add enough water to keep them from sticking and burning. Bake until thoroughly tender.
Use a pancake turner to slide the rings to a hot platter, and garnish with circles of hard-boiled
egg. This you will find an extremely delicate and appetizing dish.

The second recipe I would offer is to treat this vegetable precisely as you would creamed asparagus.
Cut the stalks in six-inch lengths, quarter them to facilitate cooking and handling, and boil
in salted water. Drain, arrange in a hot dish, and pour over a carefully made cream sauce.
I might add that one stalk would furnish sufficient material for several families. This dish
should be popular in southwestern states where the plant grows profusely; and to cultivate
these plants for shipping to Eastern markets would be quite as feasible as the shipping of
asparagus, rhubarb, artichokes, or lettuce.

I have found both these dishes peculiarly appetizing, but I should be sorry if, in introducing
Yucca as a food, I became instrumental in the extermination of this universal and wonderfully
beautiful plant. For this reason I have hesitated about including Yucca among these articles;
but when I see the bloom destroyed ruthlessly by thousands who cut it to decorate touring automobiles
and fruit and vegetable stands beside the highways, who carry it from its native location and
stick it in the parching sun of the seashore as a temporary shelter, I feel that the bloom
stems might as well be used for food as to be so ruthlessly wasted.

The plant is hardy in the extreme, growing in the most unfavorable places, clinging tenaciously
to sheer mountain and canyon walls. After blooming and seeding the plant seems to have thrown
every particle of nourishment it contains into its development, it dries out and dies (the
spongy wood is made into pincushions for the art stores); but from the roots there spring a
number of young plants, which, after a few years of growth, mature and repeat their life cycle,
while other young plants develop from the widely scattered seeds. The Spaniards at times call
the plant Quiota. This word seems to be derived from quiotl, which is the Aztec name for Agave,
from which plant a drink not unlike beer is produced, and suggests the possibility that there
might have been a time when the succulent flower stem of the Yucca furnished drink as well
as food for the Indians.

After carefully re-reading and making several minor corrections, Linda picked up her pencil,
and across the top of a sheet of heavy paper sketched the peaks of a chain of mountains. Across
the base she drew a stretch of desert floor, bristling with the thorns of many different cacti
brilliant with their gold, pink, and red bloom, intermingled with fine grasses and desert flower
faces.

At the left she painstakingly drew a huge plant of yucca with a perfect circle of bayonets,
from the center of which uprose the gigantic flower stem the length of her page, and on the
misty bloom of the flaming tongue she worked quite as late as Marian Thorne had ever seen a
light burning in her window. When she had finished her drawing she studied it carefully a long
time, adding a touch here and there, and then she said softly: "There, Daddy, I feel that even
you would think that a faithful reproduction Tomorrow night I'll paint it."

John Gilman saw the light from Linda's window when he brought Eileen home that night, and when
he left he glanced that way again, and was surprised to see the room still lighted, and the
young figure bending over a worktable. He stood very still for a few minutes, wondering what
could keep Linda awake so far into the night, and while his thoughts were upon her he wondered,
too, why she did not care to have beautiful clothes such as Eileen wore; and then he went further
and wondered why, when she could be as entertaining as she had been the night she joined them
at dinner, she did not make her appearance oftener; and then, because the mind is a queer thing,
and he had wondered about a given state of affairs, he went a step further, and wondered whether
the explanation lay in Linda's inclinations or in Eileen's management, and then his thought
fastened tenaciously upon the subject of Eileen's management.

He was a patient man. He had allowed his reason and better judgment to be swayed by Eileen's
exquisite beauty and her blandishments. He did not regret having discovered before it was too
late that Marian Thorne was not the girl he had thought her. He wanted a wife cut after the
clinging-vine pattern. He wanted to be the dominating figure in his home. It had not taken
Eileen long to teach him that Marian was self-assertive and would do a large share of dominating
herself. He had thought that he was perfectly satisfied and very happy with Eileen; yet that
day he repeatedly had felt piqued and annoyed with her. She had openly cajoled and flirted
with Henry Anderson past a point which was agreeable for any man to see his sweetheart go with
another man With Peter Morrison she had been unspeakably charming in a manner with which John
was very familiar.

He turned up his coat collar, thrust his hands in his pockets, and swore softly. Looking straight
ahead of him, he should have seen a stretch of level sidewalk, bordered on one hand by lacy,
tropical foliage, on the other, by sheets of level green lawn, broken everywhere by the uprising
boles of great trees, clumps of rare vines, and rows of darkened homes, attractive in architectural
'design' vine covered, hushed for the night. What he really saw was a small plateau, sun illumined,
at the foot of a mountain across the valley, where the lilac wall was the bluest, where the
sun shone slightly more golden than anywhere else in the valley, where huge live oaks outstretched
rugged arms, where the air had a tang of salt, a tinge of sage, an odor of orange, shot through
with snowy coolness, thrilled with bird song, and the laughing chuckle of a big spring breaking
from the foot of the mountain. They had left the road and followed a narrow, screened path
by which they came unexpectedly into this opening. They had stood upon it in wordless enchantment,
looking down the slope beneath it, across the peace of the valley, to the blue ranges beyond.

"Just where are we?" Peter Morrison had asked at last.

John Gilman had been looking at a view which included Eileen. She lifted her face, flushed
and exquisite, to Peter Morrison and answered in a breathless undertone, yet John had distinctly
heard her:

"How wonderful it would be if we were at your house. Oh, I envy the woman who shares this with
you!"

It had not been anything in particular, yet all day it had teased John Gilman's sensibilities.
He felt ashamed of himself for not being more enthusiastic as he searched records and helped
to locate the owner of that particular spot. To John, there was a new tone in Peter's voice,
a possessive light in his eyes as he studied the location, and made excursions in several directions,
to fix in his mind the exact position of the land.

He had indicated what he considered the topographical location for a house--stood on it facing
the valley, and stepped the distance suitably far away to set a garage and figured on a short
private road down to the highway. He very plainly was deeply prepossessed with a location John
Gilman blamed himself for not having found first. Certainly nature had here grown and walled
a dream garden in which to set a house of dreams. So, past midnight, Gilman stood in the sunshine,
looking at the face of the girl he had asked to marry him and who had said that she would;
and a small doubt crept into his heart, and a feeling that perhaps life might be different
for him if Peter Morrison decided to come to Lilac Valley to build his home. Then the sunlight
faded, night closed in, but as he went his homeward way John Gilman was thinking, thinking
deeply and not at all happily.

CHAPTER VIII.

"Katy, me blessing," she said gaily, "did I ever point out to you the interesting fact that
I was born on Saturday? And a devilish piece of luck it was, for I have been hustling ever
since. It's bad enough to have been born on Monday and spoiled wash day, but I call Saturday
the vanishing point, the end of the extreme limit."

Katy laughed, and, as always, turned adoring eyes on Linda.

"I am not needing ye, lambie," she said. "Is it big business in the canyon ye're having today?
Shall I be ready to be cooking up one of them God-forsaken Red Indian messes for ye when ye
come back?"

Linda held up a warning finger.

"Hiss, Katy," she said. "That is a dark secret. Don't you be forgetting yourself and saying
anything like that before anyone, or I would be ruined entirely."

"Well, I did think when ye began it," said Katy, "that of all the wild foolishness ye and your
pa had ever gone through with, that was the worst, but that last mess ye worked out was so
tasty to the tongue that I thought of it a lot, and I'm kind o' hankering for more."

Linda caught Katy and swung her around the kitchen in a wild war dance. Her gayest laugh bubbled
clear from the joy peak of her soul.

"Katy," she said, "if you had lain awake all night trying to say something that would particularly
please me, you couldn't have done better. That was a quaint little phrase and a true little
phrase, and I know a little spot that it will fit exactly. What am I doing today? Well, several
things, Katy. First, anything you need about the house. Next, I am going to empty the billiard
room and sell some of the excess furniture of the library, and with the returns I am going
to buy me a rug and a table and some tools to work with, so I won't have to clutter up my bedroom
with my lessons and things I bring in that I want to save. And then I am going to sell the
technical stuff from the library and use that money where it will be of greatest advantage
to me. And then, Katy, I am going to manicure the Bear Cat and I am going to drive it again."

Linda hesitated. Katy stood very still, thinking intently, but finally she said: "That's all
right; ye have got good common sense; your nerves are steady; your pa drilled ye fine. Many's
the time he has bragged to me behind your back what a fine little driver he was making of ye.
I don't know a girl of your age anywhere that has less enjoyment than ye. If it would be giving
ye any happiness to be driving that car, ye just go ahead and drive it, lambie, but ye promise
me here and now that ye will be mortal careful. In all my days I don't think I have seen a
meaner-looking little baste of a car."

"Of course I'll be careful, Katy," said Linda. "That car was not bought for its beauty. Its
primal object in this world was to arrive. Gee, how we shot curves, and coasted down the canyons,
and gassed up on the level when some poor soul went batty from nerve strain! The truth is,
Katy, that you can't drive very slowly. You have got to go the speed for which it was built.
But I have had my training. I won't forget. I adore that car, Katy, and I don't know how I
have ever kept my fingers off it this long. Today it gets a bath and a facial treatment, and
when I have thought up some way to meet my big problem, you're going to have a ride, Katy,
that will quite uplift your soul. We'll go scooting through the canyons, and whizzing around
the mountains, and roaring along the beach, as slick as a white sea swallow."

"Now, easy, lambie, easy," said Katy. "Ye're planning to speed that thing before ye've got
it off the jacks."

"No, that was mere talk," said Linda. "But, Katy, this is my great day. I feel in my bones
that I shall have enough money by night to get me some new tires, which I must have before
I can start out in safety."

"Of course ye must, honey. I would just be tickled to pieces to let ye have what ye need."

Linda slid her hand across Katy's lips and gathered her close in her arms.

"You blessed old darling," she said. "Of course you would, but I don't need it, Katy. I can
sit on the floor to work, if I must, and instead of taking the money from the billiard table
to buy a worktable, I can buy tires with that. But here's another thing I want to tell you,
Katy. This afternoon a male biped is coming to this house, and he's not coming to see Eileen.
His name is Donald Whiting, and when he tells you it is, and stands very straight and takes
off his hat, and looks you in the eye and says, 'Calling on Miss Linda Strong,' walk him into
the living room, Katy, and seat him in the best chair and put a book beside him and the morning
paper; and don't you forget to do it with a flourish. He is nothing but a high-school kid,
but he's the first boy that ever in all my days asked to come to see me so it's a big event;
and I wish to my soul I had something decent to wear."

"Well, with all the clothes in this house," said Katy; and then she stopped and shut her lips
tight and looked at Linda with belligerent Irish eyes.

"I know it," nodded Linda in acquiescence; "I know what you think; but never mind. Eileen has
agreed to make me a fair allowance the first of the month, and if that isn't sufficient, I
may possibly figure up some way to do some extra work that will bring me a few honest pennies,
so I can fuss up enough to look feminine at times, Katy. In the meantime, farewell, oh, my
belovedest. Call me at half-past eight, so I will be ready for business at nine."

Then Linda went to the garage and began operations. She turned the hose on the car and washed
the dust from it carefully. Then she dried it with the chamois skins as she often had done
before. She carefully examined the cushioning, and finding it dry and hard, she gave it a bath
of olive oil and wiped and manipulated it. She cleaned the engine with extreme care. At one
minute she was running to Katy for kerosene to pour through the engine to loosen the carbon.
At another she was telephoning for the delivery of oil, gasoline, and batteries for which she
had no money to pay, so she charged them to Eileen, ordering the bill to be sent on the first
of the month. It seemed to her that she had only a good start when Katy came after her.

The business of appraising the furniture was short, and Linda was well satisfied with the price
she was offered for it. After the man had gone she showed Katy the pieces she had marked to
dispose of, and told her when they would be called for. She ate a few bites of lunch while
waiting for the book man, and the results of her business with him quite delighted Linda. She
had not known that the value of books had risen with the price of everything else. The man
with whom she dealt had known her father. He had appreciated the strain in her nature which
made her suggest that he should number and appraise the books, but she must be allowed time
to go through each volume in order to remove any scraps of paper or memoranda which her father
so frequently left in books to which he was referring. He had figured carefully and he had
made Linda a far higher price than could have been secured by a man. As the girl went back
to her absorbing task in the garage, she could see her way clear to the comforts and conveniences
and the material that she needed for her work. When she reached the car she patted it as if
it had been a living creature.

"Cheer up, nice old thing," she said gaily. "I know how to get new tires for you, and you shall
drink all the gasoline and oil your tummy can hold. Now let me see. What must I do next? I
must get you off your jacks; and oh, my gracious there are the grease cups, and that's a nasty
job, but it must be done; and what is the use of Saturday if I can't do it? Daddy often did."

Linda began work in utter absorption. She succeeded in getting the car off the jacks. She was
lying on her back under it, filling some of the most inaccessible grease cups, and she was
softly singing as she worked:

"The shoes I wear are common-sense shoes--"

At that minute Donald Whiting swung down the street, turned in at the Strong residence, and
rang the bell. Eileen was coming down the stairs, dressed for the street. She had inquired
for Linda, and Katy had told her that she thought Miss Linda had decided to begin using her
car, and that she was in the garage working on it. To Eileen's credit it may be said that she
had not been told that a caller was expected. Linda never before had had a caller and, as always,
Eileen was absorbed in her own concerns. Had she got the rouge a trifle brighter on one cheek
than on the other? Was the powder evenly distributed? Would the veil hold the handmade curls
in exactly the proper place? When the bell rang her one thought might have been that some of
her friends were calling for her. She opened the door, and when she learned that Linda was
being asked for, it is possible that she mistook the clean, interesting, and well-dressed youngster
standing before her for a mechanic. What she said was: "Linda's working on her car. Go around
to the left and you will find her in the garage, and for heaven's sake, get it right before
you let her start out, for we've had enough horror in this family from motor accidents."

Then she closed the door before him and stood buttoning her gloves; a wicked and malicious
smile spreading over her face.

"Just possibly," she said, "that youngster is from a garage, but if he is, he's the best imitation
of the real thing that I have seen in these chaotic days."

Donald Whiting stopped at the garage door and looked in, before Linda had finished her grease
cups, and in time to be informed that he might wear common-sense shoes if he chose. At his
step, Linda rolled her black head on the cement floor and raised her eyes. She dropped the
grease cup, and her face reddened deeply.

"Oh, my Lord!" she gasped breathlessly. "I forgot to tell Katy when to call me!"

In that instant she also forgot that the stress of the previous four years had accustomed men
to seeing women do any kind of work in any kind of costume; but soon Linda realized that Donald
Whiting was not paying any particular attention either to her or to her occupation. He was
leaning forward, gazing at the car with positively an enraptured expression on his eager young
face.

"Shades of Jehu!" he cried. "It's a Bear Cat!"

Linda felt around her head for the grease cup.

"Why, sure it's a Bear Cat," she said with the calmness of complete recovery. "And it's just
about ready to start for its very own cave in the canyon."

Donald Whiting pitched his hat upon the seat, shook off his coat, and sent it flying after
the hat. Then he began unbuttoning and turning back his sleeves.

"Here, let me do that," he said authoritatively. "Gee! I have never yet ridden in a Bear Cat.
Take me with you, will you, Linda?"

"Sure," said Linda, pressing the grease into the cup with a little paddle and holding it up
to see if she had it well filled. "Sure, but there's no use in you getting into this mess,
because I have only got two more. You look over the engine. Did you ever grind valves, and
do you think these need it?"

"Why, they don't need it," said Donald, "if they were all right when it was jacked up."

"Well, they were," said Linda. "It was running like a watch when it went to sleep. But do we
dare take it out on these tires?"

"How long has it been?" asked Donald, busy at the engine.

"All of four years," answered Linda.

Donald whistled softly and started a circuit of the car, kicking the tires and feeling them.

"Have you filled them?" he asked.

"No," said Linda. "I did not want to start the engine until I had finished everything else."

"All right," he said, "I'll look at the valves first and then, if it is all ready, there ought
to be a garage near that we can run to carefully, and get tuned up."

"There is," said Linda. "There is one only a few blocks down the street where Dad always had
anything done that he did not want to do himself."

"That's that, then," said Donald.

Linda crawled from under the car and stood up, wiping her hands on a bit of waste.

"Do you know what tires cost now?" she asked anxiously.

"They have 'em at the garage," answered Donald, "and if I were you, I wouldn't get a set; I
would get two. I would-put them on the rear wheels. You might be surprised at how long some
of these will last. Anyway, that would be the thing to do."

"Of course," said Linda, in a relieved tone. "That would be the thing to do."

"Now," she said, "I must be excused a few minutes till I clean up so I am fit to go on the
streets. I hope you won't think I forgot you were coming."

Donald laughed drily.

"When 'shoes' was the first word I heard," he said, "I did not for a minute think you had forgotten."

"No, I didn't forget," said Linda. "What I did do was to become so excited about cleaning up
the car that I let time go faster than I thought it could. That was what made me late."

"Well, forget it!" said Donald. "Run along and jump into something, and let us get our tires
and try Kitty out."

Linda reached up and released the brakes. She stepped to one side of the car and laid her hands
on it.

"Let us run it down opposite the kitchen door," she said, "then you go around to the front,
and I'll let you in, and you can read something a few minutes till I make myself presentable."

"Oh, I'll stay out here and look around the yard and go over the car again," said the boy.
"What a bunch of stuff you have got growing here; I don't believe I ever saw half of it before."
"It's Daddy's and my collection," said Linda. "Some day I'll show you some of the things, and
tell you how we got them, and why they are rare. Today I just naturally can't wait a minute
until I try my car."

"Is it really yours?" asked Donald enviously.

"Yes," said Linda. "It's about the only thing on earth that is peculiarly and particularly
mine. I haven't a doubt there are improved models, but Daddy had driven this car only about
nine months. It was going smooth as velvet, and there's no reason why it should not keep it
up, though I suspect that by this time there are later models that could outrun it."

"Oh, I don't know," said the boy. "It looks like some little old car to me. I bet it can just
skate."

"I know it can," said Linda, "if I haven't neglected something. We'll start carefully, and
we'll have the inspector at the salesrooms look it over."

Then Linda entered the kitchen door to find Katy with everything edible that the house afforded
spread before her on the table.

"Why, Katy, what are you doing?" she asked.

"I was makin' ready," explained Katy, "to fix ye the same kind of lunch I would for Miss Eileen.
Will ye have it under the live oak, or in the living room?"

"Neither," said Linda. "Come upstairs with me, and in the storeroom you'll find the lunch case
and the thermos bottles and don't stint yourself, Katy. This is a rare occasion. It never happened
before. Probably it will never happen again. Let's make it high altitude while we are at it."

"I'll do my very best with what I happen to have," said Katy; "but I warn you right now I am
making a good big hole in the Sunday dinner."

"I don't give two whoops," said Linda, "if there isn't any Sunday dinner. In memory of hundreds
of times that we have eaten bread and milk, make it a banquet, Katy, and we'll eat bread and
milk tomorrow."

Then she took the stairway at a bound, and ran to her room. In a very short time she emerged,
clad in a clean blouse and breeches' her climbing boots, her black hair freshly brushed and
braided.

"I ought to have something," said Linda, "to shade my eyes. The glare's hard on them facing
the sun."

Going down the hall she came to the storeroom, opened a drawer' and picked out a fine black
felt Alpine hat that had belonged to her father. She carried it back to her room and, standing
at the glass, tried it on, pulling it down on one side, turning it up at the other, and striking
a deep cleft across the crown. She looked at herself intently for a minute, and then she reached
up and deliberately loosened the hair at her temples.

"Not half bad, all things considered, Linda," she said. "But, oh, how you do need a tich of color."

She ran down the hall and opened the door to Eileen's room, and going to her chiffonier, pulled
out a drawer containing an array of gloves, veils, and ribbons. At the bottom of the ribbon
stack, her eye caught the gleam of color for which she was searching, and she deftly slipped
out a narrow scarf of Roman stripes with a deep black fringe at the end. Sitting down, she
fitted the hat over her knee, picked up the dressing-table scissors, and ripped off the band.
In its place she fitted the ribbon, pinning it securely and knotting the ends so that the fringe
reached her shoulder. Then she tried the hat again. The result was blissfully satisfactory.
The flash of orange, the blaze of red, the gleam of green, were what she needed.

"Thank you very much, sister mine," she said, "I know you I would be perfectly delighted to
loan me this."

CHAPTER IX. One Hundred Per Cent Plus

Then she went downstairs and walked into the kitchen, prepared for what she would see, by what
she heard as she approached.

With Katy's apron tied around his waist, Donald Whiting was occupied in squeezing orange, lemon,
and pineapple juice over a cake of ice in a big bowl, preparatory to the compounding of Katy's
most delicious brand of fruit punch. Without a word, Linda stepped to the bread board and began
slicing the bread and building sandwiches, while Katy hurried her preparations for filling
the lunch box. A few minutes later Katy packed them in the car, kissed Linda good-bye, and
repeatedly cautioned Donald to make her be careful.

As the car rolled down the driveway and into the street, Donald looked appraisingly at the
girl beside him.

"Is it the prevailing custom in Lilac Valley for young ladies to kiss the cook?" inquired Donald
laughingly.

"Now, you just hush," said Linda. "Katy is NOT the cook, alone. Katy's my father, and my mother,
and my family, and my best friend--"

"Stop right there," interposed Donald. "That is quite enough for any human to be. Katy's a
multitude. She came out to the car with the canteen, and when I offered to help her, without
any 'polly foxin',' she just said: 'Sure. Come in and make yourself useful.' So I went, and
I am expecting amazing results from the job she gave me."

"Come to think of it," said Linda, "I have small experience with anybody's cooking except Katy's
and my own, but so far as I know, she can't very well be beaten."

Carefully she headed the car into the garage adjoining the salesrooms. There she had an ovation.
The manager and several of the men remembered her. The whole force clustered around the Bear
Cat and began to examine it, and comment on it, and Linda climbed out and asked to have the
carburetor adjusted, while the mechanic put on a pair of tires. When everything was satisfactory,
she backed to the street, and after a few blocks of experimental driving, she headed for the
Automobile Club to arrange for her license and then turned straight toward Multiflores Canyon,
but she did not fail to call Donald Whiting's attention to every beauty of Lilac Valley as
they passed through. When they had reached a long level stretch of roadway leading to the canyon,
Linda glanced obliquely at the boy beside her.

"It all comes back as natural as breathing," she said. "I couldn't forget it any more than
I could forget how to walk, or to swim. Sit tight. I am going to step on the gas for a bit,
just for old sake's sake."

"That's all right," said Donald, taking off his hat and giving his head a toss so that the
wind might have full play through his hair. "But remember our tires are not safe. Better not
go the limit until we get rid of these old ones, and have a new set all around."

Linda settled back in her seat, took a firm grip on the wheel, and started down the broad,
smooth highway, gradually increasing the speed. The color rushed to her cheeks. Her eyes were
gleaming.

"Listen to it purr!" she cried to Donald. "If you hear it begin to growl, tell me."

And then for a few minutes they rode like birds on the path of the wind. When they approached
the entrance to the canyon, gradually Linda slowed down. She turned an exultant flashing face
to Donald Whiting.

"That was a whizzer," said the boy. "I'll tell you I don't know what I'd give to have a car
like this for my very own. I'll bet not another girl in Los Angeles has a car that can go like
that."

"And I don't believe I have any business with it," said Linda; "but since circumstances make
it mine, I am going to keep it and I am going to drive it."

"Of course you are," said Donald emphatically. "Don't you ever let anybody fool you out of
this car, because if they wanted to, it would be just because they are jealous to think they
haven't one that will go as fast."

"There's not the slightest possibility of my giving it up so long as I can make the engine
turn over," she said. "I told you how Father always took me around with him, and there's nothing
in this world I am so sure of as I am sure that I am spoiled for a house cat. I have probably
less feminine sophistication than any girl of my age in the world, and I probably know more
about camping and fishing and the scientific why and wherefore of all outdoors than most of
them. I just naturally had such a heavenly time with Daddy that it never has hurt my feelings
to be left out of any dance or party that ever was given. The one thing that has hurt is the
isolation. Since I lost Daddy I haven't anyone but Katy. Sometimes, when I see a couple of
nice, interesting girls visiting with their heads together, a great feeling of envy wells up
in my soul, and I wish with all my heart that I had such a friend."

"Ever try to make one?" asked Donald. "There are mighty fine girls in the high school."

"I have seen several that I thought I would like to be friends with," said Linda, "but I am
so lacking in feminine graces that I haven't known how to make advances, in the first place,
and I haven't had the courage, in the second."

"I wish my sister were not so much older than you," said Donald.

"How old is your sister?" inquired Linda.

"She will be twenty-three next birthday," said Donald; "and of all the nice girls you ever
saw, she is the queen."

"Yes," she assented, "I am sure I have heard your sister mentioned. But didn't you tell me
she had been reared for society?"

"No, I did not," said Donald emphatically. "I told you Mother j believed in dressing her as
the majority of other girls were dressed, but I didn't say she had been reared for society.
She has been reared with an eye single to making a well-dressed, cultured, and gracious woman."

"I call that fine," said Linda. "Makes me envious of you. Now forget everything except your
eyes and tell me what you see. Have you ever been here before?"

"I have been through a few times before, but seems to me I | never saw it looking quite so pretty."

Linda drove carefully, but presently Donald uttered an exclamation as she swerved from the
road and started down what appeared to be quite a steep embankment and headed straight for
the stream.

"Sit tight," she said tersely. "The Bear Cat just loves its cave. It knows where it is going."

She broke through a group of young willows and ran the car! into a tiny plateau, walled in
a circle by the sheer sides of the! canyon reaching upward almost out of sight, topped with
great jagged overhanging boulders. Crowded to one side, she stopped the car and sat quietly,
smiling at Donald Whiting.

"How about it?" she asked in a low voice.

The boy looked around him, carefully examining the canyon walls, and then at the level, odorous
floor where one could not step without crushing tiny flowers of white, cerise, blue, and yellow.
Big ferns grew along the walls, here and there "Our Lord's Candles" lifted high torches not
yet lighted, the ambitious mountain stream skipped and circled and fell over its rocky bed,
while many canyon wrens were singing.

"Do you think," she said, "that anyone driving along here at an ordinary rate of speed would
see that car?"

"No," said Donald, getting her idea, "I don't believe they would."

"All right, then," said Linda. "Toe up even and I'll race YoU to the third curve where you
see the big white sycamore."

Donald had a fleeting impression of a flash of khaki, a gleam of red, and a wave of black as
they started. He ran with all the speed he had ever attained at a track meet. He ran with all
his might. He ran until his sides strained and his breath came short; but the creature beside
him was not running; she was flying; and long before they neared the sycamore he knew he was
beaten, so he laughingly cried to her to stop it. Linda turned to him panting and laughing.

"I make that dash every time I come to the canyon, to keep my muscle up, but this is the first
time I have had anyone to race with in a long time."

Then together they slowly walked down the smooth black floor between the canyon walls. As they
crossed a small bridge Linda leaned over and looked down.

"Anyone at your house care about 'nose twister'?" she asked lightly.

"Why, isn't that watercress?" asked Donald.

"Sure it is," said Linda. "Anyone at your house like it?"

"Every one of us," answered Donald. "We're all batty about cress salad--and, say, that reminds
me of something! If you know so much about this canyon and everything in it, is there any place
in it where a fellow could find a plant, a kind of salad lettuce, that the Indians used to use?"

"Might be," said Linda carelessly. "For why?"

"Haven't you heard of the big sensation that is being made in feminine circles by the new department
in Everybody's Home?" inquired Donald. "Mother and Mary Louise were discussing it the other
day at lunch, and they said that some of the recipes for dishes to be made from stuff the Indians
used sounded delicious. One reminded them of cress, and when we saw the cress I wondered if
I could get them some of the other."

"Might," said Linda drily, "if you could give me a pretty good idea of what it is that you want."

"When you know cress, it's queer that you wouldn't know other things in your own particular
canyon," said Donald.

Linda realized that she had overdone her disinterestedness a trifle.

"I suspect it's miners' lettuce you want," she said. "Of course I know where there's some,
but you will want it as fresh as possible if you take any, so we'll finish our day first and
gather it the last thing before we leave."

How it started neither of them noticed, but they had not gone far before they were climbing
the walls and hanging to precarious footings. Her cheeks flushed, her eyes brilliant, her lips
laughing, Linda was showing Donald thrifty specimens of that Cotyledon known as "old hen and
chickens," telling him of the rare Echeveria of the same family, and her plunge down the canyon
side while trying to uproot it, exulting that she had brought down the plant without a rift
in the exquisite bloom on its leaves.

Linda told about her fall, and the two men who had passed at that instant, and how she had
met them later, and who they were, and what they were doing. Then Donald climbed high for a
bunch of larkspur, and Linda showed him how to turn his back to the canyon wall and come down
with the least possible damage to his person and clothing. When at last both of them were tired
they went back to the car. Linda spread an old Indian blanket over the least flower-grown spot
she could select, brought out the thermos bottles and lunch case, and served their lunch. With
a glass of fruit punch in one hand and a lettuce sandwich in the other, Donald smiled at Linda.

"I'll agree about Katy. She knows how," he said appreciatively.

"Katy is more than a cook," said Linda quietly. "She is a human being. She has the biggest,
kindest heart. When anybody's sick or in trouble she's the greatest help. She is honest; she
has principles; she is intelligent. In her spare time she reads good books and magazines. She
knows what is going on in the world. She can talk intelligently on almost any subject. It's
no disgrace to be a cook. If it were, Katy would be unspeakable. Fact is, at the present minute
there's no one in all the world so dear to me as Katy. I always talk Irish with her."

"Well, I call that rough on your sister," said Donald.

"Maybe it is," conceded Linda. "I suspect a lady wouldn't have i said that, but Eileen and
I are so different. She never has made the slightest effort to prove herself lovable to me,
and so I have never learned to love her. Which reminds me--how did you happen to come to the
garage?"

"The very beautiful young lady who opened the door mistook me for a mechanic. She told me I
would find you working on your car and for goodness' sake to see that it was in proper condition
before you drove it."

Linda looked at him with wide, surprised eyes in which a trace of indignation was plainly discernible.

"Now listen to me," she said deliberately. "Eileen is a most sophisticated young lady. If she
saw you, she never in this world, thought you were a mechanic sent from a garage presenting
yourself at our front door."

"There might have been a spark of malice in the big blue-gray I eyes that carefully appraised
me," said Donald.

"Your choice of words is good," said Linda, refilling the punch glass. "'Appraise' fits Eileen
like her glove. She appraises every thing on a monetary basis, and when she can't figure that
it's going to be worth an appreciable number of dollars and cents to her--'to the garage wid
it,' as Katy would say."

When they had finished their lunch Linda began packing the box and Donald sat watching her.

"At this point," said Linda, "Daddy always smoked. Do you smoke?"

There was a hint of deeper color in the boy's cheeks.

"I did smoke an occasional cigarette," he said lightly, "up to the day, not a thousand years
ago, when a very emphatic young lady who should have known, insinuated that it was bad for
the nerves, and going on the presumption that she knew, I haven't smoked a cigarette since
and I'm not going to until I find out whether I can do better work without them."

Linda folded napkins and packed away accessories thoughtfully. Then she looked into the boy's eyes.

"Now we reach the point of our being here together," she said. "It's time to fight, and I am
sorry we didn't go at it gas and bomb the minute we met.  You're so different from what I thought
you were. If anyone had told me a week ago that you would take off your coat and mess with
my automobile engine, or wear Katy's apron and squeeze lemons in our kitchen I would have looked
him over for Daddy's high sign of hysteria, at least. It's too bad to I have such a good time
as I have had this afternoon, and then end with a fight."

"That's nothing," said Donald. "You couldn't have had as good a time as I have had. You're
like another boy. A fellow can be just a fellow with you, and somehow you make everything you
touch mean something it never meant before. You have made me feel that I would be about twice
the man I am if I had spent the time I have wasted in plain jazzing around, hunting Cotyledon
or trap-door spiders' nests."

"I get you," said Linda. "It's the difference between a girl reared in an atmosphere of georgette
and rouge, and one who has grown up in the canyons with the oaks and sycamores. One is natural
and the other is artificial. Most boys prefer the artificial."

"I thought I did myself," said Donald, "but today has taught me that I don't. I think, Linda,
that you would make the finest friend a fellow ever had. I firmly and finally decline to fight
with you; but for God's sake, Linda, tell me how I can beat that little cocoanut-headed Jap."

Linda slammed down the lid to the lunch box. Her voice was smooth and even but there was battle
in her eyes and she answered decisively: "Well, you can't beat him calling him names. There
is only one way on God's footstool that you can beat him. You can't beat him legislating against
him. You can't beat him boycotting him. You can't beat him with any tricks. He is as sly as
a cat and he has got a whole bag full of tricks of his own, and he has proved right here in
Los Angeles that he has got a brain that is hard to beat. All you can do, and be a man commendable
to your own soul, is to take his subject and put your brain on it to such purpose that you
cut pigeon wings around him. What are you studying in your classes, anyway?"

"Trigonometry, Rhetoric, Ancient History, Astronomy," answered Donald.

"And is your course the same as his?" inquired Linda.

"Strangely enough it is," answered Donald. "We have been in the same classes all through high
school. I think the little monkey--"

"Man, you mean," interposed Linda.

"'Man,'" conceded Donald. "Has waited until I selected my course all the way through, and then
he has announced what he would take. He probably figured that I had somebody with brains back
of the course I selected, and that whatever I studied would be suitable for him."

"I haven't a doubt of it," said Linda. "They are quick; oh! they are quick; and they know from
their cradles what it is that they have in the backs of their heads. We are not going to beat
them driving them to Mexico or to Canada, or letting them monopolize China. That is merely
temporizing. That is giving them fertile soil on which to take the best of their own and the
level best of ours, and by amalgamating the two, build higher than we ever have. There is just
one way in all this world that we can beat Eastern civilization and all that it intends to
do to us eventually. The white man has dominated by his color so far in the history of the
world, but it is written in the Books that when the men of color acquire our culture and combine
it with their own methods of living and rate of production, they are going to bring forth greater
numbers, better equipped for the battle of life, than we are. When they have got our last secret,
constructive or scientific, they will take it, and living in a way that we would not, reproducing
in numbers we don't, they will beat us at any game we start, if we don't take warning while
we are in the ascendancy, and keep there."

"Well, there is something to think about," said Donald Whiting, staring past Linda at the side
of the canyon as if he had seen the same handwriting on the wall that dismayed Belshazzar at
the feast that preceded his downfall.

"I see what you're getting at," he said. "I had thought that there might be some way to circumvent
him."

"There is!" broke in Linda hastily. "There is. You can beat him, but you have got to beat him
in an honorable way and in a way that is open to him as it is to you."

"I'll do anything in the world if you will only tell me how," said Donald. "Maybe you think
it isn't grinding me and humiliating me properly. Maybe you think Father and Mother haven't
warned me. Maybe you think Mary Louise isn't secretly ashamed of me. How can I beat him, Linda?"

Linda's eyes were narrowed to a mere line. She was staring at the wall back of Donald as if
she hoped that Heaven would intercede in her favor and write thereon a line that she might
translate to the boy's benefit.

"I have been watching pretty sharply," she said. "Take them as a race, as a unit--of course
there are exceptions, there always are--but the great body of them are mechanical. They are
imitative. They are not developing anything great of their own in their own country. They are
spreading all over the world and carrying home sewing machines and threshing machines and automobiles
and cantilever bridges and submarines and aeroplanes--anything from eggbeaters to telescopes.
They are not creating one single thing. They are not missing imitating everything that the
white man can do anywhere else on earth. They are just like the Germans so far as that is concerned."

"I get that, all right enough," said Donald. "Now go on. What is your deduction? How the devil
am I to beat the best? He is perfect, right straight along in everything."

The red in Linda's cheeks deepened. Her eyes opened their widest. She leaned forward, and with
her closed fist, pounded the blanket before him.

"Then, by gracious," she said sternly, "you have got to do something new. You have got to be
perfect, PLUS."

"'Perfect, plus?'" gasped Donald.

"Yes, sir!" said Linda emphatically. "You have got to be perfect, plus. If he can take his
little mechanical brain and work a thing out till he has got it absolutely right, you have
got to go further than that and discover something pertaining to it not hitherto thought of
and start something NEW. I tell you you must use your brains. You should be more than an imitator.
You must be a creator!"

Donald started up and drew a deep breath.

"Well, some job I call that," he said. "Who do you think I am, the Almighty?"

"No," said Linda quietly, "you are not. You are merely His son, created in His own image, like
Him, according to the Book, and you have got to your advantage the benefit of all that has
been learned down the ages. We have got to take up each subject in your course, and to find
some different books treating this same subject. We have got to get at it from a new angle.
We must dig into higher authorities. We have got to coach you till, when you reach the highest
note possible for the parrot, you can go ahead and embellish it with a few mocking-bird flourishes.
All Oka Sayye knows how to do is to learn the lesson in his book perfectly, and he is 100 per
cent. I have told you what you must do to add the plus, and you can do it if you are the boy
I take you for. People have talked about the 'yellow peril' till it's got to be a meaningless
phrase. Somebody must wake up to the realization that it's the deadliest peril that ever has
menaced white civilization. Why shouldn't you have your hand in such wonderful work?"

"Linda," said the boy breathlessly, "do you realize that you have been saying 'we'? Can you
help me? Will you help me?"

"No," said Linda, "I didn't realize that I had said 'we.' I didn't mean two people, just you
and me. I meant all the white boys and girls of the high school and the city and the state
and the whole world. If we are going to combat the 'yellow peril' we must combine against it.
We have got to curb our appetites and train our brains and enlarge our hearts till we are something
bigger and finer and numerically greater than this yellow peril. We can't take it and pick
it up and push it into the sea. We are not Germans and we are not Turks. I never wanted anything
in all this world worse than I want to see you graduate ahead of Oka Sayye. And then I want
to see the white boys and girls of Canada and of England and of Norway and Sweden and Australia,
and of the whole world doing exactly what I am recommending that you do in your class and what
I am doing personally in my own. I have had Japs in my classes ever since I have been in school,
but Father always told me to study them, to play the game fairly, but to BEAT them in some
way, in some fair way, to beat them at the game they are undertaking."

"Well, there is one thing you don't take into consideration," said Donald. "All of us did not
happen to be fathered by Alexander Strong. Maybe we haven't all got your brains."

"Oh, posher!" said Linda. "I know of a case where a little Indian was picked up from a tribal
battlefield in South America and brought to this country and put into our schools, and there
was nothing that any white pupil in the school could do that he couldn't, so long as it was
imitative work. You have got to be constructive. You have got to work out some way to get ahead
of them; and if you will take the history of the white races and go over their great achievements
in mechanics, science, art, literature--anything you choose--when a white man is constructive,
when he does create, he can simply cut circles around the colored races. The thing is to get
the boys and girls of today to understand what is going on in the world, what they must do
as their share in making the world safe for their grandchildren. Life is a struggle. It always
has been. It always will be. There is no better study than to go into the canyons or the deserts
and efface yourself and watch life. It's an all-day process of the stronger annihilating the
weaker. The one inexorable thing in the world is Nature. The eagle dominates the hawk; the
hawk, the falcon; the falcon, the raven; and so on down to the place where the hummingbird
drives the moth from his particular trumpet flower. The big snake swallows the little one.
The big bear appropriates the desirable cave."

"And is that what you are recommending people to do?"

"No," said Linda, "it is not. That is wild. We go a step ahead of the wild, or we ourselves
become wild. We have brains, and with our brains we must do in a scientific way what Nature
does with tooth and claw. In other words, and to be concrete, put these things in the car while
I fold the blanket. We'll gather our miners' lettuce and then we'll go home and search Daddy's
library and see if there is anything bearing in a higher way on any subject you are taking,
so that you can get from it some new ideas, some different angle, some higher light, something
that will end in speedily prefacing Oka Sayye's perfect with your pluperfect!"

CHAPTER X. Katy to the Rescue

Linda delivered Donald Whiting at his door with an armload of books and a bundle of miners'
lettuce and then drove to her home in Lilac Valley--in the eye of the beholder on the floor-level
macadam road; in her own eye she scarcely grazed it. The smooth, easy motion of the car, the
softly purring engine were thrilling. The speed at which she was going was like having wings
on her body. The mental stimulus she had experienced in concentrating her brain on Donald Whiting's
problem had stimulated her imagination. The radiant color of spring; the chilled, perfumed,
golden air; the sure sense of having found a friend, had ruffled the plumes of her spirit.
On the home road Donald had plainly indicated that he would enjoy spending the morrow with
her, and she had advised him to take the books she had provided and lock himself in his room
and sweat out some information about Monday's lessons which would at least arrest his professor's
attention, and lead his mind to the fact that something was beginning to happen. And then she
had laughingly added: "Tomorrow is Katy's turn. I told the old dear I would take her as soon
as I felt the car was safe. Every day she does many things that she hopes will give me pleasure.
This is one thing I can do that I know will delight her."

"Next Saturday, then?" questioned Donald. And Linda nodded.

"Sure thing. I'll be thinking up some place extra interesting. Come in the morning if you want,
and we'll take a lunch and go for the day. Which do you like best, mountains or canyons or
desert or sea?"

"I like it best wherever what you're interested in takes you," said Donald simply.

"All right, then," answered Linda, "we'll combine business and pleasure."

So they parted with another meeting arranged.

When she reached home she found Katy tearfully rejoicing, plainly revealing how intensely anxious
she had been. But when Linda told her that the old tires had held, that the car ran wonderfully,
that everything was perfectly safe, that she drove as unconsciously as she breathed, and that
tomorrow Katy was to go for a long ride, her joy was incoherent.

Linda laughed. She patted Katy and started down the hallway, when she called back: "What is
this package?"

"A delivery boy left it special only a few minutes ago. Must be something Miss Eileen bought
and thought she would want tomorrow, and then afterward she got this invitation and went on
as she was."

Linda stood gazing at the box. It did look so suspiciously like a dress box.

"Katy," she said, "I have just about got an irresistible impulse to peep. I was telling Eileen
last night of a dress I saw that I thought perfect. It suited me better than any other dress
I ever did see. It was at 'The Mode.' This box is from 'The Mode.' Could there be a possibility
that she sent it up specially for me?"

"I think she would put your name on it if she meant it for ye," said Katy.

"One peep would show me whether it is my dress or not," said Linda, "and peep I'm going to."

She began untying the string.

"There's one thing," said Katy, "Miss Eileen's sizes would never fit ye."

"Might," conceded Linda. "I am taller than she is, but I could wear her waists if I wanted
to, and she always alters her skirts herself to save the fees. Glory be! This is my dress,
and there's a petticoat and stockings to match it. Why, the nice old thing! I suggested hard
enough, but in my heart I hardly thought she would do it. Oh, dear, now if I only had some
shoes, and a hat."

Linda was standing holding the jacket in one hand, the stockings in the other, her face flaming.
Katy drew herself to full height. She reached over and picked the things from Linda's fingers.

"If ye know that is your dress, lambie," she said authoritatively, "ye go right out and get
into that car and run to town and buy ye a pair of shoes." 

The Bishop was walking down the wide Aiken street.

He was the only bishop in Aiken, and they made much of him, accordingly, though his diocese was
in the West, which of course was a drawback.

He was a tall man, with a handsome, kind face under his shovel hat;
portly, as a bishop should be, and having a twinkle of humor in his
eye.

He dressed well and soberly, in the decorous habiliments of his office. "So English," the young
ladies of the Highland Park Hotel used to whisper to each other, admiring him. Perhaps this
is the time to mention that the Bishop was a widower.

To-day he walked at a gentle pace, repeatedly lifting his hat in answer to a multitude of salutations;
for it was a bright April day, and the street was thronged.

There was the half-humorous incongruity between the people and the
place always visible in a place where two thirds of the population
are a mere pleasant-weather growth, dependent on the climate.

Groups of Northerners stood in the red and blue and green doorways
of the gay little shops, or sauntered past them; easily distinguished
by their clothing and their air of unaccustomed and dissatisfied languor.

One could pick out at a glance the new-comers just up from Florida; they were so decorated with alligator-tooth
jewelry, and gazed so contemptuously at the oranges and bananas in the windows. The native Southerners
were equally conspicuous, in the case of the men, from their careless dress and placid demeanor. A plentiful
sprinkling of black and yellow skins added to the picturesque character
of the scene.

Over it all hung a certain holiday air, the reason for which one presently detected to be an almost
universal wearing of flowers,--bunches of roses, clusters of violets or trailing arbutus, or twigs
of yellow jasmine; while bare-footed boys, with dusky faces and gleaming teeth, proffered nosegays
at every corner. The Aiken nosegay has this peculiarity,--the flowers are wedged together with
unexampled tightness. Truly enough may the little venders boast, "Dey's orful lots o' roses
in dem, mister; you'll fin' w'en you onties 'em." No one of the pedestrians appeared to be
in a hurry; and under all the holiday air of flowers there was a
pathetic disproportion of pale and weary faces.

 The dress was
of silky changeable tricolette, the skirt plain. Where a fold lifted and was strongly lighted,
it was an exquisite silver-gray; where a shadow fell deeply it was gray-brown. The coat reached
half way to the knees. It had a rippling skirt with a row of brown embroidery around it, a
deep belt with double buttoning at the waistline, and collar and sleeves in a more elaborate
pattern of the same embroidery as the skirt. Linda perched the hat on her head, pulled it down
securely, and faced Katy.

"Now then!" she challenged.

"And it's a perfect dress!" said Katy proudly, "and you're just the colleen to wear it. My,
but I wisht your father could be seeing ye the now."

With almost reverent hands Linda removed the clothing and laid it away. Then she read a letter
from Marian that was waiting for her, telling Katy scraps of it in running comment as she scanned
the sheets.

"She likes her boarding place. There are nice people in it. She has got a wonderful view from
the windows of her room. She is making friends. She thinks one of the men at Nicholson and
Snow's is just fine; he is helping her all he can, on the course she is taking. And she wants
us to look carefully everywhere for any scrap of paper along the hedge or around the shrubbery
on the north side of the house. One of her three sheets of plans is missing. I don't see where
in the world it could have gone, Katy."

Katy spread out her hands in despair.

"There was not a scrap of a sheet of paper in the room when I cleaned it," she said, "not a
scrap. And if I had seen a sheet flying around the yard I would have picked it up. She just
must be mistaken about having lost it here. She must have opened her case on the train and
lost it there."

Linda shook her head.

"I put that stuff in the case myself," she said, "and the clothes on top of it, and she wouldn't
have any reason for taking those things out on the train. I can't understand, but she did have
three rough sketches. She had her heart set on winning that prize and it would be a great help
to her, and certainly it was the most comprehensive and convenient plan for a house of that
class that I ever have seen. If I ever have a house, she is going to plan it, even if she doesn't
get to plan John Gilman's as he always used to say that she should. And by the way, Katy, isn't
it kind of funny for Eileen to go away over Sunday when it's his only holiday?"

"Oh, she'll telephone him," said Katy, "and very like, he'll go down, or maybe he is with her.
Ye needn't waste any sympathy on him. Eileen will take care that she has him so long as she
thinks she wants him."

Later it developed that Eileen had secured the invitation because she was able to produce three
most eligible men. Not only was John Gilman with the party, but Peter Morrison and Henry Anderson
were there as well. It was in the nature of a hastily arranged celebration, because the deal
for three acres of land that Peter Morrison most coveted on the small plateau, mountain walled,
in Lilac Valley, was in escrow. He had made a payment on it. Anderson was working on his plans.
Contractors had been engaged, and on Monday work would begin. The house was to be built as
soon as possible, and Peter Morrison had arranged that the garage was to be built first. This
he meant to occupy as a residence so that he could be on hand to superintend the construction
of the new home and to protect, as far as possible, the natural beauty and the natural growth
of the location.

Early Sunday morning Linda and Katy, with a full lunch box and a full gasoline tank, slid from
the driveway and rolled down the main street of Lilac Valley toward the desert.

"We'll switch over and strike San Fernando Road," said Linda, "and I'll scout around Sunland
a bit and see if I can find anything that will furnish material for another new dish."

That day was wonderful for Katy. She trotted after Linda over sandy desert reaches, along the
seashore, up mountain trails, and through canyons connected by long stretches of motoring that
was more like flying than riding. She was tired but happy when she went to bed. Monday morning
she was an interested spectator as Linda dressed for school.

"Sure, and hasn't the old chrysalis opened up and let out the nicest little lady-bird moth,
Katy?" inquired Linda as she smoothed her gray-gold skirts. "I think myself that this dress
is a trifle too good for school. When I get my allowance next week I think I'll buy me a cloth
skirt and a couple of wash waists and save this for better; but it really was good of Eileen
to take so much pains and send it to me, when she was busy planning a trip."

Katy watched Linda go, and she noted the new light in her eyes, the new lift of her head, and
the proud sureness of her step, and she wondered if a new dress could do all that for a girl,
she scarcely believed that it could. And, too, she had very serious doubts about the dress.
She kept thinking of it during the day, and when Eileen came, in the middle of the afternoon,
at the first words on her lips: "Has my dress come?" Katy felt a wave of illness surge through
her. She looked at Eileen so helplessly that that astute reader of human nature immediately
Suspected something.

"I sent it special," she said, "because I didn't know at the time that I was going to Riverside
and I wanted to work on it. Isn't it here yet?"

Then Katy prepared to do battle for the child of her heart.

"Was the dress ye ordered sent the one Miss Linda was telling ye about?" she asked tersely.

"Yes, it was," said Eileen. "Linda has got mighty good taste. Any dress she admired was sure
to be right. She said there was a beautiful dress at 'The Mode'. I went and looked, and sure
enough there was, a perfect beauty."

"But she wanted the dress for herself," said Katy.

"It was not a suitable dress for school," said Eileen.

"Well, it strikes me," said Katy, "that it was just the spittin' image of fifty dresses I've
seen ye wear to school.

"What do you know about it?" demanded Eileen.

"I know just this," said Katy with determination. "Ye've had one new dress in the last few
days and you're not needin' another. The blessed Virgin only knows when Miss Linda's had a
dress. She thought ye'd done yourself proud and sent it for her, and she put it on, and a becoming
and a proper thing it was too! I advanced her the money myself and sent her to get some shoes
to match it since she had her car fixed and could go in a hurry. A beautiful dress it is, and
on her back this minute it is!"

Eileen was speechless with anger. Her face was a sickly white and the rouge spots on her cheeks
stood a glaring admission.

"Do you mean to tell me--" she gasped.

"Not again," said the daughter of Erin firmly, "because I have already told ye wance. Linda's
gone like a rag bag since the Lord knows when. She had a right to the dress, and she thought
it was hers, and she took it. And if ye ever want any more respect or obedience or love from
the kiddie, ye better never let her know that ye didn't intend it for her, for nothing was
ever quite so fair and right as that she should have it; and while you're about it you'd better
go straight to the store and get her what she is needin' to go with it, or better still, ye
had better give her a fair share of the money of which there used to be such a plenty, and
let her get her things herself, for she's that tasty nobody can beat her when she's got anything
to do with."

Eileen turned on Katy in a gust of fury.

"Katherine O'Donovan," she said shrilly, "pack your trunk and see how quick you can get out
of this house. I have stood your insolence for years, and I won't endure it a minute longer!"

Katy folded her red arms and lifted her red chin, and a steel-blue light flashed from her steel-gray
eyes.

"Humph!" she said, "I'll do nothing of the sort. I ain't working for ye and I never have been
no more than I ever worked for your mother. Every lick I ever done in this house I done for
Linda and Doctor Strong and for nobody else. Half of this house and everything in it belongs
to Linda, and it's a mortal short time till she's of age to claim it. Whichever is her half,
that half I'll be staying in, and if ye manage so as she's got nothing to pay me, I'll take
care of her without pay till the day comes when she can take care of me. Go to wid ye, ye triflin',
lazy, self-possessed creature. Ten years I have itched to tell ye what I thought of ye, and
now ye know it."

As Katy's rage increased, Eileen became intimidated. Like every extremely selfish person she
was a coward in her soul.

"If you refuse to go on my orders," she said, "I'll have John Gilman issue his."

Then Katy set her left hand on her left hip, her lower jaw shot past the upper, her doubled
right fist shook precious near the tip of Eileen's exquisite little nose.

"I'm darin' ye," she shouted. "I'm just darin' ye to send John Gilman in the sound of my voice.
If ye do, I'll tell him every mean and selfish thing ye've done to me poor lambie since the
day of the Black Shadow. Send him to me? Holy Mither, I wish ye would! If ever I get my chance
at him, don't ye think I won't be tellin' him what he has lost, and what he has got? And as
for taking orders from him, I am taking my orders from the person I am working for, and as
I told ye before, that's Miss Linda. Be off wid ye, and primp up while I get my supper, and
mind ye this, if ye tell Miss Linda ye didn't mean that gown for her and spoil the happy day
she has had, I won't wait for ye to send John Gilman to me; I'll march straight to him. Put
that in your cigarette and smoke it! Think I've lost me nose as well as me sense?"

Then Katy started a triumphal march to the kitchen and cooled down by the well-known process
of slamming pots and pans for half an hour. Soon her Irish sense of humor came to her rescue.

"Now, don't I hear myself telling Miss Linda a few days ago to kape her temper, and to kape
cool, and to go aisy. Look at the aise of me when I got started. By gracious, wasn't I just
itching to wallop her?"

Then every art that Katy possessed was bent to the consummation of preparing a particularly
delicious dinner for the night.

Linda came in softly humming something to herself about the kind of shoes that you might wear
if you chose. She had entered the high school that morning with an unusually brilliant color.
Two or three girls, who never had noticed her before, had nodded to her that morning, and one
or two had said: "What a pretty dress you have!" She had caught the flash of approval in the
eyes of Donald Whiting, and she had noted the flourish with which he raised his hat when he
saw her at a distance, and she knew what he meant when he held up a book, past the covers of
which she could see protruding a thick fold of white paper. He had foresworn whatever pleasure
he might have thought of for Sunday. He had prepared notes on some subject that he thought
would further him. The lift of his head, the flourish of his hat, and the book all told Linda
that he had struggled and that he felt the struggle had brought an exhilarating degree of success.
That had made the day particularly bright for Linda. She had gone home with a feeling of uplift
and exultation in her heart. As she closed the front door she cried up the stairway: "Eileen,
are you there?"

"Yes," answered a rather sulky voice from above.

Linda ascended, two steps at a bound.

"Thank you over and over, old thing!" she cried as she raced down the hallway. "Behold me!
I never did have a more becoming dress, and Katy loaned me money, till my income begins, to
get shoes and a little scuff hat to go with it. Aren't I spiffy?"

She pirouetted in the doorway. Eileen gripped the brush she was wielding, tight.

"You have good taste," she said. "It's a pretty dress, but You're always howling about things
being suitable. Do you call that suitable for school?"

"It certainly is an innovation for me," said Linda, "but there are dozens of dresses of the
same material, only different cut and colors in the high school today. As soon as I get my
money I'll buy a skirt and some blouses so I won't have to wear this all the time; but I surely
do thank you very much, and I surely have had a lovely day. Did you have a nice time at Riverside?"

Eileen slammed down the brush and turned almost a distorted face to Linda. She had temper to
vent. In the hour's reflection previous to Linda's coming, she realized that she had reached
the limit with Katy. If she antagonized her by word or look, she would go to John Gilman, and
Eileen dared not risk what she would say.

"No, I did not have a lovely time," she said. "I furnished the men for the party and I expected
to have a grand time, but the first thing we did was to run into that inflated egotist calling
herself Mary Louise Whiting, and like a fool, Janie Brunson introduced her to Peter Morrison.
I had paired him with Janie on purpose to keep my eye on him."

Linda tried hard but she could not suppress a chuckle: "Of course you would!" she murmured softly.

Eileen turned her back. That had been her first confidence to Linda. She was so aggrieved at
that moment that she could have told unanswering walls her tribulations. It would have been
better if she had done so. She might have been able to construe silence as sympathy. Linda's
laughter she knew exactly how to interpret. "Served you right," was what it meant.

"I hadn't the least notion you would take an interest in anything concerning me," she said.
"People can talk all they please about Mary Louise Whiting being a perfect lady but she is
a perfect beast. I have met her repeatedly and she has always ignored me, and yesterday she
singled out for her special attention the most desirable man in my party--"

"'Most desirable,'" breathed Linda. "Poor John! I see his second fiasco. Lavender crystals,
please!"

Eileen caught her lip in mortification. She had not intended to say what she thought.

"Well, you can't claim," she hurried on to cover her confusion, "that it was not an ill-bred,
common trick for her to take possession of a man of my party, and utterly ignore me. She has
everything on earth that I want; she treats me like a dog, and she could give me a glorious
time by merely nodding her head."

"I am quite sure you are mistaken," said Linda. "From what I've heard of her, she wouldn't
mistreat anyone. Very probably what she does is merely to feel that she is not acquainted with
you. You have an unfortunate way, Eileen, of defeating your own ends. If you wanted to attract
Mary Louise Whiting, you missed the best chance you ever could have had, at three o'clock Saturday
afternoon, when you maliciously treated her only brother as you would a mechanic, ordered him
to our garage, and shut our door in his face."

Eileen turned to Linda. Her mouth fell open. A ghastly greenish white flooded her face.

"What do you mean?" she gasped.

"I mean," said Linda, "that Donald Whiting was calling on me, and you purposely sent him to
the garage."

Crash down among the vanities of Eileen's dressing table went her lovely head, and she broke
into deep and violent sobs. Linda stood looking at her a second, slowly shaking her head. Then
she turned and went to her room.

Later in the evening she remembered the Roman scarf and told Eileen of what she had done, and
she was unprepared for Eileen's reply: "That scarf always was too brilliant for me. You're
welcome to it if you want it."

"Thank you," said Linda gravely, "I want it very much indeed."

CHAPTER XI. Assisting Providence

Linda went to the library to see to what state of emptiness it had been reduced by the removal
of several pieces of furniture she had ordered taken away that day. As she stood on the threshold
looking over the room as usual, a throb of loving appreciation of Katy swept through her heart.
Katy had been there before her. The room had been freshly swept and dusted, the rugs had been
relaid, the furniture rearranged skilfully, and the table stood at the best angle to be lighted
either by day or night. On the table and the mantel stood big bowls of lovely fresh flowers.
Linda was quite certain that anyone entering the room for the first time would have felt it
completely furnished, and she doubted if even Marian would notice the missing pieces. Cheered
in her heart, she ran up to the billiard room, and there again Katy had preceded her. The windows
were shining. The walls and floor had been cleaned. Everything was in readiness for the new
furniture. Her heart full of gratitude, Linda went to her room, prepared her lessons for the
next day, and then drew out her writing materials to answer Marian's letter. She wrote:

I have an acute attack of enlargement of the heart. So many things have happened since your
leaving. But first I must tell you about your sketch. We just know you did not leave it here.
Katy says there was not a scrap in our bedroom when she cleaned it; and as she knows you make
plans and how precious they are to you, I guarantee she would have saved it if she had found
anything looking like a parallelogram on a piece of paper. And I have very nearly combed the
lawn, not only the north side, but the west, south, and east; and then I broke the laws and
went over to your house and crawled through a basement window and worked my way up, and I have
hunted every room in it, but there is nothing there. You must have lost that sketch after you
reached San Francisco. I hope to all that's peaceful you did not lay it down in the offices
of Nicholson and Snow, or where you take your lessons. I know nothing about architecture, but
I do know something about comfort in a home, and I thought that was the most comfortable and
convenient-looking house I ever had seen.

Now I'll go on and tell you all the news, and I don't know which is the bigger piece to burst
on you first. Would you be more interested in knowing that Peter Morrison has bought three
acres on the other side of the valley from us and up quite a way, or in the astonishing fact
that I have a new dress, a perfect love of a dress, really too good for school? You know there
was blood in my eye when you left, and I didn't wait long to start action. I have managed to
put the fear of God into Eileen's heart so that she has agreed to a reasonable allowance for
me from the first of next month; but she must have felt at least one small wave of contrition
when I told her about a peculiarly enticing dress I had seen at The Mode. She sent it up right
away, and Katy, blessed be her loving footprints, loaned me money to buy a blouse and some
shoes to match, so I went to school today looking very like the Great General Average, minus
rouge, lipstick, hairdress, and French heels.

I do hope you will approve of two things I have done.

Then Linda recounted the emptying of the billiard room, the inroads in the library, the listing
of the technical books, and what she proposed to do with the money. And then, her face slightly
pale and her fingers slightly trembling, she wrote:

And, Marian dear, I hope you won't be angry with me when I tell you that I have put the Bear
Cat into commission and driven it three times already. It is running like the feline it is,
and I am being as careful as I can. I know exactly how you will feel. It is the same feeling
that has held me all these months, when I wouldn't even let myself think of it. But something
happened at school one day, Marian. You know the Whitings? Mary Louise Whiting's brother is
in the senior class. He is a six-footer, and while he is not handsome he is going to be a real
man when he is fully developed, and steadied down to work. One day last week he made it his
business to stop me in the hall and twit me about my shoes, and incidentally to ask me why
I didn't dress like the other girls; and some way it came rougher than if it had been one of
the girls. The more I thought about it the more wronged I felt, so I ended in a young revolution
that is to bring me an income, a suitable place to work in and has brought me such a pretty
dress. I think it has brought Eileen to a sense of at least partial justice about money, and
it brought me back the Bear Cat. You know the proudest moment of my life was when Father would
let me drive the little beast, and it all came back as natural as breathing. Please don't worry,
Marian. Nothing shall happen, I promise you.

It won't be necessary to tell you that Katy is her darling old self, loyal and steadfast as
the sun, and quite as necessary and as comforting to me. And I have a couple of other interests
in life that are going to--I won't say make up for your absence, because nothing could do that--but
they are going to give me something interesting to think about, something agreeable to work
at, while you are gone. But, oh, Marian, do hurry. Work all day and part of the night. Be Saturday's
child yourself if you must, just so you get home quick, and where your white head makes a beacon
light for the truest, lovingest pal you will ever have,

                                                 LINDA.

Linda laid down the pen, slid down in her chair, and looked from the window across the valley,
and she wondered if in her view lay the location that had been purchased by Peter Morrison.
She glanced back at her letter and sat looking at the closing lines and the signature.

"Much good that will do her," she commented. "When a woman loves a man and loves him with all
her heart, as Marian loved John, and when she loses him, not because she has done a single
unworthy thing herself, but because he is so rubber spined that he will let another woman successfully
intrigue him, a lot of comfort she is going to get from the love of a schoolgirl!"

Linda's eyes strayed to the window again, and traveled down to the city and up the coast, all
the way to San Francisco, and out of the thousands of homes there they pictured a small, neat
room, full of Marian's belongings, and Marian herself bending over a worktable, absorbed in
the final draft of her precious plans. Linda could see Marian as plainly as she ever had seen
her, but she let her imagination run, and she fancied that when Marian was among strangers
and where no one knew of John Gilman's defection, that hers might be a very heavy heart, that
hers might be a very sad face. Then she went to planning. She had been desolate, heart hungry,
and isolated herself. First she had endured, then she had fought; the dawn of a new life was
breaking over her hill. She had found work she was eager to do. She could put the best of her
brain, the skill of her fingers, the creative impulse of her heart, into it.

She was almost sure that she had found a friend. She had a feeling that when the coming Saturday
had been lived Donald Whiting would be her friend. He would want her advice and her help in
his work. She would want his companionship and the stimulus of his mind, in hers. What Linda
had craved was a dear friend among the girls, but no girl had offered her friendship. This
boy had, so she would accept what the gods of time and circumstance provided. It was a very
wonderful thing that had happened to her. Now why could not something equally wonderful happen
to Marian? Linda wrinkled her brows and thought deeply.

"It's the worst thing in all this world to work and work with nobody to know about it and nobody
to care," thought Linda. "Marian could break a record if she thought John Gilman cared now
as he used to. It's almost a necessary element to her success. If he doesn't care, she ought
to be made to feel that somebody cares. This thing of standing alone, since I have found a
friend, appeals to me as almost insupportable. Let me think."

It was not long until she had worked out a scheme for putting an interest in Marian's life
and giving her something for which to work, until a more vital reality supplanted it. The result
was that she took some paper, went down to the library, and opening the typewriter, wrote a
letter. She read it over, making many changes and corrections, and then she copied it carefully.
When she came to addressing it she was uncertain, but at last she hit upon a scheme of sending
it in the care of Nicholson and Snow because Marian had told her that she meant to enter their
contest immediately she reached San Francisco, and she would have left them her address. On
the last reading of the letter she had written, she decided that it was a manly, straightforward
production, which should interest and attract any girl. But how was she to sign it? After thinking
deeply for a long time, she wrote "Philip Sanders, General Delivery," and below she added a
postscript:

To save you the trouble of inquiring among your friends as to who Philip Sanders is, I might
as well tell you in the beginning that he isn't. He is merely an assumption under which I shall
hide my personality until you let me know whether it is possible that you could become even
slightly interested in me, as a small return for the very deep and wholesome interest abiding
in my heart for you.

"Abiding," said Linda aloud. "It seems to me that there is nothing in all the world quite so
fine as a word. Isn't 'abiding' a good word? Doesn't it mean a lot? Where could you find one
other word that means being with you and also means comforting you and loving you and sympathizing
with you and surrounding you with firm walls and a cushioned floor and a starry roof? I love
that word. I hope it impresses Marian with all its wonderful meaning."

She went back to her room, put both letters into her Geometry, and in the morning mailed them.
She stood a long time hesitating with the typewritten letter in her hand, but finally dropped
it in the letter box also.

"It will just be something," she said, "to make her think that some man appreciates her lovely
face and doesn't care if her hair is white, and sees how steadfast and fine she is."

And then she slowly repeated, "'steadfast,' that is another fine word. It has pearls and rubies
all over it."

After school that evening she visited James Brothers' and was paid the full amount of the appraisement
of her furniture. Then she went to an art store and laid in a full supply of the materials
she needed for the work she was trying to do. Her fingers were trembling as she handled the
boxes of water colors and selected the brushes and pencils for her work, and sheets of drawing
paper upon which she could do herself justice. When the transaction was finished, she had a
few dollars remaining. As she put them in her pocket she said softly:

"That's gasoline. Poor Katy! I'm glad she doesn't need her money, because she is going to have
to wait for the allowance or the sale of the books or on Jane Meredith. But it's only a few
days now, so that'll be all right."

CHAPTER XII. The Lay of the Land

Linda entered the street car for her daily ride to Lilac Valley. She noticed Peter Morrison
and Henry Anderson sitting beside each other, deeply engrossed in a drawing. She had been accustomed
to ride in the open section of the car as she liked the fresh air. She had a fleeting thought
of entering the body of the car and sitting where they would see her; and then a perverse spirit
in Linda's heart said to her:

"That is precisely what Eileen would do. You sit where you belong."

Whereupon Linda dropped into the first vacant seat she could reach, but it was only a few moments
before Peter Morrison, looking up from the plans he was studying, saw her, and lifting his
hat, beckoned her to come and sit with him. They made room for her between them and spreading
the paper across her lap, all three of them began to discuss the plans for the foundation for
Peter's house. Anderson had roughly outlined the grounds, sketching in the trees that were
to be saved, the spring, and the most available route for reaching the road. The discussion
was as to where the road should logically enter the grounds, and where the garage should stand.

"Which reminds me," said Linda--"haven't you your car with you? Or was that a hired one you
were touring in?"

"Mine," said Peter Morrison, "but we toured so far, it's in the shop for a general overhauling
today."

"That being the case," said Linda, "walk home with me and I'll take you to your place in mine
and bring you back to the cars, if you only want to stay an hour or two."

"Why, that would be fine," said Peter. "You didn't mention, the other evening, that you had a car."

"No," said Linda, "I had been trying to keep cars out of my thought for a long time, but I
could endure it no longer the other day, so I got mine out and tuned it up. If you don't mind
stacking up a bit, three can ride in it very comfortably."

That was the way it happened that Linda walked home after school that afternoon between Peter
Morrison and his architect, brought out the Bear Cat, and drove them to Peter's location.

All that day, workmen had been busy under the management of a well-instructed foreman, removing
trees and bushes and stones and clearing the spot that had been selected for the garage and
approximately for the house.

The soft brownish gray of Linda's dress was exactly the color to intensify the darker brown
of her eyes. There was a fluctuating red in her olive cheeks, a brilliant red framing her even
white teeth. Once dressed so that she was satisfied with the results, Linda immediately forgot
her clothes, and plunged into Morrison's plans.

"Peter," she said gravely, with Peter perfectly cognizant of the twinkle in her dark eyes,
"Peter, you may save money in a straight-line road, but you're going to sin against your soul
if you build it. You'll have to economize in some other way, and run your road around the base
of those boulders, then come in straight to the line here, and then you should swing again
and run out on this point, where guests can have one bewildering glimpse of the length of our
blue valley, and then whip them around this clump of perfumy lilac and elders, run them to
your side entrance, and then scoot the car back to the garage. I think you should place the
front of your house about here." Linda indicated where. "So long as you're buying a place like
this you don't want to miss one single thing; and you do want to make the very most possible
out of every beauty you have. And you mustn't fail to open up and widen the runway from that
energetic, enthusiastic spring. Carry it across your road, sure. It will cost you another little
something for a safe bridge, but there's nothing so artistic as a bridge with a cold stream
running under it. And think what a joyful time I'll have, gathering specimens for you of every
pretty water plant that grows in my particular canyon. Any time when you're busy in your library
and you hear my car puffing up the incline and around the corner and rattling across the bridge,
you'll know that I am down here giving you a start of watercress and miners' lettuce and every
lovely thing you could mention that likes to be nibbled or loved-up, while it dabbles its toes
in the water."

Peter Morrison looked at Linda reflectively. He looked for such a long moment that Henry Anderson
reached a nebulous conclusion. "Fine!" he cried. "Every one of those suggestions is valuable
to an inexperienced man. Morrison, shan't I make a note of them?"

"Yes, Henry, you shall," said Peter. "I am going to push this thing as fast as possible, so
far as building the garage is concerned and getting settled in it. After that I don't care
if I live on this spot until we know each other by the inch, before I begin building my home.
At the present minute it appeals to me that 'home' is about the best word in the language of
any nation. I have a feeling that what I build here is going to be my home, very possibly the
only one I shall ever have. We must find the spot on which the Lord intended that a house should
grow on this hillside, and then we must build that house so that it has a room suitable for
a workshop in which I may strive, under the best conditions possible, to get my share of the
joy of life and to earn the money that I shall require to support me and entertain my friends;
and that sounds about as selfish as anything possibly could. It seems to be mostly 'me' and
'mine,' and it's not the real truth concerning this house. I don't believe there is a healthy,
normal man living who has not his dream. I have no hesitation whatever in admitting that I
have mine. This house must be two things. It has got to be a concrete workshop for me, and
it has got to be an abstract abiding place for a dream. It's rather difficult to build a dream
house for a dream lady, so I don't know what kind of a fist I am going to make of it."

Linda sat down on a boulder and contemplated her shoes for a minute. Then she raised her ever-shifting,
eager, young eyes to Peter, and it seemed to him as he looked into them that there were little
gold lights flickering at the bottom of their darkness.

"Why, that's just as easy," she said. "A home is merely a home. It includes a front porch and
a back porch and a fireplace and a bathtub and an ice chest and a view and a garden around
it; all the rest is incidental. If you have more money, you have more incidentals. If you don't
have so much, you use your imagination and think you have just as much on less."

"Now, I wonder," said Peter, "when I find my dream lady, if she will have an elastic imagination."

"Haven't you found her yet?" asked Linda casually.

"No," said Peter, "I haven't found her, and unfortunately she hasn't found me. I have had a
strenuous time getting my start in life. It's mostly a rush from one point of interest to another,
dropping at any wayside station for refreshment and the use of a writing table. Occasionally
I have seen a vision that I have wanted to follow, but I never have had time. So far, the lady
of this house is even more of a dream than the house."

"Oh, well, don't worry," said Linda comfortingly. "The world is full of the nicest girls. When
you get ready for a gracious lady I'll find you one that will have an India-rubber imagination
and a great big loving heart and Indian-hemp apron strings so that half a dozen babies can
swing from them."

Morrison turned to Henry Anderson.

"You hear, Henry?" he said. "I'm destined to have a large family. You must curtail your plans
for the workroom and make that big room back of it into a nursery."

"Well, what I am going to do," said Henry Anderson, "is to build a place suitable for your
needs. If any dream woman comes to it, she will have to fit herself to her environment."

Linda frowned.

"Now, that isn't a bit nice of you," she said, "and I don't believe Peter will pay the slightest
attention to you. He'll let me make you build a lovely room for the love of his heart, and
a great big bright nursery on the sunny side for his small people."

"I never believed," said Henry Anderson, "in counting your chickens before they are hatched.
There are a couple of acres around Peter's house, and he can build an addition as his needs
increase."

"Messy idea," said Linda promptly. "Thing to do, when you build a house, is to build it the
way you want it for the remainder of your life, so you don't have to tear up the scenery every
few years, dragging in lumber for expansion. And I'll tell you another thing. If the homemakers
of this country don't get the idea into their heads pretty soon that they are not going to
be able to hold their own with the rest of the world, with no children, or one child in the
family, there's a sad day of reckoning coming. With the records at the patent office open to
the world, you can't claim that the brain of the white man is not constructive. You can look
at our records and compare them with those of countries ages and ages older than we are, which
never discovered the beauties of a Dover egg-beater or a washing machine or a churn or a railroad
or a steamboat or a bridge. We are head and shoulders above other nations in invention, and
just as fast as possible, we are falling behind in the birth rate. The red man and the yellow
man and the brown man and the black man can look at our egg-beaters and washing machines and
bridges and big guns, and go home and copy them; and use them while rearing even bigger families
than they have now. If every home in Lilac Valley had at least six sturdy boys and girls growing
up in it with the proper love of country and the proper realization of the white man's right
to supremacy, and if all the world now occupied by white men could make an equal record, where
would be the talk of the yellow peril? There wouldn't be any yellow peril. You see what I mean?"

Linda lifted her frank eyes to Peter Morrison.

"Yes, young woman," said Peter gravely, "I see what you mean, but this is the first time I
ever heard a high-school kid propound such ideas. Where did you get them?"

"Got them in Multiflores Canyon from my father to start with," said Linda, "but recently I
have been thinking, because there is a boy in high school who is making a great fight for a
better scholarship record than a Jap in his class. I brood over it every spare minute, day
or night, and when I say my prayers I implore high Heaven to send him an idea or to send me
one that I can pass on to him, that will help him to beat that Jap."

"I see," said Peter Morrison. "We'll have to take time to talk this over. It's barely possible
I might be able to suggest something."

"You let that kid fight his own battles," said Henry Anderson roughly. "He's no proper bug-catcher.
I feel it in my bones."

For the first time, Linda's joy laugh rang over Peter Morrison's possession.

"I don't know about that," she said gaily. "He's a wide-awake specimen; he has led his class
for four years when the Jap didn't get ahead of him. But, all foolishness aside, take my word
for it, Peter, you'll be sorry if you don't build this house big enough for your dream lady
and for all the little dreams that may spring from her heart."

"Nightmares, you mean," said Henry Anderson. "I can't imagine a bunch of kids muddying up this
spring and breaking the bushes and using slingshots on the birds."

"Yes," said Linda with scathing sarcasm, "and wouldn't our government be tickled to death to
have a clear spring and a perfect bush and a singing bird, if it needed six men to go over
the top to handle a regiment of Japanese!"

Then Peter Morrison laughed.

"Well, your estimate is too low, Linda," he said in his nicest drawling tone of voice. "Believe
me, one U. S. kid will never march in a whole regiment of Japanese. They won't lay down their
guns and walk to surrender as bunches of Germans did. Nobody need ever think that. They are
as good fighters as they are imitators. There's nothing for you to do, Henry, but to take to
heart what Miss Linda has said. Plan the house with a suite for a dream lady, and a dining
room, a sleeping porch and a nursery big enough for the six children allotted to me."

"You're not really in earnest?" asked Henry Anderson in doubting astonishment.

"I am in the deepest kind of earnest," said Peter Morrison. "What Miss Linda says is true.
As a nation, our people are pampering themselves and living for their own pleasures. They won't
take the trouble or endure the pain required to bear and to rear children; and the day is rolling
toward us, with every turn of the planet one day closer, when we are going to be outnumbered
by a combination of peoples who can take our own tricks and beat us with them. We must pass
along the good word that the one thing America needs above every other thing on earth is HOMES
AND HEARTS BIG ENOUGH FOR CHILDREN, as were the homes of our grandfathers, when no joy in life
equaled the joy of a new child in the family, and if you didn't have a dozen you weren't doing
your manifest duty."

"Well, if that is the way you see the light, we must enlarge this house. As designed, it included
every feminine convenience anyway. But when I build my house I am going to build it for myself."

"Then don't talk any more about being my bug-catcher," said Linda promptly, "because when I
build my house it's going to be a nest that will hold six at the very least. My heart is perfectly
set on a brood of six."

Linda was quite unaware that the two men were studying her closely, but if she had known what
was going on in their minds she would have had nothing to regret, because both of them found
her very attractive, and both of them were wondering how anything so superficial as Eileen
could be of the same blood as Linda.

"Are we keeping you too late?" inquired Peter.

"No," said Linda, "I am as interested as I can be. Finish everything you want to do before
we go. I hope you're going to let me come over often and watch you with your building. Maybe
I can get an idea for some things I want to do. Eileen and I have our house divided by a Mason
and Dixon line. On her side is Mother's suite, the dining room, the living room and the front
door. On mine there's the garage and the kitchen and Katy's bedroom and mine and the library
and the billiard room. At the present minute I am interested in adapting the library to my
requirements instead of Father's, and I am emptying the billiard room and furnishing it to
make a workroom. I have a small talent with a brush and pencil, and I need some bare walls
to tack my prints on to dry, and I need numerous places for all the things I am always dragging
in from the desert and the canyons; and since I have the Bear Cat running, what I have been
doing in that line with a knapsack won't be worthy of mention."

"How did it come," inquired Henry Anderson, "that you had that car jacked up so long?"

"Why, hasn't anybody told you," asked Linda, "about our day of the Black Shadow?"

"John Gilman wrote me when it happened," said Peter softly, "but I don't believe it has been
mentioned before Henry. You tell him."

Linda turned to Henry Anderson, and with trembling lips and paling cheeks, in a few brief sentences
she gave him the details. Then she said to Peter Morrison in a low voice: "And that is the
why of Marian Thorne's white head. Anybody tell you that?"

"That white head puzzled me beyond anything I ever saw," he said. "I meant to ask John about
it. He used to talk to me and write to me often about her, and lately he hasn't; when I came
I saw the reason, and so you see I felt reticent on the subject."

"Well, there's nothing the matter with my tongue," said Linda. "It's loose at both ends. Marian
was an expert driver. She drove with the same calm judgment and precision and graceful skill
that she does everything else, but the curve was steep and something in the brakes was defective.
It broke with a snap and there was not a thing she could do. Enough was left of the remains
of the car to prove that. Ten days afterward her head was almost as white as snow. Before that
it was as dark as mine. But her body is just as young and her heart is just as young and her
face is even more beautiful. I do think that a white crown makes her lovelier than she was
before. I have known Marian ever since I can remember, and I don't know one thing about her
that I could not look you straight in the eye and tell you all about. There is not a subterfuge
or an evasion or a small mean deceit in her soul. She is the brainiest woman and the biggest
woman I know."

"I haven't a doubt of it," said Peter Morrison. "And while you are talking about nice women,
we met a mighty fine one at Riverside on Sunday. Her name is Mary Louise Whiting. Do you know her?"

"Not personally," said Linda. "I don't recall that I ever saw her. I know her brother, Donald.
He is the high-school boy who is having the wrestle with the Jap."

"I liked her too," said Henry Anderson. "And by the way, Miss Linda, haven't bug-catchers any
reputation at all as nest builders? Is it true that among feathered creatures the hen builds
the home?"

"No, it's not," said Linda promptly. "Male birds make a splendid record carrying nest material.
What is true is that in the majority of cases the female does the building."

"Well, what I am getting at," said Henry Anderson, "is this. Is there anything I can do to
help you with that billiard room that you're going to convert to a workroom? What do you lack
in it that you would like to have? Do you need more light or air, or a fireplace, or what?
When you take us to the station, suppose you drive us past your house and give me a look at
that room and let me think over it a day or two. I might be able to make some suggestion that
would help you."

"Now that is positively sweet of you," said Linda. "I never thought of such a thing as either
comfort or convenience. I thought I had to take that room as it stands and do the best I could
with it, but since you mention it, it's barely possible that more air might be agreeable and
also more light, and if there could be a small fireplace built in front of the chimney where
it goes up from the library fireplace, it certainly would be a comfort, and it would add something
to the room that nothing else could.

"No workroom really has a soul if you can't smell smoke and see red when you go to it at night."

"You little outdoor heathen," laughed Peter Morrison. "One would think you were an Indian."

"I am a fairly good Indian," said Linda. "I have been scouting around with my father a good
many years. How about it, Peter? Does the road go crooked?"

"Yes," said Peter, "the road goes crooked."

"Does the bed of the spring curve and sweep across the lawn and drop off to the original stream
below the tree-tobacco clump there?"

"If you say so, it does," said Peter.

"Including the bridge?" inquired Linda.

"Including the bridge," said Peter. "I'll have to burn some midnight oil, but I can visualize
the bridge."

"And is this house where you 'set up your rest,' as you so beautifully said the other night
at dinner, going to lay its corner stone and grow to its roof a selfish house, or is it going
to be generous enough for a gracious lady and a flight of little footsteps?"

Peter Morrison took off his hat. He turned his face toward the length of Lilac Valley and stood,
very tall and straight, looking far away before him. Presently he looked down at Linda.

"Even so," he said softly. "My shoulders are broad enough; I have a brain; and I am not afraid
to work. If my heart is not quite big enough yet, I see very clearly how it can be made to expand."

"I have been told," said Linda in a low voice, "that Mary Louise Whiting is a perfect darling."

Peter looked at her from the top of her black head to the tips of her brown shoes. He could
have counted the freckles bridging her nose. The sunburn on her cheeks was very visible; there
was something arresting in the depth of her eyes, the curve of her lips, the lithe slenderness
of her young body; she gave the effect of something smoldering inside that would leap at a breath.

"I was not thinking of Miss Whiting," he said soberly.

Henry Anderson was watching. Now he turned his back and commenced talking about plans, but
in his heart he said: "So that's the lay of the land. You've got to hustle yourself, Henry,
or you won't have the ghost of a show."

Later, when they motored down the valley and stopped at the Strong residence, Peter refused
to be monopolized by Eileen. He climbed the two flights of stairs with Henry Anderson and Linda
and exhausted his fund of suggestions as to what could be done to that empty billiard room
to make an attractive study of it. Linda listened quietly to all their suggestions, and then
she said:

"It would be fine to have another window, and a small skylight would be a dream, and as for
the fireplace you mention, I can't even conceive how great it would be to have that; but my
purse is much more limited than Peter's, and while I have my school work to do every day, my
earning capacity is nearly negligible. I can only pick up a bit here and there with my brush
and pencil--place cards and Easter cards and valentines, and once or twice magazine covers,
and little things like that. I don't see my way clear to lumber and glass and bricks and chimney
pieces."

Peter looked at Henry, and Henry looked at Peter, and a male high sign, ancient as day, passed
between them.

"Easiest thing in the world," said Peter. "It's as sure as shooting that when my three or four
fireplaces, which Henry's present plans call for, are built, there is going to be all the material
left that can be used in a light tiny fireplace such as could be built on a third floor, and
when the figuring for the house is done it could very easily include the cutting of a skylight
and an extra window or two here, and getting the material in with my stuff, it would cost you
almost nothing."

Linda's eyes opened wide and dewy with surprise and pleasure.

"Why, you two perfectly nice men!" she said. "I haven't felt as I do this minute since I lost
Daddy. It's wonderful to be taken care of. It's better than cream puffs with almond flavoring."

Henry Anderson looked at Linda keenly.

"You're the darndest kid!" he said. "One minute you're smacking your lips over cream puffs,
and the next you're going to the bottom of the yellow peril. I never before saw your combination
in one girl. What's the explanation?" For the second time that evening Linda's specialty in
rapture floated free.

"Bunch all the component parts into the one paramount fact that I am Saturday's child," she
said, "so I am constantly on the job of working for a living, and then add to that the fact
that I was reared by a nerve specialist." 

Philo in effect expounds Judaism in their spirit, though he speaks their message in the voice
of Plato and to a people whose minds were trained in Greek culture.

Yet it is significant that he wrote all his commentaries round the
Five Books of Moses, and used the prophets and other Biblical books
only to illustrate and support the Mosaic teaching, which contains
the whole way of life and the whole religious philosophy.

According to the rabbis also the Prophets formed only a complement
to the Torah, "a species of Agadah";[129] and the prophetic vision
of Moses was much clearer than that of his successors.

Philo, too, clearly realized that Judaism was the religion of the law. His view of the Torah
is what the modern world would call uncritical: that is to say, he accepts the idea that the
whole of the Five Books was an objective revelation to Moses at Sinai.

But though--or because--he is innocent of the higher criticism, and believes in the literal inspiration
of the Torah, his conception is none the less enlightened and spiritual. The law--the Divine Logos--is
not the enactment of an outside power, arbitrarily imposed, and to
be obeyed because of its miraculous origin; it is the expression of
the human soul within, when raised to its highest power by the Divine
inspiration.

Every man may fit himself to receive the Divine word, which is, in
modern language, revelation.[130] Moses, then, is distinguished above
all other legislators, not because he alone received it, but because
he received it in its purest form, and because he was the most noble
interpreter of it.

It is for this reason that the law of Moses is of universal validity
for conduct.

The Divine spirit possessed him so fully that his Logos, or revelation, is eternally true, and
by following it all men become fit to be blessed with the Divine
gift themselves.

This is true of the other prophets of the Bible to a smaller degree, and in a still minor degree
Philo hoped that it was true of himself.

It should be premised that the "law of nature" was at the time of Philo an idea as widely accepted
as "evolution" is to-day. Men believed that by a study of the processes of the universe the
individual might discover the law of conduct that should bring his action into harmony with
the whole. What the Greek philosophers declared to be the privilege of the few, Philo declared to
have been imparted by God to His people as their law of life. Hence the Mosaic legislation is the code
of nature and reason, and the righteous man directs his conduct in accordance with those rules
of nature by which the cosmos is ordered.[131] Obedience to the law should not be obedience
to an outward prescription, but rather the following out of our own highest nature.
 The thing that rankled was that the car belonged to Linda.
The touring car which she might have owned and driven, had she so desired, lay in an extremely
slender string of pearls around her neck at that instant. She reflected that if she had kept
her car and made herself sufficiently hardy to drive it, she might have been the one to have
taken Peter Morrison to his home location and to have had many opportunities for being with him.

"I've been a fool," said Eileen, tugging at the pearls viciously. "They are nothing but a little
bit of a string that looks as if I were trying to do something and couldn't, at best. What
I've got to do is to think more of myself. I've got to plan some way to prevent Linda from
being too popular until I really get my mind made up as to what I want to do."

CHAPTER XIII. Leavening the Bread of Life

"'A house that is divided against itself cannot stand,'" quoted Linda. "I must keep in mind
what Eileen said, not that there is the slightest danger, but to fall behind in my grades is
a thing that simply must not happen. If it be true that Peter and Henry can so easily and so
cheaply add a few improvements in my workroom in connection with Peter's building, I can see
no reason why they shouldn't do it, so long as I pay for it. I haven't a doubt but that there
will be something I can do for Peter, before he finishes his building, that he would greatly
appreciate, while, since I'm handy with my pencil, I MIGHT be able to make a few head and tail
pieces for some of his articles that would make them more attractive. I don't want to use any
friend of mine: I don't want to feel that I am not giving quite as much as I get, but I think
I see my way clear, between me and the Bear Cat, to pay for all the favors I would receive
in altering my study.

"First thing I do I must go through Father's books and get the money for them, so I'll know
my limitation when I come to select furniture. And I don't know that I am going to be so terribly
modest when it comes to naming the sum with which I'll be satisfied for my allowance. Possibly
I shall exercise my age-old prerogative and change my mind; I may just say 'half' right out
loud and stick to it. And there's another thing. Since the editor of Everybody's Home has started
my department and promised that if it goes well he will give it to me permanently, I can certainly
depend on something from that. He has used my Introduction and two instalments now. I should
think it might be fair to talk payments pretty soon. He should give me fifty dollars for a
recipe with its perfectly good natural history and embellished with my own vegetable and floral
decorations.

"In the meantime I think I might buy my worktable and possibly an easel, so I can have real
room to spread out my new material and see how it would feel to do one drawing completely unhampered.
I'll order the table tonight, and then I'll begin on the books, because I must have Saturday
free; and I must be thinking about the most attractive and interesting place I can take Donald
to. I just have to keep him interested until he gets going of his own accord, because he shall
beat Oka Sayye. I wouldn't let Donald say it but I don't mind saying myself to myself with
no one present except myself that in all my life I have never seen anything so masklike as
the stolid little square head on that Jap. I have never seen anything I dislike more than the
oily, stiff, black hair standing up on it like menacing bristles. I have never had but one
straight look deep into his eyes, but in that look I saw the only thing that ever frightened
me in looking into a man's eyes in my whole life. And there is one thing that I have to remember
to caution Donald about. He must carry on this contest in a perfectly open, fair, and aboveboard
way, and he simply must not antagonize Oka Sayye. There are so many of the Japs. They all look
so much alike, and there's a blood brotherhood between them that will make them protect each
other to the death against any white man. It wouldn't be safe for Donald to make Oka Sayye
hate him. He had far better try to make him his friend and put a spirit of honest rivalry into
his heart; but come to think of it, there wasn't anything like that in my one look into Oka
Sayye's eyes. I don't know what it was, but whatever it was it was something repulsive."

With this thought in her mind Linda walked slowly as she approached the high school the next
time. Far down the street, over the walks and across the grounds, her eyes were searching eagerly
for the tall slender figure of Donald Whiting. She did not see him in the morning, but at noon
she encountered him in the hall.

"Looking for you," he cried gaily when he saw her. "I've got my pry in on Trig. The professor's
interested. Dad fished out an old Trig that he used when he was a boy and I have some new angles
that will keep my esteemed rival stirring up his gray matter for some little time."

"Good for you! Joyous congratulations! You've got the idea!" cried Linda. "Go to it! Start
something all along the line, but make it something founded on brains and reason and common
sense. But, Donald, I was watching for you. I wanted to say a word."

Donald Whiting bent toward her. The faintest suspicion of a tinge of color crept into his cheeks.

"That's fine," he said. "What was it you wanted?"

"Only this," she said in almost a breathless whisper. "There is nothing in California I am
afraid of except a Jap, and I am afraid of them, not potentially, not on account of what all
of us know they are planning in the backs of their heads for the future, but right here and
now, personally and physically. Don't antagonize Oka Sayye. Don't be too precipitate about
what you're trying to do. Try to make it appear that you're developing ideas for the interest
and edification of the whole class. Don't incur his personal enmity. Use tact."

"You think I am afraid of that little jiu-jitsu?" he scoffed. "I can lick him with one hand."

"I haven't a doubt of it," said Linda, measuring his height and apparent strength and fitness.
"I haven't a doubt of it. But let me ask you this confidentially: Have you got a friend who
would slip in and stab him in the back in case you were in an encounter and he was getting
the better of you?"

Donald Whiting's eyes widened. He looked at Linda amazed.

"Wouldn't that be going rather far?" he asked. "I think I have some fairly good friends among
the fellows, but I don't know just whom I would want to ask to do me that small favor."

"That is precisely the point," cried Linda. "You haven't a friend you would ask; and you haven't
a friend who would do it, if you did. But don't believe for one second that Oka Sayye hasn't
half a dozen who would make away with you at an unexpected time and in a secluded place, and
vanish, if it would in any way further Oka Sayye's ambition, or help establish the supremacy
of the Japanese in California."

"Um-hm," said Donald Whiting.

He was looking far past Linda and now his eyes were narrowed in thought. "I believe you're
RIGHT about it."

"I've thought of you so often since I tried to spur you to beat Oka Sayye," said Linda. "I
feel a sort of responsibility for you. It's to the honor and glory of all California, and the
United States, and the white race everywhere for you to beat him, but if any harm should come
to you I would always feel that I shouldn't have urged it."

"Now that's foolishness," said Donald earnestly. "If I am such a dub that I didn't have the
ambition to think up some way to beat a Jap myself, no matter what happens you shouldn't regret
having been the one to point out to me my manifest duty. Dad is a Harvard man, you know, and
that is where he's going to send me, and in talking about it the other night I told him about
you, and what you had said to me. He's the greatest old scout, and was mightily interested.
He went at once and opened a box of books in the garret and dug out some stuff that will be
a big help to me. He's going to keep posted and see what he can do; he said even worse things
to me than you did; so you needn't feel that you have any responsibility; besides that, it's
not proved yet that I can beat Oka Sayye."

"Yes, it is!" said Linda, sending a straight level gaze deep into his eyes. "Yes, it is! Whenever
a white man makes up his mind what he's going to do, and puts his brain to work, he beats any
man, of any other color. Sure you're going to beat him."

"Fat chance I have not to," said Donald, laughing ruefully. "If I don't beat him I am disgraced
at home, and with you; before I try very long in this highly specialized effort I am making,
every professor in the high school and every member of my class is bound to become aware of
what is going on. You're mighty right about it. I have got to beat him or disgrace myself right
at the beginning of my nice young career."

"Of course you'll beat him," said Linda.

"At what hour did you say I should come, Saturday?"

"Oh, come with the lark for all I care," said Linda. "Early morning in the desert is a mystery
and a miracle, and the larks have been there just long enough to get their voices properly
tuned for their purest notes."

Then she turned and hurried away. Her first leisure minute after reaching home she went to
the library wearing one of Katy's big aprons, and carrying a brush and duster. Beginning at
one end of each shelf, she took down the volumes she intended to sell, carefully dusted them,
wiped their covers, and the place on which they had stood, and then opened and leafed through
them so that no scrap of paper containing any notes or memoranda of possible value should be
overlooked. It was while handling these volumes that Linda shifted several of the books written
by her father, to separate them from those with which she meant to part. She had grown so accustomed
to opening each book she handled and looking through it, that she mechanically opened the first
one she picked up and from among its leaves there fell a scrap of loose paper. She picked it
up and found it was a letter from the publishers of the book. Linda's eyes widened suddenly
as she read:

MY DEAR STRONG:

Sending you a line of congratulations. You have gone to the head of the list of "best sellers"
among medical works, and the cheque I draw you for the past six months' royalties will be considerably
larger than that which goes to your most esteemed contemporary on your chosen subject.

Very truly yours,

The signature was that of Frederic Dickman, the editor of one of the biggest publishing houses
of the country.

"Hm," she said to herself softly. "Now that is a queer thing. That letter was written nearly
five years ago. I don't know why I never thought of royalties since Daddy went. I frequently
heard him mention them before. I suppose they're being paid to John Gilman as administrator,
or to the Consolidated Bank, and cared for with Father's other business. There's no reason
why these books should not keep on selling. There are probably the same number of young men,
if not a greater number, studying medicine every year. I wonder now, about these royalties.
I must do some thinking."

Then Linda began to examine books more carefully than before. The letter she carried with her
when she went to her room; but she made a point of being on the lawn that evening when John
Gilman came, and after talking to him a few minutes, she said very casually: "John, as Father's
administrator, does a royalty from his medical books come to you?"

"No," said Gilman. "It is paid to his bank."

"I don't suppose," said Linda casually, "it would amount to enough to keep one in shoes these
inflated days."

"Oh, I don't know about that," said John testily. "I have seen a few of those cheques in your
Father's time. You should be able to keep fairly well supplied with shoes."

"So I should," said Linda drily. "So I should."

Then she led him to the back of the house and talked the incident out of his mind as cleverly
as possible by giving him an intensive botanical study of Cotyledon. But she could not interest
him quite so deeply as she had hoped, for presently he said: "Eileen tells me that you're parting
with some of the books."

"Only technical ones for which I could have no possible use," said Linda. "I need clothes,
and have found that had I a proper place to work in and proper tools to work with, I could
earn quite a bit with my brush and pencil, and so I am trying to get enough money together
to fit up the billiard room for a workroom, since nobody uses it for anything else."

"I see," said John Gilman. "I suppose running a house is extremely expensive these days, but
even so the income from your estate should be sufficient to dress a schoolgirl and provide
for anything you would want in the way of furnishing a workroom."

"That's what I have always thought myself," said Linda; "but Eileen doesn't agree with me,
and she handles the money. When the first of the month comes, we are planning to go over things
together, and she is going to make me a proper allowance."

"That is exactly as it should be," said Gilman. "I never realized till the other night at dinner
that you have grown such a great girl, Linda. That's fine! Fix your workroom the way you would
like to have it, and if there's anything I can do to help you in any way, you have only to
command me. I haven't seen you often lately."

"No," said Linda, "but I don't feel that it is exactly my fault. Marian and I were always pals.
When I saw that you preferred Eileen, I kept with Marian to comfort her all I could. I don't
suppose she cared, particularly. She couldn't have, or she would at least have made some effort
to prevent Eileen from monopolizing you. She probably was mighty glad to be rid of you; but
since you had been together so much, I thought she might miss you, so I tried to cover your
defection."

John Gilman's face flushed. He stood very still, while he seemed deeply thoughtful.

"Of course you were free to follow your inclinations, or Eileen's machinations, whichever you
did follow," Linda said lightly, "but 'them as knows' could tell you, John, as Katy so well
puts it, that you have made the mistake of your young life."

Then she turned and went to the garage, leaving John to his visit with Eileen.

The Eileen who took possession of John was an Eileen with whom he was not acquainted. He had
known, the night of the dinner party, that Eileen was pouting, but there had been no chance
to learn from her what her grievance was, and by the next time they met she was a bundle of
flashing allurement, so he ignored the occurrence. This evening, for the first time, it seemed
to him that Eileen was not so beautiful a woman as he had thought her. Something had roiled
the blood in her delicate veins until it had muddied the clear freshness of her smooth satiny
skin. There was discontent in her eyes, which were her most convincing attraction. They were
big eyes, wide open and candid. She had so trained them through a lifetime of practice that
she could meet other eyes directly while manipulating her most dextrous evasion. Whenever Eileen
was most deceptively subtle, she was looking straight at her victim with the innocent appeal
of a baby in her gaze.

John Gilman had had his struggle. He had succeeded. He had watched, and waited, and worked
incessantly, and when his opportunity came he was ready. Success had come to such a degree
that in a short time he had assured himself of comfort for any woman he loved. He knew that
his appearance was quite as pleasing as that of his friend. He knew that in manner and education
they were equals. He was now handling large business affairs. He had made friends in high places.
Whenever Eileen was ready, he would build and furnish a home he felt sure would be equal, if
not superior, to what Morrison was planning. Why had Eileen felt that she would envy any woman
who shared life with Peter Morrison?

All that day she had annoyed him, because there must have been in the very deeps of his soul
"a still, small voice" whispering to him that he had not lived up to the best traditions of
a gentleman in his course with Marian. While no definite plans had been made, there had been
endless assumption. Many times they had talked of the home they would make together. When he
reached the point where he decided that he never had loved Marian as a man should love the
woman he marries, he felt justified in turning to Eileen, but in his heart he knew that if
he had been the man he was pleased to consider himself, he would have gone to Marian Thorne
and explained, thereby keeping her friendship, while he now knew that he must have earned her
contempt.

The day at Riverside had been an enigma he could not solve. Eileen was gay to a degree that
was almost boisterous. She had attracted attention and comment which no well-bred woman would
have done.

The growing discontent in John's soul had increased under Linda's direct attack. He had known
Linda since she was four years old and had been responsible for some of her education. He had
been a large influence in teaching Linda from childhood to be a good sport, to be sure she
was right and then go ahead, and if she hurt herself in the going, to rub the bruise, but to
keep her path.

A thing patent to the eye of every man who turned an appraising look upon Linda always had
been one of steadfast loyalty. You could depend upon her. She was the counterpart of her father;
and Doctor Strong had been loved by other men. Wherever he had gone he had been surrounded.
His figure had been one that attracted attention. When he had spoken, his voice and what he
had to say had commanded respect. And then there had emanated from him that peculiar physical
charm which gives such pleasing and distinguished personality to a very few people in this
world. This gift too had descended to Linda. She could sit and look straight at you with her
narrow, interested eyes, smile faintly, and make you realize what she thought and felt without
opening her lips. John did not feel very well acquainted with the girl who had dominated the
recent dinner party, but he did see that she was attractive, that both Peter Morrison and Henry
Anderson had been greatly amused and very much entertained by her. He had found her so interesting
himself that he had paid slight attention to Eileen's pouting.

Tonight he was forced to study Eileen, for the sake of his own comfort to try to conciliate
her. He was uncomfortable because he was unable to conduct himself as Eileen wished him to,
without a small sickening disgust creeping into his soul. Before the evening was over he became
exasperated, and ended by asking flatly: "Eileen, what in the dickens is the matter with you?"

It was a new tone and a new question on nerves tensely strung.

"If you weren't blind you'd know without asking," retorted Eileen hotly.

"Then I am 'blind,' for I haven't the slightest notion. What have I done?"

"Isn't it just barely possible," asked Eileen, "that there might be other people who would
annoy and exasperate me? I have not hinted that you have done anything, although I don't know
that it's customary for a man calling on his betrothed to stop first for a visit with her sister."

"For the love of Mike!" said John Gilman. "Am I to be found fault with for crossing the lawn
a minute to see how Linda's wild garden is coming on? I have dug and helped set enough of those
plants to justify some interest in them as they grow."

"And the garden was your sole subject of conversation?" inquired Eileen, implied doubt conveyed
nicely.

"No, it was not," answered Gilman, all the bulldog in his nature coming to the surface.

"As I knew perfectly," said Eileen. "I admit that I'm not feeling myself. Things began going
wrong recently, and everything has gone wrong since. I think it all began with Marian Thorne's
crazy idea of selling her home and going to the city to try to ape a man."

"Marian never tried to ape a man in her life," said John, instantly yielding to a sense of
justice. "She is as strictly feminine as any woman I ever knew."

"Do you mean to say that you think studying architecture is a woman's work?" sneered Eileen.

"Yes, I do," said Gilman emphatically. "Women live in houses. They're in them nine tenths of
the time to a man's one tenth. Next to rocking a cradle I don't know of any occupation in this
world more distinctly feminine than the planning of comfortable homes for homekeeping people."

Eileen changed the subject swiftly. "What was Linda saying to you?" she asked.

"She was showing me a plant, a rare Echeveria of the Cotyledon family, that she tobogganed
down one side of Multiflores Canyon and delivered safely on the roadway without its losing
an appreciable amount of 'bloom' from its exquisitely painted leaves."

Eileen broke in rudely. "Linda has missed Marian. There's not a possible thing to make life
uncomfortable for me that she is not doing. You needn't tell me you didn't see and understand
her rude forwardness the other night!"

"No, I didn't see it," said John, "because the fact is I thought the kid was positively charming,
and so did Peter and Henry because both of them said so. There's one thing you must take into
consideration, Eileen. The time has come when she should have clothes and liberty and opportunity
to shape her life according to her inclinations. Let me tell you she will attract attention
in georgette and laces."

"And where are the georgette and laces to come from?" inquired Eileen sarcastically. "All outgo
and no income for four years is leaving the Strong finances in mighty precarious shape, I can
tell you."

"All right," said Gilman, "I'm financially comfortable now. I'm ready. Say the word. We'll
select our location and build our home, and let Linda have what there is of the Strong income
till she is settled in life. You have pretty well had all of it for the past four years."

"Yes," said Eileen furiously, "I have 'pretty well' had it, in a few little dresses that I
have altered myself and very frequently made entirely. I have done the best I could, shifting
and skimping, and it's not accomplished anything that I have really wanted. According to men,
the gas and the telephone and the electric light and the taxes and food and cook pay for themselves.
All a woman ever spends money on is clothes!"

"Eileen," chuckled John Gilman, "this sounds exactly as if we were married, and we're not, yet."

"No," said Eileen, "thank heaven we're not. If it's come to the place where you're siding with
everybody else against me, and where you're more interested in what my kid sister has to say
to you than you are in me, I don't think we ever shall be."

Then, from stress of nerve tension and long practice, some big tears gushed up and threatened
to overflow Eileen's lovely eyes. That never should happen, for tears are salt water and they
cut little rivers through even the most carefully and skillfully constructed complexion, while
Eileen's was looking its worst that evening. She hastily applied her handkerchief, and John
Gilman took her into his arms; so the remainder of the evening it was as if they were not married.
But when John returned to the subject of a home and begged Eileen to announce their engagement
and let him begin work, she evaded him, and put him off, and had to have time to think, and
she was not ready, and there were many excuses, for none of which Gilman could see any sufficient
reason. When he left Eileen that night, it was with a heavy heart.

CHAPTER XIV. Saturday's Child

Throughout the week Linda had worked as never during her life previously, in order to save
Saturday for Donald Whiting. She ran the Bear Cat down to the garage and had it looked over
once more to be sure that everything was all right. Friday evening, on her way from school,
she stopped at a grocery where she knew Eileen kept an account, and for the first time ordered
a few groceries. These she carried home with her, and explained to Katy what she wanted.

Katy fully realized that Linda was still her child, with no thought in her mind save standing
at the head of her classes, carrying on the work she had begun with her father, keeping up
her nature study, and getting the best time she could out of life in the open as she had been
taught to do from her cradle.

Katy had not the slightest intention of opening her lips to say one word that might put any
idea into the head of her beloved child, but she saw no reason why she herself should not harbor
all the ideas she pleased.

Whereupon, actuated by a combination of family pride, love, ambition in her chosen profession,
Katy made ready to see that on the morrow the son of Frederick Whiting should be properly nourished
on his outing with Linda.

At six o'clock Saturday morning Linda ran the Bear Cat to the back door, where she and Katy
packed it. Before they had finished, Donald Whiting came down the sidewalk, his cheeks flushed
with the exercise of walking, his eyes bright with anticipation, his cause forever won--in
case he had a cause--with Katy, because she liked the wholesome, hearty manner in which he
greeted Linda, and she was dumbfounded when he held out his hand to her and said laughingly:
"Blessed among women, did you put in a fine large consignment of orange punch?"

"No," said Katy, "I'll just tell ye flat-footed there ain't going to be any punch, but, young
sir, you're eshcortin' a very capable young lady, and don't ye bewail the punch, because ye
might be complimenting your face with something ye would like a hape better."

"Can't be done, Katy," cried Donald.

"Ye must have a poor opinion of us," laughed Katy, "if ye are thinking ye can get to the end
of our limitations in one lunch. Fourteen years me and Miss Linda's been on this lunch-box
stunt. Don't ye be thinkin' ye can exhaust us in any wan trip, or in any wan dozen."

So they said good-bye to Katy and rolled past Eileen's room on the way to the desert. Eileen
stood at the window watching them, and never had her heart been so full of discontent and her
soul the abiding place of such envy or her mind so busy. Just when she had thought life was
going to yield her what she craved, she could not understand how or why things should begin
to go wrong.

As the Bear Cat traversed Lilac Valley, Linda was pointing out Peter Morrison's location. She
was telling Donald Whiting where to find Peter's articles, and what a fine man he was, and
that he had promised to think how he could help with their plan to make of Donald a better
scholar than was Oka Sayye.

"Well, I call that mighty decent of a stranger," said Donald.

"But he is scarcely more of a stranger than I am," answered Linda. "He is a writer. He is interested
in humanity. It's the business of every man in this world to reach out and help every boy with
whom he comes in contact into the biggest, finest manhood possible. He only knows that you're
a boy tackling a big job that means much to every white boy to have you succeed with, and for
that reason he's just as interested as I am. Maybe, when we come in this evening, I'll run
up to his place, and you can talk it over with him. If your father helped you at one angle,
it's altogether probable that Peter Morrison could help you at another."

Donald Whiting rubbed his knee reflectively. He was sitting half turned in the wide seat so
that he might watch Linda's hands and her face while she drove.

"Well, that's all right," he said heartily. "You can write me down as willing and anxious to
take all the help I can get, for it's going to be no microscopic job, that I can tell you.
One week has waked up the Jap to the fact that there's something doing, and he's digging in
and has begun, the last day or two, to speak up in class and suggest things himself. Since
I've been studying him and watching him, I have come to the conclusion that he is much older
than I am. Something he said in class yesterday made me think he had probably had the best
schooling Japan could give him before he came here. The next time you meet him look for a suspicion
of gray hairs around his ears. He's too blamed comprehensive for the average boy of my age.
You said the Japs were the best imitators in the world and I have an idea in the back of my
head that before I get through with him, Oka Sayye is going to prove your proposition."

Linda nodded as she shot the Bear Cat across the streetcar tracks and headed toward the desert.
The engine was purring softly as it warmed up. The car was running smoothly. The sun of early
morning was shining on them through bracing, salt, cool air, and even in the valley the larks
were busy, and the mockingbirds, and from every wayside bush the rosy finches were singing.
All the world was coming to the exquisite bloom of a half-tropical country. Up from earth swept
the heavy odors of blooming citrus orchards, millions of roses, and the overpowering sweetness
of gardens and cultivated flowers; while down from the mountains rolled the delicate breath
of the misty blue lilac, the pungent odor of California sage, and the spicy sweet of the lemonade
bush. They were two young things, free for the day, flying down a perfect road, adventuring
with Providence. They had only gone a few miles when Donald Whiting took off his hat, stuffed
it down beside him, and threw back his head, shaking his hair to the wind in a gesture so soon
to become familiar to Linda. She glanced across at him and found him looking at her. A smile
broke over her lips. One of her most spontaneous laughs bubbled up in her throat.

"Topping, isn't it!" she cried gaily.

"It's the best thing that ever happened to me," answered Donald Whiting instantly. "Our car
is a mighty good one and Dad isn't mean about letting me drive it. I can take it frequently
and can have plenty of gas and take my crowd; but lordy, I don't believe there's a boy or girl
living that doesn't just positively groan when they see one of these little gray Bear Cats
go loping past. And I never even had a ride in one before. I can't get over the fact that it's
yours. It wouldn't seem so funny if it belonged to one of the fellows."

With steady hand and gradually increasing speed, Linda put the Bear Cat over the roads of early
morning. Sometimes she stopped in the shade of pepper, eucalyptus, or palm, where the larks
were specializing in their age-old offertory. And then again they went racing until they reached
the real desert. Linda ran the car under the shade of a tall clump of bloom-whitened alders.
She took off her hat, loosened the hair at her temples, and looked out across the long morning
stretch of desert.

"It's just beginning to be good," she said. She began pointing with her slender hand. "That
gleam you see over there is the gold of a small clump of early poppies. The purple beyond it
is lupin. All these exquisite colors on the floor are birds'-eyes and baby blue eyes, and the
misty white here and there is forget-me-not. It won't be long til thousands and thousands of
yucca plants will light their torches all over the desert and all the alders show their lacy
mist. Of course you know how exquisitely the Spaniards named the yucca 'Our Lord's Candles.'
Isn't that the prettiest name for a flower, and isn't it the prettiest thought?"

"It certainly is," answered Donald.

"Had any experience with the desert?" Linda asked lightly.

"Hunted sage hens some," answered Donald.

"Oh, well, that'll be all right," said Linda. "I wondered if you'd go murdering yourself like
a tenderfoot."

"What's the use of all this artillery?" inquired Donald as he stepped from the car.

"Better put on your hat. You're taller than most of the bushes; you'll find slight shade,"
cautioned Linda. "The use is purely a matter of self-protection. The desert has got such a
devil of a fight for existence, without shade and practically without water, that it can't
afford to take any other chance of extermination, and so it protects itself with needles here
and spears there and sabers at other places and roots that strike down to China everywhere.
First thing we are going to get is some soap."

"Great hat!" exclaimed Donald. "If you wanted soap why didn't you bring some?"

"For all you know," laughed Linda, "I may be going to education you up a little. Dare you to
tell me how many kinds of soap I can find today that the Indians used, and where I can find it."

"Couldn't tell you one to save my life," said Donald.

"And born and reared within a few miles of the desert!" scoffed Linda. "Nice Indian you'd make.
We take our choice today between finding deer-brush and digging for amole, because the mock
oranges aren't ripe enough to be nice and soapy yet. I've got the deer-brush spotted, and we'll
pass an amole before we go very far. Look for a wavy blue-green leaf like a wide blade of grass
and coming up like a lily."

So together they went to the deer-brush and gathered a bunch of flowers that Linda bound together
with some wiry desert grass and fastened to her belt. It was not long before Donald spied an
amole, and having found one, discovered many others growing near. Then Linda led the way past
thorns and brush, past impenetrable beds of cholla, until they reached a huge barrel cactus
that she had located with the glasses. Beside this bristling monstrous growth Linda paused,
and reached for the axe, which Donald handed to her. She drew it lightly across the armor protecting
the plant.

"Short of Victrola needles?" she inquired. "Because if you are, these make excellent ones.
A lot more singing quality to them than the steel needles, not nearly so metallic."

"Well, I am surely going to try that," said Donald. "Never heard of such a thing."

Linda chopped off a section of plant. Then she picked one of the knives from the bucket and
handed it to him.

"All right, you get what you want," she said, "while I operate on the barrel."

She set her feet firmly in the sand, swung the axe, and with a couple of deft strokes sliced
off the top of the huge plant, and from the heart of it lifted up half a bucketful of the juicy
interior, with her dipper.

"If we didn't have drink, here is where we would get it, and mighty good it is," she said,
pushing down with the dipper until she formed a small pool in the heart of the plant which
rapidly filled. "Have a taste."

"Jove, that is good!" said Donald. "What are you going to do with it?"

"Show you later," laughed Linda. "Think I'll take a sip myself."

Then by a roundabout route they started on their return to the car. Once Linda stopped and
gathered a small bunch of an extremely curious little plant spreading over the ground, a tiny
reddish vine with quaint round leaves that looked as if a drop of white paint rimmed with maroon
had fallen on each of them.

"I never saw that before," said Donald. "What are you going to do with it?"

"Use it on whichever of us gets the first snake bite," said Linda. "That is rattlesnake weed
and if a poisonous snake bites you, score each side of the wound with the cleanest, sharpest
knife you have and then bruise the plant and bind it on with your handkerchief, and forget it."

"Is that what you do?" inquired Donald.

"Why sure," said Linda, "that is what I would do if a snake were so ungallant as to bite me,
but there doesn't seem to be much of the antagonistic element in my nature. I don't go through
the desert exhaling the odor of fright, and so snakes lie quiescent or slip away so silently
that I never see them."

"Now what on earth do you mean by that?" inquired Donald.

"Why that is the very first lesson Daddy ever taught me when he took me to the mountains and
the desert. If you are afraid, your system throws off formic acid, and the animals need only
the suspicion of a scent of it to make them ready to fight. Any animal you encounter or even
a bee, recognizes it. He reproaches the ascetics for their "savage enthusiasm,"[274] probably
hinting at the extreme sects of the Essenes and the Therapeutæ.

  "Those who follow a gentler wisdom
  seek after God, but at the same time do not despise human things."

"Truth will properly blame those who without discrimination shun all concern with the life of the
State, and say that they despise the acquisition of good repute and
pleasure. They are only making grand pretensions, and they do not
really despise these things. He said that a man was safe to make his way anywhere he wanted to go, if he started his
journey by recognizing a blood brotherhood with anything living he would meet on the way; and
I have heard Enos Mills say that when he was snow inspector of Colorado he traveled the crest
of the Rockies from one end of the state to the other without a gun or any means of self-defense."

"Now, that is something new to think about," said Donald.

"And it's something that is very true," said Linda. "I have seen it work times without number.
Father and I went quietly up the mountains, through the canyons, across the desert, and we
would never see a snake of any kind, but repeatedly we would see men with guns and dogs out
to kill, to trespass on the rights of the wild, and they would be hunting for sticks and clubs
and firing their guns where we had passed never thinking of lurking danger. If you start out
in accord, at one with Nature, you're quite as safe as you are at home, sometimes more so.
But if you start out to stir up a fight, the occasion is very rare on which you can't succeed."

"And that reminds me," said Donald, with a laugh, "that a week ago I came to start a fight
with you. What has become of that fight we were going to have, anyway?"

"You can search me," laughed Linda, throwing out her hands in a graceful gesture. "There's
not a scrap of fight in my system concerning you, but if Oka Sayye were having a fight with
you and I were anywhere around, you'd have one friend who would help you to handle the Jap."

Donald looked at Linda thoughtfully.

"By the great hocus-pocus," he said, "you know, I believe you. If two fellows were having a
pitched battle most of the girls I know would quietly faint or run, but I do believe that you
would stand by and help a fellow if he needed it."

"That I surely would," said Linda; "but don't you say 'most of the girls I know' and then make
a statement like that concerning girls, because you prove that you don't know them at all.
A few years ago, I very distinctly recall how angry many women were at this line in one of
Kipling's poems:

    The female of the species is more deadly than the male,

and there was nothing to it save that a great poet was trying to pay womanhood everywhere the
finest compliment he knew how. He always has been fundamental in his process of thought. He
gets right back to the heart of primal things. When he wrote that line he was not really thinking
that there was a nasty poison in the heart of a woman or death in her hands. What he was thinking
was that in the jungle the female lion or tiger or jaguar must go and find a particularly secluded
cave and bear her young and raise them to be quite active kittens before she leads them out,
because there is danger of the bloodthirsty father eating them when they are tiny and helpless.
And if perchance a male finds the cave of his mate and her tiny young and enters it to do mischief,
then there is no recorded instance I know of in which the female, fighting in defense of her
young, has not been 'more deadly than the male.' And that is the origin of the much-discussed
line concerning the female of the species, and it holds good fairly well down the line of the
wild. Theology, the subject of the Bible, according to him, demands perfect obedience, philosophy
perfect knowledge.[345] Both alike are saving, but the spheres of the two are distinct: and Moses
and the prophets excel in law and imagination, not in reason and
reflection. You can't tell what is in a woman's heart
by looking at her. You must bring her face to face with an emergency before you can say what
she'll do, but I would be perfectly willing to stake my life on this: There is scarcely a girl
you know who would see you getting the worst of a fight, say with Oka Sayye, or someone who
meant to kill you or injure you, who would not pick up the first weapon she could lay her hands
on, whether it was an axe or a stick or a stone, and go to your defense, and if she had nothing
else to fight with, I have heard of women who put up rather a tidy battle with their claws.
Sounds primitive, doesn't it?"

"It sounds true," said Donald reflectively. "I see, young lady, where one is going to have
to measure his words and think before he talks to you."

"Pretty thought!" said Linda lightly. "We'll have a great time if you must stop to consider
every word before you say it."

"Well, anyway," said Donald, "when are we going to have that fight which was the purpose of
our coming together?"

"Why, we're not ever going to have it," answered Linda. "I have got nothing in this world to
fight with you about since you're doing your level best to beat Oka Sayye. I have watched your
head above the remainder of your class for three years and wanted to fight with you on that point."

"Now that's a queer thing," said Donald, "because I have watched you for three years and wanted
to fight with you about your drygoods, and now since I've known you only such a short while,
I don't care two whoops what you wear. It's a matter of perfect indifference to me. You can
wear French heels or baby pumps, or go barefoot. You would still be you."

 "Is it a truce?" asked Linda.  I

"No, ma'am," said Donald, "it's not a truce. That implies war and we haven't fought. It's not
armed neutrality; it's not even watchful waiting. It's my friend, Linda Strong. Me for her
and her for me, if you say so."

He reached out his hand. Linda laid hers in it, and looking into his eyes, she said: "That
is a compact. We'll test this friendship business and see what there is to it. Now come on;
let's run for the canyon."

It was only a short time until the Bear Cat followed its trail of the previous Saturday, and,
rushing across the stream, stopped at its former resting place, while Linda and Donald sat
looking at the sheer-walled little room before them.

"I can see," said Linda, "a stronger tinge in the green. There are more flowers in the carpet.
There is more melody in the birds' song. We are going to have a better time than we had last
Saturday. First let's fix up our old furnace, because we must have a fire today."

So they left the car, and under Linda's direction they reconstructed the old fireplace at which
the girl and her father had cooked when botanizing in Multiflores. In a corner secluded from
wind, using the wall of the canyon for a back wall, big boulders the right distance apart on
each side, and small stones for chinking, Linda superintended the rebuilding of the fireplace.

She unpacked the lunch box, set the table, and when she had everything in readiness she covered
the table, and taking a package, she carried it on a couple of aluminium pie pans to where
her fire was burning crisply. With a small field axe she chopped a couple of small green branches,
pointed them to her liking, and peeled them. Then she made a poker from one of the saplings
they had used to move the rocks, and beat down her fire until she had a bright bed of deep
coals. When these were arranged exactly to her satisfaction, she pulled some sprays of deer
weed bloom from her bundle and, going down to the creek, made a lather and carefully washed
her hands, tucking the towel she used in drying them through her belt. Then she came back to
the fire and, sitting down beside it, opened the package and began her operations. On the long,
slender sticks she strung a piece of tenderloin beef, about three inches in circumference and
one fourth of an inch in thickness, then half a slice of bacon, and then a slice of onion.
This she repeated until her skewer would bear no more weight. Then she laid it across the rocks
walling her fire, occasionally turning it while she filled the second skewer. Then she brought
from the car the bucket of pulp she had taken from the barrel cactus, transferred it to a piece
of cheesecloth and deftly extracted the juice. To this she added the contents of a thermos
bottle containing a pint of sugar that had been brought to the boiling point with a pint of
water and poured over some chopped spearmint to which had been added the juice of half a dozen
lemons and three or four oranges. From a small, metal-lined compartment, Linda took a chunk
of ice and dropped it into this mixture.

She was sitting on the ground, one foot doubled under her, the other extended. She had taken
off her hat; the wind and the bushes had roughened her hair. Exercise had brought deep red
to her cheeks and her lips. Happiness had brought a mellow glow to her dark eyes. She had turned
back her sleeves, and her slender hands were fascinatingly graceful in their deft handling
of everything she touched. They were a second edition of the hands with which Alexander Strong
had felt out defective nerve systems and made delicate muscular adjustments. She was wholly
absorbed in what she was doing. Sitting on the blanket across from her Donald Whiting was wholly
absorbed in her and he was thinking. He was planning how he could please her, how he could
earn her friendship. He was admitting to himself that he had very little, if anything, to show
for hours of time that he had spent in dancing, at card games, beach picnics, and races. All
these things had been amusing. But he had nothing to show for the time he had spent or the
money he had wasted. Nothing had happened that in any way equipped him for his battle with
Oka Sayye. Conversely, this girl, whom he had resented, whom he had criticized, who had claimed
his notice only by her radical difference from the other girls, had managed, during the few
minutes he had first talked with her in the hall, to wound his pride, to spur his ambition,
to start him on a course that must end in lasting and material benefit to him even if he failed
in making a higher record of scholarship than Oka Sayye. It was very certain that the exercise
he was giving his brain must be beneficial. He had learned many things that were intensely
interesting to him and he had not even touched the surface of what he could see that she had
been taught by her father or had learned through experience and personal investigation. She
had been coming to the mountains and the canyons alone, for four years doing by herself what
she would have done under her father's supervision had he lived. That argued for steadfastness
and strength of character. She would not utter one word of flattery. She would say nothing
she did not mean. Watching her intently, Donald Whiting thought of all these things. He thought
of what she had said about fighting for him, and he wondered if it really was true that any
girl he knew would fight for him. He hardly believed it when he remembered some of his friends,
so entirely devoted to personal adornment and personal gratification. But Linda had said that
all women were alike in their hearts. She knew about other things. She must know about this.
Maybe all women would fight for their young or for their men, but he knew of no other girl
who could drive a Bear Cat with the precision and skill with which Linda drove. He knew no
other girl who was master of the secrets of the desert and the canyons and the mountains. Certainly
he knew no other girl who would tug at great boulders and build a fireplace and risk burning
her fingers and scorching her face to prepare a meal for him. So he watched Linda and so he
thought.

At first he thought she was the finest pal a boy ever had, and then he thought how he meant
to work to earn and keep her friendship; and then, as the fire reddened Linda's cheeks and
she made running comments while she deftly turned her skewers of brigand beefsteak, food that
half the Boy Scouts in the country had been eating for four years, there came an idea with
which he dallied until it grew into a luring vision.

"Linda," he asked suddenly, "do you know that one of these days you're going to be a beautiful
woman?"

Linda turned her skewers with intense absorption. At first he almost thought she had not heard
him, but at last she said quietly: "Do you really think that is possible, Donald?"

"You're lovely right now!" answered the boy promptly.

"For goodness' sake, have an eye single to your record for truth and veracity," said Linda.
"Doesn't this begin to smell zippy?"

"It certainly does," said Donald. "It's making me ravenous. But honest, Linda, you are a pretty
girl."

"Honest, your foot!" said Linda scornfully. "I am not a pretty girl. I am lean and bony and
I've got a beak where I should have a nose. Speaking of pretty girls, my sister, Eileen, is
a pretty girl. She is a downright beautiful girl."

"Yes," said Donald, "she is, but she can't hold a candle to you. How did she look when she
was your age?"

"I can't remember Eileen," said Linda, "when she was not exquisitely dressed and thinking more
about taking care of her shoes than anything else in the world. I can't remember her when she
was not curled, and even when she was a tiny thing Mother put a dust of powder on her nose.
She said her skin was so delicate that it could not bear the sun. She never could run or play
or motor much or do anything, because she has always had to be saved for the sole purpose of
being exquisitely beautiful. Talk about lilies of the field, that's what Eileen is! She is
an improvement on the original lily of the field--she's a lily of the drawing room. Me, now,
I'm more of a Joshua tree."

Donald Whiting laughed, as Linda intended that he should.

A minute afterward she slid the savory food from a skewer upon one of the pie pans, tossed
back the cover from the little table, stacked some bread-and-butter sandwiches beside the meat
and handed the pan to Donald.

"Fall to," she said, "and prove that you're a man with an appreciative tummy. Father used to
be positively ravenous for this stuff. I like it myself."

She slid the food from the second skewer to a pan for herself, settled the fire to her satisfaction
and they began their meal. Presently she filled a cup from the bucket beside her and handed
it to Donald. At the same time she lifted another for herself.

"Here's to the barrel cactus," she said. "May the desert grow enough of them so that we'll
never lack one when we want to have a Saturday picnic."

Laughingly they drank this toast; and the skewers were filled a second time. When they could
eat no more they packed away the lunch things, buried the fire, took the axe and the field
glasses, and started on a trip of exploration down the canyon. Together they admired delicate
and exquisite ferns growing around great gray boulders. Donald tasted hunters' rock leek, and
learned that any he found while on a hunting expedition would furnish a splendid substitute
for water. Linda told him of rare flowers she lacked and what they were like and how he would
be able to identify what she wanted in case he should ever find any when he was out hunting
or with his other friends. They peeped into the nesting places of canyon wrens and doves and
finches, and listened to the exquisite courting songs of the birds whose hearts were almost
bursting with the exuberance of spring and the joy of home making. When they were tired out
they went back to the dining room and after resting a time, they made a supper from the remnants
of their dinner. When they were seated in the car and Linda's hand was on the steering wheel,
Donald reached across and covered it with his own.

"Wait a bit," he said. "Before we leave here I want to ask you a question and I want you to
make me a promise."

"All right," said Linda. "What's your question?"

"What is there," said Donald, "that I can do that would give you such pleasure as you have
given me?"

Linda could jest on occasions, but by nature she was a serious person. She looked at Donald
reflectively.

"Why, I think," she said at last, "that having a friend, having someone who understands and
who cares for the things I do, and who likes to go to the same places and to do the same things,
is the biggest thing that has happened to me since I lost my father. I don't see that you are
in any way in my debt, Donald."

"All right then," said the boy, "that brings me to the promise I want you to make me. May we
always have our Saturdays together like this?"

"Sure!" said Linda, "I would be mightily pleased. I'll have to work later at night and scheme,
maybe. By good rights Saturday belongs to me anyway because I am born Saturday's child."

"Well, hurrah for Saturday! It always was a grand old day," said Donald, "and since I see what
it can do in turning out a girl like you, I've got a better opinion of it than ever. We'll
call that settled. I'll always ask you on Friday at what hour to come, and hereafter Saturday
is ours."

"Ours it is," said Linda.

Then she put the Bear Cat through the creek and on the road and, driving swiftly as she dared,
ran to Lilac Valley and up to Peter Morrison's location.

She was amazed at the amount of work that had been accomplished. The garage was finished. Peter's
temporary work desk and his cot were in it. A number of his personal belongings were there.
The site for his house had been selected and the cellar was being excavated.

Linda descended from the Bear Cat and led Donald before Peter.

"Since you're both my friends," she said, "I want you to know each other. This is Donald Whiting,
the Senior I told you about, Mr. Morrison. You know you said you would help him if you could."

"Certainly," said Peter. "I am very glad to know any friend of yours, Miss Linda. Come over
to my workroom and let's hear about this."

"Oh, go and talk it over between yourselves," said Linda. "I am going up here to have a private
conversation with the spring. I want it to tell me confidentially exactly the course it would
enjoy running so that when your house is finished and I come to lay out your grounds I will
know exactly how it feels about making a change."

"Fine!" said Peter. "Take your time and become extremely confidential, because the more I look
at the location and the more I hear the gay chuckling song that that water sings, the more
I am in love with your plan to run it across the lawn and bring it around the boulder."

"It would be a downright sin not to have that water in a convenient place for your children
to play in, Peter," said Linda.

"Then that's all settled," said Peter. "Now, Whiting, come this way and we'll see whether I
can suggest anything that will help you with your problem."

"Whistle when you are ready, Donald," called Linda as she turned away.

Peter Morrison glanced after her a second, and then he led Donald Whiting to a nail keg in
the garage and impaled that youngster on the mental point of a mental pin and studied him as
carefully as any scientist ever studied a rare specimen. When finally he let him go, his mental
comment was: "He's a mighty fine kid. Linda is perfectly safe with him."

CHAPTER XV. Linda's Hearthstone

Early the following week Linda came from school one evening to find a load of sand and a heap
of curiously marked stones beside the back door.

"Can it possibly be, Katy," she asked, "that those men are planning to begin work on my room
so soon? I am scared out of almost seven of my five senses. I had no idea they would be ready
to begin work until after I had my settlement with Eileen or was paid for the books."

"Don't ye be worried," said Katy. "There's more in me stocking than me leg, and you're as welcome
to it as the desert is welcome to rain, an' nadin' it 'most as bad."

"Anyway," said Linda, "it will surely take them long enough so that I can pay by the time they
finish."

But Linda was not figuring that back of the projected improvements stood two men, each of whom
had an extremely personal reason for greatly desiring to please her. Peter Morrison had secured
a slab of sandstone. He had located a marble cutter to whom he meant to carry it, and was spending
much thought that he might have been using on an article in trying to hit upon exactly the
right line or phrase to build in above Linda's fire--something that would convey to her in
a few words a sense of friendship and beauty.

While Peter gazed at the unresponsive gray sandstone and wrote line after line which he immediately
destroyed, Henry Anderson explored the mountain and came in, red faced and perspiring, from
miles of climbing with a bright stone in each hand, or took the car to bring in small heaps
too heavy to carry that he had collected near the roads. They were two men striving for the
favor of the same girl. How Linda would have been amused had she understood the situation,
or how Eileen would have been provoked, neither of the men knew nor did they care.

The workmen came after Linda left and went before her return. Having been cautioned to silence,
Katy had not told her when work actually began; and so it happened that, going to her room
one evening, she unlocked the door and stepped inside to face the completed fireplace. The
firebox was not very large but ample. The hearthstone was a big sheet of smooth gray sandstone.
The sides and top were Henry's collection of brilliant boulders, carefully and artistically
laid in blue mortar, and over the firebox was set Peter's slab of gray sandstone. On it were
four deeply carved lines. The quaint Old English lettering was filled even to the surface with
a red mortar, while the capitals were done in dull blue. The girl slowly read:

  Voiceless stones, with Flame-tongues Preach     Sermons struck
from Nature's Lyre; Notes of Love and Trust and Hope Hourly sing in
Linda's Fire.

In the firebox stood a squat pair of black andirons, showing age and usage. A rough eucalyptus
log waited across them while the shavings from the placing of the mantel and the cutting of
the windows were tucked beneath it. Linda stood absorbed a minute. She looked at the skylight,
flooding the room with the light she so needed coming from the right angle. She went over to
the new window that gave her a view of the length of the valley she loved and a most essential
draft. When she turned back to the fireplace her hands were trembling.

"Now isn't that too lovely of them?" she said softly. "Isn't that altogether wonderful? How
I wish Daddy were here to sit beside my fire and share with me the work I hope to do here."

In order to come as close to him as possible she did the next best thing. She sat down at her
table and wrote a long letter to Marian, telling her everything she could think of that would
interest her. Then she re-read with extreme care the letter she had found at the Post Office
that day in reply to the one she had written Marian purporting to come from an admirer. Writing
slowly and thinking deeply, she answered it. She tried to imagine that she was Peter Morrison
and she tried to say the things in that letter that she thought Peter would say in the circumstances,
because she felt sure that Marian would be entertained by such things as Peter would say. When
she finished, she read it over carefully, and then copied it with equal care on the typewriter,
which she had removed to her workroom.

When she heard Katy's footstep outside her door, she opened it and drew her in, slipping the
bolt behind her. She led her to the fireplace and recited the lines.

"Now ain't they jist the finest gentlemen?" said Katy. "Cut right off of a piece of the same
cloth as your father. Now some way we must get together enough money to get ye a good-sized
rug for under your worktable, and then ye've got to have two bits of small ones, one for your
hearthstone and one for your aisel; and then ye're ready, colleen, to show what ye can do.
I'm so proud of ye when I think of the grand secret it's keepin' for ye I am; and less and
less are gettin' me chances for the salvation of me soul, for every night I'm a-sittin' starin'
at the magazines ye gave me when I ought to be tellin' me beads and makin' me devotions. Ain't
it about time the third was comin' in?"

"Any day now," said Linda in a whisper. "And, Katy, you'll be careful? That editor must think
that 'Jane Meredith' is full of years and ripe experience. I probably wouldn't get ten cents,
no not even a for-nothing chance, if he knew those articles were written by a Junior."

"Junior nothing!" scoffed Katy. "There was not a day of his life that your pa did not spend
hours drillin' ye in things the rest of the girls in your school never heard of. 'Tain't no
high-school girl that's written them articles. It's Alexander Strong speakin' through the medium
of his own flesh and blood."

"Why, so it is, Katy!" cried Linda delightedly. "You know, I never thought of that. I have
been so egoistical I thought I was doing them myself."

"Paid ye anything yet?" queried Katy.

"No," said Linda, "they haven't. It seems that the amount of interest the articles evoke is
going to decide what I am to be paid for them, but they certainly couldn't take the recipe
and the comments and the sketch for less than twenty-five or thirty dollars, unless recipes
are like poetry. Peter said the other day that if a poet did not have some other profession
to support him, he would starve to death on all he was paid for writing the most beautiful
things that ever are written in all this world. Peter says even an effort to write a poem is
a beautiful thing."

"Well, maybe that used to be the truth," said Katy as she started toward the door, "but I have
been reading some things labeled 'poetry' in the magazines of late, and if the holy father
knows what they mean, he's even bigger than ever I took him to be."

"Katy," said Linda, "we are dreadful back numbers. We are letting this world progress and roll
right on past us without a struggle. We haven't either one been to a psychoanalyst to find
out the color of our auras."

"Now God forbid," said Katy. "I ain't going to have one of them things around me. The colors
I'm wearin' satisfy me entoirely."

"And mine are going to satisfy me very shortly, now," laughed Linda, "because tomorrow is my
big day with Eileen. Next time we have a minute together, old dear, I'll have started my bank
account."

"Right ye are," said Katy, "jist exactly right. You're getting such a great girl it's the proper
thing ye should be suitably dressed, and don't ye be too modest."

"The unfortunate thing about that, Katy, is that l intimated the other day that I would be
content with less than half, since she is older and she should have her chance first."

"Now ain't that jist like ye?" said Katy. "I might have known ye would be doing that very thing."

"After I have gone over the accounts," said Linda, "I'll know better what to demand. Now fly
to your cooking, Katy, and let me sit down at this table and see if I can dig out a few dollars
of honest coin; but I'm going to have hard work to keep my eyes on the paper with that fireplace
before me. Isn't that red and blue lettering the prettiest thing, Katy, and do you notice that
tiny 'P. M.' cut down in the lower left-hand corner nearly out of sight? That, Katy, stands
for 'Peter Morrison,' and one of these days Peter is going to be a large figure on the landscape.
The next Post he has an article in I'll buy for you."

"It never does," said Katy, "to be makin' up your mind in this world so hard and fast that
ye can't change it. In the days before John Gilman got bewitched out of his senses I did think,
barrin' your father, that he was the finest man the Lord ever made; but I ain't thought so
much of him of late as I did before."

"Same holds good for me," said Linda.

"I've studied this Peter," continued Katy, "like your pa used to study things under his microscope.
He's the most come-at-able man. He's got such a kind of a questionin' look on his face, and
there's a bit of a stoop to his shoulders like they had been whittled out for carryin' a load,
and there's a kind of a whimsy quiverin' around his lips that makes me heart stand still every
time he speaks to me, because I can't be certain whether he is going to make me laugh or going
to make me cry, and when what he's sayin' does come with that little slow drawl, I can't be
just sure whether he's meanin' it or whether he's jist pokin' fun at me. He said the quarest
thing to me the other day when he was here fiddlin' over the makin' of this fireplace. He was
standin' out beside your desert garden and I come aven with him and I says to him: 'Them's
the rare plants Miss Linda and her pa have been goin' to the deserts and the canyons, as long
as he lived, to fetch in; and then Miss Linda went alone, and now the son of Judge Whiting,
the biggest lawyer in Los Angeles, has begun goin' with her. Ain't it the brightest, prettiest
place?' I says to him. And he stood there lookin', and he says to me: 'No, Katy, that is a
graveyard.' Now what in the name of raison was the man meanin' by that?"

Linda stared at the hearth motto reflectively.

"A graveyard!" she repeated. "Well, if anything could come farther from a graveyard than that
spot, I don't know how it would do it. I haven't the remotest notion what he meant. Why didn't
you ask him?"

"Well, the truth is," said Katy, "that I proide myself on being able to kape me mouth shut
when I should."

"I'll leave to think over it," said Linda. "At present I have no more idea than you in what
respect my desert garden could resemble a graveyard. Oh! yes, there's one thing I wanted to
ask you, Katy. Has Eileen been around while this room was being altered?"

"She came in yesterday," answered Katy, "when the hammerin' and sawin' was goin' full blast."

"What I wanted to find out'" said Linda, "was whether she had been here and seen this room
or not, because if she hasn't and she wants to see it, now is her time. After I get things
going here and these walls are covered with drying sketches this room is going to be strictly
private. You see that you keep your key where nobody gets hold of it."

"It's on a string round me neck this blessed minute," said Katy. "I didn't see her come up
here, but ye could be safe in bettin' anything ye've got that she came."

"Yes, I imagine she did," said Linda. "She would be sufficiently curious that she would come
to learn how much I have spent if she had no other interest in me."

She looked at the fireplace reflectively.

"I wonder," she said, "what Eileen thought of that and I wonder if she noticed that little
'P. M.' tucked away down there in the corner."

"Sure she did," said Katy. "She has got eyes like a cat. She can see more things in a shorter
time than anybody I ever knew." So that evening at dinner Linda told Eileen that the improvements
she had made for her convenience in the billiard room were finished, and asked her if she would
like to see them.

"I can't imagine what you want to stick yourself off up there alone for," said Eileen. "I don't
believe I am sufficiently interested in garret skylights and windows to climb up to look at
them. What everybody in the neighborhood can see is that you have absolutely ruined the looks
of the back part of the house."

"Good gracious!" said Linda. "Have I? You know I never thought of that."

"Of course! But all you've got to do is go on the cast lawn and take a look at that side and
the back end of the house to see what you have done," said Eileen. "Undoubtedly you've cut
the selling price of the house one thousand, at least. But it's exactly like you not to have
thought of what chopping up the roof and the end of the house as you have done, would make
it look like. You have got one of those single-track minds, Linda, that can think of only one
thing at a time, and you never do think, when you start anything, of what the end is going to be."

"Very likely there's a large amount of truth in that," said Linda soberly. "Perhaps I do get
an idea and pursue it to the exclusion of everything else. It's an inheritance from Daddy,
this concentrating with all my might on one thing at a time. But I am very sorry if I have
disfigured the house."

"What I want to know," said Eileen, "is how in this world, at present wages and cost of material,
you're expecting to pay men for the work you have had done."

"I can talk more understandingly about that," said Linda quietly, "day after tomorrow. I'll
get home from school tomorrow as early as I can, and then we'll figure out our financial situation
exactly."

Eileen made no reply.

CHAPTER XVI. Producing the Evidence

When Linda hurried home the next evening, her first word to Katy was to ask if Eileen were there.

"No, she isn't here," said Katy, "and she's not going to be."

"Not going to be!" cried Linda, her face paling perceptibly.

"She went downtown this morning and she telephoned me about three sayin' she had an invoitation
to go with a motor party to Pasadena this afternoon, an' she wasn't knowin' whether she could
get home the night or not."

"I don't like it," said Linda. "I don't like it at all."

She liked it still less when Eileen came home for a change of clothing the following day, and
again went to spend the night with a friend, without leaving any word whatever.

"I don't understand this," said Linda, white lipped and tense. "She does not want to see me.
She does not intend to talk business with me if she can possibly help it. She is treating me
as if I were a four-year-old instead of a woman with as much brain as she has. If she appears
while I am gone tomorrow and starts away again, you tell her Come to think of it, you needn't
tell her anything; I'll give you a note for her."

So Linda sat down and wrote:

DEAR EILEEN:

It won't be necessary to remind you of our agreement night before last to settle on an allowance
from Father's estate for me. Of course I realize that you are purposely avoiding seeing me,
for what reason I can't imagine; but I give you warning, that if you have been in this house
and have read this note, and are not here with your figures ready to meet me when I get home
tomorrow night, I'll take matters into my own hands, and do exactly what I think best without
the slightest reference to what you think about it. If you don't want something done that you
will dislike, even more than you dislike seeing me, you had better heed this warning.

LINDA.

She read it over slowly: "My, that sounds melodramatic!" she commented. "It's even got a threat
in it, and it's a funny thing to threaten my own sister. I don't think that it's a situation
that occurs very frequently, but for that matter I sincerely hope that Eileen isn't the kind
of sister that occurs frequently."

Linda went up to her room and tried to settle herself to work, but found that it was impossible
to fix her attention on what she was doing. Her mind jumped from one thing to another in a
way that totally prohibited effective work of any kind. A sudden resolve came into her heart.
She would not wait any longer. She would know for herself just how she was situated financially.
She wrote a note to the editor of Everybody's Home, asking him if it would be convenient to
let her know what reception her work was having with his subscribers, whether he desired her
to continue the department in his magazines, and if so, what was the best offer he could make
her for the recipes, the natural history comments accompanying them, and the sketches. Then
she went down to the telephone book and looked up the location of the Consolidated Bank. She
decided that she would stop there on her way from school the next day and ask to be shown the
Strong accounts.

While she was meditating these heroic measures the bell rang and Katy admitted John Gilman.
Strangely enough, he was asking for Linda, not for Eileen. At the first glimpse of him Linda
knew that something was wrong; so without any prelude she said abruptly: "What's the matter,
John? Don't you know where I Eileen is either?"

"Approximately," he answered. "She has 'phoned me two or three times, but I haven't seen her
for three days. Do you know where she is or exactly why she is keeping away from home as she is?"

"Yes," said Linda, "I do. I told you the other day the time had come when I was going to demand
a settlement of Father's estate and a fixed income. That time came three days ago and I have
not seen Eileen since."

They entered the living room. As Linda passed the table, propped against a candlestick on it,
she noticed a note addressed to herself.

"Oh, here will be an explanation," she said. "Here is a note for me. Sit down a minute till
I read it."

She seated herself on the arm of a chair, tore open the note, and instantly began reading aloud.

"Dear little sister--"

"Pathetic," interpolated Linda, "in consideration of the fact that I am about twice as big
as she is. However, we'll let that go, and focus on the enclosure." She waved a slender slip
of paper at Gilman. "I never was possessed of an article like this before in all my tender
young life, but it seems to me that it's a cheque, and I can't tell you quite how deeply it
amuses me. But to return to business, at the present instant I am:

DEAR LITTLE SISTER:

It seems that all the friends I have are particularly insistent on seeing me all at once and
all in a rush. I don't think I ever had quite so many invitations at one time in my life before,
and the next two or three days seem to be going to be equally as full. But I took time to run
into the bank and go over things carefully. I find that after the payment of taxes and insurance
and all the household expenses, that by wearing old clothes I have and making them over I can
afford to turn over at least seventy-five dollars a month to you for your clothing and personal
expenses. As I don't know exactly when I can get home, I am enclosing a cheque which is considerably
larger than I had supposed I could make it, and I can only do this by skimping myself; but
of course you are getting such a big girl and beginning to attract attention, so it is only
right that you should have the very best that I can afford to do for you. I am not taking the
bill from The Mode into consideration. I paid that with last month's expenses.

With love,

EILEEN.

Linda held the letter in one hand, the cheque in the other, and stared questioningly at John
Gilman.

"What do you think of that?" she inquired tersely.

"It seems to me," said Gilman, "that a more pertinent question would be, what do you think of it?"

"Rot!" said Linda tersely. "If I were a stenographer in your office I would think that I was
making a fairly good start; but I happen to be the daughter of Alexander Strong living in my
own home with my only sister, who can afford to flit like the flittingest of social butterflies
from one party to another as well dressed as, and better dressed than, the Great General Average.
You have known us, John, ever since Eileen sat in the sun to dry her handmade curls, while
I was leaving a piece of my dress on every busk in Multiflores Canyon. Right here and now I
am going to show you something!"

Linda started upstairs, so John Gilman followed her. She went to the door of Eileen's suite
and opened it.

"Now then," she said, "take a look at what Eileen feels she can afford for herself. You will
observe she has complete and exquisite furnishings and all sorts of feminine accessories on
her dressing table. You will observe that she has fine rugs in her dressing room and bathroom.
Let me call your attention to the fact that all these drawers are filled with expensive comforts
and conveniences."

Angrily Linda began to open drawers filled with fancy feminine apparel, daintily and neatly
folded, everything in perfect order: gloves, hose, handkerchiefs, ribbons, laces, all in separate
compartments She pointed to the high chiffonier, the top decorated with candlesticks and silver-framed
pictures. Here the drawers revealed heaps of embroidered underclothing and silken garments.
Then she walked to the closet and threw the door wide.

She pushed hangers on their rods, sliding before the perplexed and bewildered man dress after
dress of lace and georgette, walking suits of cloth, street dresses of silk, and pretty afternoon
gowns, heavy coats, light coats, a beautiful evening coat. Linda took this down and held it
in front of John Gilman.

"I see things marked in store windows," she said. "Eileen paid not a penny less than three
hundred for this one coat. Look at the rows of shoes, and pumps, and slippers, and what that
box is or I don't know."

Linda slid to the light a box screened by the hanging dresses, and with the toe of her shoe
lifted the lid, disclosing a complete smoking outfit--case after case of cigarettes. Linda
dropped the lid and shoved the box back. She stood silent a second, then she looked at John Gilman.

"That is the way things go in this world," she said quietly. "Whenever you lose your temper,
you always do something you didn't intend to do when you started. I didn't know that, and I
wouldn't have shown it to you purposely if I had known it; but it doesn't alter the fact that
you should know it. If you did know it no harm's done but if you didn't know it, you shouldn't
be allowed to marry Eileen without knowing as much about her as you did about Marian, and there
was nothing about Marian that you didn't know. I am sorry for that, but since I have started
this I am going through with it. Now give me just one minute more."

Then she went down the hall, threw open the door to her room, and walking in said: "You have
seen Eileen's surroundings; now take a look at mine. There's my bed; there's my dresser and
toilet articles; and this is my wardrobe."

She opened the closet door and exhibited a pair of overalls in which she watered her desert
garden. Next ranged her khaki breeches and felt hat. Then hung the old serge school dress,
beside it the extra skirt and orange blouse. The stack of underclothing on the shelves was
pitifully small, visibly dilapidated. Two or three outgrown gingham dresses hung forlornly
on the opposite wall. Linda stood tall and straight before John Gilman.

"What I have on and one other waist constitute my wardrobe," she said, "and I told Eileen where
to get this dress and suggested it before I got it."

Gilman looked at her in a dazed fashion.

"I don't understand," he said slowly. "If that isn't the dress I saw Eileen send up for herself,
I'm badly mistaken. It was the Saturday we went to Riverside. It surely is the very dress."

Linda laughed bleakly.

"That may be," she said. "The one time she ever has any respect for me is in a question of
taste. She will agree that I know when colors are right and a thing is artistic. Now then,
John, you are the administrator of my father's estate; you have seen what you have seen. What
are you going to do about it?"

"Linda," he said quietly, "what my heart might prompt me to do in consideration of the fact
that I am engaged to marry Eileen, and what my legal sense tells me I must do as executor of
your father's wishes, are different propositions. I am going to do exactly what you tell me
to. What you have shown me, and what I'd have realized, if I had stopped to think, is neither
right nor just."

Then Linda took her tun at deep thought.

"John," she said at last, "I am feeling depressed over what I have just done. I am not sure
that in losing my temper and bringing you up here I have played the game fairly. You don't
need to do anything. I'll manage my affairs with Eileen myself. But I'll tell you before you
go, that you needn't practice any subterfuges. When she reaches the point where she is ready
to come home, I'll tell her that you were here, and what you have seen. That is the best I
can do toward squaring myself with my own conscience."

Slowly they walked down the hall together. At the head of the stairs Linda took the cheque
that she carried and tore it into bits. Stepping across the hall, she let the little heap slowly
flutter to the rug in front of Eileen's door. Then she went back to her room and left John
Gilman to his own reflections.

CHAPTER XVII. A Rock and a Flame

The first time Linda entered the kitchen after her interview with Gilman, Katy asked in deep
concern, "Now what ye been doing, lambie?"

"Doing the baby act, Katy," confessed Linda. "Disgracing myself. Losing my temper. I wish I
could bring myself to the place where I would think half a dozen times before I do a thing once."

"Now look here," said Katy, beginning to bristle, "ain't it the truth that ye have thought
for four years before ye did this thing once?"

"Quite so," said Linda. "But since I am the daughter of the finest gentleman I ever knew, I
should not do hasty, regrettable things. On the living-room table I found a note sweeter than
honey, and it contained a cheque for me that wouldn't pay Eileen's bills for lunches, candy,
and theaters for a month; so in undue heat I reduced it to bits and decorated the rug before
her door. But before that, Katy, I led my guardian into the room, and showed him everything.
I meant to tell him that, since he had neglected me for four years, he could see that I had
justice now, but when I'd personally conducted him from Eileen's room to mine, and when I took
a good look at him there was something on his face, Katy, that I couldn't endure. So I told
him to leave it to me; that I would tell Eileen myself what I had done, and so I will. But
I am sorry I did it, Katy; I am awfully sorry. You always told me to keep my temper and I lost
it completely. From now on I certainly will try to behave myself more like a woman than a spoiled
child. Now give me a dust cloth and brushes. I am almost through with my job in the library
and I want to finish, because I shall be forced to use the money from the books to pay for
my skylight and fireplace."

Linda went to the library and began work, efficiently, carefully, yet with a precise rapidity
habitual to her. Down the long line of heavy technical books, she came to the end of the shelf.
Three books from the end she noticed a difference in the wall behind the shelf. Hastily removing
the other two volumes, she disclosed a small locked door having a scrap of paper protruding
from the edge which she pulled out and upon which she read:

In the event of my passing, should anyone move these books and find this door, these lines
are to inform him that it is to remain untouched. The key to it is in my safety-deposit vault
at the Consolidated Bank. The Bank will open the door and attend to the contents of the box
at the proper time.

Linda fixed the paper back exactly as she had found it. She stood looking at the door a long
time, then she carefully wiped it, the wall around it, and the shelf. Going to another shelf,
she picked out the books that had been written by her father and, beginning at the end of the
shelf, she ranged them in a row until they completely covered the opening. Then she finished
filling the shelf with other books that she meant to keep, but her brain was working, milling
over and over the question of what that little compartment contained and when it was to be
opened and whether John Gilman knew about it, and whether the Consolidated Bank would remember
the day specified, and whether it would mean anything important to her.

She carried the dusters back to Katy, and going to her room, concentrated resolutely upon her
work; but she Was unable to do anything constructive. Her routine lessons she could prepare,
but she could not even sketch a wild rose accurately. Finally she laid down her pencil, washed
her brushes, put away her material, and locking her door, slipped the key into her pocket. Talboys
and Louise looked at each other, and bit their lips. It was only a woman,--a tall, thin, bent
woman in a shabby print gown, with a faded sunbonnet pushed back from her gray head and a common
clay pipe between her lips. Probably in her youth she had been a pretty woman, and the worn features
and dim eyes still retained something engaging in their expression
of timid good-will.

"Won' you all step in?" she said, advancing.

"Yes, yes," added Demming, inclining his body and waving both hands
with magnificent courtesy; "alight, gen'lemen, alight!

I'm sorry I ain't no staggah juice to offah ye, but yo' right welcome to sweet potatoes an'
pussimmon beah, w'ich's all--"

"Demming," said the Bishop, sternly, "what does this mean?

I came to bury Mrs. Demming, and--and here she is!"

"Burry me!" exclaimed the woman. "Why, I ain't dead!"

Demming rubbed his hands, his face wearing an indescribable expression of mingled embarrassment,
contrition, and bland insinuation. "Well, yes, Bishop, yere she is, an' no mistake! Nuthin'
more 'n a swond, you unnerstan'.

I 'lowed ter notify you uns this mahnin', but fac' is I wuz so decomposed,
fin'in' her traipsin' 'bout in the gyardin an' you all 'xpectin' a
fun'al, thet I jes' hed ter brace up; an' fac' is I braced up too
much, an' ovahslep'.

I'm powerful sorry, an' I don' blame you uns ef you do feel mad!"

The Bishop flung off his robes in haste and walked to the carriage, where he bundled them in with
scant regard for their crispness.

"Never heard of such a thing!" said Louise, that being her invariable formula for occasions demanding
expression before she was prepared to commit herself. By this time
a glimmering notion of the state of things had reached the coachman's
brain, and he was in an ecstasy. Talboys thought it fitting to speak.
He turned to Mrs. Demming, who was looking from one to another of
the group, in a scared way.

"Were you in a swoon?" he asked.

"Oh,
laws!" cried the poor woman. "Oh, Demming, what hev you gwine an'
done now? Gentlemen, he didn't mean no harm, I'm suah!"

"You were
not, then?" said Talboys.

"I wonder now," said Linda, "if you are going to say that I could be any such lovely thing
on the landscape as a bridge."

"No," said Peter slowly, "nothing so prosaic. Bridges are common in this world. You are going
to be something uncommon. History records the experiences of but one man who has seen a flame
in the open. I am a second Moses and you are going to be my burning bush. I intended to read
this article to you."

Peter massed the sheets, straightened them on the desk, and deliberately ripped them across
several times. Linda sprang to her feet and stretched out her hands.

"Why, Peter!" she cried in a shocked voice. "That is perfectly inexcusable. There are hours
and hours of work on that, and I have not a doubt but that it was good work."

"Simple case of mechanism," said Peter, reducing the bits to smaller size and dropping them
into the empty nail keg that served as his wastebasket. "A lifeless thing without a soul, mere
clockwork. I have got the idea now. I am to build a bridge and make a road. Every way I look
I can see a golden-flame tongue of inspiration burning. I'll rewrite that thing and animate
it. Take me for a ride, Linda."

Linda rose and walked to the Bear Cat. Peter climbed in and sat beside her. Linda laid her
hands on the steering wheel and started the car. She ran it down to the highway and chose a
level road leading straight down the valley through cultivated country. In all the world there
was nothing to equal the panorama that she spread before Peter that evening. She drove the
Bear Cat past orchards, hundreds of acres of orchards of waxen green leaves and waxen white
bloom of orange, grapefruit, and lemon. She took him where seas of pink outlined peach orchards,
and other seas the more delicate tint of the apricots. She glided down avenues lined with palm
and eucalyptus, pepper and olive, and through unbroken rows, extending for miles, of roses,
long stretches of white, again a stretch of pink, then salmon, yellow, and red. Nowhere in
all the world are there to be found so many acres of orchard bloom and so many miles of tree-lined,
rose-decorated roadway as in southern California. She sent the little car through the evening
until she felt that it was time to go home, and when at last she stopped where they had started,
she realized that neither she nor Peter had spoken one word. As he stepped from the car she
leaned toward him and reached out her hand.

"Thank you for the fireplace, Peter," she said.

Peter took the hand she extended and held it one minute in both his own. Then very gently he
straightened it out in the palm of one of his hands and with the other hand turned back the
fingers and laid his lips to the heart of it.

"Thank you, Linda, for the flame," he said, and turning abruptly, he went toward his workroom.

Stopping for a bite to eat in the kitchen, Linda went back to her room. She sat down at the
table and picking up her pencil, began to work, and found that she could work. Every stroke
came true and strong. Every idea seemed original and unusual. Quite as late as a light ever
had shone in her window, it shone that night, the last thing she did being to write another
anonymous letter to Marian, and when she reread it Linda realized that it was an appealing
letter. She thought it certainly would comfort Marian and surely would make her feel that someone
worth while was interested in her and in her work. She loved some of the whimsical little touches
she had put into it, and she wondered if she had made it so much like Peter Morrison that it
would be suggestive of him to Marian. She knew that she had no right to do that and had no
such intention. She merely wanted a model to copy from and Peter seemed the most appealing
model at hand.

After school the next day Linda reported that she had finished going through the books and
was ready to have them taken. Then, after a few minutes of deep thought, she made her way to
the Consolidated Bank. At the window of the paying teller she explained that she wished to
see the person connected with the bank who had charge of the safety-deposit boxes and who looked
after the accounts pertaining to the estate of Alexander Strong. The teller recognized the
name. He immediately became deferential.

"I'll take you to the office of the president," he said. "He and Doctor Strong were very warm
friends. You can explain to him what it is you want to know."

Before she realized what was happening, Linda found herself in an office that was all mahogany
and marble. At a huge desk stacked with papers sat a man, considerably older than her father.
Linda remembered to have seen him frequently in their home, in her father's car, and she recalled
one fishing expedition to the Tulare Lake region where he had been a member of her father's party.

"Of course you have forgotten me, Mr. Worthington," she said as she approached his desk. "I
have grown such a tall person during the past four years."

The white-haired financier rose and stretched out his hand.

"You exact replica of Alexander Strong," he said laughingly, "I couldn't forget you any more
than I could forget your father. That fine fishing trip where you proved such a grand little
scout is bright in my memory as one of my happiest vacations. Sit down and tell me what I can
do for you."

Linda sat down and told him that she was dissatisfied with the manner in which her father's
estate was being administered.

He listened very carefully to all she had to say, then he pressed a button and gave a few words
of instruction to the clerk who answered it. When several ledgers and account books were laid
before him, with practiced hand he turned to what he wanted. The records were not complicated.
They covered a period of four years. They showed exactly what monies had been paid into the
bank for the estate. They showed what royalties had been paid on the books. Linda sat beside
him and watched his pencil running up and down columns, setting down a list of items, and making
everything plain. Paid cheques for household expenses I and drygoods bills were all recorded
and deducted. With narrow, alert eyes, Linda was watching, and her brain was keenly alive.
As she realized the discrepancy between the annual revenue from the estate and the totaling
of the expenses, she had an inspiration. Something she never before had thought of occurred
to her. She looked the banker in the eye and said very quietly: "And now, since she is my sister
and I am going to be of age very shortly and these things must all be gone into and opened
up, would it be out of place for me to ask you this afternoon to let me have a glimpse at the
private account of Miss Eileen Strong?"

The banker drew a deep breath and looked at Linda keenly.

"That would not be customary," he said slowly.

"No?" said Linda. "But since Father and Mother went out at the same time and there was no will
and the property would be legally divided equally between us upon my coming of age, would my
sister be entitled to a private account?"

"Had she any sources of obtaining money outside the estate?"

"No," said Linda. "At least none that I know of. Mother had I some relatives in San Francisco
who were very wealthy people, but they never came to see us and we never went there. I know
nothing about them. I never had any money from them and I am quite sure Eileen never had."

Linda sat very quietly a minute and then she looked at the banker.

"Mr. Worthington," she said, "the situation is slightly peculiar. My guardian, John Gilman,
is engaged to marry my sister Eileen. She is a beautiful girl, as you no doubt recall, and
he is very much in love with her. Undoubtedly she has been able, at least recently, to manage
affairs very much in her own way. She is more than four years my senior, and has always had
charge of the household accounts and the handling of the bank accounts. Since there is such
a wide discrepancy between the returns from the property and the expenses that these books
show, I am forced to the conclusion that there must be upon your books, or the books of some
other bank in the city, a private account in Eileen's name or in the name of the Strong estate."

"That I can very easily ascertain," said Mr. Worthington, reaching again toward the button
on his desk. A few minutes later the report came that there was a private account in the name
of Miss Eileen Strong. Again Linda was deeply thoughtful.

"Is there anything I can do," she inquired, "to prevent that account from being changed or
drawn out previous to my coming of age?"

Then Mr. Worthington grew thoughtful.

"Yes," he said at last. "If you are dissatisfied, if you feel that you have reason to believe
that money rightfully belonging to you is being diverted to other channels, you have the right
to issue an injunction against the bank, ordering it not to pay out any further money on any
account nor to honor any cheques drawn by Miss Strong until the settlement of the estate. Ask
your guardian to execute and deliver such an injunction, or merely ask him, as your guardian
and the administrator of the estate, to give the bank a written order to that effect."

"But because he is engaged to Eileen, I told him I would not bring him into this matter," said
Linda. "I told him that I would do what I wanted done, myself."

"Well, how long is it until this coming birthday of yours?" inquired Mr. Worthington.

"Less than two weeks," answered Linda.

For a time the financier sat in deep thought, then he looked at Linda. It was a keen, searching
look. It went to the depths of her eyes; it included her face and hair; it included the folds
of her dress, the cut of her shoe, and rested attentively on the slender hands lying quietly
in her lap.

"I see the circumstances very clearly," he said. "I sympathize with your position. Having known
your father and being well acquainted with your guardian, would you be satisfied if I should
take the responsibility of issuing to the clerks an order not to allow anything to be drawn
from the private account until the settlement of the estate?"

"Perfectly satisfied," said Linda.

"It might be," said Mr. Worthington, "managing matters i that way, that no one outside of ourselves
need ever know of il Should your sister not draw on the private account in the mean time, she
would be free to draw household cheques on the monthly income and if in the settlement of the
estate she turns in this private account or accounts, she need never know of the restriction
concerning this fund."

"Thank you very much," said Linda. "That will fix everything finely."

On her way to the street car, Linda's brain whirled.

"It's not conceivable," she said, "that Eileen should be enriching herself at my expense. I
can't imagine her being dishonest in money affairs, and yet I can recall scarcely a circumstance
in life in which Eileen has ever hesitated to be dishonest when a lie served her purpose better
than the truth. Anyway, matters are safe now."

The next day the books were taken and a cheque for their value was waiting for Linda when she
reached home. She cashed this cheque and went straight to Peter Morrison for his estimate of
the expenses for the skylight and fireplace. When she asked for the bill Peter hesitated.

"You wouldn't accept this little addition to your study as a gift from Henry and me?" he asked
lightly. "It would be a great pleasure to us if you would."

"I could accept stones that Henry Anderson had gathered from the mountains and canyons, and
I could accept a verse carved on stone, and be delighted with the gift; but I couldn't accept
hours of day labor at the present price of labor, so you will have to give me the bill, Peter."

Peter did not have the bill, but he had memoranda, and when Linda paid him she reflected that
the current talk concerning the inflated price of labor was greatly exaggerated.

For two evenings as Linda returned from school and went to her room she glanced down the hall
and smiled at the decoration remaining on Eileen's rug. The third evening it was gone, so that
she knew Eileen was either in her room or had been there. She did not meet her sister until
dinnertime. She was prepared to watch Eileen, to study her closely. She was not prepared to
admire her, but in her heart she almost did that very thing. Eileen had practiced subterfuges
so long, she was so accomplished, that it would have taken an expert to distinguish reality
from subterfuge. She entered the dining room humming a gay tune. She was carefully dressed
and appealingly beautiful. She blew a kiss to Linda and waved gaily to Katy.

"I was rather afraid," she said lightly, "that I might find you two in mourning when I got
back. I never stayed so long before, did I? Seemed as if every friend I had made special demand
on my time all at once. Hope you haven't been dull without me."

"Oh, no," said Linda quietly. "Being away at school all day, of course I wouldn't know whether
you were at home or not, and I have grown so accustomed to spending my evenings alone that
I don't rely on you for entertainment at any time."

"In other words," said Eileen, "it doesn't make any difference to you where I am."

"Not so far as enjoying your company is concerned," said Linda. "Otherwise, of course it makes
a difference. I hope you had a happy time."

"Oh, I always have a happy time," answered Eileen lightly. "I certainly have the best friends."

"That's your good fortune," answered Linda.

At the close of the meal Linda sat waiting. Eileen gave Katy instructions to have things ready
for a midnight lunch for her and John Gilman and then, humming her tune again, she left the
dining room and went upstairs. Linda stood looking after her.

 "Now or never," she said at last.  "I have no business to let
her meet John until I have recovered my self-respect. But the Lord help
me to do the thing decently!"

So she followed Eileen up the stairway. She tapped at the door, and without waiting to hear
whether she was invited or not, opened it and stepped inside. Eileen was sitting before the
window, a big box of candy beside her, a magazine in her fingers.

Evidently she intended to keep her temper in case the coming interview threatened to become
painful.

"I was half expecting you," she said, "you silly hothead. I found the cheque I wrote you when
I got home this afternoon. That was a foolish thing to do. Why did you tear it up? If it were
too large or if it were not enough why didn't you use it and ask for another? Because I had
to be away that was merely to leave you something to go on until I got back."

Then Linda did the most disconcerting thing possible. In her effort at self-control she went
too far. She merely folded her hands in her lap and sat looking straight at Eileen without
saying one word. It did not show much on the surface, but Eileen really had a conscience, she
really had a soul; Linda's eyes, resting rather speculatively on her, were honest eyes, and
Eileen knew what she knew. She flushed and fidgeted, and at last she broke out impatiently:
"Oh, for goodness' sake, Linda, don't play 'Patience-on-a-monument.' Speak up and say what
it is that you want. If that cheque was not big enough, what will satisfy you?"

"Come to think of it," said Linda quietly, "I can get along with what I have for the short
time until the legal settlement of our interests is due. You needn't bother any more about
a cheque."

Eileen was surprised and her face showed it; and she was also relieved. That too her face showed.

"I always knew," she said lightly, "that I had a little sister with a remarkably level head
and good common sense. I am glad that you recognize the awful inflation of prices during the
war period, and how I have had to skimp and scheme and save in order to make ends meet and
to keep us going on Papa's meager income."

All Linda's good resolutions vanished. She was under strong nervous tension. It irritated her
to have Eileen constantly referring to their monetary affairs as if they were practically paupers,
as if their father's life had been a financial failure, as if he had not been able to realize
from achievements recognized around the world a comfortable living for two women.

"Oh, good Lord!" she said shortly. "Bluff the rest of the world like a professional, Eileen,
but why try it with me? You're right about my having common sense. I'll admit that I am using
it now. I will be of age in a few days, and then we'll take John Gilman and go to the Consolidated
Bank, and if it suits your convenience to be absent for four or five days at that period, I'll
take John Gilman and we'll go together."

Eileen was amazed. The receding color in her cheeks left the rouge on them a ghastly, garish thing.

"Well, I won't do anything of the sort," she said hotly, "and neither will John Gilman."

"Unfortunately for you," answered Linda, "John Gilman is my guardian, not yours. He'll be forced
to do what the law says he must, and what common decency tells him he must, no matter what
his personal feelings are; and I might as well tell you that your absence has done you no good.
You'd far better have come home, as you agreed to, and gone over the books and made me a decent
allowance, because in your absence John came here to ask me where you were, and I know that
he was anxious."

"He came here!" cried Eileen.

"Why, yes," said Linda. "Was it anything unusual? Hasn't he been coming here ever since I can
remember? Evidently you didn't keep him as well posted this time as you usually do. He came
here and asked for me."

"And I suppose," said Eileen, an ugly red beginning to rush into her white cheeks, "that you
took pains to make things uncomfortable for me."

"I am very much afraid," said Linda, "that you are right. You have made things uncomfortable
for me ever since I can remember, for I can't remember the time when you were not finding fault
with me, putting me in the wrong and getting me criticized and punished if you possibly could.
It was a fair understanding that you should be here, and you were not, and I was seeing red
about it; and just as John came in I found your note in the living room and read it aloud.'

"Oh, well, there was nothing in that," said Eileen in a relieved tone.

"Nothing in the wording of it, no," said Linda, "but there was everything in the intention
back of it. Because you did not live up to your tacit agreement, and because I had been on
high tension for two or three days, I lost my temper completely. I brought John Gilman up here
and showed him the suite of rooms in which you have done for yourself, for four years. I gave
him rather a thorough inventory of your dressing table and drawers, and then I opened the closet
door and called his attention to the number and the quality of the garments hanging there.
The box underneath them I thought was a shoe box, but it didn't prove to be exactly that; and
for that I want to tell you, as I have already told John, I am sorry. I wouldn't have done
that if I had known what I was doing."

"Is that all?" inquired Eileen, making a desperate effort at self-control.

"Not quite," said Linda. "When I finished with your room, I took him back and showed him mine
in even greater detail than I showed him yours. I thought the contrast would be more enlightening
than anything either one of us could say."

"And I suppose you realize," said Eileen bitterly, "that you lost me John Gilman when you did it."

"I?" said Linda. "I lost you John Gilman when I did it? But I didn't do it. You did it. You
have been busy for four years doing it. If you hadn't done it, it wouldn't have been there
for me to show him. I can't see that this is profitable. Certainly it's the most distressing
thing that ever has occurred for me. But I didn't feel that I could let you meet John Gilman
tonight without telling you what he knows. If you have any way to square your conscience and
cleanse your soul before you meet him, you had better do it, for he's a mighty fine man and
if you lose him you will have lost the best chance that is likely ever to come to you."

Linda sat studying Eileen. She saw the gallant effort she was making to keep her self-possession,
to think with her accustomed rapidity, to strike upon some scheme whereby she could square
herself. She rose and started toward the door.

"What you'll say to John I haven't the faintest notion," she said. "I told him very little.
I just showed him."

Then she went out and closed the door after her. At the foot of the stairs she met Katy admitting
Gilman. Without any preliminaries she said: "I repeat, John, that I'm sorry for what happened
the other day. I have just come from Eileen. She will be down as soon as Katy tells her you're
here, no doubt. I have done what I told you I would. She knows what I showed you so you needn't
employ any subterfuges. You can be frank and honest with each other."

"I wish to God we could," said John Gilman.

Linda went to her work. She decided that she would gauge what happened by the length of time
John stayed. If he remained only a few minutes it would indicate that there had been a rupture.
If he stayed as long as he usually did, the chances were that Eileen's wit had triumphed as usual.

At twelve o'clock Linda laid her pencils in the box, washed the brushes, and went down the
back stairs to the ice chest for a glass of milk. The living room was still lighted and Linda
thought Eileen's laugh quite as gay as she ever had heard it. Linda closed her lips very tight
and slowly climbed the stairs. When she entered her room she walked up to the mirror and stared
at herself in the glass for a long time, and then of herself she asked this question:

"Well, how do you suppose she did it?"

CHAPTER XVIII. Spanish Iris

Just as Linda was most deeply absorbed with her own concerns there came a letter from Marian
which Linda read and reread several times; for Marian wrote:

MY DEAREST PAL:

Life is so busy up San Francisco way that it makes Lilac Valley look in retrospection like
a peaceful sunset preliminary to bed time.

But I want you to have the consolation and the comfort of knowing that I have found at least
two friends that I hope will endure. One is a woman who has a room across the hall from mine
in my apartment house. She is a newspaper woman and life is very full for her, but it is filled
with such intensely interesting things that I almost regret having made my life work anything
so prosaic as inanimate houses; but then it's my dream to enliven each house I plan with at
least the spirit of home. This woman--her name is Dana Meade--enlivens every hour of her working
day with something concerning the welfare of humanity. She is a beautiful woman in her soul,
so extremely beautiful that I can't at this minute write you a detailed description of her
hair and her eyes and her complexion, because this nice, big, friendly light that radiates
from her so lights her up and transfigures her that everyone says how beautiful she is, and
yet I have a vague recollection that her nose is what you would call a "beak," and I am afraid
her cheek bones are too high for good proportion, and I know that her hair is not always so
carefully dressed as it should be, but what is the difference when the hair is crowned with
a halo? I can't swear to any of these things; they're sketchy impressions. The only thing I
am absolutely sure about is the inner light that shines to an unbelievable degree. I wish she
had more time and I wish I had more time and that she and I might become such friends as you
and I are. I can't tell you, dear, how much I think of you. It seems to me that you're running
a sort of undercurrent in my thoughts all day long. 

But he greeted the present opportunity all the more warmly.

In the morning, the three--the Bishop, Louise, and Talboys--drove to the cracker's cabin. The
day was perfect, one of those Aiken days, so fair that even invalids find no complaint in their
wearisome list to bring against them and can but sigh over each, "Ah, if all days might only
be like this!" Hardly a cloud marred the tender blue of the sky. The air was divinely soft. They
drove through the woods, and the ground was carpeted with dry pine spikes, whereon their horses'
hoofs made a dull and pleasant sound. A multitude of violets grew in the little spaces among
the trees. Yellow jasmine flecked the roadside shade with gold, its fragrance blending with the
keen odors of the pine. If they looked up, they saw the pine tops etched upon the sky, and a
solemn, ceaseless murmur beat its organ-like waves through all their talk. The Bishop had put
on his clerical robes; he sat on the back seat of the carriage, a superb figure, with his
noble head and imposing mien. As they rolled along, the Bishop talked. He spoke of death. He
spoke not as a priest, but as a man, dwelling on the mystery of death, bringing up those speculations
with which from the beginning men have striven to light the eternal darkness.

"I suppose it is the mystery," said the Bishop, "which causes the unreality of death, its perpetual
surprise. Now, behind my certainty of this poor woman's death I have a lurking expectation
of seeing her standing in the doorway, her old clay pipe in her mouth.
I can't help it."

"Though she was a 'bawn lady,' she smoked, did
she?" said Talboys. Then he felt the remark to be hopelessly below
the level of the conversation, and made haste to add, "I suppose it
was a consolation to her; she had a pretty hard life, I fancy." For one minute I truly experienced
a thrill. I thought he was going to give that mass of flowers to me, but he did not. He merely
laid it across my lap and said: "Edith adored the flowers from bulbs. I never see such bloom
that my heart does not ache with a keen, angry ache to think that she should be taken from
the world, and the beauty that she so loved, so early and so ruthlessly. We'll take her these
as I would take them to her were she living."

So, Linda dear, I sat there and looked at color and drank in fragrance, and we whirled through
the city and away to a cemetery on a beautiful hill, and filled a vase inside the gates of
a mausoleum with these appealing flowers. Then we sat down, and a man with a hurt heart told
me about his hurt, and what an effort he was making to get through the world as the woman he
loved would have had him; and before I knew what I was doing, Linda, I told him the tellable
part of my own hurts. I even lifted my turban and bowed my white head before him. This hurt--it
was one of the inexorable things that come to people in this world--I could talk about. That
deeper hurt, which has put a scar that never will be effaced on my soul, of course I could
not tell him about. But when we went back to the car he said to me that he would help me to
get back into the sunlight. He said the first thing I must do to regain self-confidence was
to begin driving again. I told him I could not, but he said I must, and made me take the driver's
seat of a car I had never seen and take the steering wheel of a make of machine I had never
driven, and tackle two or three serious problems for a driver. I did it all right, Linda, because
I couldn't allow myself to fail the kind of a man Mr. Snow is, when he was truly trying to
help me, but in the depths of my heart I am afraid I am a coward forever, for there is a ghastly
illness takes possession of me as I write these details to you. But anyway, put a red mark
on your calendar beside the date on which you get this letter, and joyfully say to yourself
that Marian has found two real, sympathetic friends.

In a week or ten days I shall know about the contest. If I win, as I really have a sneaking
hope that I shall, since I have condensed the best of two dozen houses into one and exhausted
my imagination on my dream home, I will surely telegraph, and you can make it a day of jubilee.
If I fail, I will try to find out where my dream was not true and what can be done to make
it materialize properly; but between us, Linda girl, I am going to be dreadfully disappointed.
I could use the material value that prize represents. I could start my life work which I hope
to do in Lilac Valley on the prestige and the background that it would give me. I don't know,
Linda, whether you ever learned to pray or not, but I have, and it's a thing that helps when
the black shadow comes, when you reach the land of "benefits forgot and friends remembered not."

And this reminds me that I should not write to my very dearest friend who has her own problems
and make her heart sad with mine; so to the joyful news of my two friends add a third, Linda,
for I am going to tell you a secret because it will make you happy. Since I have been in San
Francisco some man, who for a reason of his own does not tell me his name, has been writing
me extremely attractive letters. I have had several of them and I can't tell you, Linda, what
they mean to me or how they help me. There is a touch of whimsy about them. I can't as yet
connect them with anybody I ever met, but to me they are taking the place of a little lunch
on the bread of life. They are such real, such vivid, such alive letters from such a real person
that I have been doing the very foolish and romantic thing of answering them as my heart dictates
and signing my own name to them, which on the surface looks unwise when the man in the case
keeps his identity in the background; but since he knows me and knows my name it seems useless
to do anything else: and answer these letters I shall and must; because every one of them is
to me a strong light thrown on John Gilman. Every time one of these letters comes to me I have
the feeling that I would like to reach out through space and pick up the man who is writing
them and dangle him before Eileen and say to her: "Take HIM. I dare you to take HIM." And my
confidence, Linda, is positively supreme that she could not do it.

You know, between us, Linda, we regarded Eileen as a rare creature, a kind of exotic thing,
made to be kept in a glass house with tempered air and warmed water; but as I go about the
city and at times amuse myself at concerts and theaters, I am rather dazed to tell you, honey,
that the world is chock full of Eileens. On the streets, in the stores, everywhere I go, sometimes
half a dozen times in a day I say to myself: "There goes Eileen." I haven't a doubt that Eileen
has a heart, if it has not become so calloused that nobody could ever reach it, and I suspect
she has a soul, but the more I see of her kind the more I feel that John Gilman may have to
breast rather black water before he finds them.

With dearest love, be sure to remember me to Katherine O'Donovan. Hug her tight and give her
my unqualified love. Don't let her forget me.

As ever,

MARIAN.

This was the letter that Linda read once, then she read it again and then she read it a third
time, and after that she lost count and reread it whenever she was not busy doing something
else, for it was a letter that was the next thing to laying hands upon Marian. The part of
the letter concerning the unknown man who was writing Marian, Linda pondered over deeply.

"That is the best thing I ever did in my life," she said in self-commendation. "It's doing
more than I hoped it would. It's giving Marian something to think about. It's giving her an
interest in life. It's distracting her attention. Without saying a word about John Gilman it
is making her see for herself the weak spots in him through the very subtle method of calling
her attention to the strength that may lie in another man. For once in your life, Linda, you
have done something strictly worth while. The thing for you to do is to keep it up, and in
order to keep it up, to make each letter fresh and original, you will have to do a good deal
of sticking around Peter Morrison's location and absorbing rather thoroughly the things he
says. Peter doesn't know he is writing those letters but he is in them till it's a wonder Marian
does not hear him drawl and see the imps twisting his lips as she reads them. Before I write
another single one I'll go see Peter. Maybe he will have that article written. I'll take a
pencil, and as he reads I'll jot down the salient points and then I'll come home and work out
a head and tail piece for him to send in with it, and in that way I'll ease my soul about the
skylight and the fireplace."

So Linda took pad and pencils, raided Katy for everything she could find that was temptingly
edible, climbed into the Bear Cat, and went to see Peter as frankly as she would have crossed
the lawn to visit Marian. He was not in the garage when she stopped her car before it, but
the workmen told her that he had strolled up the mountain and that probably he would return
soon. Learning that he had been gone but a short time Linda set the Bear Cat squalling at the
top of its voice. Then she took possession of the garage, and clearing Peter's worktable spread
upon it the food she had brought, and then started out to find some flowers for decorations.
When Peter came upon the scene he found Linda, flushed and brilliant eyed, holding before him
a big bouquet of alder bloom, the last of the lilacs she had found in a cool, shaded place,
pink filaree, blue lupin, and white mahogany panicles. "Peter," she cried. "you can't guess
what I have been doing!"

Peter glanced at the flowers.

"Isn't it obvious?" he inquired.

"No, it isn't," said Linda, "because I am capable of two processes at once. The work of my
hands is visible; with it I am going to decorate your table. You won't have to go down to the
restaurant for your supper tonight because I have brought my supper up to share with you, and
after we finish, you're going to read me your article as you have rewritten it. I am going
to decorate it and we are going to make a hit with it that will be at least a start on the
road to greater fame. What you see is material. You can pick it up, smell it, admire it and
eat it. But what I have truly been doing is setting Spanish iris for yards down one side of
the bed of your stream. When I left it was a foot and a half high Peter, and every blue that
the sky ever knew in its loveliest moments, and a yellow that is the concentrated essence of
the best gold from the heart of California. Oh, Peter, there is enchantment in the way I set
it. There are irregular deep beds, and there are straggly places where there are only one or
two in a ragged streak, and then it runs along the edge in a fringy rim, and then it stretches
out in a marshy place that is going to have some other wild things, arrowheads, and orchids,
and maybe a bunch of paint brush on a high, dry spot near by. I wish you could see it!"

Peter looked at Linda reflectively and then he told her that he could see it. He fold her that
he adored it, that he was crazy about her straggly continuity and her fringy border, but there
was not one word of truth in what he said, because what he saw was a slender thing, willowy,
graceful; roughened wavy black hair hanging half her length in heavy braids, dark eyes and
bright cheeks, a vivid red line of mouth, and a bright brown line of freckles bridging a prominent
and aristocratic nose. What he was seeing was a soul, a young thing, a thing he coveted with
every nerve and fiber of his being. And while he glibly humored her in her vision of decorating
his brook, in his own consciousness he was saying to himself: "Is there any reason why I should
not try for her?"

And then he answered himself. "There is no reason in your life. There is nothing ugly that
could offend her or hurt her. The reason, the real reason, probably lies in the fact that if
she were thinking of caring for anyone it would be for that attractive young schoolmate she
brought up here for me to exercise my wits upon. It is very likely that she regards me in the
light of a grandfatherly person to whom she can come with her joys or her problems, as frankly
as she has now."

So Peter asked if the irises crossed the brook and ran down both sides. Linda sat on a packing
case and concentrated on the iris, and finally she announced that they did. She informed him
that his place was going to be natural, that Nature evolved things in her own way. She did
not grow irises down one side of a brook and arrowheads down the other. They waded across and
flew across and visited back and forth, riding the water or the wind or the down of a bee or
the tail of a cow. As she served the supper she had brought she very gravely informed him that
there would be iris on both sides of his brook, and cress and miners' lettuce under the bridge;
and she knew exactly where the wild clematis grew that would whiten his embankment after his
workmen had extracted the last root of poison oak.

"It may not scorch you, Peter," she said gravely, "but you must look out for the Missus and
the little things. I haven't definitely decided on her yet, but she looks a good deal like
Mary Louise Whiting to mc. I saw her the other day. She came to school after Donald. I liked
her looks so well that I said to myself: 'Everybody talks about how fine she is. I shouldn't
wonder if I had better save her for Peter'; but if I decide to, you should act that poison
stuff out, because it's sure as shooting to attack any one with the soft, delicate skin that
goes with a golden head."

"Oh, let's leave it in," said Peter, "and dispense with the golden head. By the time you get
that stream planted as you're planning, I'll have become so accustomed to a dark head bobbing
up and down beside it that I won't take kindly to a sorrel top." "That is positively sacrilegious,"
said Linda, lifting her hands to her rough black hair. "Never in my life saw anything lovelier
than the rich gold on Louise Whiting's bare head as she bent to release her brakes and start
her car. A black head looks like a cinder bed beside it; and only think what a sunburst it
will be when Mary Louise kneels down beside the iris."

When they had finished their supper Linda gathered up the remnants and put them in the car,
then she laid a notebook and pencil on the table.

"Now I want to hear that article," she said. "I knew you would do it over the minute I was
gone, and I knew you would keep it to read to me before you sent it."

"Hm," said Peter. "Is it second sight or psychoanalysis or telepathy, or what?"

"Mostly 'what'," laughed Linda. "I merely knew. The workmen are gone and everything is quiet
now, Peter. Begin. I am crazy to get the particular angle from which you 'make the world safe
for democracy.' John used to call our attention to your articles during the war. He said we
had not sent another man to France who could write as humanely and as interestingly as you
did. I wish I had kept those articles; because I didn't get anything from them to compare with
what I can get since I have a slight acquaintance with the procession that marches around your
mouth. Peter, you will have to watch that mouth of yours. It's an awfully betraying feature.
So long as it's occupied with politics and the fads and the foibles and the sins and the foolishness
and the extravagances of humanity, it's all very well. But if you ever get in trouble or if
ever your heart hurts, or you get mad enough to kill somebody, that mouth of yours is going
to be a most awfully revealing feature, Peter. You will have hard work to settle it down into
hard-and-fast noncommittal lines."

Peter looked at the girl steadily.

"Have you specialized on my mouth?" he asked.

"Huh-umph!" said Linda, shaking her head vigorously. "When I specialize I use a pin and a microscope
and go right to the root of matters as I was taught. This is superficial. I am extemporizing now."

"Well, if this is extemporizing," said Peter, "God help my soul if you ever go at me with a
pin and a microscope."

"Oh, but I won't!" cried Linda. "It wouldn't be kind to pin your friends on a setting board
and use a microscope on them. You might see things that were strictly private. You might see
things they wouldn't want you to see. They might not be your friends any more if you did that.
When I make a friend I just take him on trust like I did Donald. You're my friend, aren't you,
Peter?"

"Yes, Linda," said Peter soberly. "Put me to any test you can think of if you want proof."

"But I don't believe in PROVING friends, either," said Linda. "I believe in nurturing them.
I would set a friend in my garden and water his feet and turn the sunshine on him and tell
him to stay there and grow. I might fertilize him, I might prune him, and I might use insecticide
on him. I might spray him with rather stringent solutions, but I give you my word I would not
test him. If he flourished under my care I would know it, and if he did not I would know it,
and that would be all I would want to know. I have watched Daddy search for the seat of nervous
disorders, and sometimes he had to probe very deep to find what developed nerves unduly but
he didn't ever do any picking and raveling and fringing at the soul of a human being merely
for the sake of finding out what it was made of; and everyone says I am like him."

"I wish I might have known him," said Peter.

"Don't I wish it!" said Linda. "Now then, Peter, go ahead. Read your article."

Peter opened a packing case, picked out a sheaf of papers, and sitting opposite Linda, began
to read. He was dumbfounded to find that he, a man who had read and talked extemporaneously
before great bodies of learned men, should have cold feet and shaking hands and a hammering
heart because he was trying to read an article on America for Americans before a high-school
Junior. But presently, as the theme engrossed him, he forgot the vision of Linda interesting
herself in his homemaking, and saw instead a vision of his country threatened on one side by
the red menace of the Bolshevik, on the other by the yellow menace of the Jap, and yet on another
by the treachery of the Mexican and the slowly uprising might of the black man, and presently
he was thundering his best-considered arguments at Linda until she imperceptibly drew back
from him on the packing case, and with parted lips and wide eyes she listened in utter absorption.
She gazed at a transformed Peter with aroused eyes and a white light of patriotism on his forehead,
and a conception even keener than anything that the war had brought her young soul was burning
in her heart of what a man means when he tries to express his feeling concerning the land of
his birth. Presently, without realizing what she was doing, she reached for her pad and pencils
and rapidly began sketching a stretch of peaceful countryside over which a coming storm of
gigantic proportions was gathering. Fired by Peter's article, the touch of genius in Linda's
soul became creative and she fashioned huge storm clouds wind driven, that floated in such
a manner as to bring the merest suggestion of menacing faces, black faces, yellow faces, brown
faces, and under the flash of lightning, just at the obscuring of the sun, a huge, evil, leering
red face. She swept a stroke across her sheet and below this she began again, sketching the
same stretch of country she had pictured above, strolling in cultivated fields, dotting it
with white cities, connecting it with smooth roadways, sweeping the sky with giant planes.
At one side, winging in from the glow of morning, she drew in the strong-winged flight of a
flock of sea swallows, peacefully homing toward the far-distant ocean. She was utterly unaware
when Peter stopped reading. Absorbed, she bent over her work. When she had finished she looked up.

"Now I'll take this home," she said. "I can't do well on color with pencils. You hold that
article till I have time to put this on water-color paper and touch it up a bit here and there,
and I believe it will be worthy of starting and closing your article."

She pushed the sketches toward him.

"You little wonder!" said Peter softly.

"Yes, 'little' is good," scoffed Linda, rising to very nearly his height and reaching for the
lunch basket. "'Little' is good, Peter. If I could do what I like to myself I would get in
some kind of a press and squash down about seven inches."

"Oh, Lord!" said Peter. "Forget it. What's the difference what the inches of your body are
so long as your brain has a stature worthy of mention?"

"Good-bye!" said Linda. "On the strength of that I'll jazz that sketch all up, bluey and red-purple
and jade-green. I'll make it as glorious as a Catalina sunset."

As she swung the car around the sharp curve at the boulders she looked back and laughingly
waved her hand at Peter, and Peter experienced a wild desire to shriek lest she lose control
of the car and plunge down the steep incline. A second later, when he saw her securely on the
road below, he smiled to himself.

"Proves one thing," he said conclusively. "She is over the horrors. She is driving unconsciously.
Thank God she knew that curve so well she could look the other way and drive it mentally."

CHAPTER XIX. The Official Bug-Catcher

Not a mile below the exit from Peter's grounds, Linda perceived a heavily laden person toiling
down the roadway before her and when she ran her car abreast and stopped it, Henry Anderson
looked up at her with joyful face.

"Sorry I can't uncover, fair lady," he said, "but you see I am very much otherwise engaged."

What Linda saw was a tired, disheveled man standing in the roadway beside her car, under each
arm a boulder the size of her head, one almost jet-black, shot through with lines of white
and flying figures of white crossing between these bands that almost reminded one of winged
dancers. The other was a combination stone made up of matrix thickly imbedded with pebbles
of brown, green, pink, and dull blue.

"For pity's sake!" said Linda. "Where are you going and why are you personally demonstrating
a new method of transporting rock?"

"I am on my way down Lilac Valley to the residence of a friend of mine," said Henry Anderson.
"I heard her say the other day that she saved every peculiarly marked boulder she could find
to preserve coolness and moisture in her fern bed."

Linda leaned over and opened the car door.

"All well and good," she said; "but why in the cause of reason didn't you leave them at Peter's
and bring them down in his car?"

Henry Anderson laid the stones in the bottom of the car, stepped in and closed the door behind
him. He drew a handkerchief from his pocket and wiped his perspiring face and soiled hands.

"I had two sufficient personal reasons," he said. "One was that the car at our place is Peter
Morrison's car, not mine; and the other was that it's none of anybody's business but my own
if I choose to 'say it' with stones."

Linda started the car, being liberal with gas--so liberal that it was only a few minutes till
Henry Anderson protested.

"This isn't the speedway," he said. "What's your hurry?"

"Two reasons seem to be all that are allowed for things at the present minute," answered Linda.
"One of mine is that you can't drive this beast slow, and the other is that my workroom is
piled high with things I should be doing. I have two sketches I must complete while I am in
the mood, and I have had a great big letter from my friend, Marian Thorne, today that I want
to answer before I go to bed tonight."

"In other words," said Henry Anderson bluntly, "you want me to understand that when I have
reached your place and dumped these stones I can beat it; you have no further use for me."

"You said that," retorted Linda.

"And who ever heard of such a thing," said Henry, "as a young woman sending away a person of
my numerous charms and attractions in order to work, or to write a letter to another woman?"

"But you're not taking into consideration," said Linda, "that I must work, and I scarcely know
you, while I have known Marian ever since I was four years old and she is my best friend."

"Well, she has no advantage over me," said Henry instantly, "because I have known you quite
as long as Peter Morrison has at least, and I'm your official bug-catcher."

"I had almost forgotten about the bugs," said Linda.

"Well, don't for a minute think I am going to give you an opportunity to forget," said Henry
Anderson.

He reached across and laid his hand over Linda's on the steering gear. Linda said nothing,
neither did she move. She merely added more gas and put the Bear Cat forward at a dizzy whirl.
Henry laughed.

"That's all right, my beauty," he said. "Don't you think for a minute that I can't ride as
fast as you can drive."

A dull red mottled Linda's cheeks. As quickly as it could be done she brought the Bear Cat
to a full stop. Then she turned and looked at Henry Anderson. The expression in her eyes was
disconcerting even to that cheeky young individual--he had not borne her gaze a second until
he removed his hand.

"Thanks," said Linda in a dry drawl. "And you will add to my obligation if in the future you
will remember not to deal in assumptions. I am not your 'beauty,' and I'm not anyone's beauty;
while the only thing in this world that I am interested in at present is to get the best education
I can and at the same time carry on work that I love to do. I have a year to finish my course
in the high school and when I finish I will only have a good beginning for whatever I decide
to study next."

"That's nothing," said the irrepressible Henry. "It will take me two years to catch a sufficient
number of gold bugs to be really serious, but there wouldn't be any harm in having a mutual
understanding and something definite to work for, and then we might be able, you know, to cut
out some of that year of high-school grinding. If the plans I have submitted in the Nicholson
and Snow contest should just happen to be the prize winners, that would put matters in such
a shape for young Henry that he could devote himself to crickets and tumble-bugs at once."

"Don't you think," said Linda quietly, "that you would better forget that silly jesting and
concentrate the best of your brains on improving your plans for Peter Morrison's house?"

"Why, surely I will if that's what you command me to do," said Henry, purposely misunderstanding
her.

"You haven't mentioned before," said Linda, "that you had submitted plans in that San Francisco
contest."

"All done and gone," said Henry Anderson lightly. "I had an inspiration one day and I saw a
way to improve a house with comforts and conveniences I never had thought of before. I was
enthusiastic over the production when I got it on paper and figured it. It's exactly the house
that I am going to build for Peter, and when I've cut my eye teeth on it I am going to correct
everything possible and build it in perfection for you."

"Look here," said Linda soberly, "I'm not accustomed to this sort of talk. I don't care for
it. If you want to preserve even the semblance of friendship with me you must stop it, and
get to impersonal matters and stay there."

"All right," he agreed instantly, "but if you don't like my line of talk, you're the first
girl I ever met that didn't."

"You have my sympathy," said Linda gravely. "You have been extremely unfortunate."

Then she started the Bear Cat, and again running at undue speed she reached her wild-flower
garden. Henry Anderson placed the stones as she directed and waited for an invitation to come
in, but the invitation was not given. Linda thanked him for the stones. She told him that in
combination with a few remaining from the mantel they would make all she would require, and
excusing herself she drove to the garage. When she came in she found the irrepressible Henry
sitting on the back steps explaining to Katy the strenuous time he had had finding and carrying
down the stones they had brought. Katy had a plate of refreshments ready to hand him when Linda
laughingly passed them and went to her room.

When she had finished her letter to Marian she took a sheet of drawing paper, and in her most
attractive lettering sketched in the heading, "A Palate Teaser," which was a direct quotation
from Katy. Below she wrote:

You will find Tunas in the cacti thickets of any desert, but if you are so fortunate as to
be able to reach specimens which were brought from Mexico and set as hedges around the gardens
of the old missions, you will find there the material for this salad in its most luscious form.
Naturally it can be made from either Opuntia Fiscus-Indica or Opuntia Tuna, but a combination
of these two gives the salad an exquisite appearance and a tiny touch more delicious flavor,
because Tuna, which is red, has to my taste a trifle richer and fuller flavor than Indica,
which is yellow. Both fruits taste more like the best well-ripened watermelon than any other
I recall.

Bring down the Tunas with a fishing rod or a long pole with a nail in the end. With anything
save your fingers roll them in the sand or in tufts of grass to remove the spines. Slice off
either end, score the skin down one side, press lightly, and a lush globule of pale gold or
rosy red fruit larger than a hen's egg lies before you. With a sharp knife, beginning with
a layer of red and ending with one of yellow, slice the fruits thinly, stopping to shake out
the seeds as you work. In case you live in San Diego County or farther south, where it is possible
to secure the scarlet berries of the Strawberry Cactus--it is the Mammillaria Goodridgei species
that you should use--a beautiful decoration for finishing your salad can be made from the red
strawberries of these. If you live too far north to find these, you may send your salad to
the table beautifully decorated by cutting fancy figures from the red Tuna, or by slicing it
lengthwise into oblong pieces and weaving them into a decoration over the yellow background.

For your dressing use the juice of a lemon mixed with that of an orange, sweetened to taste,
into which you work, a drop at a time, four tablespoons of the best Palermo olive oil. If the
salad is large more oil and more juice should be used.

To get the full deliciousness of this salad, the fruit must have been on ice, and the dressing
made in a bowl imbedded in cracked ice, so that when ready to blend both are ice-cold, and
must be served immediately.

Gigantic specimens of fruit-bearing Cacti can be found all over the Sunland Desert near to
the city, but they are not possessed of the full flavor of the cultivated old mission growths,
so that it is well worth your while to make a trip to the nearest of these for the fruit with
which to prepare this salad. And if, as you gather it, you should see a vision of a white head,
a thin, ascetic, old face, a lean figure trailing a brown robe, slender white hands clasping
a heavy cross; if you should hear the music of worship ascending from the throats of Benedictine
fathers leading a clamoring choir of the blended voices of Spaniard, Mexican, and Indian, combining
with the music of the bells and the songs of the mocking birds, nest making among the Tunas,
it will be good for your soul in the line of purging it from selfishness, since in this day
we are not asked to give all of life to the service of others, only a reasonable part of it.

Linda read this over, working in changes here and there, then she picked up her pencil and
across the top of her sheet indicated an open sky with scarcely a hint of cloud. Across the
bottom she outlined a bit of Sunland Desert she well remembered, in the foreground a bed of
flat-leaved nopal, flowering red and yellow, the dark red prickly pears, edible, being a near
relative of the fruits she had used in her salad. After giving the prickly pear the place of
honor to the left, in higher growth she worked in the slender, cylindrical, jointed stems of
the Cholla, shading the flowers a paler, greenish yellow. On the right, balancing the Cholla,
she drew the oval, cylindrical columns of the hedgehog cactus, and the color touch of the big
magenta flowers blended exquisitely with the color she already had used. At the left, the length
of her page, she drew a gigantic specimen of Opuntia Tuna, covered with flowers, and well-developed
specimens of the pears whose coloring ran into the shades of the hedgehog cactus.

She was putting away her working materials when she heard steps and voices on the stairs, so
she knew that Eileen and John Gilman were coming. She did not in the least want them, yet she
could think of no excuse for refusing them admission that would not seem ungracious. She hurried
to the wall, snatched down the paintings for Peter Morrison, and looked around to see how she
could dispose of them. She ended by laying one of them in a large drawer which she pushed shut
and locked. The other she placed inside a case in the wall which formerly had been used for
billiard cues. At their second tap she opened the door. Eileen was not at her best. There was
a worried look across her eyes, a restlessness visible in her movements, but Gilman was radiant.

"What do you think, Linda?" he cried. "Eileen has just named the day!"

"I did no such thing," broke in Eileen.

"Your pardon, fair lady, you did not," said Gilman. "That was merely a figure of speech. I
meant named the month. She has definitely promised in October, and I may begin to hunt a location
and plan a home for us. I want the congratulations of my dear friend and my dearer sister."

Linda held out her hand and smiled as bravely as she could.

"I am very glad you are so pleased, John," she said quietly, "and I hope that you will be as
happy as you deserve to be."

"Now exactly what do you mean by that?" he asked.

"Oh, Linda prides herself on being deep and subtle and conveying hidden meanings," said Eileen.
"She means what a thousand people will tell you in the coming months: merely that they hope
you will be happy."

"Of course," Linda hastened to corroborate, wishing if possible to avoid any unpleasantness.

"You certainly have an attractive workroom here," said John, "much as I hate to see it spoiled
for billiards."

"It's too bad," said Linda, "that I have spoiled it for you for billiards. I have also spoiled
the outside appearance of the house for Eileen."

"Oh, I don't know," said John. "I looked at it carefully the other day as I came up, and I
thought your changes enhanced the value of the property."

"I am surely glad to hear that," said Linda. "Take a look through my skylight and my new window.
Imagine you see the rugs I am going to have and a few more pieces of furniture when I can afford
them; and let me particularly point out the fireplace that Henry Anderson and your friend Peter
designed and had built for me. Doesn't it add a soul and a heart to my study?"

John Gilman walked over and looked at the fireplace critically. He read the lines aloud, then
he turned to Eileen.

"Why, that is perfectly beautiful," he said. "Let's duplicate it in our home."

"You bungler!" scoffed Eileen.

"I think you're right," said Gilman reflectively, "exactly right. Of course I would have no
business copying Linda's special fireplace where the same people would see it frequently; and
if I had stopped to think a second, I might have known that you would prefer tiling to field
stone."

"Linda seems very busy tonight," said Eileen. "Perhaps we are bothering her."

"Yes," said John, "we'll go at once. I had to run up to tell our good news; and I wanted to
tell you too, Linda dear, that I think both of us misjudged Eileen the other day. You know,
Linda, you have always dressed according to your father's ideas, which were so much simpler
and plainer than the manner in which your mother dressed Eileen, that she merely thought that
you wished to continue in his way. She had no objection to your having any kind of clothes
you chose, if only you had confided in her, and explained to her what you wanted."

Linda stood beside her table, one lean hand holding down the letter she had been writing. She
stood very still, but she was powerless to raise her eyes to the face of either John or Eileen.
Above everything she did not wish to go any further in revealing Eileen to John Gilman. If
he knew what he knew and if he felt satisfied, after what he had seen, with any explanation
that Eileen could trump up to offer, Linda had no desire to carry the matter further. She had
been ashamed of what she already had done. She had felt angry and dissatisfied with herself,
so she stood before them downcast and silent.

"And it certainly was a great joke on both of us," said John jovially, "what we thought about
that box of cigarettes, you know. Herein he differs from his Jewish predecessors, for the notion
of the old historians of the Alexandrian movement, that there was a systematic Jewish philosophy
before Philo, does not appear to have been well-founded. All that Aristeas and Aristobulus and
the Apocryphal authors had done was to assimilate certain philosophemes
to their religious ideas; they had not re-interpreted the whole system
of philosophy from a Jewish point of view or traced an independent
system, or an eclectic doctrine in the Holy Scriptures.


But Eileen had no intention of meeting anyone's gaze at that minute. She was fidgeting with
a sheet of drawing paper.

"Careful you don't bend that," cautioned Linda. Then she looked at John Gilman. He BELIEVED
what he was saying; he was happy again. Linda evolved the best smile she could.

"How stupid of us not to have guessed!" she said.

Closing the door behind them, Linda leaned against it and looked up through the skylight at
the creep blue of the night, the low-hung stars. How long she stood there she did not know.
Presently she went to her chair, picked up her pencil, and slowly began to draw. At first she
scarcely realized what she was doing, then she became absorbed in her work. Then she reached
for her color box and brushes, and shortly afterward tacked against the wall an extremely clever
drawing of a greatly enlarged wasp. Skillfully she had sketched a face that was recognizable
round the big insect eyes. She had surmounted the face by a fluff of bejewelled yellow curls,
encased the hind legs upon which the creature stood upright in pink velvet Turkish trousers
and put tiny gold shoes on the feet. She greatly exaggerated the wings into long trails and
made them of green gauze with ruffled edges. All the remainder of the legs she had transformed
into so many braceleted arms, each holding a tiny fan, or a necklace, a jewel box, or a handkerchief
of lace. She stood before this sketch, studying it for a few minutes, then she walked over
to the table and came back with a big black pencil. Steadying her hand with a mahl stick rested
against the wall, with one short sharp stroke she drew a needle-pointed stinger, so screened
by the delicate wings that it could not be seen unless you scrutinized the picture minutely.
After that, with careful, interested hands she brought out Peter Morrison's drawings and replaced
them on the wall to dry.

CHAPTER XX. The Cap Sheaf

Toward the last of the week Linda began to clear the mental decks of her ship of life in order
that she might have Saturday free for her promised day with Donald. She had decided that they
would devote that day to wave-beaten Laguna. It was a long drive but delightful. It ran over
the old King's Highway between miles of orange and lemon orchards in full flower, bordered
by other miles of roses in their prime.

Every minute when her mind was not actively occupied with her lessons or her recipes Linda
was dreaming of the King's Highway. Almost unconsciously she began to chant:

"All in the golden weather, forth let us ride today, You and I together on the King's Highway,
The blue skies above us, and below the shining sea; There's many a road to travel, but it's
this road for me."

You must have ridden this road with an understanding heart and the arm of God around you to
know the exact degree of disappointment that swelled in Linda's heart when she answered the
telephone early Saturday morning and heard Donald Whiting's strained voice speaking into it.
He was talking breathlessly in eager, boyish fashion.

"Linda, I am in a garage halfway downtown," he was saying, "and it looks to me as if to save
my soul I couldn't reach you before noon. I have had the darnedest luck. Our Jap got sick last
week and he sent a new man to take his place. There wasn't a thing the matter with our car
when I drove it in Friday night. This morning Father wanted to use it on important business,
and it wouldn't run. He ordered me to tinker it up enough to get it to the shop. I went at
it and when it would go, I started You can imagine the clip I was going, and the thing went
to pieces. I don't know yet how it comes that I saved my skin. I'm pretty badly knocked out,
but I'll get there by noon if it's a possible thing."

"Oh, that's all right," said Linda, fervently hoping that the ache in her throat would not
tincture her voice.

