 Gardiner adds he must have known that his case would not
bear the light. Apparently this means that he had asserted, or had fraudulently suffered James
to infer, that no Spaniards were settled in the vicinity of Keymis's Mine, or were in the least
likely to withstand in arms his approach to it; or that he had made a promise, of which the
resistance of his men to the Spanish attack was a breach, in no circumstances to fight. These
are unproved assumptions. Ralegh, who constitutionally took his instructions from Secretary
Winwood, cannot be shown to have given, or been asked for, any positive pledge that in no circumstances
would he force his way into the interior of Guiana. The warlike equipment of his fleet, and
of the men he led, is evidence that the contingency of a collision with armed Spanish ships
and soldiers was contemplated by the Government and prepared for. The nature of the business
on which James had despatched him fully authorized the claim in the Apology. He was sent to
work a mine on the Orinoko, where the whole commercial world knew that Spaniards were settled.
James must have known it from many sources. He knew it definitely from Gondomar, whose protests
against the expedition were based particularly on it. Any 'guilt' of Ralegh's for letting his
followers run the gauntlet of the San Thome garrison, James must share equally for letting
him go with an armed squadron to the Orinoko at all.

[Sidenote: Manourie's Story.]

On the first of August, when the Apology was already completed, the King arrived at Salisbury.
It is not known whether Ralegh succeeded in having the composition at once laid before him.
If the King saw it, we may be certain that it exerted upon the royal mind the precise reverse
of the conciliatory effect the writer anticipated. Orders immediately were issued that Ralegh
should move forward. Thereupon, according to Manourie, Ralegh bribed him with twenty crowns,
and an offer of £50 a year, to aid his escape. On the same suspicious testimony, he was furious
against the King, and uttered menaces. Ralegh informed Manourie of King's Tilbury project.
He said he must fly, for 'a man that fears is never secure.' Further, he asserted his conviction
that the courtiers had concluded among them 'a man must die to reassure the traffic which he
had broken in Spain.' Manourie pretended Ralegh handed to him jewels and money for the purchase
of Stukely's connivance. Ralegh acknowledged he had told Stukely he hoped to procure payment
of his debts. Any offers beyond this he denied. At Staines Manourie left. He said to Ralegh,
whom he was betraying to prison and death, that he did not expect to see him again while Ralegh
was in England. It is a pity his figure cannot be wholly obliterated from Ralegh's biography,
on which it is one of several ugly human blurs.

[Sidenote: Interview with French Agents.]

At Brentford a more loyal but as unlucky a Frenchman, David de Novion, came to meet Ralegh
at the inn. He brought a message from le Clerc, the French Resident, that he wished to see
Ralegh. The Government knew of this, and thought that, by affecting ignorance, it might learn
more. On July 30 had arrived a Council warrant for Ralegh's committal to the Tower. It was
not at once executed. Before he left Salisbury it had been conceded through the mediation,
it is said, of Digby, touched by his apparent infirmities at Salisbury, that he should be conveyed
to his own house in Broad-street, for four or five days' rest. He now obtained leave to have
that arrangement confirmed or resumed. Naunton told Carleton that he procured the permission
on a pretence of sickness, that he might take medicine at home. Probably it was granted that
he might be tempted to plan an escape with the Frenchmen, and give the Government an excuse
for more rigour. On the night of Friday, August 7, he arrived in Broad-street, where he found
Lady Ralegh. On the evening of Sunday, at eight, le Clerc and de Novion came. They showed little
caution, speaking freely in the presence of eight or ten persons. They intimated he might count
on their help in his flight, and on a good reception in France. The French interest in Ralegh
was an anti-Spanish interest. If safe in France he could, it was thought, exercise in some
not very apparent way influence in England against the Anglo-Spanish alliance. Queen Anne was
understood to prefer vehemently a French to a Spanish bride for Prince Charles. The French
dealings with Ralegh, it was believed at the time, had been prompted by the Queen or her confidants.
Ralegh seems to have listened to his French visitors with grateful courtesy, but not to have
accepted any offer of French assistance. He intended to make his way to France. He would not
go in a French vessel.

[Sidenote: Preparations for Flight.]

The plan on which he decided had been concerted with King. A former boatswain of King's, called
Hart, had a ketch. Cottrell, apparently Ralegh's old Tower servant, who had once before borne
witness against him, had found Hart for King. Before Ralegh reached London, King had arranged
with Hart through Cottrell that the ketch should be held ready off Tilbury. Implicit trust
was placed in Cottrell's supposed devotion to Ralegh. In reality he and Hart had at once betrayed
the whole arrangement to a Mr. William Herbert, not the Herbert of the Guiana Expedition. Herbert
told Sir William St. John, who in 1616 had traded in Ralegh's liberation. St. John in company,
it would seem from Stukely's subsequent account, with Herbert, had posted off with the news
to Salisbury. He had met Stukely and his prisoner at Bagshot on the road, and warned the former,
who scarcely required the information. Stukely showed such zeal for Ralegh's safety as wholly
to delude both him and King. He had obtained a licence from Naunton to enter, without liability,
into any contract, and comply with any offer. Though in theory Ralegh was under his charge
in Broad-street, he left him full liberty of action. Ralegh's own servants were allowed to
wait on him. Stukely borrowed £10 of him. The pretence was a wish to pay for the despatch into
the country of his own servants, that they might not interfere with the flight. He promised
to accompany Ralegh into France. Ralegh, with all his wit and experience of men, his wife,
with her love and her clearness of vision, the shrewd French diplomatists, and honest King,
were dupes of a mere cormorant, like Stukely, and of vulgar knaves, like Cottrell and Hart.
Without the least suspicion of foul play Ralegh on that Sunday night, after le Clerc and de
Novion had left, went down to the river side.

It was a foolish business. Nothing, except success, could have been more woful than all its
features and its failure. If the attempt be blamed as rebellion against the law, the correctness
of the condemnation cannot be disputed. Ralegh derived no right to fly from the injustice of
his treatment. Had he been of the nature of Socrates he would not have thought of flight. His
respect for authority was not like that of Socrates. His conscience never particularly troubled
him for the immorality of his endeavour to break from custody. It stung him very soon and sharply
for the degradation of having run from danger. Flight was unworthy of him, and he acknowledged
its shame. But his own account of the temptation to which he yielded may be accepted as truthful.
He told Sir Thomas Wilson his intention was to seek an asylum in France from Spanish vengeance,
until 'the Queen should have made means for his pardon and recalling.' In England he was doomed,
he foresaw, to death or to perpetual confinement; and he believed he had work in life still
to do. He feared neither death nor prison for itself. In a paroxysm of despair he clutched
the only chance he perceived of reserving his powers for the enterprise he had set them, the
overthrow of the colonial monopoly of Spain.

[Sidenote: On the Thames.]

[Sidenote: Stukely Unmasked.]

Two wherries were hired at the Tower dock. Ralegh, attended by one of his pages, Stukely, Stukely's
son, King, and Hart, set off. Sir William St. John and Herbert followed secretly in another
boat. Ralegh wore a false beard and a hat with a green band. Stukely asked King whether thus
far he had not acted as an honest man. King replied by a hope that he would continue to act
thus. Herbert's boat was seen first making as if it would go through the bridge; but finally
it returned down the river. Ralegh became alarmed. He asked the watermen if they would row
on, though one came to arrest him in the King's name. They answered they could at all events
not go beyond Gravesend. Ralegh explained that a brabbling matter with the Spanish Ambassador
was taking him to Tilbury to embark for the Low Countries. He offered them ten gold pieces.
Thereupon Stukely began cursing himself that he should be so unfortunate as to venture his
life and fortune with a man full of doubt. He swore he would kill the watermen if they did
not row on. The delays spent the tide, and the men said they could not reach Gravesend before
morning. When they were a mile beyond Woolwich, at a reach called the Gallions, near Plumstead,
Ralegh felt sure he was betrayed, and ordered the men to row back. Herbert's and St. John's
wherry met them. Then Ralegh, wishing to remain in Stukely's custody, declared himself his
prisoner. He still supposed the man was faithful. He pulled things out of his pocket and gave
them to Stukely, who hugged him with tenderness. They landed at Greenwich, Ralegh intending
to go to Stukely's house. But the other crew landed also. Now at last Stukely revealed his
true character. He arrested Ralegh and King in his Majesty's name, and committed them to the
charge of two of St. John's men. Ralegh understood, and said: 'Sir Lewis, these actions will
not turn out to your credit.' With a generous thoughtfulness for a very different man, he tried
to induce King to give himself out for an accomplice in Stukely's plot. King could not be persuaded.
Ralegh and he were kept separate till the morning, when Ralegh was conducted to the Tower.
As once more he passed within, he must have felt that his tomb had opened for him. King was
allowed to attend him to the gate. There he was compelled to part. He left Ralegh, he wrote
after the execution, 'to His tuition with whom I do not doubt but his soul resteth.' Ralegh's
farewell words to him were: 'Stukely and Cottrell have betrayed me.'

CHAPTER XXVIII.

A MORAL RACK (August 10-October 15).

[Sidenote: Ralegh's Trinkets.]

