When Mahmoud had exhausted his tobacco, and perceived that I also had ceased to puff forth
smoke, he spoke in Italian to the interpreter, and the interpreter forthwith proceeded to explain
to me the purport of this visit.  This was done with much difficulty, for the interpreter's
stock of English was very scanty--but after awhile I understood, or thought I understood, as
follows:- At some previous period of my existence I had done some deed which had given infinite
satisfaction to Mahmoud al Ackbar.  Whether, however, I had done it myself, or whether my father
had done it, was not quite clear to me.  My father, then some time deceased, had been a wharfinger
at Liverpool, and it was quite possible that Mahmoud might have found himself at that port.
Mahmoud had heard of my arrival in Egypt, and had been given to understand that I was coming
to Suez--to carry myself away in the ship, as the interpreter phrased it.  This I could not
understand, but I let it pass.  Having heard these agreeable tidings--and Mahmoud, sitting
in the corner, bowed low to me as this was said--he had prepared for my acceptance a slight
refection for the morrow, hoping that I would not carry myself away in the ship till this had
been eaten.  On this subject I soon made him quite at ease, and he then proceeded to explain
that as there was a point of interest at Suez, Mahmoud was anxious that I should partake of
the refection somewhat in the guise of a picnic, at the Well of Moses, over in Asia, on the
other side of the head of the Red Sea.  Mahmoud would provide a boat to take across the party
in the morning, and camels on which we would return after sunset. Or else we would go and return
on camels, or go on camels and return in the boat.  Indeed any arrangement would be made that
I preferred. If I was afraid of the heat, and disliked the open boat, I could be carried round
in a litter.  The provisions had already been sent over to the Well of Moses in the anticipation
that I would not refuse this little request.

I did not refuse it.  Nothing could have been more agreeable to me than this plan of seeing
something of the sights and wonders of this land,--and of this seeing them in good company.
I had not heard of the Well of Moses before, but now that I learned that it was in Asia,--in
another quarter of the globe, to be reached by a transit of the Red Sea, to be returned from
by a journey on camels' backs,-- I burned with anxiety to visit its waters.  What a story would
this be for Judkins!  This was, no doubt, the point at which the Israelites had passed.  Of
those waters had they drunk.  I almost felt that I had already found one of Pharaoh's chariot
wheels.  I readily gave my assent, and then, with much ceremony and many low salaams, Mahmoud
and his attendant left me.  "I am very glad that I came to Suez," said I to myself.

I did not sleep much that night, for the mosquitoes of Suez are very persevering; but I was
saved from the agonising despair which these animals so frequently produce, by my agreeable
thoughts as to Mahmoud al Ackbar.  I will put it to any of my readers who have travelled, whether
it is not a painful thing to find one's-self regarded among strangers without any kindness
or ceremonious courtesy.  I had on this account been wretched at Cairo, but all this was to
be made up to me at Suez.  Nothing could be more pleasant than the whole conduct of Mahmoud
al Ackbar, and I determined to take full advantage of it, not caring overmuch what might be
the nature of those previous favours to which he had alluded.  That was his look-out, and if
he was satisfied, why should not I be so also?

On the following morning I was dressed at six, and, looking out of my bed-room, I saw the boat
in which we were to be wafted into Asia being brought up to the quay close under my window.
It had been arranged that we should start early, so as to avoid the mid-day sun, breakfast
in the boat,--Mahmoud in this way engaged to provide me with two refections,--take our rest
at noon in a pavilion which had been built close upon the well of the patriarch, and then eat
our dinner, and return riding upon camels in the cool of the evening. Nothing could sound more
pleasant than such a plan; and knowing as I did that the hampers of provisions had already
been sent over, I did not doubt that the table arrangements would be excellent.  Even now,
standing at my window, I could see a basket laden with long-necked bottles going into the boat,
and became aware that we should not depend altogether for our morning repast on that gritty
coffee which my friend Mahmoud's followers prepared.

I had promised to be ready at six, and having carefully completed my toilet, and put a clean
collar and comb into my pocket ready for dinner, I descended to the great gateway and walked
slowly round to the quay.  As I passed out, the porter greeted me with a low obeisance, and
walking on, I felt that I stepped the ground with a sort of dignity of which I had before been
ignorant.  It is not, as a rule, the man who gives grace and honour to the position, but the
position which confers the grace and honour upon the man.  I have often envied the solemn gravity
and grand demeanour of the Lord Chancellor, as I have seen him on the bench; but I almost think
that even Judkins would look grave and dignified under such a wig. Mahmoud al Ackbar had called
upon me and done me honour, and I felt myself personally capable of sustaining before the people
of Suez the honour which he had done me.

As I walked forth with a proud step from beneath the portal, I perceived, looking down from
the square along the street, that there was already some commotion in the town.  I saw the
flowing robes of many Arabs, with their backs turned towards me, and I thought that I observed
the identical gown and turban of my friend Mahmoud on the back and head of a stout short man,
who was hurrying round a corner in the distance.  I felt sure that it was Mahmoud.  Some of
his servants had failed in their preparations, I said to myself, as I made my way round to
the water's edge.  This was only another testimony how anxious he was to do me honour.

I stood for a while on the edge of the quay looking into the boat, and admiring the comfortable
cushions which were luxuriously arranged around the seats.  The men who were at work did not
know me, and I was unnoticed, but I should soon take my place upon the softest of those cushions.
I walked slowly backwards and forwards on the quay, listening to a hum of voices that came
to me from a distance.  There was clearly something stirring in the town, and I felt certain
that all the movement and all those distant voices were connected in some way with my expedition
to the Well of Moses.  At last there came a lad upon the walk dressed in Frank costume, and
I asked him what was in the wind.  He was a clerk attached to an English warehouse, and he
told me that there had been an arrival from Cairo.

He knew no more than that, but he had heard that the omnibuses had just come in.  Could it
be possible that Mahmoud al Ackbar had heard of another old acquaintance, and had gone to welcome
him also?

