He hesitated--glanced hurriedly around to again assure himself it was not possible to be overheard--then
finished the sentence:

"No one has been here since I came a thousand years ago."

At the words so strange, so inexplicable upon any theory of nature and common experience, the
lamp shook in his hand. Involuntarily he shrank from the admission, though to himself. But
recovering, he repeated:

"Since I came a thousand years ago."

Then he added more firmly:

"But the earth and the sea are always giving up their secrets. So saith the good King Hiram;
and since I am a witness proving the wisdom of the speech, I at least must believe him. Wherefore
it is for me to govern myself as if another will shortly follow me. The saying of the king
is an injunction."

With that, he turned the glittering sword over and over admiringly. Loath to let it go, he
drew the blade partly from the scabbard, and its clearness had the depth peculiar to the sky
between stars at night.

"Is there anything it will not buy," he continued, reflectively. "What king could refuse a
sword once Solomon's? I will take it."

Thereupon he passed both the emerald and the sword out to the slaves, whom he presently joined.

The conviction, but a moment before expressed, that another would follow him to the tomb of
the venerated Tyrian, was not strong enough to hinder the master from attempting to hide every
sign which might aid in the discovery. The negro, under his direction, returned the lid exactly
to its former fitting place on the sarcophagus; the emerald and the sword he wrapped in his
gown; the bags and the tools were counted and distributed among the slaves for easy carriage.
Lamp in hand, he then walked around to see that nothing was left behind. Incidentally he even
surveyed the brown walls and the dim dome overhead. Having reached the certainty that everything
was in its former state, he waved his hand, and with one long look backward at the model, ghostly
beautiful in its shining white transparency, he led the way to the passage of entrance, leaving
the king to his solitude and stately sleep, unmindful of the visitation and the despoilment.

Out in the large reception room, he paused again to restore the wall. Beginning with the insignificant
key, one by one the stones, each of which, as we have seen, had been numbered by him, were
raised and reset. Then handfuls of dust were collected and blown into the slight crevices till
they were invisible. The final step was the restoration of the sarcophagus; this done, the
gallery leading to the real vault of the king was once more effectually concealed.

"He who follows, come he soon or late, must have more than sharp eyes if he would have audience
with Hiram, my royal friend of Tyre," the adventurer said, in his meditative way, feeling at
the same time in the folds of his gown for the chart so the object of solicitude on the ship.
The roll, the emerald, and the sword were also safe. Signing the slaves to remain where they
were, he moved slowly across the chamber, and by aid of his lamp surveyed an aperture there
so broad and lofty it was suggestive of a gate rather than a door.

"It is well," he said, smiling. "The hunter of spoils, hereafter as heretofore, will pass this
way instead of the other."

The remark was shrewd. Probably nothing had so contributed to the long concealment of the gallery
just reclosed the second time in a thousand years as the high doorway, with its invitation
to rooms beyond it, all now in iconoclastic confusion.

Rejoining his workmen, he took a knife from the girdle of one of them, and cut a slit in the
gurglet large enough to admit the bags of precious stones. The skin was roomy, and received
them, though with the loss of much of the water. Having thus disposed of that portion of the
plunder to the best advantage both for portage and concealment, he helped swing it securely
upon the negro's shoulder, and without other delay led from the chamber to the great outdoors,
where the lamps were extinguished.

The pure sweet air, as may be imagined, was welcome to every one. While the slaves stood breathing
it in wholesome volumes, the master studied the stars, and saw the night was not so far gone
but that, with industry, the sea-shore could be made in time for the ship.

Still pursuing the policy of hiding the road to the tomb much as possible, he waited while
the men covered the entrance as before with stones brought up from the bank. A last survey
of the face of the rock, minute as the starlight allowed, reassured him that, as to the rest
of the world, the treasure might remain with its ancient owner undisturbed for yet another
thousand years, if not forever; after which, in a congratulatory mood, he descended the mountain
side to the place of bivouac, and thence in good time, and without adventure, arrived at the
landing by the sea. There the negro, wading far out, flung the tools into the water.

In the appointed time the galley came down from the city, and, under impulsion of the oars,
disappeared with the party up the coast northward.

The negro unrolled the pallet upon the deck, and brought some bread, Smyrna figs, and wine
of Prinkipo, and the four ate and drank heartily.

The skipper was then summoned.

"You have done well, my friend," said the master. "Spare not sail or oar now, but make Byzantium
without looking into any wayside port. I will increase your pay in proportion as you shorten
the time we are out. Look to it--go--and speed you."

Afterward the slaves in turn kept watch while he slept. And though the coming and going of
sailors was frequent, not one of them noticed the oil-stained water-skin cast carelessly near
the master's pillow, or the negro's shaggy half-cloak, serving as a wrap for the roll, the
emerald, and the sword once Solomon's.

The run of the galley from the nameless bay near Sidon was without stop or so much as a headwind.
Always the blue sky above the deck, and the blue sea below. In daytime the master passenger
would occasionally pause in his walk along the white planks, and, his hand on the gunwale,
give a look at some of the landmarks studding the ancient Cycladean Sea, an island here, or
a tall promontory of the continent yonder, possibly an Olympian height faintly gray in the
vaster distance. His manner at such moments did not indicate a traveller new to the highway.
A glance at the points such as business men closely pressed give the hands on the face of a
clock to determine the minute of the hour, and he would resume walking. At night he slept right
soundly.

From the Dardanelles into the Hellespont; then the Marmora. The captain would have coasted,
but the passenger bade him keep in the open. "There is nothing to fear from the weather," he
said, "but there is time to be saved."

In an afternoon they sighted the great stones Oxia and Plati; the first, arid and bare as a
gray egg, and conical like an irregular pyramid; the other, a plane on top, with verdure and
scattering trees. A glance at the map shows them the most westerly group of the Isles of the
Princes.

Now Nature is sometimes stupid, sometimes whimsical, doing unaccountable things. One gazing
at the other isles of the group from a softly rocking caique out a little way on the sea divines
instantly that she meant them for summer retreats, but these two, Oxia and Plati, off by themselves,
bleak in winter, apparently always ready for spontaneous combustion in the heated months, for
what were they designed? No matter--uses were found for them--fitting uses. Eremites in search
of the hardest, grimmest places, selected Oxia, and pecking holes and caves in its sides, shared
the abodes thus laboriously won with cormorants, the most gluttonous of birds. In time a rude
convent was built near the summit. On the other hand, Plati was converted into a Gehenna for
criminals, and in the vats and dungeons with which it was provided, lives were spent weeping
for liberty. On this isle, tears and curses; on that, tears and prayers.

At sundown the galley was plying its oars between Oxia and the European shore about where St.
Stephano is now situated. The dome of Sta. Sophia was in sight; behind it, in a line to the
northwest, arose the tower of Galata. "Home by lamplighting--Blessed be the Virgin!" the mariners
said to each other piously. But no! The master passenger sent for the captain.

"I do not care to get into harbor before morning. The night is delicious, and I will try it
in the small boat. I was once a rower, and yet have a fancy for the oars. Do thou lay off and
on hereabouts. Put two lamps at the masthead that I may know thy vessel when I desire to return.
Now get out the boat."

The captain thought his voyager queer of taste; nevertheless he did as told. In a short time
the skiff--if the familiar word can be pardoned-- put off with the negro and his master, the
latter at the oars.

In preparation for the excursion the gurglet half full of water and the sheepskin mantle of
the black man were lowered into the little vessel. The boat moved away in the direction of
Prinkipo, the mother isle of the group; and as the night deepened, it passed from view.

When out of sight from the galley's deck, the master gave the rowing to the negro, and taking
seat by the rudder, changed direction to the southeast; after which he kept on and on, until
Plati lay directly in his course.

The southern extremity of Plati makes quite a bold bluff. In a period long gone a stone tower
had been constructed there, a lookout and shelter for guardsmen on duty; and there being no
earthly chance of escape for prisoners, so securely were they immured, the duty must have been
against robbers from the mainland on the east, and from pirates generally. Under the tower
there was a climb difficult for most persons in daylight, and from the manoeuvring of the boat,
the climb was obviously the object drawing the master. He at length found it, and stepped out
on a shelving stone. The gurglet and mantle were passed to him, and soon he and his follower
were feeling their way upward.

On the summit, the chief walked once around the tower, now the merest ruin, a tumbledown without
form, in places overgrown with sickly vines. Rejoining his attendant, and staying a moment
to thoroughly empty the gurglet of water, on his hands and knees he crawled into a passage
much obstructed by debris. The negro waited outside.

The master made two trips; the first one, he took the gurglet in; the second, he took the mantle
wrapping the sword. At the end, he rubbed his hands in self-congratulation.

"They are safe--the precious stones of Hiram, and the sword of Solomon! Three other stores
have I like this one--in India, in Egypt, in Jerusalem--and there is the tomb by Sidon. Oh,
I shall not come to want!" and he laughed well pleased.

The descent to the small boat was effected without accident.

Next morning toward sunrise the passengers disembarked at Port St. Peter on the south side
of the Golden Horn. A little later the master was resting at home in Byzantium.

Within three days the mysterious person whom we, wanting his proper name and title, have termed
the master, had sold his house and household effects. In the night of the seventh day, with
his servants, singular in that all of them were deaf and dumb, he went aboard ship, and vanished
down the Marmora, going no one but himself knew whither.

The visit to the tomb of the royal friend of Solomon had evidently been to provide for the
journey; and that he took precious stones in preference to gold and silver signified a journey
indefinite as to time and place.

BOOK II

THE PRINCE OF INDIA

CHAPTER I

A MESSENGER FROM CIPANGO

Just fifty-three years after the journey to the tomb of the Syrian king--more particularly
on the fifteenth day of May, fourteen hundred and forty-eight--a man entered one of the stalls
of a market in Constantinople--to-day the market would be called a bazaar--and presented a
letter to the proprietor.

The Israelite thus honored delayed opening the linen envelope while he surveyed the messenger.
The liberty, it must be remarked, was not a usual preliminary in the great city, the cosmopolitanism
of which had been long established; that is to say, a face, a figure, or a mode, to gain a
second look from one of its denizens, had then, as it has now, to be grossly outlandish. In
this instance the owner of the stall indulged a positive stare. He had seen, he thought, representatives
of all known nationalities, but never one like the present visitor--never one so pinkish in
complexion, and so very bias-eyed--never one who wrapped and re-wrapped himself in a single
shawl so entirely, making it answer all the other vestments habitual to men. The latter peculiarity
was more conspicuous in consequence of a sack of brown silk hanging loosely from the shoulder,
with leaves and flowers done in dazzling embroidery down the front and around the edges. And
then the slippers were of silk not less rich with embroidery, while over the bare head a sunshade
of bamboo and paper brilliantly painted was carried.

Too well bred to persist in the stare or attempt to satisfy his curiosity by a direct question,
the proprietor opened the letter, and began reading it. His neighbors less considerate ran
together, and formed a crowd around the stranger, who nevertheless bore the inspection composedly,
apparently unconscious of anything to make him such a cynosure.

The paper which the removal of the envelope gave to the stall-keeper's hand excited him the
more. The delicacy of its texture, its softness to the touch, its semi-transparency, were unlike
anything he had ever seen; it was not only foreign, but very foreign.

The lettering, however, was in Greek plainly done. He noticed first the date; then, his curiosity
becoming uncontrollable, and the missive being of but one sheet, his eyes dropped to the place
of signature. There was no name there--only a seal--an impression on a surface of yellow wax
of the drooping figure of a man bound to a cross.

At sight of the seal his eyes opened wider. He drew a long breath to quiet a rising feeling,
half astonishment, half awe. Retreating to a bench near by, he seated himself, and presently
became unmindful of the messenger, of the crowd, of everything, indeed, except the letter and
the matters of which it treated.

The demand of the reader for a sight of the paper which could produce such an effect upon a
person who was not more than an ordinary dealer in an Eastern market may by this time have
become imperious; wherefore it is at once submitted in free translation. Only the date is modernized.

"ISLAND IN THE OVER-SEA. FAR EAST. May 15, A.D. 1447.

"Uel, Son of Jahdai.

"Peace to thee and all thine!

"If thou hast kept faithfully the heirlooms of thy progenitors, somewhere in thy house there
is now a duplication of the seal which thou wilt find hereto attached; only that one is done
in gold. The reference is to prove to thee a matter I am pleased to assert, knowing it will
at least put thee upon inquiry--I knew thy father, thy grandfather, and his father, and others
of thy family further back than it is wise for me to declare; and I loved them, for they were
a virtuous and goodly race, studious to do the will of the Lord God of Israel, and acknowledging
no other; therein manifesting the chiefest of human excellences. To which, as more directly
personal to thyself, I will add that qualities of men, like qualities in plants, are transmissible,
and go they unmixed through many generations, they make a kind. Therefore, at this great distance,
and though I have never looked into thy face, or touched thy hand, or heard thy voice, I know
thee, and give thee trust confidently. The son of thy father cannot tell the world what he
has of me here, or that there is a creature like unto me living, or that he has to do with
me in the least; and as the father would gladly undertake my requests, even those I now reveal
unto thee, not less willingly will his son undertake them. Refusal would be the first step
toward betrayal.

"With this preface, O Son of Jahdai, I write without fear, and freely; imparting, first, that
it is now fifty years since I set foot upon the shores of this Island, which, for want of a
name likely to be known to thee, I have located and described as 'In the Over-Sea. Far East.'
Its people are by nature kindly disposed to strangers, and live simply and affectionately.
Though they never heard of the Nazarene whom the world persists in calling the Christ, it is
truth to say they better illustrate his teachings, especially in their dealings with each other,
than the so-called Christians amongst whom thy lot is cast. Withal, however, I have become
weary, the fault being more in myself than in them. Desire for change is the universal law.
Only God is the same yesterday, to-day, and to-morrow eternally. So I am resolved to seek once
more the land of our fathers and Jerusalem, for which I yet have tears. In her perfection,
she was more than beautiful; in her ruin, she is more than sacred.

"In the execution of my design, know thou next, O Son of Jahdai, that I despatch my servant,
Syama, intrusting him to deliver this letter. When it is put into thy hand, note the day, and
see if it be not exactly one year from this 15 May, the time I have given him to make the journey,
which is more by sea than land. Thou mayst then know I am following him, though with stoppages
of uncertain duration; it being necessary for me to cross from India to Mecca; thence to Kash-Cush,
and down the Nile to Cairo. Nevertheless I hope to greet thee in person within six months after
Syama hath given thee this report.

"The sending a courier thus in advance is with a design of which I think it of next importance
to inform thee.

"It is my purpose to resume residence in Constantinople; for that, I must have a house. Syama,
amongst other duties in my behalf, is charged to purchase and furnish one, and have it ready
to receive me when I arrive. The day is long passed since a Khan had attractions for me. Much
more agreeable is it to think my own door will open instantly at my knock. In this affair thou
canst be of service which shall be both remembered and gratefully recompensed. He hath no experience
in the matter of property in thy city; thou hast; it is but natural, therefore, if I pray thou
bring it into practice by assisting him in the selection, in perfecting the title, and in all
else the project may require doing; remembering only that the tenement be plain and comfortable,
not rich; for, alas! the time is not yet when the children of Israel may live conspicuously
in the eye of the Christian world.

"Thou wilt find Syama shrewd and of good judgment, older than he seemeth, and quick to render
loyalty for my sake. Be advised also that he is deaf and dumb; yet, if in speaking thou turn
thy face to him, and use the Greek tongue, he will understand thee by the motion of thy lips,
and make answer by signs.

"Finally, be not afraid to accept this commission on account of pecuniary involvement. Syama
hath means of procuring all the money he may require, even to extravagance; at the same time
he is forbidden to contract a debt, except it be to thee for kindness done, all which he will
report to me so I may pay them fitly.

"In all essential things Syama hath full instructions; besides, he is acquainted with my habits
and tastes; wherefore I conclude this writing by saying I hope thou wilt render him aid as
indicated, and that when I come thou wilt allow me to relate myself to thee as father to son,
in all things a help, in nothing a burden.

"Again, O Son of Jahdai, to thee and thine--Peace!"

[Seal.]

The son of Jahdai, at the conclusion of the reading, let his hands fall heavily in his lap,
while he plunged into a study which the messenger with his foreign airs could not distract.

Very great distance is one of the sublimities most powerful over the imagination. The letter
had come from an Island he had never heard named. An Island in the Over-Sea which doubtless
washed the Eastern end of the earth, wherever that might be. And the writer! How did he get
there? And what impelled him to go?

A chill shot the thinker's nerves. He suddenly remembered that in his house there was a cupboard
in a wall, with two shelves devoted to storage of heirlooms; on the upper shelf lay the torah
of immemorial usage in his family; the second contained cups of horn and metal, old phylacteries,
amulets, and things of vertu in general, and of such addition and multiplication through the
ages that he himself could not have made a list of them; in fact, now his attention was aroused,
he recalled them a mass of colorless and formless objects which had ceased to have history
or value. Amongst them, however, a seal in the form of a medallion in gold recurred to him;
but whether the impression upon it was raised or sunken he could not have certainly said; nor
could he have told what the device was. His father and grandfather had esteemed it highly,
and the story they told him about it divers times when he was a child upon their knees he could
repeat quite substantially.

A man committed an indignity to Jesus the pretended Christ, who, in punishment, condemned him
to linger on the earth until in the fulness of time he should come again; and the man had gone
on living through the centuries. Both the father and grandfather affirmed the tale to be true;
they had known the unfortunate personally; yet more, they declared he had been an intimate
of the family, and had done its members through generations friendlinesses without number;
in consequence they had come to consider him one of them in love. They had also said that to
their knowledge it was his custom to pray for death regularly as the days came and went. He
had repeatedly put himself in its way; yet curiously it passed him by, until he at last reached
a conviction he could not die.

Many years had gone since the stall-keeper last heard the tale, and still more might have been
counted since the man disappeared, going no one knew whither.

But he was not dead! He was coming again! It was too strange to believe! It could not be! Yet
one thing was clear--whatever the messenger might be, or presuming him a villain, whatever
the lie he thought to make profitable, appeal could be safely and cheaply made to the seal
in the cupboard. As a witness it, too, was deaf and dumb; on its face nevertheless there was
revelation and the truth.

Through the momentary numbness of his faculties so much the son of Jahdai saw, and he did not
wait. Signing the messenger to follow, he passed into a closet forming part of the stall, and
the two being alone, he spoke in Greek.

"Be thou seated here," he said, "and wait till I return."

The messenger smiled and bowed, and took seat; thereupon Uel drew his turban down to his ears,
and, letter in hand, started home.

His going was rapid; sometimes he almost ran. Acquaintances met him on the street, but he did
not see them; if they spoke to him, he did not hear. Arrived at his own door, he plunged into
the house as if a mob were at his heels. Now he was before the cupboard! Little mercy the phylacteries
and amulets, the bridle-spanglery of donkeys, the trinketry of women, his ancestresses once
famous for beauty or many children-- little mercy the motley collection on the second shelf
received from his hands. He tossed them here and there, and here and there again, but the search
was vain. Ah, good Lord! was the medalet lost? And of all times, then?

The failure made him the more anxious; his hands shook while he essayed the search once more;
and he reproached himself. The medal was valuable for its gold, and besides it was a sacred
souvenir. Conscience stung him. Over and over he shifted and turned the various properties
on the shelf, the last time systematically and with fixed attention. When he stopped to rest,
the perspiration stood on his forehead in large drops, and he fairly wrung his hands, crying,
"It is not here--it is lost! My God, how shall I know the truth now!"

At this pause it is to be said that the son of Jahdai was wifeless. The young woman whom he
had taken as helpmeet in dying had left him a girl baby who, at the time of our writing, was
about thirteen years old. Under the necessity thus imposed, he found a venerable daughter of
Jerusalem to serve him as housekeeper, and charge herself with care of the child. Now he thought
of that person; possibly she knew where the seal was. He turned to seek her, and as he did
so, the door of an adjoining room opened, and the child appeared.

He held her very dear, because she had the clear olive complexion of her mother, and the same
soft black eyes with which the latter used to smile upon him in such manner that words were
never required to assure him of her love. And the little one was bright and affectionate, and
had prettinesses in speech, and sang low and contentedly the day long. Often as he took her
on his lap and studied her fondly, he was conscious she promised to be gentle and beautiful
as the departed one; beyond which it never occurred to him there could be superior excellences.

Distressed as the poor man was, he took the child in his arms, and kissed her on the round
cheek, and was putting her down when he saw the medal at her throat, hanging from a string.
She told him the housekeeper had given it to her as a plaything. Untied at last--for his impatience
was nigh uncontrollable--he hurried with the recovered treasure to a window, to look at the
device raised upon it; then, his heart beating rapidly, he made comparison with the impression
sunk in the yellow wax at the foot of the letter; he put them side by side--there could be
no mistake--the impression on the wax might have been made by the medallion!

Let it not be supposed now that the son of Jahdai did not appreciate the circumstance which
had befallen. The idea of a man suffering a doom so strange affected him, while the doom itself,
considered as a judgment, was simply awful; but his thought did not stop there--it carried
him behind both the man and the doom. Who was He with power by a word, not merely to change
the most fixed of the decrees of nature, but, by suspending it entirely, hold an offending
wretch alive for a period already encroaching upon the eternal? One less firmly rooted in the
faith of his fathers would have stood aghast at the conclusion to which the answer as an argument
led--a conclusion admitting no escape once it was reached. The affair in hand, however, despite
its speculative side, was real and urgent; and the keeper of the stall, remembering the messenger
in half imprisonment, fell to thinking of the practical questions before him; first of which
was the treatment he should accord his correspondent's requests.

This did not occupy him long. His father, he reflected, would have received the stranger cordially,
and as became one of such close intimacy; so should he. The requests were easy, and carried
no pecuniary liability with them; he was merely to aid an inexperienced servant in the purchase
of a dwelling-house, the servant having plenty of funds. True, when the master presented himself
in person, it would be necessary to determine exactly the footing to be accorded him; but for
the present that might be deferred. If, in the connection, the son of Jahdai dwelt briefly
upon possible advantages to himself, the person being presumably rich and powerful, it was
human, and he is to be excused for it.

The return to the market was less hurried than the going from it. There Uel acted promptly.
He took Syama to his house, and put him into the guest-chamber, assuring him it was a pleasure.
Yet when night came he slept poorly. The incidents of the day were mixed with much that was
unaccountable, breaking the even tenor of his tradesman's life by unwonted perplexities. He
had not the will to control his thoughts; they would go back to the excitement of the moment
when he believed the medallion lost; and as points run together in the half-awake state on
very slender threads, he had a vision of a mysterious old man coming into his house, and in
some way taking up and absorbing the life of his child. When the world at last fell away and
left him asleep, it was with a dread tapping heavily at his heart.

The purchase which Uel was requested to assist in making proved a light affair. After diligent
search through the city, Syama decided to take a two-story house situated in a street running
along the foot of the hill to-day crowned by the mosque Sultan Selim, although it was then
the site of an unpretentious Christian church. Besides a direct eastern frontage, it was in
the divisional margin between the quarters of the Greeks, which were always clean, and those
of the Jews, which were always filthy. It was also observed that neither the hill nor the church
obstructed the western view from the roof; that is to say, it was so far around the upper curve
of the hill that a thistle-down would be carried by a south-east wind over many of the proudest
Greek residences and dropped by the Church of the Holy Virgin on Blacherne, or in the imperial
garden behind the Church. In addition to these advantages, the son of Jahdai was not unmindful
that his own dwelling, a small but comfortable structure also of wood, was just opposite across
the street. Everything considered, the probabilities were that Syama's selection would prove
satisfactory to his master. The furnishment was a secondary matter.

It is to be added that in course of the business there were two things from which Uel extracted
great pleasure; Syama always had money to pay promptly for everything he bought; in the next
place, communication with him was astonishingly easy. His eyes made up for the deficiency in
hearing; while his signs, gestures, and looks were the perfection of pantomime. Of evenings
the child never tired watching him in conversation.

While we go now to bring the Wanderer up, it should not be forgotten that the house, completely
furnished, is awaiting him, and he has only to knock at the door, enter, and be at home.

CHAPTER II

THE PILGRIM AT EL KATIF

The bay of Bahrein indents the western shore of the Persian Gulf. Hard by the point on the
north at which it begins its inland bend rise the whitewashed, one-story mud-houses of the
town El Katif. Belonging to the Arabs, the most unchangeable of peoples, both the town and
the bay were known in the period of our story by their present names.

The old town in the old time derived importance chiefly from the road which, leading thence
westwardly through Hejr Yemameh, brought up, after many devious stretches across waterless
wastes of sand, at El Derayeh, a tented capital of the Bedouins, and there forked, one branch
going to Medina, the other to Mecca. In other words, El Katif was to Mecca on the east the
gate Jeddo was to it on the west.

When, in annual recurrence, the time for the indispensable Hajj, or Pilgrimage, came, the name
of the town was on the lips of men and women beyond the Green Sea, and southwardly along the
coast of Oman, and in the villages and dowars back of the coast under the peaks of Akdar, only
a little less often than those of the holy cities. Then about the first of July the same peoples
as pilgrims from Irak, Afghanistan, India, and beyond those countries even, there being an
East and a Far East, and pilgrims from Arabia, crowded together, noisy, quarrelsome, squalid,
accordant in but one thing--a determination to make the Hajj lest they might die as Jews or
Christians.

The law required the pilgrim to be at Mecca in the month of Ramazan, the time the Prophet himself
had become a pilgrim. From El Katif the direct journey might be made in sixty days, allowing
an average march of twelve miles. By way of Medina, it could be made to permit the votary to
be present and participate in the observances usual on the day of the Mysterious Night of Destiny.

The journey moreover was attended with dangers. Winds, drouth, sand storms beset the way; and
there were beasts always hungry, and robbers always watchful. The sun beat upon the hills,
curtained the levels with mirage, and in the fiumuras kindled invisible fires; so in what the
unacclimated breathed and in what they drank of the waters of the land there were diseases
and death.

The Prophet having fixed the month of Ramazan for the Hajj, pilgrims accustomed themselves
to assemblage at Constantinople, Damascus, Cairo and Bagdad. If they could not avoid the trials
of the road, they could lessen them. Borrowing the term caravan as descriptive of the march,
they established markets at all convenient places.

This is the accounting for one of the notable features of El Katif from the incoming of June
till the caravan extended itself on the road, and finally disappeared in the yellow farness
of the Desert. One could not go amiss for purveyors in general. Dealers in horses, donkeys,
camels, and dromedaries abounded. The country for miles around appeared like a great stock
farm. Herds overran the lean earth. Makers of harness, saddles, box-houdahs, and swinging litters
of every variety and price, and contractors of camels, horses, and trains complete did not
wait to be solicited; the competition between them was too lively for dignity. Hither and thither
shepherds drove fatted sheep in flocks, selling them on the hoof. In shady places sandal merchants
and clothiers were established; while sample tents spotted the whole landscape. Hucksters went
about with figs, dates, dried meats and bread. In short, pilgrims could be accommodated with
every conceivable necessary. They had only to cry out, and the commodity was at hand.

Amongst the thousands who arrived at El Katif in the last of June, 1448, was a man whose presence
made him instantly an object of general interest. He came from the south in a galley of eight
oars manned by Indian seamen, and lay at anchor three days before landing. His ship bore nothing
indicative of nationality except the sailors. She was trim-looking and freshly painted; otherwise
there was nothing uncommon in her appearance. She was not for war--that was plain. She floated
too lightly to be laden; wherefore those who came to look at her said she could not be in commercial
service.

Almost before furling sail, an awning was stretched over her from bow to stern--an awning which
from the shore appeared one great shawl of variegated colors. Thereupon the wise in such matters
decided the owner was an Indian Prince vastly rich, come, like a good Mohammedan, to approve
his faith by pilgrimage.

This opinion the stranger's conduct confirmed. While he did not himself appear ashore, he kept
up a busy communication by means of his small boat. For three days, it carried contractors
of camels and supplies aboard, and brought them back.

They described him of uncertain age; he might be sixty, he might be seventy-five. While rather
under medium height, he was active and perfectly his own master. He sat in the shade of the
awning cross-legged. His rug was a marvel of sheeny silk. He talked Arabic, but with an Indian
accent. His dress was Indian--a silken shirt, a short jacket, large trousers, and a tremendous
white turban on a red tarbousche, held by an aigrette in front that was a dazzle of precious
stones such as only a Rajah could own. His attendants were few, but they were gorgeously attired,
wore shintyan swung in rich belts from their shoulders, and waited before him speechless and
in servile posture. One at his back upheld an umbrella of immense spread. He indulged few words,
and they were strictly business. He wanted a full outfit for the Hajj; could the contractor
furnish him twenty camels of burden, and four swift dromedaries? Two of the latter were to
carry a litter for himself; the other two were for his personal attendants, whom he desired
furnished with well-shaded shugdufs. The camels he would load with provisions. While speaking,
he would keep his eyes upon the person addressed with an expression uncomfortably searching.
Most extraordinary, however, he did not once ask about prices.

One of the Shaykhs ventured an inquiry.

"How great will his Highness' suite be?"

"Four."

The Shaykh threw up his hands.

"O Allah! Four dromedaries and twenty camels for four men!"

"Abuser of the salt," said the stranger calmly, "hast thou not heard of the paschal charity,
and of the fine to the poor? Shall I go empty handed to the most sacred of cities?"

Finally an agent was found who, in concert with associates, undertook to furnish the high votary
with all he asked complete.

The morning of the fourth day after his arrival the Indian was pulled ashore, and conducted
out of town a short distance to where, on a rising ground, a camp had been set up provisionally
for his inspection. There were tents, one for storage of goods and provisions; one for the
suite; one for the chief Shaykh, the armed guards, the tent pitchers, and the camel drivers;
and a fourth one, larger than the others, for the Prince himself. With the dromedaries, camels,
and horses, the camp was accepted; then, as was the custom, the earnest money was paid. By
set of sun the baggage was removed from the ship, and its partition into cargoes begun. The
Prince of India had no difficulty in hiring all the help he required.

Of the thirty persons who constituted the train ten were armed horsemen, whose appearance was
such that, if it were answered by a commensurate performance, the Prince might at his leisure
march irrespective of the caravan. Nor was he unmindful in the selection of stores for the
journey. Long before the sharp bargainers with whom he dealt were through with him, he had
won their best opinion, not less by his liberality than for his sound judgment. They ceased
speaking of him sneeringly as the miyan. [Footnote: Barbarous Indian]

Soon as the bargain was bound, the stranger's attendants set about the furnishment of the master's
tent. Outside they painted it green. The interior they divided into two equal compartments;
one for reception, the other for a maglis or drawing-room; and besides giving the latter divans
and carpets, they draped the ceiling in the most tasteful manner with the shawls which on the
ship had served for awning.

At length, everything in the catalogue of preparation having been attended to, it remained
only to wait the day of general departure; and for that, as became his greatness, the Prince
kept his own quarters, paying no attention to what went on around him. He appeared a man who
loved solitude, and was averse to thinking in public.

CHAPTER III

THE YELLOW AIR [Footnote: The plague is known amongst Arabs as "the Yellow Air."]

One evening the reputed Indian sat by the door of his tent alone. The red afterglow of the
day hung in the western sky. Overhead the stars were venturing timidly out. The camels were
at rest, some chewing their cuds, others asleep, their necks stretched full length upon the
warm earth. The watchmen in a group talked in low voices. Presently the cry of a muezzin, calling
to prayer, flew in long, quavering, swelling notes through the hushed air. Others took up the
call, clearer or fainter according to the distance; and so was it attuned to the feeling invoked
by the conditions of the moment that no effort was required of a listener to think it a refrain
from the sky. The watchmen ceased debating, drew a little apart from each other, spread their
abbas on the ground, and stepping upon them barefooted, their faces turned to where Mecca lay,
began the old unchangeable prayer of Islam--God is God, and Mahomet is His Prophet.

The pilgrim at the tent door arose, and when his rude employes were absorbed in their devotions,
like them, he too prayed, but very differently.

"God of Israel--my God!" he said, in a tone hardly more than speaking to himself. "These about
me, my fellow creatures, pray thee in the hope of life, I pray thee in the hope of death. I
have come up from the sea, and the end was not there; now I will go into the Desert in search
of it. Or if I must live, Lord, give me the happiness there is in serving thee. Thou hast need
of instruments of good; let me henceforth be one of them, that by working for thy honor, I
may at last enjoy the peace of the blessed--Amen."

Timing his movements with those of the watchmen, he sank to his knees, and repeated the prayer;
when they fell forward, their faces to the earth in the rik'raths so essential by the Mohammedan
code, he did the same. When they were through the service, he went on with it that they might
see him. A careful adherence to this conduct gained him in a short time great repute for sanctity,
making the pilgrimage enjoyable as well as possible to him.

The evening afterglow faded out, giving the world to night and the quiet it affects; still
the melancholy Indian walked before his tent, his hands clasped behind him, his chin in the
beard on his breast. Let us presume to follow his reflections.

"Fifty years! A lifetime to all but me. Lord, how heavy is thy hand when thou art in anger!"

He drew a long breath, and groaned.

"Fifty years! That they are gone, let those mourn to whom time is measured in scanty dole."

He became retrospective.

"The going to Cipango was like leaving the world. War had yielded to contentions about religion.
I wearied of them also. My curse is to weary of everything. I wonder if the happiness found
in the affection of women is more lasting?"

He pursued the thought awhile, finishing with a resolution.

"If the opportunity comes my way, I will try it. I remember yet the mother of my Lael, though
I did not understand the measure of the happiness she brought me until she died."

He returned then to the first subject.

"When will men learn that faith is a natural impulse, and pure religion but faith refined of
doubt?"

The question was succeeded by a wordless lapse in his mind, the better apparently to prolong
the pleasure he found in the idea.

"God help me," he presently resumed, "to bring about an agreement in that definition of religion!
There can be no reform or refinement of faith except God be its exclusive subject; and so certainly
it leads to lopping off all parasitical worships such as are given to Christ and Mahomet....
Fifty years ago the sects would have tortured me had I mentioned God as a principle broad and
holy enough for them to stand upon in compromise of their disputes; they may not be better
disposed now, yet I will try them. If I succeed I will not be a vulgar monument builder like
Alexander; neither will I divide a doubtful fame with Caesar. My glory will be unique. I will
have restored mankind to their true relations with God. I will be their Arbiter in Religion.
Then surely"--he lifted his face appealingly as to a person enthroned amidst the stars--"surely
thou wilt release me from this too long life.... If I fail"--he clinched his hands--"if I fail,
they may exile me, they may imprison me, they may stretch me on the rack, but they cannot kill me."

Then he walked rapidly, his head down, like a man driven. When he stopped it was to say to
himself uncertainly:

"I feel weak at heart. Misgivings beset me. Lord, Lord, how long am I to go on thus cheating
myself? If thou wilt not pardon me, how can I hope honor from my fellow men? Why should I struggle
to serve them?"

Again he clinched his hands.

"Oh, the fools, the fools! Will they never be done? When I went away they were debating, Was
Mahomet a Prophet? Was Christ the Messiah? And they are debating yet. What miseries I have
seen come of the dispute!"

From this to the end, the monologue was an incoherent discursive medley, now plaintive, now
passionate, at times prayerful, then exultant. As he proceeded, he seemed to lose sight of
his present aim at doing good in the hope of release from termless life, and become the Jew
he was born.

"The orators called in the sword, and they plied each other with it through two hundred years
and more. There were highways across Europe blazoned with corpses.... But they were great days.
I remember them. remember Manuel's appeal to Gregory. I was present at the Council of Clermont.
I heard Urban's speech. I saw Walter, the beggar of Burgundy, a fugitive in Constantinople;
but his followers, those who went out with him--where were they? I saw Peter, the eremite and
coward, dragged back, a deserter, to the plague-smitten camps of Antioch. I helped vote Godfrey
King of Jerusalem, and carried a candle at his coronation. I saw the hosts of Louis VII and
Conrad, a million and more, swallowed up in Iconia and the Pisidian mountains. Then, that the
persecutors of my race might not have rest, I marched with Saladin to the re-conquest of the
Holy City, and heard Philip and Richard answer his challenge. The brave Kurd, pitying the sorrows
of men, at last agreed to tolerate Christians in Jerusalem as pilgrims; and there the strife
might have ended, but I played upon the ambition of Baldwin, and set Europe in motion again.
No fault of mine that the knight stopped at Constantinople as King of the East. Then the second
Frederick presumed to make a Christian city of Jerusalem. I resorted to the Turks, and they
burned and pillaged it, and captured St. Louis, the purest and best of the crusaders. He died
in my arms. Never before had I a tear for man or woman of his faith! Then came Edward I., and
with him the struggle as a contest of armies terminated. By decision of the sword, Mahomet
was the Prophet of God, and Christ but the carpenter's son.... By permission of the Kaliphs,
the Christians might visit Jerusalem as pilgrims. A palmer's staff in place of a sword! For
shield, a beggar's scrip! But the bishops accepted, and then ushered in an age of fraud, Christian
against Christian.... The knoll on which the Byzantine built his church of the Holy Sepulchre
is not the Calvary. That the cowled liars call the Sepulchre never held the body of Christ.
The tears of the millions of penitents have but watered a monkish deceit.... Fools and blasphemers!
The Via Dolorosa led out of the Damascus gate on the north. The skull-shaped hill beyond that
gate is the Golgotha. Who should know it better than I? The Centurion asked for a guide; I
walked with him. Hyssop was the only green thing growing upon the mount; nothing but hyssop
has grown there since. At the base on the west was a garden, and the Sepulchre was in the garden.
From the foot of the cross I looked toward the city, and there was a sea of men extending down
to the gate.... I know!--I know!--I and misery know!... When I went out fifty years ago there
was an agreement between the ancient combatants; each vied with the other in hating and persecuting
the Jew, and there was no limit to the afflictions he endured from them.... Speak thou, O Hebron,
city of the patriarchs! By him who sits afar, and by him near unto thee, by the stars this
peaceful night, and by the Everlasting who is above the stars, be thou heard a witness testifying!
There was a day when thou didst stand open to the children of Israel; for the cave and the
dead within it belonged to them. Then Herod built over it, and shut it up, though without excluding
the tribes. The Christian followed Herod; yet the Hebrew might pay his way in. After the Christian,
the Moslem; and now nor David the King, nor son of his, though they alighted at the doors from
chariots, and beat upon them with their crowns and sceptres, could pass in and live.... Kings
have come and gone, and generations, and there is a new map from which old names have been
dropped. As respects religion, alas! the divisions remain--here a Mohammedan, there a Christian,
yonder a Judean.... From my door I study these men, the children of those in life at my going
into exile. Their ardor is not diminished. To kiss a stone in which tradition has planted a
saying of God, they will defy the terrors of the Desert, heat, thirst, famine, disease, death.
I bring them an old idea in a new relation--God, giver of life and power to Son and Prophet--God,
alone entitled to worship--God, a principle of Supreme Holiness to which believers can bring
their creeds and doctrines for mergence in a treaty of universal brotherhood. Will they accept
it? ... Yesterday I saw a Schiah and a Sunite meet, and the old hate darkened their faces as
they looked at each other. Between them there is only a feud of Islamites; how much greater
is their feud with Christians? How immeasurably greater the feud between Christian and Jew?
... My heart misgives me! Lord! Can it be I am but cherishing a dream?"

At sight of a man approaching through the dusk, he calmed himself.

"Peace to thee, Hadji," said the visitor, halting.

"Is it thou, Shaykh?"

"It is I, my father's son. I have a report to make."

"I was thinking of certain holy things of priceless worth, sayings of the Prophet. Tell me
what thou hast?"

The Shaykh saluted him, and returned, "The caravan will depart to-morrow at sunrise."

"Be it so. We are ready. I will designate our place in the movement. Thou art dismissed."

"O Prince! I have more to report."

"More?"

"A vessel came in to-day from Hormuz on the eastern shore, bringing a horde of beggars."

"Bismillah! It was well I hired of thee a herd of camels, and loaded them with food. I shall
pay my fine to the poor early."

The Shaykh shook his head.

"That they are beggars is nothing," he said. "Allah is good to all his creatures. The jackals
are his, and must be fed. For this perhaps the unfortunates were blown here by the angel that
rides the yellow air. Four corpses were landed, and their clothes sold in the camp."

"Thou wouldst say," the Prince rejoined, "that the plague will go with us to the Kaaba. Content
thee, Shaykh. Allah will have his way."

"But my men are afraid."

"I will place a drop of sweetened water on their lips, and bring them safe through, though
they are dying. Tell them as much."

The Shaykh was departing when the Prince, shrewdly suspecting it was he who feared, called
him back.

"How call ye the afternoon prayer, O Shaykh?"

"El Asr."

"What didst thou when it was called?"

"Am I not a believer? I prayed."

"And thou hast heard the Arafat sermon?"

"Even so, O Prince."

"Then, as thou art a believer, and a hadji, O Shaykh, thou and all with thee shalt see the
Khatib on his dromedary, and hear him again. Only promise me to stay till his last Amin."

"I promise," said the Shaykh, solemnly.

"Go--but remember prayer is the bread of faith."

The Shaykh was comforted, and withdrew.

With the rising of the sun next day the caravan, numbering about three thousand souls, defiled
confusedly out of the town. The Prince, who might have been first, of choice fell in behind
the rest.

"Why dost thou take this place, O Prince?" asked the Shaykh, who was proud of his company,
and their comparative good order.

He received for answer, "The blessings of Allah are with the dying whom the well-to-do and
selfish in front have passed unnoticed."

The Shaykh repeated the saying to his men, and they replied: "Ebn-Hanife was a Dervish: so
is this Prince--exalted be his name!"

Eulogy could go no further.

CHAPTER IV

EL ZARIBAH

"I will be their Arbiter in Religion," said the Indian Mystic in his monologue.

This is to be accepted as the motive of the scheme the singular man was pursuing in the wastes
of Arabia. There, in a repentant hour, he had conceived the idea of a Universal Religious Brotherhood,
with God for its accordant principle; and he was now returned to present and urge the compromise.
In more distinct statement, he was making the pilgrimage to ascertain from personal observation
if the Mohammedan portion of the world was in a consenting mood. It was not his first visit
to Mecca; but the purpose in mind gave the journey a new zest; and, as can be imagined, nothing
in the least indicative of the prevalent spirit of the Hajj escaped him. Readers following
the narrative should keep this explanation before them.

From El Derayah the noble pilgrim had taken the longer route by way of Medina, where he scrupulously
performed the observances decreed for the faithful at the Mosque of the Prophet. Thence he
descended with the caravan from Damascus.

Dawn of the sixth of September broke over the rolling plain known as the Valley of El Zaribah,
disclosing four tents pitched on an eminence to the right of a road running thence south-west.
These tents, connected by ropes, helped perfect an enclosure occupied by horses, donkeys, camels
and dromedaries, and their cumbrous equipments. Several armed men kept watch over the camp.

The Valley out to the pink granite hills rimming it round wore a fresh green tint in charming
contrast with the tawny-black complexion of the region through which the day's journey had
stretched. Water at a shallow depth nourished camel grass in patches, and Theban palms, the
latter much scattered and too small to be termed trees. The water, and the nearness of the
Holy City--only one day distant--had, in a time long gone, won for El Zaribah its double appointment
of meeting place for the caravans and place of the final ceremony of assumption of the costume
and vows El Ihram.

The Prophet himself had prescribed the ceremony; so the pilgrims in the camp on the eminence,
the better to observe it and at the same time get a needful rest, had come up during the night
in advance of the caravans. In other words, the Prince of India--the title by which he was
now generally known--might, at the opening hour of the day, have been found asleep in the larger
of the four tents; the one with the minaret in miniature so handsomely gilded and of such happy
effect over the centre pole.

Along the roadsides and on the high grounds of the Valley other tints were visible, while faint
columns of smoke arising out of the hollows told of preparations for breakfast. These signified
the presence of hucksters, barbers, costume dealers, and traders generally, who, in anticipation
of the arrival of the caravans, had come from the city to exercise their callings. Amongst
them, worthy of special attention, was a multitude of professional guides, [Footnote: Mutawif.]
ready for a trifling hire to take charge of uninitiated pilgrims, and lead them regardfully
through the numerous ceremonies to which they were going.

Shortly after noon the Prince called in a guide, and several barbers, men with long gowns,
green turbans, brass basins, sharp knives, and bright bladed scissors. The assumption of the
real pilgrimage by his people was then begun. Each man submitted his head, mustaches, and nails
to the experts, and bathed and perfumed himself, and was dusted with musk. Next the whole party
put off their old garments, and attired themselves in the two white vestments El Ihram.[Footnote:
A mantle and skirt of white cloth unsewn.] The change of apparel was for the better. Finally
the votaries put on sandals peculiar in that nothing pertaining to them might cover the instep;
then they stood up in a row faced toward Mecca, and repeated the ancient formula of dedication
of the Ihram to the Almighty slowly intoned for them by the guide.

The solemn demeanor of the men during the ceremony, which was tedious and interspersed with
prayers and curious recitals, deeply impressed the Prince, who at the end of the scene retired
into his tent, with his three mute attendants, and there performed the vows for himself and
them. There also they all assumed the indispensable costume. Then, as he well might do, the
law permitting him to seek the shade of a house or a tent, he had a rug spread before his door,
where, in the fresh white attire, he seated himself, and with a jar of expressed juice of pomegranates
at his side made ready to witness the passing of the caravans, the dust of which was reported
visible in the east.

Afterwhile the cloud of dust momentarily deepening over in that direction was enlivened by
a clash of cymbals and drums, blent with peals of horns, the fine, high music yet cherished
by warriors of the Orient. Presently a body of horsemen appeared, their spear points glistening
in the sunlight. A glance at them, then his gaze fixed upon a chief in leading.

The sun had been hot all day; the profiles of the low hills were dim with tremulous haze lying
scorchingly upon them; the furred hulks of the camels in the enclosure looked as if they were
smoking; the sky held nothing living except two kites which sailed the upper air slowly, their
broad wings at widest extension; yet the chief persisted in wearing his arms and armor, like
the soldiers behind him. Ere long he rode up and halted in front of the Prince, and near by.

His head was covered with a visorless casque, slightly conical, from the edge of which, beginning
about the temples, a cape of fine steel rings, buckled under the chin, enveloped the neck and
throat, and fell loosely over the neck and shoulders, and part way down the back. A shirt of
linked mail, pliable as wool, defended the body and the arms to the elbows; overalls of like
material, save that the parts next the saddle were leather, clothed the thighs and legs. As
the casque and every other link of the mail were plated with gold, the general effect at a
distance was as if the whole suit were gold. A surcoat of light green cloth hung at the back
half hiding a small round shield of burnished brass; at the left side there was a cimeter,
and in the right hand a lance. The saddle was of the high-seated style yet affected by horsemen
of Circassia; at the pommel a bow and well-filled quiver were suspended, and as the stirrups
were in fact steel slippers the feet were amply protected by them.

At sight of the martial figure, the Indian, in admiration, arose to a sitting posture. Such,
he thought, were the warriors who followed Saladin! And when the stranger, reaching the summit
of the eminence, turned out of the road coming apparently to the door of the tent, he involuntarily
sprang to his feet ready to do him honor.

The face, then plainly seen, though strong of feature, and thoroughly bronzed, was that of
a young man not more than twenty-two or three, dark-eyed, mustached and bearded, and of a serious
though pleasant expression. He kept his seat with ease and grace; if he and the broad-chested
dark-bay horse were not really one, they were one in spirit; together they wrought the impression
which was the origin of majesty, a title for kings.

While the Prince was turning this in his mind, the soldier pulled rein, and stopped long enough
to glance at him and at the camp; then, turning the horse, he looked the other way, making
it apparent he had taken position on the rise to overlook the plain, and observe the coming
and dispersion of the caravans.

Another mounted man ascended the hill, armed and armored like the first one, though not so
richly, and bearing a standard of dulled yellow silk hanging from a gilded staff. The ground
of the standard was filled with inscriptions in red lettering, leaving the golden crescent
and star on the point of the staff to speak of nationality. The bearer of the flag dismounted,
and at a sign planted it in the ground.

Seeing his Shaykh, the Prince called him:

"Who is the warrior yonder?--He in the golden armor?"

"The Emir El Hajj, [Footnote: Chief officer of the Pilgrimage. The appointment was considered
the highest favor in the Sultan's gift.] O Prince."

"He the Emir El Hajj!--And so young?--Oh! a hero of the Serail. The Kislar Aga extolled him
one day."

"Thy remark and common report, O excellent Prince, could not journey together on the same camel,"
said the Shaykh. "In the Khan at Medina I heard his story. There is a famous enemy of the Turks,
Iskander Bey, in strength a Jinn, whose sword two men can scarcely lift. He appeared before
the army of the Sultan one day with a challenge. He whom thou seest yonder alone dared go forth
to meet him. The fought from morning till noon; then they rested. 'Who art thou?' asked Iskander.
'I am a slave of Amurath, the Commander of the Faithful, who hath commissioned me to take thee
to him dead or alive.' Iskander laughed, and said, 'I know by thy tongue now thou art not a
Turk; and to see if the Commander of the Faithful, as thou callest him, hath it in soul to
make much of thy merit as a warrior, I will leave thee the honors of the combat, and to go
thy way.' Whereat they say he lifted his ponderous blade as not heavier than the leaf of a
dead palm, and strode from the field."

The Prince listened, and at the end said, like a man in haste:

"Thou knowest Nilo, my black man. Bring him hither."

The Shaykh saluted gravely, and hurried away, leaving his patron with eyes fixed on the Emir,
and muttering:

"So young!--and in such favor with the old Amurath! I will know him. If I fail, he may be useful
to me. Who knows? Who knows?"

He looked upward as if speaking to some one there.

Meantime the Emir was questioning the ensign.

"This pilgrim," he said, "appears well provided."

And the ensign answered:

"He is the Indian Prince of whom I have been hearing since we left Medina."

"What hast thou heard?"

"That being rich, he is open-handed, making free with his aspers as sowers with their seed."

"What more?"

"He is devout and learned as an Imam. His people call him Malik. Of the prayers he knows everything.
As the hours arrive, he lifts the curtains of his litter, and calls them with a voice like
Belal's. The students in the mosque would expire of envy could they see him bend his back in
the benedictions."

"Bismillah!"

"They say also that in the journey from El Katif to Medina he travelled behind the caravan
when he might have been first."

"I see not the virtue in that. The hill-men love best to attack the van."

"Tell me, O Emir, which wouldst thou rather face, a hill-man or the Yellow Air?"

"The hill-man," said the other decidedly.

"And thou knowest when those in front abandon a man struck with the disease?"

"Yes."

"And then?"

"The vultures and the jackals have their rights."

"True, O Emir, but listen. The caravan left El Katif three thousand strong. Three hundred and
more were struck with the plague, and left to die; of those, over one hundred were brought
in by the Indian. They say it was for this he preferred to march in the rear. He himself teaches
a saying of the Hadis, that Allah leaves his choicest blessings to be gathered from amidst
the poor and the dying."

"If he thou describest be not a Prince of India as he claims, he is a"--

"A Mashaikh." [Footnote: Holier than a Dervish.]

"Ay, by the Most Merciful! But how did he save the castaways?"

"By a specific known only to kings and lords in his country. Can he but reach the plague-struck
before death, a drop on the tongue will work a cure. Thou heardst what he did at Medina?"

"No."

"The Masjid El Nabawi [Footnote: Tomb of the Prophet.] as thou knowest, O Emir, hath many poor
who somehow live in its holy shade."

"I know it," said the Emir, with a laugh. "I went in the house rich, and come out of it poorer
than the poorest of the many who fell upon me at the doors."

"Well," the ensign continued, not heeding the interruption, "he called them in, and fed them;
not with rice, and leeks, and bread ten days sour, but with dishes to rejoice a Kaliph; and
they went away swearing the soul of the Prophet was returned to the world."

At this juncture a troop of horsemen ascending the hill brought the conversation to a stop.
The uniformity of arms and armor, the furniture of the steeds, the order and regularity of
the general movement, identified the body as some favorite corps of the Turkish army; while
the music, the bristling lances, the many-folded turbans, and the half-petticoated trousers
threw about it a glamor of purest orientalism.

In the midst of the troop, a vanguard in front, a rearguard behind them, central objects of
care and reverence, moved the sacred camels, tall, powerful brutes, more gigantic in appearance
because of their caparisoning and the extraordinary burdens they bore. They too were in full
regalia, their faces visored in silk and gold, their heads resplendent with coronets of drooping
feathers, their ample neck cloths heavy with tasselled metallic fringing falling to the knees.
Each one was covered with a mantle of brocaded silk arranged upon a crinoline form to give
the effect somewhat of the curved expansion on the rim of a bell. On the humps rose pavilions
of silk in flowing draperies, on some of which the entire Fatihah was superbly embroidered.
Over the pavilions arose enormous aigrettes of green and black feathers. Such were the mahmals,
containing, among other things of splendor and fabulous value, the Kiswah which the Sultan
was forwarding to the Scherif of Mecca to take the place of the worn curtains then draping
the Tabernacle or House of God.

The plumed heads of the camels, and the yet more richly plumed pavilions, exalted high above
the horsemen, moved like things afloat. One may not tell what calamities to body and soul would
overtake the Emir El Hajj did he fail to deliver the mahmals according to consignment.

While the cavalry came up the hill the musicians exerted themselves; at the top, the column
turned and formed line left of the Emir, followed by strings of camels loaded with military
properties, and a horde of camp-followers known as farrash. Presently another camp was reared
upon the eminence, its white roofs shining afar over the plain, and in their midst one of unusual
dimensions for the Sultan's gifts.

The caravans in the meantime began to emerge from the dun cloud of their own raising, and spread
at large over the land; and when the young Emir was most absorbed in the spectacle the Prince's
Shaykh approached him.

"O Emir!" the Arab said, after a salaam.

A wild fanfare of clarions, cymbals, and drums drowning his voice, he drew nearer, almost to
the stirrup.

"O Emir!" he said again.

This time he was heard.

"What wouldst thou?"

There was the slightest irritation in the tone, and on the countenance of the speaker as he
looked down; but the feeling behind it vanished at sight of a negro whose native blackness
was intensified by the spotless white of the Ihram in which he was clad. Perhaps the bright
platter of beaten copper the black man bore, and the earthen bottle upon it, flanked by two
cups, one of silver, the other of crystal, had something to do with the Emir's change of manner
and mind.

"What wouldst thou?" he asked, slightly bending towards them.

The Shaykh answered:

 "The most excellent Hadji, my patron, whom thou mayst see reclining at
the door of his tent, sends thee greeting such as is lawful from one
true believer to another travelling for the good of their souls to the
most Holy of Cities; and he prays thou wilt accept from him a draught of
this water of pomegranates, which he vouches cooling to the tongue and
healthful to the spirit, since he bought it at the door of the House of
the Prophet--to whom be prayer and praise forever."

During the speech, the negro, with a not unpractised hand, and conscious doubtless of the persuasion
there was in the sound and sparkle of the beverage, especially to one not yet dismounted from
a long ride on the desert, filled the cups, and held them up for acceptance.

Stripping the left hand of its steel-backed gauntlet, the Emir lifted the glass, and, with
a bow to the pilgrim then arisen and standing by the tent-door, drank it at a draught; whereupon,
leaving the ensign to pay like honor to the offered hospitality, he wheeled his horse, and
rode to make acknowledgment in person.

"The favor thou hast done me, O Hadji," he said, dismounted, "is in keeping with the acts of
mercy to thy fellow-men with which I hear thou hast paved the road from El Katif as with mother-of-pearl."

"Speak not of them, I pray," the Wanderer answered, returning the bow he received. "Who shall
refuse obedience to the law?"

"I see plainly thou art a good man," the Emir said, bowing again.

"It would not become me to say so. Turning to something better, this tent in the wilderness
is mine, and as the sun is not declined to its evening quarter, perhaps, O gallant Emir, it
would be more to thy comfort were we to go within. I, and all I have, are at thy command."

"I am grateful for the offer, most excellent Hadji--if the address be lower than thy true entitlement,
thou shouldst bring the Shaykh yonder to account for misleading a stranger--but the sun and
I have become unmindful of each other, and duty is always the same in its demands at least.
Here, because the valley is the micath, [Footnote: Meeting place.] the caravans are apt to
run wild, and need a restraining hand. I plead the circumstance in excuse for presuming to
request that thou wilt allow me to amend thy offer of courtesy."

The Emir paused, waiting for the permission.

"So thou dost accept the offer, amend it as thou wilt," and the Prince smiled.

Then the other returned, with evident satisfaction: "When our brethren of the caravans are
settled, and the plain is quiet, and I too have taken the required vows, I will return to thee.
My quarters are so close to thine it would please me to be allowed to come alone."

"Granted, O Emir, granted--if, on thy side, thou wilt consent to permit me to give thee of
the fare I may yet have at disposal. I can promise thou shalt not go away hungry."

"Be it so."

Thereupon the Emir remounted, and went back to his stand overlooking the plain, and the coming
of the multitude.

CHAPTER V

THE PASSING OF THE CARAVANS

From his position the Wanderer could see the advancing caravans; but as the spectacle would
consume the afternoon, he called his three attendants, and issued directions for the entertainment
of the Emir in the evening; this done, he cast himself upon the rug, and gave rein to his curiosity,
thinking, not unreasonably, to find in what would pass before him something bearing on the
subject ever present in his mind.

The sky could not be called blue of any tint; it seemed rather to be filled with common dust
mixed with powder of crushed brick. The effect was of a semi-transparent ceiling flushed with
heat from the direct down-beating action of the sun, itself a disk of flame. Low mountains,
purplish black in hue, made a horizon on which the ceiling appeared set, like the crystal in
the upper valve of a watch. Thus shut in, but still fair to view east and south of the position
the spectator occupied, lay El Zaribah, whither, as the appointed meeting place, so many pilgrims
had for days and weeks ever wearier growing been "walking with their eyes." In their thought
the Valley was not so much a garden or landscape of beauty as an ante-chamber of the House
of Allah. As they neared it now, journeying since the break of day, impatience seized them;
so when the cry sped down the irregular column--"It is here! It is here!" they answered with
a universal labbayaki, signifying, "Thou hast called us-- here we are, here we are!" Then breaking
into a rabble, they rushed multitudinously forward. To give the reader an idea of the pageant
advancing to possess itself of the Valley, it will be well to refresh his memory with a few
details. He should remember, in the first place, that it was not merely the caravan which left
El Katif over on the western shore of the Green Sea, but two great caravans merged into one--El
Shemi, from Damascus, and Misri, from Cairo. To comprehend these, the region they drained of
pilgrims should be next considered. For example, at Cairo there was a concentration from the
two Egypts, Upper and Lower, from the mysterious deserts of Africa, and from the cities and
countries along the southern shore of the Mediterranean far as Gibraltar; while the whole East,
using the term in its most comprehensive sense, emptied contingents of the devout into Damascus.
In forwarding the myriads thus poured down upon them the Arabs were common carriers, like the
Venetians to the hordes of western Europe in some of the later crusades; so to their thousands
of votaries proper, the other thousands of them engaged in the business are also to be computed.
El Medina was the great secondary rendezvous. Hardly could he be accounted of the Faithful
who in making the pilgrimage would turn his back upon the bones of the Prophet; of such merit
was the saying, "One prayer in this thy mosque is of more virtue than a thousand in other places,
save only the Masjid El Haram." Once at Medina, how could the pilgrim refuse his presence,
if not his tears, at El Kuba, forever sacred to the Mohammedan heart as the first place of
public prayer in Islam? Finally, it should not be forgotten that the year we write of belonged
to a cycle when readers of the Koran and worshippers at Mecca were more numerous than now,
if not more zealous and believing. And it was to witness the passing of this procession, so
numerous, so motley, so strangely furnished, so uncontrolled except as it pleased, the Prince
of India was seated at the door of his tent upon the hill. Long before the spectacle was sighted
in the distance, its approach was announced by an overhanging pillar of cloud, not unlike that
which went before the Israelites in their exodus through similar wastes. Shortly after the
interview with the Emir, the Prince, looking under the pillar, saw a darkening line appear,
not more at first than a thread stretched across a section of the east.

The apparition was without a break; nor might he have said it was in motion or of any depth.
A sound came from the direction not unlike that of a sibilant wind. Presently out of the perspective,
which reduced the many to one and all sizes to a level, the line developed into unequal divisions,
with intervals between them; about the same time the noise became recognizable as the voices
fiercely strained and inarticulate of an innumerable host of men. Then the divisions broke
into groups, some larger than others; a little later individuals became discernible; finally
what had appeared a line resolved itself into a convulsing mass, without front, without wings,
but of a depth immeasurable.

The pilgrims did not attempt to keep the road; having converted their march into a race, they
spread right and left over the country, each seeking a near way; sometimes the object was attained,
sometimes not; the end was a confusion beyond description. The very inequalities of the ground
helped the confusion. A group was one moment visible on a height; then it vanished in a hollow.
Now there were thousands on a level; then, as if sinking, they went down, down, and presently
where they were there was only dust or a single individual.

Afterwhile, so wide was the inrolling tide, the field of vision overflowed, and the eye was
driven to ranging from point to point, object to object. Then it was discernible that the mass
was mixed of animals and men--here horses, there camels--some with riders, some without--all,
the burdened as well as unburdened, straining forward under urgency of shriek and stick--forward
for life--forward as if of the two "comforts," Success beckoned them in front, and Despair
behind plied them with spears. [Footnote: In the philosophy of the Arabs Success and Despair
are treated as comforts.]

At length the eastern boundary of the Valley was reached. There one would suppose the foremost
of the racers, the happy victors, would rest or, at their leisure, take of the many sites those
they preferred; but no--the penalty attaching to the triumph was the danger of being run down
by the thousands behind. In going on there was safety--and on they went.

To this time the spectacle had been a kind of panoramic generality; now the details came to
view, and accustomed as he was to marvels of pageantry, the Prince exclaimed: "These are not
men, but devils fleeing from the wrath of God!" and involuntarily he went nearer, down to the
brink of the height. It seemed the land was being inundated with camels; not the patient brutes
we are used to thinking of by that name, with which domestication means ill-treatment and suffering--the
slow-going burden-bearers, always appealing to our sympathy because always apparently tired,
hungry, sleepy, worn-out--always reeling on as if looking for quiet places in which to slip
their loads of whatever kind, and lie down and die; but the camel aroused, enraged, frightened,
panic-struck, rebellious, sending forth strange cries, and running with all its might--an army
of camels hurling their gigantic hulks along at a rate little less than blind impetus. And
they went, singly, and in strings, and yonder a mass. The slower, and those turned to the right
or left of the direct course, and all such as had hesitated upon coming to a descent, were
speedily distanced or lost to sight; so the ensemble was constantly shifting. And then the
rolling and tossing of the cargoes and packages on the backs of the animals, and the streaming
out of curtains, scarfs, shawls, and loose draperies of every shape and color, lent touches
of drollery and bright contrasts to the scene. One instant the spectator on the hill was disposed
to laugh, then to admire, then to shiver at the immensity of a danger; over and over again
amidst his quick variation of feeling, he repeated the exclamation: "These are not men, but
devils fleeing from the wrath of God!"

Such was the spectacle in what may be called the second act; presently it reached a third;
and then the fury of the movement, so inconsistent with the habits and patient nature of the
camel, was explained. In the midst of the hurly-burly, governing and directing it, were horsemen,
an army of themselves. Some rode in front, and the leading straps on which they pulled with
the combined strength of man and horse identified them as drivers; others rode as assistants
of the drivers, and they were armed with goads which they used skilfully and without mercy.
There were many collisions, upsets, and entanglements; yet the danger did not deter the riders
from sharing the excitement, and helping it forward to their utmost. They too used knotted
ropes, and stabbed with sharpened sticks; they also contributed to the unearthly tumult of
sounds which travelled with the mob, a compound of prayers, imprecations, and senseless screams--the
medley that may be occasionally heard from a modern mad-house.

In the height of the rush the Shaykh came up.

"How long," said the Prince--"in the Prophet's name, how long will this endure?"

"Till night, O most excellent Hadji--if the caravans be so long in coming."

"Is it usual?"

"It has been so from the beginning."

Thereupon the curiosity of the Prince took another turn. A band of horsemen galloped into view--free
riders, with long lances carried upright, their caftans flying, and altogether noble looking.

"These are Arabs. I know by their horses and their bearing," said he, with admiration; "but
possibly thou canst give me the name of their tribe."

The Shaykh answered with pride: "Their horses are gray, and by the sign, O lover of the Prophet,
they are the Beni-Yarb. Every other one of them is a poet; in the face of an enemy, they are
all warriors."

The camps on the hill, with the yellow flag giving notice of the Emir's station, had effect
upon others besides the Yarbis; all who wished to draw out of the melange turned towards them,
bringing the spectacle in part to the very feet of the Wanderer; whereas he thought with a
quicker beating of the heart, "The followers of the Prophet are coming to show me of what they
are this day composed." Then he said to the Shaykh, "Stand thou here, and tell me as I shall ask."

The conversation between them may be thus summarized:

The current which poured past then, its details in perfect view, carried along with it all
the conditions and nationalities of the pilgrimage. Natives of the desert on bare-backed camels,
clinging to the humps with one hand, while they pounded with the other--natives on beautiful
horses, not needing whip or spur--natives on dromedaries so swift, sure-footed, and strong
there was no occasion for fear. Men, and often women and children, on ragged saddle-cloths,
others in pretentious boxes, and now and then a person whose wealth and rank were published
by the magnificence of the litter in which he was borne, swinging luxuriously between long-stepping
dromedaries from El Sbark.

"By Allah!" the Prince exclaimed. "Here hath barbarism its limit! Behold!"

They of whom he spoke came up in irregular array mounted on dromedaries without housing. At
their head rode one with a white lettered green flag, and beating an immense drum. They were
armed with long spears of Indian bamboo, garnished below the slender points with swinging tufts
of ostrich feathers. Each carried a woman behind him disdainful of a veil. The feminine screams
of exultation rose high above the yells of the men, helping not a little to the recklessness
with which the latter bore onward.

Woe to such in their way as were poorly mounted. In a twinkling they were ridden down. Nor
did those fare better who were overtaken struggling with a string of camels. The crash of bursting
boxes, the sharp report of rending ropes, the warning cry, the maddening cheer; a battle of
men, another of beasts--and when the collision had passed, the earth was strewn with its wreck.

"They are Wahabbas, O Hadji," said the Shaykh. "Thou seest the tufts on their spears. Under
them they carry Jehannum."

"And these now coming?" asked the Prince. "Their long white hats remind me of Persia."

"Persians they are," replied the Shaykh, his lip curling, his eyes gleaming. "They will tear
their clothes, and cut their shaven crowns, and wail, 'Woe's me, O Ali!' then kiss the Kaaba
with defilement on their beards. The curse of the Shaykaim is on them--may it stay there!"

Then the Prince knew it was a Sunite speaking of Schiahs.

Yet others of the Cafila of Bagdad passed with the despised sons of Iran; notably Deccanese,
Hindoos, Afghans, and people from the Himalayas, and beyond them far as Kathay, and China,
and Siam, all better known to the Prince than to his Shaykh, who spoke of them, saying, "Thou
shouldst know thine own, O Hadji! Thou art their father!"

Next, in a blending that permitted no choice of associates, along swept the chief constituents
of the caravans--Moors and Blackamoors, Egyptians, Syrians, Turks, Kurds, Caucasians, and Arabs
of every tribe, each a multitude of themselves, and their passing filled up the afternoon.

Towards sundown the hurry and rush of the movement perceptibly slackened. Over in the west
there were signs of a halt; tents were rising, and the smoke of multiplying fires began to
deepen the blue of the distance. It actually appeared as if settlement for the night would
creep back upon the east, whence the irruption had burst.

At a moment when the Prince's interest in the scene was commencing to flag, and he was thinking
of returning to his tent, the rearmost divisions of the pilgrims entered the Valley. They were
composed of footmen and donkey-riders, for whom the speed of the advance bodies had been too
great. High-capped Persians, and Turks whose turbans were reduced to faded fezes, marched in
the van, followed closely by a rabble of Takruris, ragged, moneyless, living upon meat of abandoned
animals. Last of all were the sick and dying, who yet persisted in dragging their fainting
limbs along as best they could. Might they but reach the Holy City! Then if they died it would
be as martyrs for whom the doors of Paradise are always open. With them, expectants of easy
prey, like the rakham [Footnote: Vultures.] sailing in slow circles overhead, flocked the beggars,
thieves, outcasts and assassins; but night came quickly, and covered them, and all the things
they did, for evil and night have been partners from the beginning.

At last the Prince returned to his tent. He had seen the sun set over El Zaribah; he had seen
the passing of the caravans. Out there in the Valley they lay. They--to him, and for his purposes,
the Mohammedan world unchanged--the same in composition, in practice, in creed--only he felt
now a consciousness of understanding them as never before. Mahomet, in his re-introduction
of God to man, had imposed himself upon their faith, its master idea, its central figure, the
superior in sanctity, the essential condition--the ONE! Knowingly or unknowingly, he left a
standard of religious excellence behind him--Himself. And by that standard the thief in the
wake of the mighty caravans robbing the dead, the Thug strangling a victim because he was too
slow in dying, were worthy Paradise, and would attain it, for they believed in him. Faith in
the Prophet of God was more essential than faith in God. Such was the inspiration of Islam.
A sinking of spirit fell upon the unhappy man. He felt a twinge of the bitterness always waiting
on failure, where the undertaking, whatever it be, has enlisted the whole heart. At such times
instinctively we turn here and there for help, and in its absence, for comfort and consolation;
what should he do now but advert to Christianity? What would Christians say of his idea? Was
God lost in Christ as he was here in Mahomet?

CHAPTER VI

THE PRINCE AND THE EMIR

In the reception room of the Prince's tent the lamps are lighted; one fastened to the stout
centre pole, and five others on as many palings planted in the ground, all burning brightly.
The illumination is enriched by the admirable blending of colors in the canopy of shawls. Within
the space defined by the five lamps, on a tufted rug, the Mystic and the Emir are seated, both
in Ihram, and looking cool and comfortable, though the night outside still testifies to the
heat of the day.

A wooden trencher, scoured white as ivory, separates the friends, leaving them face to face.
In supping they have reached what we call the dessert.

On the trencher are slender baskets containing grapes, figs, and dates, the choicest of the
gardens of Medina. A jar of honey, an assortment of dry biscuits, and two jugs, one of water,
the other of juice of pomegranates, with drinking cups, complete the board.

At this age, Orientals lingering at table have the cheer of coffee and tobacco; unhappily for
the two of whom we are writing, neither of the great narcotics was discovered. Nevertheless
it should not be supposed the fruits, the honey, and the waters failed to content them. Behind
the host is the negro we already know as Nilo. He is very watchful of his master's every motion.

As guest and host appear now the formalism of acquaintanceship just made has somewhat disappeared,
and they are talking easily and with freedom. Occasionally a movement of one or the other brings
his head to a favorable angle, whereat the light, dropping on the freshly shaven crown, is
sharply glinted back.

The Emir has been speaking of the plague.

"At Medina I was told it had run its course," the host remarked.

"True, O Hadji, but it has returned, and with greater violence. The stragglers were its victims;
now it attacks indiscriminately. Yesterday the guard I keep in the rear came to a pilgrim of
rank. His litter was deserted, and he was lying in it dead."

"The man may have been murdered."

"Nay," said the Emir, "gold in large amount was found on his person."

"But he had other property doubtless?"

"Of great value."

"What disposition was made of it?"

"It was brought to me, and is now with other stores in my tent; a law of ancient institution
vesting it in the Emir El Hajj."

The countenance of the Jew became serious.

"The ownership was not in my thought," he said, waving his hand. "I knew the law; but this
scourge of Allah has its laws also, and by one of them we are enjoined to burn or bury whatever
is found with the body."

The Emir, seeing the kindly concern of his host, smiled as he answered:

"But there is a higher law, O Hadji."

"I spoke without thinking danger of any kind could disturb thee."

The host drew forward the date basket, and the Emir, fancying he discerned something on his
mind besides the fruit, waited his further speech.

"I am reminded of another matter, O brave Emir; but as it also is personal I hesitate. Indeed
I will not speak of it except with permission."

"As you will," the other replied, "I will answer--May the Prophet help me!"

"Blessed be the Prophet!" said the Prince, reverently. "Thy confidence doeth me honor, and
I thank thee; at the same time I would not presume upon it if thy tongue were less suggestive
of a land whose name is music--Italy. It is in my knowledge, O Emir, that the Sultan, thy master--may
Allah keep him in countenance!--hath in his service many excellent soldiers by birth of other
countries than his own, broad as it is--Christians, who are none the less of the true faith.
Wherefore, wilt thou tell me of thyself?"

The question did not embarrass the Emir.

"The answer must be brief," he answered, without hesitation, "because there is little to tell.
I do not know my native country. The peculiarity of accent you have mentioned has been observed
by others; and as they agreed with you in assigning it to Italy, I am nothing loath to account
myself an Italian. The few shreds of circumstance which came to me in course of time confirmed
the opinion, and I availed myself of a favorable opportunity to acquire the tongue. In our
further speech, O Hadji, you may prefer its use."

"At thy pleasure," the host replied; "though there is no danger of our being overheard. Nilo,
the slave behind me, has been a mute from birth."

Then, without the slightest interruption, the Emir changed his speech from Greek to Italian.
The report of the waves breaking upon the shore lives distinctly in my memory; so does the
color of the trees in the orchard which has since become familiar to me as the green of olives.
Equally clear is the recollection that, returning in-doors, I was carried into a house of stone
so large it must have been a castle. I speak of it, as of the orchard, and the sea, and the
roar of the breakers, quite as much by reference to what I have subsequently seen as from trust
in my memory."

Here the host interrupted him to remark:

"Though an Eastern, I have been a traveller in the west, and the description reminds me of
the eastern shore of Italy in the region of Brindisi."

"My next recollection," the Emir resumed, "is a child's fright, occasioned by furious flames,
and thick smoke, and noises familiar now as of battle. There was then a voyage on the sea during
which I saw none but bearded men. The period of perfect knowledge so far as my history is concerned
began when I found myself an object of the love and care of the wife of a renowned Pacha, governor
of the city of Brousa. She called me Mirza. My childhood was spent in a harem, and I passed
from it into a school to enter upon my training as a soldier. In good time I became a Janissary.
An opportunity presented itself one day, and I distinguished myself. My master, the Sultan,
rewarded me by promotion and transfer to the Silihdars, [Footnote: D'Oheson.] the most ancient
and favored corps of the Imperial army, it being the body-guard of the Padisha, and garrison
of his palace. The yellow flag my ensign carries belongs to that corps. As a further token
of his confidence, the Sultan appointed me Emir El Hajj. In these few words, O Hadji, you have
my history."

The listener was impressed with the simplicity of the narrative, and the speaker's freedom
from regret, sorrow, or passion of any kind.

"It is a sad story, O Emir," he said, sympathetically, "and I cannot think it ended. Knowest
thou not more?"

"Nothing of incident," was the reply. "All that remains is inferential. The castle was attacked
at night by Turks landed from their galleys."

"And thy father and mother?"

"I never knew them."

"There is another inference," said the Prince, suggestively--"they were Christians."

"Yes, but unbelievers."

The suppression of natural affection betrayed by the remark still more astonished the host.

"But they believed in God," he said.

"They should have believed Mahomet was his Prophet."

"I fear I am giving you pain, O Emir."

"Dismiss the fear, O Hadji."

Again the Jew sought the choicest date in the basket. The indifference of his guest was quick
fuel to the misgivings which we have already noticed as taking form about his purpose, and
sapping and weakening it. To be arbiter in the religious disputes of men, the unique consummation
called for by his scheme, the disputants must concede him room and hearing. Were all Mohammedans,
from whom he hoped most, like this one born of Christians, then the two conditions would be
sternly refused him. By the testimony of this witness, there was nothing in the heredity of
faith; and it went to his soul incisively that, in stimulating the passions which made the
crusades a recurrence of the centuries, he himself had contributed to the defeat now threatening
his latest ambition. The sting went to his soul; yet, by force of will, always at command in
the presence of strangers, he repressed his feeling, and said:

"Everything is as Allah wills. Let us rejoice that he is our keeper. The determination of our
fate, in the sense of what shall happen to us, and what we shall be, and when and where the
end shall overtake us, is no more to him than deciding the tint of the rose before the bud
is formed. O Emir, I congratulate you on the resignation with which you accept his judgment.
I congratulate you upon the age in which he has cast your life. He who in a moment of uncertainty
would inform himself of his future should not heed his intentions and hopes; by studying his
present conditions, he will find himself an oracle unto himself. He should address his best
mind to the question, 'I am now in a road; if I keep it, where will I arrive?' And wisdom will
answer, 'What are thy desires? For what art thou fitted? What are the opportunities of the
time?' Most fortunate, O Emir, if there be correspondence between the desire, the fitness,
and the opportunity!"

The Emir did not comprehend, and seeing it, the host added with a directness approaching the
abrupt:

"And now to make the reason of my congratulations clear, it is necessary that thou consent
to my putting a seal upon your lips. What sayest thou?"

"If I engage my silence, O Hadji, it is because I believe you are a good man."

The dignity of the Emir's answer did not entirely hide the effect of the Prince's manner.

"Know thou then," the latter continued, with a steady, penetrating gaze--"know thou then, there
is a Brahman of my acquaintance who is a Magus. I use the word to distinguish him from the
necromancers whom the Koran has set in everlasting prohibition. He keeps school in a chapel
hid away in the heart of jungles overgrowing a bank of the Bermapootra, not far from the mountain
gates of the river. He has many scholars, and his intelligence has compassed all knowledge.
He is familiar with the supernatural as with the natural. On my way, I visited him.... Know
thou next, O Emir, I too have had occasion to make inquiries of the future. The vulgar would
call me an astrologer--not a professional practising for profit, but an adept seeking information
because it lifts me so much nearer Allah and his sublimest mysteries. Very lately I found a
celestial horoscope announcing a change in the status of the world. The masterful waves, as
you may know, have for many ages flowed from the West; but now, the old Roman impetus having
at last spent itself, a refluence is to set in, and the East in its turn pour a dominating
flood upon the West. The determining stars have slipped their influences. They are in motion.
Constantinople is doomed!"

The guest drew a quick breath. Understanding was flooding him with light.

"And now, O Emir, say, if the revelation had stopped there--stopped, I mean, with the overthrow
of the Christian capital--wouldst thou have been satisfied with it?"

"No, by Allah, no!"

"Further, Emir. The stars being communicable yet, what wouldst thou have asked them next?"

"I would not have rested until I had from them the name of him who is to be leader in the movement."

The Mystic smiled at the young man's fervor.

"Thou hast saved me telling what I did, and affirmed the logic of our human nature," he said.
"Thy imperial master is old, and much worn by wars and cares of government, is he not?"

"Old in greatness," answered the Emir, diplomatically.

"Hath he not a son?"

"A son with all the royal qualities of the father."

"But young--not more than eighteen."

"Not more."

"And the Prophet hath lent him his name?"

"Even so."

The host released the eager face of the Emir from his gaze, while he sought a date in the basket.

"Another horoscope--the second"--he then said, quietly, "revealed everything but the hero's
name. He is to be of kingly birth, and a Turk. Though a lad, he is already used to arms and armor."

"Oh! by Allah, Hadji," cried the guest, his face flushed, his words quick, his voice mandatory.
"Release me from my pledge of silence. Tell me who thou art, that I may report thee, and the
things thou sayest. There was never such news to warm a heroic heart."

The Prince pursued his explanation without apparently noticing the interruption noticing the
interruption.

"To verify the confidences of the stars, I sought the Magus in his chapel by the sacred river.
Together we consulted them, and made the calculations. He embraced me; but it was agreed between
us that absolute verity of the finding could only be had by re-casting the horoscopes at Constantinople.
Thou must know, O Emir, there is an astral alphabet which has its origin in the inter-relations
of the heavenly bodies, represented by lines impalpable to the common eye; know also that the
most favored adept cannot read the mystic letters with the assurance best comporting with verity,
except he be at the place of the destined event or revolution. To possess myself of the advantage,
I shall ere long visit the ancient capital. More plainly, I am on the way thither now."

Instead of allaying the eagerness of the Emir, the words excited it the more.

"Release me from my pledge," he repeated, entreatingly, "and tell me who thou art. Mahommed
is my pupil; he rides, carries shield, lays lance, draws arrow, and strikes with sword and
axe as I have taught him. Thou canst not name a quality characteristic of heroes he does not
possess. Doth Allah permit me safe return from the Hajj, he will be first to meet me at his
father's gate. Think what happiness I should have in saluting him there with the title--Hail
Mahommed, Conqueror of Constantinople!"

The Jew answered:

"I would gladly help thee, O Emir, to happiness and promotion; for I see what afterwhile, if
not presently, they would follow such a salutation of thy pupil, if coupled with a sufficient
explanation; but his interests are paramount; at the same time it becomes me to be allegiant
to the divinatory stars. What rivalries the story might awaken! It is not uncommon in history,
as thou mayst know, that sons of promise have been cut off by jealous fathers. I am not accusing
the great Amurath; nevertheless precautions are always proper."

The speaker then became dramatic.

"Nay, brave Emir, the will to help thee has been already seconded by the deed. I spoke but
now of lines of correspondence between the shining lights that are the life of the sky at night.
Let me illustrate my meaning. Observe the lamps about us. The five on the uprights. Between
them, in the air, two stars of interwoven form are drawn. Take the lamps as determining points,
and use thy fancy a moment."

The Emir turned to the lamps; and the host, swift to understand the impulse, gave him time
to gratify it; then he resumed:

"So the fields of Heaven between the stars, where the vulgar see only darkness, are filled
with traceries infinite in form yet separable as the letters of the alphabet. They are the
ciphers in which Allah writes his reasons for every creation, and his will concerning it. There
the sands are numbered, and the plants and trees, and their leaves, and the birds, and everything
animate; there is thy history, and mine, and all of little and great and good and bad that
shall befall us in this life. Death does not blot out the records. Everlastingly writ, they
shall be everlastingly read--for the shame of some, for the delight of others."

"Allah is good," said the Emir, bending his head.

"And now," the Mystic continued, "thou hast eaten and drunk with me in the Pentagram of the
Magii. Such is the astral drawing between the five lamps. Henceforth in conflicts of interest,
fortune against fortune, influences undreamt of will come to thy assistance. So much have I
already done for thee."

The Emir bowed lower than before.

"Nor that alone," the Jew continued. "Henceforth our lives will run together on lines never
divergent, never crossing. Be not astonished, if, within a week, I furnish, to thy full satisfaction,
proof of what I am saying."

The expression could not be viewed except as of more than friendly interest.

"Should it so happen," the Emir said, with warmth, "consider how unfortunate my situation would
be, not knowing the name or country of my benefactor."

The host answered simply, though evasively:

"There are reasons of state, O Emir, requiring me to make this pilgrimage unknown to any one."

The Emir apologized.

"It is enough," the host added, "that thou remember me as the Prince of India, whose greatest
happiness is to believe in Allah and Mahomet his Prophet; at the same time I concede we should
have the means of certainly knowing each other should communication become desirable hereafter."

He made a sign with his right hand which the negro in waiting responded to by passing around
in front of him.

"Nilo," the master said in Greek, "bring me the two malachite rings--those with the turquoise
eyes."

The slave disappeared.

"Touching the request to be released from the promise of secrecy, pardon me, O Emir, if I decline
to grant it. The verification to be made in Constantinople should advise thee that the revolution
to which I referred is not ripe for publication to the world. A son might be excused for dishonoring
his parents; but the Magus who would subject the divine science to danger of ridicule or contempt
by premature disclosure is fallen past hope--he would betray Allah himself."

The Emir bowed, but with evident discontent. At length the slave returned with the rings.

"Observe, O Emir," the Jew said, passing them both to his guest, "they are rare, curious, and
exactly alike."

The circlets were of gold, with raised settings of deep green stone, cut so as to leave a drop
of pure turquoise on the top of each, suggestive of birds' eyes.

"They are exactly the same, O Prince," said the Emir, tendering them back.

The Jew waved his hand.

"Select one of them," he said, "and I will retain the other. Borne by messengers, they will
always identify us each to the other."

The two grew more cordial, and there was much further conversation across the board, interspersed
with attentions to the fruit basket and pomegranate water. About midnight the Emir took his
departure. When he was gone, the host walked to and fro a long time; once he halted, and said
aloud--"I hear his salute, 'Hail Mahommed, Conqueror of Constantinople !' It is always well
to have a store of strings for one's bow."

And to himself he laughed heartily.

Next day at dawn the great caravan was afoot, every man, woman, and child clad in Ihram, and
whitening the pale green Valley.

CHAPTER VII

AT THE KAABA

The day before the pilgrimage.

A cloud had hung over the valley where Mecca lies like drift in the bed of a winding gorge.
About ten o'clock in the morning the cloud disappeared over the summit of Abu Kubays in the
east. The promise of rain was followed by a simoom so stifling that it plunged every breathing
thing into a struggle for air. The dogs burrowed in the shade of old walls; birds flew about
with open beaks; the herbage wilted, and the leaves on the stunted shrubs ruffled, then rolled
up, like drying cinnamon. If the denizens of the city found no comfort in their houses of stone
and mud, what suffering was there for the multitude not yet fully settled in the blistering
plain beyond the bluffs of Arafat?

The zealous pilgrim, obedient to the law, always makes haste to celebrate his arrival at the
Holy City by an immediate visit to the Haram. If perchance he is to see the enclosure for the
first time, his curiosity, in itself pardonable, derives a tinge of piety from duty. The Prince
of India but illustrated the rule. He left his tents pitched close to those of the Emir El
Hajj and the Scherif of Mecca, under the Mountain of Mercy, as Arafat was practically translated
by the very faithful. Having thus assured the safety of his property, for conveniency and greater
personal comfort he took a house with windows looking into the Mosque. By so doing, he maintained
the dignity of his character as a Prince of India. The beggars thronging his door furnished
lively evidence of the expectations his title and greatness had already excited.

With a guide, his suite, and Nilo shading his head with an umbrella of light green paper, the
Prince appeared in front of the chief entrance to the sacred square from the north. [Footnote:
The Bab el Vzyadeh.]

The heads of the party were bare; their countenances becomingly solemn; their Ihram fresh and
spotlessly white. Passing slowly on, they were conducted under several outside arches, and
down a stairway into a hall, where they left the umbrella and their shoes.

The visitor found himself then in a cloister of the Mosque with which the area around the Kaaba
is completely enclosed. There was a pavement of undressed flags, and to the right and left
a wilderness of tall pillars tied together by arches, which in turn supported domes. Numbers
of people, bareheaded and barefooted, to whom the heat outside was insupportable, were in refuge
there; some, seated upon the stones, revolved their rosaries; others walked slowly about. None
spoke. The silence was a tribute to the ineffable sanctity of the place. The refreshing shade,
the solemn hush, the whiteness of the garments were suggestive of sepulchres and their spectral
tenantry.

In the square whither the Prince next passed, the first object to challenge his attention was
the Kaaba itself. At sight of it he involuntarily stopped.

The cloisters, seen from the square, were open colonnades. Seven minarets, belted in red, blue
and yellow, arose in columnar relief against the sky and the mountains in the south. A gravelled
plot received from the cloisters; next that, toward the centre, was a narrow pavement of rough
stone in transverse extension down a shallow step to another gravelled plot; then another pavement
wider than the first, and ending, like it, in a downward step; after which there was a third
sanded plot, and then a third pavement defined by gilded posts upholding a continuous row of
lamps, ready for lighting at the going down of the sun. The last pavement was of gray granite
polished mirror-like by the friction of millions of bare feet; and upon it, like the pedestal
of a monument upon a plinth, rested the base of the Holy House, a structure of glassy white
marble about two feet in height, with a bench of sharp inclination from the top. At intervals
it was studded with massive brass rings. Upon the base the Kaaba rose, an oblong cube forty
feet tall, eighteen paces lengthwise, and fourteen in breadth, shrouded all in black silk wholly
unrelieved, except by one broad band of the appearance of gold, and inscriptions from the Koran,
of a like appearance, wrought in boldest lettering. The freshness of the great gloomy curtain
told how quickly the gift of the Sultan had been made available, and that whatever else might
betide him, the young Emir was already happily discharged of his trust.

Of the details, the only one the Jew actually coupled with a thought was the Kaaba. A hundred
millions of human beings pray five times every day, their faces turned to this funereal object!
The idea, though commonplace, called up that other always in waiting with him. In a space too
brief for the formulation of words, he felt the Arbitership of his dreams blow away. The work
of the founder of Islam was too well done and now too far gone to be disturbed, except with
the sanction of God. Had he the sanction? A writhing of the soul, accompanied with a glare,
like lightning, and followed, like lightning, by an engulfing darkness, wrung his features,
and instinctively he covered them with his hands. The guide saw the action, and misjudged it.

"Let us not be in haste," he said. "Others before you have found the House at first sight blinding.
Blessed be Allah!"

The commiseration affected the Prince strangely. The darkness, under pressure of his hands
upon the eyeballs, gave place to an atmosphere of roseate light, in the fulness of which he
saw the House of God projected by Solomon and rebuilt by Herod. The realism of the apparition
was absolute, and comparison unavoidable. That he, familiar with the glory of the conception
of the Israelite, should be thought blinded by this Beit Allah of the Arab, so without grace
of form or lines, so primitive and expressionless, so palpably uninspired by taste, or genius,
or the Deity it was designed to honor, restored him at once: indeed, in the succeeding reaction,
he found it difficult to keep down resentment. Dropping his hands, he took another survey of
the shrouded pile, and swept all the square under eye.

He beheld a crowd of devotees at the northeast corner of the House, and over their heads two
small open structures which, from descriptions often heard, he recognized as praying places.
A stream of worshippers was circling around the marble base of the Most Holy, some walking,
others trotting; these, arriving at the northeast corner, halted--the Black Stone was there!
A babel of voices kept the echoes of the enclosure in unremitting exercise. The view taken,
the Jew said, calmly:

"Blessed be Allah! I will go forward."

In his heart he longed to be in Constantinople--Islam, it was clear, would lend him no ear;
Christendom might be more amenable.

He was carried next through the Gate of the Sons of the Old Woman; thence to the space in front
of the well Zem-Zem; mindful of the prayers and prostrations required at each place, and of
the dumb servants who went with him.

The famous well was surrounded by a throng apparently impassable.

"Room for the Royal Hadji--for the Prince of India!" the guide yelled. "There are no poor where
he is--make way!"

A thousand eyes sought the noble pilgrim; and as a path opened for him, a score of Zem-Zemis
refilled their earthen cups with the bitter water afresh. A Prince of Hind did not come to
them every day.

He tasted from a cup--his followers drank--and when the party turned away there were jars paid
for to help all the blind in the caravan back to healthful vision.

"There is no God but Allah! Be merciful to him, O Allah," the crowd shouted, in approval of
the charity.

The press of pilgrims around the northeastern corner of the Kaaba, to which the guide would
have conducted the Prince next, was greater than at the well. Each was waiting his turn to
kiss the Black Stone before beginning the seven circuits of the House.

Never had the new-comer seen a concourse so wrought upon by fanaticism; never had he seen a
concourse so peculiarly constituted. All complexions, even that of the interior African, were
a reddish desert tan. Eyes fiercely bright appeared unnaturally swollen from the colirium with
which they were generally stained. The diversities the penitential costume would have masked
were effectually exposed whenever mouths opened for utterance. Many sang, regardless of time
or melody, the tilbiye they had hideously vocalized in their advance toward the city. For the
most part, however, the effort at expression spent itself in a long cry, literally rendered--"Thou
hast called me--I am here! I am here!" The deliverance was in the vernacular of the devotee,
and low or loud, shrill or hoarse, according to the intensity of the passion possessing him.

To realize the discordancy, the reader must recall the multiplicity of the tribes and nations
represented; then will he fancy the agitation of the mass, the swaying of the white-clad bodies,
the tossing of bare arms and distended hands, the working of tearful faces turned up to the
black-curtained pile regardless of the smiting of the sun--here men on their knees, there men
grovelling on the pavement--yonder one beating his breast till it resounds like an empty cask--some
comprehension of the living obstruction in front of the Jew can be had.

Then the guide, calling him, tried the throng.

"The Prince of India!" he shouted, at the top of his voice. "Room for the beloved of the Prophet!
Stand not in his way--Room, room!"

After much persistence the object was achieved. A pilgrim, the last one in front of the Prince,
with arms extended along the two sides of the angle of the wall where the curtain was looped
up, seemed struggling to embrace the House; suddenly, as in despair he beat his head frantically
against the sharp corner--a second thrust more desperate than the first--then a groan, and
he dropped blindly to the pavement. The guide rejoicing made haste to push the Prince into
the vacant place.

Without the enthusiasm of a traveller, calmly as a philosopher, the Jew, himself again, looked
at the Stone which more nearly than any other material thing commanded idolatrous regard from
the Mohammedan world. He had known personally most of the great men of that world--its poets,
lawmakers, warriors, ascetics, kings--even the Prophet. And now they came one by one, as one
by one they had come in their several days, and kissed the insensate thing; and between the
coming and going time was scarcely perceptible. The mind has the faculty of compressing, by
one mighty effort, the incidents of a life, even of centuries, into a flash-like reenactment.

As all the way from the first view of the sanctuary to arrival at the gate, and thence to this
point, the Jew had promptly followed his guide, especially in recitation of the prescribed
prayers, he was about to do so now; already his hands were raised.

"Great God! O my God! I believe in Thee--I Believe in thy Book--I believe in thy Word--I believe
in thy Promise," the zealous prompter said, and waited.

For the first time the votary was slow to respond. How could he, at such a juncture, refuse
a thought to the Innumerables whose ghosts had been rendered up in vain struggles to obey the
law which required them to come and make proof of faith before this Stone! The Innumerables,
lost at sea, lost in the desert--lost body and soul, as in their dying they themselves had
imagined! Symbolism! An invention of men--a necessity of necromancers! God had his ministers
and priests, the living media of his will, but of symbols--nothing!

"Great God! O my God!" the guide began again. A paroxysm of disgust seized the votary. The
Phariseeism in which he was born and bred, and which he could no more outlive than he could
outlive his body asserted itself.

In the crisis of the effort at self-control, he heard a groan, and, looking down, saw the mad
devotee at his feet. In sliding from the shelf of the base, the man had been turned upon his
back, so that he was lying face upward. On the forehead there were two cruel wounds; and the
blood, yet flowing, had partially filled the hollows of the eyes, making the countenance unrecognizable.

"The wretch is dying," the Prince exclaimed.

"Allah is merciful--let us attend to the prayers," the guide returned, intent on business.

"But he will die, if not helped."

"When we have finished, the porters will come for him."

The sufferer stirred, then raised a hand.

"O Hadji--O Prince of India!" he said faintly, in Italian.

The Wanderer bent down to get a nearer view.

"It is the Yellow Air--save me!"

Though hardly articulate, the words were full of light to the listener.

"The virtues of the Pentagram endure," he said, with absolute self-possession. "The week is
not ended, and, lo!--I save him."

Rising to his full stature, he glanced here and there over the throng, as if commanding attention,
and proclaimed:

"A mercy of the Most Merciful! It is the Emir El Hajj."

There was a general silence. Every man had seen the martial figure of the young chief in his
arms and armor, and on horseback; many of them had spoken to him.

"The Emir El Hajj--dying," passed rapidly from mouth to mouth.

"O Allah!" burst forth in general refrain; after which the ejaculations were all excerpted
from prayers.

"'O Allah! This is the place of him who flies to thee from fire!--Shadow him, O Allah, in thy
shadow!--Give him drink from the cup of thy Prophet!'"

A Bedouin, tall, almost black, and with a tremendous mouth open until the red lining was exposed
between the white teeth down to the larynx, shouted shrilly the inscription on the marble over
the breast of the Prophet--"In the name of Allah! Allah have mercy upon him!"--and every man
repeated the words, but not one so much as reached a hand in help.

The Prince waited--still the Amins, and prayerful ejaculations. Then his wonder ceased. Not
a pilgrim but envied the Emir--that he should die so young was a pity--that he should die at
the base of the sanctuary, in the crowning act of the Hajj, was a grace of God. Each felt Paradise
stooping low to receive a martyr, and that its beatitude was near. They trembled with ecstasy
at hearing the gates opening on their crystal hinges, and seeing light as from the robe of
the Prophet glimmering through them. O happy Emir!

The Jew drew within himself. Compromise with such fanaticism was impossible. Then, with crushing
distinctness, he saw what had not before occurred to him. In the estimation of the Mohammedan
world, the role of Arbiter was already filled; that which he thought of being, Mahomet was.
Too late, too late! In bitterness of soul he flung his arms up and shouted:

"The Emir is dying of the plague!"

He would have found satisfaction in seeing the blatant crowd take to its heels, and hie away
into the cloisters and the world outside; not one moved!

"By Allah!" he shouted, more vehemently than before. "The Yellow Air hath blown upon the Emir--is
blowing upon you--Fly!"

"Amin! Such the answers returned him.

The general voice became a howl. Surely here was something more than fanaticism. Then it entered
his understanding. What he beheld was Faith exulting above the horrors of disease, above the
fear of death--Faith bidding Death welcome! His arms fell down. The crowd, the sanctuary, the
hopes he had built on Islam, were no more to him. He signed to his three attendants, and they
advanced and raised the Emir from the pavement.

"To-morrow I will return with thee, and complete my vows;" he said to his guide. "For the present,
lead out of the square to my house."

The exit was effected without opposition.

Next day the Emir, under treatment of the Prince, was strong enough to tell his story. The
plague had struck him about noon of the day following the interview in the tent at El Zaribah.
Determined to deliver the gifts he had in keeping, and discharge his trust to the satisfaction
of his sovereign, he struggled resolutely with the disease. After securing the Scherif's receipt
he bore up long enough to superintend the pitching his camp. Believing death inevitable, he
was carried into his tent, where he issued his final orders and bade his attendants farewell.
In the morning, though weak, half-delirious, his faith the strongest surviving impulse, he
called for his horse, and being lifted into the saddle, rode to the city, resolved to assure
himself of the blessings of Allah by dying in the shadow of the sanctuary.

The Prince, listening to the explanation, was more than ever impressed with the futility of
attempting a compromise with people so devoted to their religion. There was nothing for him
but to make haste to Constantinople, the centre of Christian sentiment and movement. There
he might meet encouragement and ultimate success.

In the ensuing week, having performed the two pilgrimages, and seen the Emir convalescent,
he took the road again, and in good time reached Jedda, where he found his ship waiting to
convey him across the Red Sea to the African coast. The embarkation was without incident, and
he departed, leaving a reputation odorous for sanctity, with numberless witnesses to carry
it into every quarter of Islam.

CHAPTER VIII

THE ARRIVAL IN CONSTANTINOPLE

Uel, the son of Jahdai, was in the habit of carrying the letter received from the mysterious
stranger about with him in a breast pocket. How many times a day he took it out for reexamination
would be difficult to say. Observing the appearance of signs of usage, he at length wrapped
it in an envelope of yellow silk. If he had thought less of it, he would have resorted to plain
linen.

There were certain points in the missive which seemed of greater interest to him than others.
For example, the place whence it had been addressed was an ever recurring puzzle; he also dwelt
long upon the sentence which referred so delicately to a paternal relationship. The most exigent
passages, however, were those relative to the time he might look for the man's coming. As specially
directed, he had taken note of the day of the delivery of the letter, and was greatly surprised
to find the messenger had arrived the last day of the year permitted him. The punctuality of
the servant might be in imitation of a like virtue of the master. If so, at the uttermost,
the latter might be expected six months after receipt of the letter. Or he might appear within
the six months. The journeys laid out were of vast distances, and through wild and dangerous
countries, and by sea as well. Only a good traveller could survive them at all; to execute
them in such brief space seemed something superhuman.

So it befell that the son of Jahdai was at first but little concerned. The months--three, four,
five--rolled away, and the sixth was close at hand; then every day brought him an increase
of interest. In fact, he found himself looking for the arrival each morning, and at noon promising
it an event of the evening.

November was the sixth and last month of the time fixed. The first of that month passed without
the stranger. Uel became anxious. The fifteenth he turned the keeping of his shop over to a
friend; and knowing the passage from Alexandria must be by sea, he betook himself, with Syama,
to the port on the Golden Horn known as the Gate of St. Peter, at the time most frequented
by Egyptian sailing masters. In waiting there, he saw the sun rise over the heights of Scutari,
and it was the morning of the very last day. Syama, meantime, occupied himself in final preparation
of the house for the reception. He was not excited, like Uel, because he had no doubt of the
arrival within the period set. He was also positively certain of finding his master, when at
length he did appear, exactly as when he separated from him in Cipango. He was used to seeing
Time waste itself upon the changeless man; he had even caught from him a kind of contempt for
what other men shrank from as dangers and difficulties.

The site of the house has been described; it remains to give the reader an idea of its interior.
There were four rooms on the ground floor furnished comfortably for servants, of whom the arrangement
indicated three besides Syama. The first floor was of three apartments communicable by doorways
with portieres of camel's hair. The furniture was Roman, Greek, and Egyptian mixed. Of the
three the middle chamber was largest, and as its fittings were in a style of luxury supposed
to be peculiar to princes, the conclusion was fair that it was designed for the proprietor's
occupancy during his waking hours. A dark blue rug clothed the floor. In the centre, upon a
shield of clear copper, arose a silver brazier. The arms and legs of the stools here and there
on the rug were carven in grotesque imitation of reptiles and animals of the ultra dragonish
mode. The divans against the walls were of striped silk. In each corner stood a tall post of
silvered bronze, holding at the end of a graceful crook several lamps of Pompeiian model. A
wide window in the east end, filled with plants in bloom, admitted ample light, which, glancing
through the flowers, fell on a table dressed in elegant cloth, and bearing a lacquered waiter
garnished with cups of metal and glass, and one hand-painted porcelain decanter for drinking
water. An enormous tiger-skin, the head intact and finished with extraordinary realism, was
spread on the floor in front of the table. The walls were brilliant with fresh Byzantine frescoing.
The air of the room was faintly pervaded with a sweet incense of intoxicating effect upon one
just admitted to it. Indeed the whole interior partook of this sweetness.

The care of the faithful servant had not been confined to the rooms; he had constructed a summer
house upon the roof, knowing that when the weather permitted his master would pass the nights
there in preference to the chambers below. This structure looked not unlike a modern belfry,
except that the pillars and shallow dome of the top were of Moorish lightness. Thence, to a
familiar, the heavens in the absence of the sun would be an unrolled map.

When the last touch of the preparation had been given, and Syama said to himself, "He may come
now," one point was especially noticeable--nowhere in the house was there provision for a woman.

The morning of the last day Syama accompanied Uel to the port reluctantly. Feeling sure his
master had not arrived in the night, he left his friend on the watch, and returned home early.

The noise and stir of business at the ancient landing were engaging. With a great outcry, a
vessel would be drawn up, and made fast, and the unloading begun. A drove of donkeys, or a
string of camels, or a mob of porters would issue from the gate, receive the cargo and disappear
with it. Now and then a ship rounded the classic Point, its square sail bent and all the oars
at work: sweeping past Galata on the north side of the Horn, then past the Fish Market Gate
on the south, up it would come gracefully as a flying bird; if there was place for it at the
quay, well; if not, after hovering around awhile, it would push out to a berth in the open
water. Such incidents were crises to Uel. To this one and to that he would run with the question:

"Where is she from?"

If from the upper sea, he subsided; but if from the Marmora, he kept eager lookout upon her,
hoping to recognize in every disembarkee the man he was expecting.

That he had never seen the person was of little consequence. He had thought of him so much
awake, and seen him so repeatedly in dreams, he was confident of knowing him at sight. Imagining
a stranger's appearance is for the most part a gentle tribute of respect; the mistakes we make
are for the most part ludicrous.

No one answering the preconception came. Noon, and still no one; then, cast down and disappointed,
Uel went home, ate something, held the usual childish dialogue with his little girl, and about
mid afternoon crossed the street to the new residence. Great was his astonishment at finding
a pyramid of coals glowing in the silver brazier, and the chill already driven from the sitting-room.
Here--there--upstairs, downstairs--the signs were of present occupancy. For a moment he thought
the master had slipped by him or landed at some other port of the city.

"Is he here? Has he come?" he asked, excitedly, and Syama answered with a shake of the head.

"Then why the fire?"

Syama, briefly waving his hand as if following the great Marmorean lake, turned the finger
ends into the other palm, saying plainly and emphatically:

"He is coming--he will be here directly."

Uel smiled--faith could not be better illustrated--and it was so in contrast with his own incredulity!

He lingered awhile. Restlessness getting the mastery, he returned home, reflecting on the folly
of counting so implicitly upon the conclusion to a day of a tour so vast. More likely, he thought,
the traveller's bones were somewhere whitening the desert, or the savages of Kash-Cush had
eaten him. He had heard of their cannibalism.

Want of faith, however, did not prevent the shopkeeper from going to his friend's house after
supper. It was night, and dark, and the chilling moisture of a winter wind blowing steadily
from the Black Sea charged the world outside with discomfort. The brazier with its heap of
living coals had astonished him before; now the house was all alight! He hastened upstairs.
In the sitting-room the lamps were burning, and the illumination was brilliant. Syama was there,
calm and smiling as usual.

"What--he is here?" Uel said, looking from door to door.

The servant shook his head, and waved his hand negatively, as to say:

"Not yet--be patient--observe me."

To indulge his wonder, Uel took seat. Later on he tried to get from Syama an explanation of
his amazing confidence, but the latter's substitute for speech was too limited and uncertain
to be satisfactory.

About ten o'clock Syama went below, and presently returned with food and drink on a large waiter.

"Ah, good Lord!" Uel thought. "He is making a meal ready. What a man! What a master!"

Then he gave attention to the fare, which was of wheaten wafers, cold fowl, preserved fruits,
and wine in a stoneware bottle. These Syama set on a circular table not higher than the divan
in front of which it was drawn. A white napkin and a bowl for laving the fingers completed
the preparation, as Uel supposed. But no. Syama went below again, and reappeared with a metal
pot and a small wooden box. The pot he placed on the coals in the brazier, and soon a delicate
volume of steam was pouring from the spout; after handling the box daintily as if the contents
were vastly precious, he deposited it unopened by the napkin and bowl. Then, with an expression
of content upon his face, he too took seat, and surrendered himself to expectancy. The lisping
of the steam escaping from the pot on the fire was the only sound in the room.

The assurance of the servant was contagious. Uel began to believe the master would come. He
was congratulating himself upon the precaution he had taken in leaving a man at the port to
conduct him rightly when he heard a shuffling of feet below stairs. He listened startled. There
were several men in the company. Steps shook the floor. Uel and Syama arose.

The latter's countenance flushed with pleasure; giving one triumphal glance at his friend,
much as to say, There--did I not tell you so? he walked forward quickly, and reached the head
of the steps just as a stranger finished their ascent. In a moment Syama was on his knees,
kissing the hand held out to him. Uel needed no prompter--it was the master!

If only on account of the mutuality of affection shown between the two, the meeting was a pleasant
sight. That feature, however, was lost to the shopkeeper, who had no thought except of the
master's appearance. He had imagined him modelled after the popular conceptions of kings and
warriors--tall, majestic, awe-inspiring. He saw instead a figure rather undersized, slightly
stoop-shouldered, thin; at least it seemed so then, hid as it was under a dark brown burnoose
of the amplitude affected by Arab sheiks. The head was covered by a woollen handkerchief of
reddish tint, held by a scarlet cord. The edge of the handkerchief projected over the forehead
enough to cast the entire face in shade, leaving to view only a mass of white beard overflowing
the breast.

The master ended the reception at the head of the stairs by gently raising Syama to his feet.
Then he subjected the room to a swift inspection, and, in proof of satisfaction, he patted
the happy retainer on the shoulder. Invited by the fire, and the assurance of comfort in its
glow, he advanced to the brazier, and while extending his hands over it, observed Uel. Without
surprise or hesitation he walked to him.

"Son of Jahdai!" he said, offering his hand.

The voice was of exceeding kindness. As an overture to peace and goodwill, it was reenforced
by very large eyes, the intense blackness of which was softened by a perceptible glow of pleasure.
Uel was won on the instant. A recollection of the one supreme singularity of the new acquaintance--his
immunity from death--recurred to him, and he could not have escaped its effect had he wished.
He was conscious also that the eyes were impressing him. Without distinct thought, certainly
without the slightest courtierly design, he obeyed the impulse of the moment, and stooped and
touched the extended hand with his lips. And before rising he heard the beginning of further
speech:

"I see the truth of my judgment. The family of my ancient friends has trodden the ways of righteousness
under the commandments of the Lord until it has become a kind unto itself. I see too my trust
has been verified. O Son of Jahdai, you did assist my servant, as I requested, and to your
kindness, doubtless, I am indebted for this home full of comforts after a long absence among
strangers. I hold you my creditor."

The tendency of the speech was to relieve Uel of embarrassment.

"Do not thank me," he answered. "The business was ordinary, and strictly within Syama's capacity.
Indeed, the good man could have finished it without my help."

The master, rich in experience, noticed the deferential manner of the reply, and was agreeably
assured on his side.

"Very well. There will be no harm in reserving an opinion," he said. "The good man, as you
call him, is making ready a drink with which he has preceded me from his country, and which
you must stay and share, as it is something unknown in the West."

"Let me first welcome you here," Uel returned.

"Oh, I saw the welcome in your face. But let us get nearer the fire. The night is chilling.
If I were owner of a garden under whatever hill along the Bosphorus, verily I should tremble
for my roses."

Thus briefly, and in such simple manner, the wise Mystic put the shopkeeper perfectly at ease.

At the brazier they watched Syama in the operation since become of universal knowledge under
title of "drawing tea." The fragrance of the decoction presently filled the room to the suppression
of the incense, and they drank, ate, and were sociable. The host outlined his travels. Uel,
in return, gave him information of the city. When the latter departed, it was with a light
heart, and an elastic step; the white beard and patriarchal manner of the man had laid his
fears, and the future was to him like a cloudless sky.

Afterwhile the master signified a wish to retire; whereupon his household came, as was their
wont, to bid him good-night. Of these there were two white men. At sight of Syama, they rushed
to embrace him as became brethren of old acquaintance long in the same service. A third one
remained at the door. Syama looked at him, and then at the master; for the man was a stranger.
Then the Jew, with quick intuition of the requirement of the time, went, and took him by the
hand, and led him to the others. Addressing Syama, he said gravely:

"This is Nilo, son of the Nilo whom you knew. As you held the father in love, so you shall
hold the son."

The man was young, very black, and gigantic in stature. Syama embraced him as he had the others.

In the great city there was not a more united household under roof than that of the shopkeeper's
friend.

CHAPTER IX

THE PRINCE AT HOME

A wise man wishing to know another always attends him when he is in narrative. The reader may
be familiar with the principle, and a believer in it; for his better satisfaction, therefore,
a portion of the Prince's conversation with Uel over the tea-table the night of his arrival
in Constantinople shall be reported nearly as possible in his own words. It will be found helpful
to the story as well as an expose of character.

"I said in my letter, as thou mayst remember, O son of Jahdai"--the voice of the speaker was
low, but earnest, and admirably in harmony with the sentiment, "that I hoped thou wouldst allow
me to relate myself to thee as father to son. Thou hast not forgotten it, I am sure."

"I recall it distinctly," Uel answered, respectfully.

"Thou wilt remember not less clearly then that I added the words, 'in all things a help, in
nothing a burden.'"

Uel assented.

"The addition I thought of great importance," the Prince continued; "for it was very desirable
that thou shouldst not imagine me coming to sit down upon thee, and in idleness fatten upon
the fruits of thy industry. As something of even greater importance, thou shouldst know now,
at this earliest moment of our intercourse, that I am abundantly able from what I have of goods
and treasure to keep any condition I may choose to assume. Indeed thou shouldst not be too
much astonished did I practise the style and manner of the nobles who are privileged in the
palaces of thy Caesar. At home I shall be as thou seest me now, thy friend of simplest habits,
because my tastes really incline to them; when I go abroad, the officials of the Church and
State whom I chance to encounter shall be challenged to comparison of appearance, and be piqued
to inquire about me. Then when the city observes thou art intimate with me, the demand for
thy wares will increase; thou mayst even be put to stress to keep apace with it. In speaking
thus, I trust thy natural shrewdness, sharpened as it must have become by much dealing as a
merchant."

He paused here to give his cup to Syama for replenishment; whereupon Uel said: "I have followed
thy discourse with interest, and I hope with understanding; yet I am conscious of a disadvantage.
I do not know thy name, nor if thou hast a title."

"Yes, and thou mightest have set down in the table of defaults," the Wanderer began pleasantly
in reply, but broke off to receive the cup smoking hot from the servant, and say--"Thanks,
Syama. I see thy hand hath not lost its deftness; neither has the green leaf suffered from
its long journey over the sea."

Uel noticed with what intentness Syama watched the master's lips while he was speaking, and
the gratification that beamed from his face in answer to the compliment; and he thought, "Verily
this must be a good man to be so beloved by his dependents."

"I was saying, O son of Jahdai, that thou mightest have set down the other points of information
equally necessary to our intercourse--Whence I come? And why? And I will not leave thee in
the dark respecting them. Only let me caution thee--It is not required that the public should
be taken into our confidence. I have seen a flower good to look upon, but viscous, and with
a scent irresistible to insects. That flower represents the world; and what is the folly of
its victims but the madness of men who yield themselves with too easy faith to the seductions
of the world? Nay, my son--observe thou the term--I use it to begin the relationship I seek--observe
also I begin the relationship by confidences which were unwisely given without the injunction
that they are intended to be put away in thy inner-conscience. Tell me if I am understood."

The question was emphasized by a look whose magnetism thrilled Uel's every nerve.

"I believe I understand you," he replied.

Then, as if the Prince knew the effect he had wrought, and that it relieved him from danger
of betrayal, he returned to his former easy manner.

"And yet, as thou shalt see, my son, the confidences are not crimes--But thy cup is empty,
and Syama waiting for it."

"The drink is new to me," Uel replied, yielding to the invitation.

"New? And wilt thou not also say it is better than wine? The world of which we are talking,
will one day take up the admission, and be happier of it."

Turning then to serious matter:

"Afterwhile," he said, "thou wilt be importuned by the curious to know who I am, and thou shouldst
be able to answer according to the fact--He is a Prince of India. The vulgar will be satisfied
with the reply. Others will come demanding more. Refer them to me. As to thyself, O son of
Jahdai, call me as I have instructed thee to speak of me--call me Prince. At the same time
I would have thee know that on my eighth day I was carried into a temple and registered a son
of a son of Jerusalem. The title I give thee for my designation did not ennoble me. The birthright
of a circumcised heritor under the covenant with Israel is superior to every purely human dignity
whatever its derivation."

"In other words, O Prince, thou art"--Uel hesitated.

"A Jew!" the other answered promptly--"A Jew, as thy father was--as thou art."

The look of pleasure that appeared on the shopkeeper's face was swiftly interpreted by the
Prince, who felt he had indeed evoked a tie of blood, and bound the man with it.

"So much is despatched," he said, with evident satisfaction; then, after a draught from the
tea-cup, and a re-delivery to Syania for more, he continued: "Possibly thou wilt also remember
my letter mentions a necessity for my crossing from India to Mecca on the way to Kash-Cush,
and that, despite the stoppage, I hoped to greet thee in person within six months after Syama
reported himself. How stands the time?"

"This is the last day of the six months," Uel answered.

"Yes, there was never man"--the Prince paused, as if the thought were attended with a painful
recollection--"never a man," he presently resumed, "who kept account of time more exactly than
myself."

A copious draught of tea assuaged the passing regret.

"I wrote the letter while in Cipango, an island of the great eastern sea. Thirty years after
I set foot upon its shore, theretofore unvisited by a white man, a countryman of ours from
this city, the sole survivor of a shipwreck, joined me. From him I heard of thy father's death.
He also gave me thy name.... My life on the island was comparatively untroubled. Indeed, for
thy perfect comprehension, my son, it is best to make an explanation now; then thou wilt have
a key to many things in my conduct to come as well as conduct gone which would otherwise keep
thee in doubtful reflection. The study of greatest interest is religion. I have travelled the
world over--I mean the inhabited parts--and in its broad extent there is not a people without
worship of some kind. Wherefore my assertion, that beyond the arts, above the sciences, above
commerce, above any or all other human concernments, religion is the superlative interest.
It alone is divine. The study of it is worship. Knowledge of it is knowledge of God. Can as
much be said of any other subject?"

Uel did not answer; he was following the speech too intently, and the Prince, seeing it, drank
again, and proceeded:

"The divine study took me to Cipango. Fifty years thou mayst say to thyself was a long term
in such a country. Not so, my son. I found there two faiths; the one Sin-Siu, which I turned
my back upon as mythologic, without the poetry of the Greek and Roman; the other--well, a life
given to the laws of Buddha were well spent. To say truth, there is such similitude between
them and the teachings of him we are in the habit of calling the carpenter's son that, if I
did not know better, it were easy to believe the latter spent the years of his disappearance
in some Buddhistic temple.... Leaving explanation to another time, the same study carried me
to Mecca. The binding of men, the putting yokes about their necks, trampling them in the dust,
are the events supposed most important and therefore most noticeable in history; but they are
as nothing in comparison with winning belief in matters indeterminable by familiar tests. The
process there is so mysterious, the achievement so miraculous that where the operator is vastly
successful one may well look under them for the permission of God. The day was when Islamism
did but stir contemptuous laughter; now it is the faith acceptable to more men than any other.
Is it not worthy the vigils of a student? And then it happens, my son, that in the depths of
their delusion, people sometimes presume to make their own gods, and reform them or cast them
out. Deities have been set up or thrown down by their makers in the changes of a moon. I wanted
to see if such calamity had befallen the Allah of Mahomet.... My going to Kash-Cush was on
what thou wouldst call business, and of it I will also tell thee. At Jedda, whither I betook
myself after making the pilgrimages at Mecca, I regained my ship, and descended the Red Sea,
landing at a village on the extreme inland shore of the bay of Tajurrah, below the Straits
of Bab-el-Mandel. I was then in Kash-Cush. From the village on the coast, I passed into the
interior, travelling in a litter on the shoulders of native porters, and, after many days,
reached my destination--a collection of bungalows pitched on the bank of a tributary of the
Blue Nile called the Dedhesa. The journey would have been difficult and tedious but that one
of my attendants--a black man--had been king of the tribe I sought. His name was Nilo, and
his tribe paramount throughout the uncivilized parts of Kash-Cush. More than fifty years before,--prior,
in fact, to my setting out for Cipango,--I made the same tour, and found the king. He gave
me welcome; and so well did he please me that I invited him to share my wanderings. He accepted
the proposal upon condition that in his old age he should be returned home, and exchanged for
a younger man of his blood. I agreed, provided one younger could be found who, besides the
requisite physique and the virtues of intellect and courage, was also deaf and dumb, like himself.
A treaty was thus perfected. I call it a treaty as distinct from a purchase, for Nilo was my
friend and attendant--my ally, if you please--never my slave. There was a reception for us
the like of which for feasting and merriment was without mention in the traditions of the tribe.
A grandson filled my friend's throne; but he gave it back to him, and voluntarily took his
place with me. Thou shalt see him to-morrow. I call him Nilo, and spend the morning hours teaching
him to talk; for while he keeps me reminded of a Greek demi-god--so tall, strong and brave
is he--he is yet deaf and dumb, and has to be taught as Syama was. When thou hast to do with
him be gentle and courteous. I wish it kept in mind he is my friend and ally, bound to me by
treaty as his grandfather was.... The only part of the tour given thee in my letter which I
omitted was the descent of the Nile. Having performed it before, my curiosity was sated, and
I allowed my impatience to be in thy city here to determine my course. I made way back to the
village on the bay of Tajurrah where, in anticipation of such a change, my vessel was held
in detention. Thence, up the sea and across the Isthmus, I proceeded to Alexandria, and to-night
happily find myself at home, in hope of rest for my body and renewal of my spirit."

With this, the explanation appeared concluded; for the Prince notified Syama that he did not
desire more tea, and lapsed into a thoughtful silence. Presently Uel arose, saying: "You must
be weary. With permission I will take my leave now. I confess you have given me much to think
over, and made me happy by taking me into your confidence. If it be agreeable, I will call
at noon to-morrow."

The Prince went with him to the head of the stairs, and there bade him peace and good-night.

CHAPTER X

THE ROSE OF SPRING

The Prince, as the Jew preferred to be called, kept his house closely quite a month, resting,
not hibernating. He took exercise daily on the flat roof; and walking to and fro there, found
three objects of attraction: the hill to the southwest with the church upon it, the Palace
of Blacherne off further in the west, and the Tower of Galata. The latter, across the Golden
Horn in the north, arose boldly, like a light-house on a cliff; yet, for a reason--probably
because it had connection with the subject of his incessant meditations--he paused oftenest
to gaze at the Palace.

He was in his study one day deeply absorbed. The sun, nearing meridian, poured a stream of
white light through the south window, flooding the table at which he sat. That the reader may
know something of the paths the Mystic most frequented when in meditation, we will make free
with one of the privileges belonging to us as a chronicler.

The volume directly in front of him on the table, done in olive wood strengthened at the corners
with silver, was near two feet in length, and one and a half in width; when closed, it would
be about one foot thick. Now he had many wonderful rare and rich antiques, but none so the
apple of his eye as this; for it was one of the fifty Holy Bibles of Greek transcription ordered
by Constantine the Great.

At his right, held flat by weights, were the Sacred Books of China, in form a roll of broad-leafed
vellum.

At his left, a roll somewhat similar in form and at the moment open, lay the Rig-Veda of the
Aryans in Sanscrit.

The fourth book was the Avesta of Zoroaster--a collection of MSS. stitched together, and exquisitely
rendered by Parse devas into the Zend language.

A fifth book was the Koran.

The arrangement of the volumes around the Judean Bible was silently expressive of the student's
superior respect; and as from time to time, after reading a paragraph from one of the others,
he returned to the great central treasure, it was apparent he was making a close comparison
of texts with reference to a particular theme, using the Scriptures as a standard. Most of
the time he kept the forefinger of his left hand on what is now known as the fourteenth verse
of the third chapter of Exodus--"And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus
shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you." If, as the Prince
himself had declared, religion were indeed the study of most interest to the greatest number
of men, he was logically consistent in comparing the definitions of God in the Bibles of theistic
nations. So had he occupied himself since morning. The shrewd reader will at once discern the
theme of his comparative study.

At length he grew weary of bending over the books, and of the persistent fixedness of attention
required for the pursuit of fine shades of meaning in many different languages. He threw his
arms up in aid of a yawn, and turned partly around, his eyes outrunning the movement of his
body. The half-introverted glance brightened with a gleam, and remained fixed, while the arms
dropped down. He could only look in wonder at what he saw--eyes black and almost large as his
own gazing at him in timid surprise. Beholding nothing but the eyes, he had the awesome feeling
which attends imagining a spirit suddenly risen; then he saw a forehead low, round, and white,
half shaded by fluffs of dark hair; then a face of cherubic color and regularity, to which
the eyes gave an indefinable innocency of expression.

Every one knows the effect of trifles on the memory. A verse or a word, the smell of a flower,
a lock of hair, a turn in music, will not merely bring the past back, but invest it with a
miraculous recurrency of events. The Prince's gaze endured. He stretched his hand out as if
fearful lest what he saw might vanish. The gesture was at once an impulse and an expression.
There was a time--tradition says it was the year in which he provoked the curse--when he had
wife and child. To one of them, possibly both, the eyes then looking into his might have belonged.
The likeness unmanned him. The hand he stretched forth fell lightly upon the head of the intruder.

"What are you?" he said.

The vagueness of the expression will serve excellently as a definition of his condition; at
the same time it plunged the child addressed into doubt. Presently she answered:

"I am a little girl."

Accepting the simplicity of the reply as evidence of innocency too extreme for fear, he took
the visitor in his arms, and sat her on his knee.

"I did not mean to ask what you are, but who?" he said.

"Uel is my father."

"Uel? Well, he is my friend, and I am his; therefore you and I should be friends. What is your
name?"

"He calls me Gul Bahar."

"Oh! That is Turkish, and means Rose of Spring. How came you by it?"

"My mother was from Iconium."

"Yes--where the Sultans used to live."

"And she could speak Turkish."

"I see! Gul Bahar is an endearment, not a real name."

"My real name is Lael."

The Prince paled from cheek to brow; his lips trembled; the arm encircling her shook; and looking
into his eyes, she saw tears dim them. After a long breath, he said, with inexpressible tenderness,
and as if speaking to one standing just behind her--"Lael!" Then, the tears full formed, he
laid his forehead on her shoulder so his white hair blent freely with her chestnut locks; and
sitting passively, but wondering, she heard him sob and sob again and again, like another child.
Soon, from pure sympathy, unknowing why, she too began sobbing. Several minutes passed thus;
then, raising his face, and observing her responsive sorrow, he felt the need of explanation.

"Forgive me," he said, kissing her, "and do not wonder at me. I am old--very old--older than
thy father, and there have been so many things to distress me which other men know nothing
of, and never can. I had once"--

He stopped, repeated the long breath, and gazed as at a far object.

"I too had once a little girl."

Pausing, he dropped his eyes to hers.

"How old are you?"

"Next spring I shall be fourteen," she answered.

"And she was just your age, and so like you--so small, and with such hair and eyes and face;
and she was named Lael. I wanted to call her Rimah, for she seemed a song to me; but her mother
said, as she was a gift from the Lord, she wanted in the fulness of days to give her back to
him, and that the wish might become a covenant, she insisted on calling her Lael, which, in
Hebrew--thy father's tongue and mine--means To God."

The child, listening with all her soul, was now not in the least afraid of him; without waiting,
she made the application.

"You loved her, I know," she said

"How much--Oh, how much!"

"Where is she now?"

"At Jerusalem there was a gate called the Golden Gate. It looked to the east. The sun, rising
over the top of Mount Olivet, struck the plates of gold and Corinthian brass more precious
than gold, so it seemed one rosy flame. The dust at its rocky sill, and the ground about it
are holy. There, deep down, my Lael lies. A stone that tasked many oxen to move it covers her;
yet, in the last day, she will be among the first to rise--Of such excellence is it to be buried
before that Golden Gate."

"Oh! she is dead!" the child exclaimed.

"She is dead;" and seeing her much affected, he hastened to say, "I shed many tears thinking
of her. Ah, how gentle and truthful she was! And how beautiful! I cannot forget her. I would
not if I could; but you who look so like her will take her place in my heart now, and love
me as she did; and I will love you even as I loved her. I will take you into my life, believing
she has come again. In the morning I will ask first, Where is my Lael? At noon, I will demand
if the day has been kind to her; and the night shall not be half set in except I know it has
brought her the sweetness of sleep. Will you be my Lael?"

The question perplexed the child, and she was silent.

Again he asked, "Will you be my Lael?"

The earnestness with which he put the question was that of a hunger less for love than an object
to love. The latter is not often accounted a passion, yet it creates necessities which are
peremptory as those of any passion. One of the incidents of the curse he was suffering was
that he knew the certainty of the coming of a day when he must be a mourner for whomsoever
he should take into his heart, and in this way expiate whatever happiness the indulgence might
bring him. Nevertheless the craving endured, at times a positive hunger. In other words, his
was still a human nature. The simplicity and beauty of the girl were enough to win him of themselves;
but when she reminded him of the other asleep under a great rock before the gate of the Holy
City, when the name of the lost one was brought to him so unexpectedly, it seemed there had
been a resurrection, making it possible for him to go about once more as he was accustomed
to in his first household. A third time he asked, "You will be my Lael?"

"Can I have two fathers?" she returned.

"Oh, yes!" he answered quickly. "One in fact, the other by adoption; and they can both love
you the same."

Immediately her face became a picture of childish trust.

"Then I will be your Lael too."

He clasped her close to his breast, and kissed her, crying:

"My Lael has come back to me! God of my fathers, I thank thee!"

She respected his emotion, but at length, with her hand upon his shoulder, said:

"You and my father are friends, and thinking he came here, I came too."

"Is he at home?"

"I think so."

"Then we will go to him. You cannot be my Lael without his consent."

Presently, hand in hand, they descended the stairs, crossed the street, and were in the shopkeeper's
presence.

The room was plainly but comfortably furnished as became the proprietor's fortune and occupation.
Closer acquaintance, it is to be said, had dissipated the latent dread, which, as has been
seen, marked Uel's first thought of intimacy between the stranger and the child. Seeing him
old, and rich, and given to study, not to say careless of ordinary things, the father was beginning
to entertain the idea that it might in some way be of advantage to the child could she become
an object of interest to him. Wherefore, as they entered now, he received them with a smile.

Traces of the emotion he had undergone were in the Prince's face, and when he spoke his voice
was tremulous.

"Son of Jahdai," he said, standing, "I had once a wife and child. They perished-how and when,
I cannot trust myself to tell. I have been faithful to their memory. From the day I lost them,
I have gone up and down the world hunting for many things which I imagined might renew the
happiness I had from them. I have been prodigal of gratitude, admiration, friendship, and goodwill,
and bestowed them singly and together, and often; but never have I been without consciousness
of something else demanding to be given. Happiness is not all in receiving. I passed on a long
time before it came to me that we are rich in affections not intended for hoarding, and that
no one can be truly content without at least one object on which to lavish them. Here"--and
he laid his hand on the child's head--"here is mine, found at last."

"Lael is a good girl," Uel said with pride.

"Yes, and as thou lovest her let me love her," the Prince responded. Then, seeing Uel become
serious, he added, "To help thee to my meaning, Lael was my child's name, and she was the image
of this one; and as she died when fourteen, thy Lael's age, it is to me as if the tomb had
miraculously rendered its victim back to me."

"Prince," said Uel, "had I thought she would not be agreeable to you, I should have been sorry."

"Understand, son of Jahdai," the other interposed, "I seek more of thee than thy permission
to love her. I want to do by her as though she were mine naturally."

"You would not take her from me?"

"No. That would leave thee bereft as I have been. Like me, thou wouldst then go up and down
looking for some one to take her place in thy heart. Be thou her father still; only let me
help thee fashion her future."

"Her birthrights are humble," the shopkeeper answered, doubtfully; for while in his secret
heart he was flattered, his paternal feeling started a scruple hard to distinguish from fear.

A light shone brightly in the eyes of the elder Jew, and his head arose.

"Humble!" he said. "She is a daughter of Israel, an inheritor of the favor of the Lord God,
to whom all things are possible. He keeps the destinies of his people. He--not thou or I--knows
to what this little one may come. As we love her, let us hope the happiest and the highest,
and prepare her for it. To this end it were best you allow her to come to me as to another
father. I who teach the deaf and dumb to speak--Syama and Nilo the elder--will make her a scholar
such as does not often grace a palace. She shall speak the Mediterranean tongues. There shall
be no mysteries of India unknown to her. Mathematics shall bring the heavens to her feet. Especially
shall she become wise in the Chronicles of God. At the same time, lest she be educated into
unfitness for the present conditions of life, and be unsexed, thou shalt find a woman familiar
with society, and instal her in thy house as governess and example. If the woman be also of
Israel, so much the better; for then we may expect faithfulness without jealousy. And further,
son of Jahdai, be niggardly in nothing concerning our Lael. Clothe her as she were the King's
daughter. At going abroad, which she shall do with me in the street and on the water, I would
have her sparkle with jewels, the observed of everybody, even the Emperor. And ask not doubtingly,
'Whence the money for all this?' I will find it. What sayest thou now?"

Uel did not hesitate.

"O Prince, as thou dost these things for her--so far beyond the best I can dream of--take her
for thine, not less than mine."

With a beaming countenance, the elder raised the child, and kissed her on the forehead.

"Dost hear?" he said to her. "Now art thou my daughter."

She put her arms about his neck, then held them out to Uel, who took her, and kissed her, saying:

"Oh my Gul Bahar!"

"Good!" cried the Prince. "I accept the name. To distinguish the living from the dead, I too
will call her my Gul Bahar."

Thereupon the men sat, and arranged the new relation, omitting nothing possible of anticipation.

Next day the Prince's house was opened with every privilege to the child. A little later on
a woman of courtly accomplishment was found and established under Uel's roof as governess.
Thereupon the Mystic entered upon a season during which he forgot the judgment upon him, and
all else save Gul Bahar, and the scheme he brought from Cipango. He was for the time as other
men. In the lavishment of his love, richer of its long accumulation, he was faithful to his
duty of teacher, and was amply rewarded by her progress in study.

BOOK III

THE PRINCESS IRENE

CHAPTER I

MORNING ON THE BOSPHORUS

Our narrative proceeds now from a day in the third year after Lael, the daughter of the son
of Jahdai, dropped into the life of the Prince of India--a day in the vernal freshness of June.

From a low perch above the mountain behind Becos, the sun is delivering the opposite European
shore of the Bosphorus from the lingering shades of night. Out on the bosom of the classic
channel vessels are swinging lazily at their anchorages. The masthead of each displays a flag
bespeaking the nationality of the owner; here a Venetian, there a Genoese, yonder a Byzantine.
Tremulous flares of mist, rising around the dark hulls, become entangled in the cordage, and
as if there were no other escape, resolve themselves into air. Fisher boats are bringing their
owners home from night-work over in the shallows of Indjerkeui. Gulls and cormorants in contentious
flocks, drive hither and thither, turning and tacking as the schools of small fish they are
following turn and tack down in the warm blue-green depths to which they are native. The many
wings, in quick eccentric motion, give sparkling life to the empurpled distance.

The bay of Therapia, on the same European shore over against Becos, was not omitted from rescue
by the sun. Within its lines this morning the ships were in greater number than out in the
channel--ships of all grades, from the sea going commercial galley to the pleasure shallop
which, if not the modern caique, was at least its ante-type in lightness and grace.

And as to the town, one had but to look at it to be sure it had undergone no recent change--that
in the day of Constantine Dragases it was the same summer resort it had been in the day of
Medea the sorceress--the same it yet is under sway of the benignant Abdul-Hamid.

From the lower point northwardly jutting finger-like into the current of the channel, the beach
swept in a graceful curve around to the base of the promontory on the south. Then as now children
amused themselves gathering the white and black pebbles with which it was strewn, and danced
in and out with the friendly foam-capped waves. Then as now the houses seemed tied to the face
of the hill one above another in streetless disarrangement; insomuch that the stranger viewing
them from his boat below shuddered thinking of the wild play which would ensue did an earthquake
shake the hill ever so lightly.

And then as now the promontory south served the bay as a partial land-lock. Then as now it
arose boldly a half mountain densely verdurous, leaving barely space enough for a roadway around
its base. Then as now a descending terrace of easy grade and lined with rock pine trees of
broadest umbrella tops, slashed its whole townward front. Sometime in the post-Medean period
a sharp-eyed Greek discerned the advantages it offered for aesthetic purposes, and availed
himself of them; so that in the age of our story its summit was tastefully embellished with
water basins, white-roofed pavilions, and tessellated pavements Roman style. Alas, for the
perishability of things human! And twice alas, that the beautiful should ever be the most perishable!

But it is now to be said we have spoken thus of the Bosphorus, and the bay and town of Therapia,
and the high promontory, as accessories merely to a plot of ground under the promontory and
linked to it by the descending terrace. There is no word fitly descriptive of the place. Ravine
implies narrowness; gorge signifies depth; valley means width; dell is too toylike. A summer
retreat more delicious could not be imagined. Except at noon the sun did but barely glance
into it. Extending hundreds of yards back from the bay toward the highlands west of the town,
it was a perfected garden of roses and flowering vines and shrubs, with avenues of boxwood
and acacias leading up to ample reservoirs hidden away in a grove of beeches. The water flowing
thence became brooks or was diverted to enliven fountains. One pipe carried it in generous
flow to the summit of the promontory. In this leafy Eden the birds of the climate made their
home the year round. There the migratory nightingale came earliest and lingered longest, singing
in the day as well as in the night. There one went regaled with the breath of roses commingled
with that of the jasmine. There the bloom of the pomegranate flashed through the ordered thicket
like red stars; there the luscious fig, ripening in its "beggar's jacket," offered itself for
the plucking; there the murmur of the brooks was always in the listening ear.

Along the whole front of the garden, so perfectly a poet's ideal, stretched a landing defended
from the incessant swash of the bay by a stone revetment. There was then a pavement of smoothly
laid flags, and then a higher wall of dark rubble-work, coped with bevelled slabs. An open
pavilion, with a bell-fashioned dome on slender pillars, all of wood red painted, gave admission
to the garden. Then a roadway of gray pebbles and flesh-tinted shells invited a visitor, whether
afoot or on horseback, through clumps of acacias undergrown with carefully tended rosebushes,
to a palace, which was to the garden what the central jewel is to the cluster of stones on
"my lady's" ring.

Standing on a tumulus, a little removed from the foot of the promontory, the palace could be
seen from cornice to base by voyagers on the bay, a quadrangular pile of dressed marble one
story in height, its front relieved by a portico of many pillars finished in the purest Corinthian
style. A stranger needed only to look at it once, glittering in the sun, creamy white in the
shade, to decide that its owner was of high rank--possibly a noble--possibly the Emperor himself.

It was the country palace of the Princess Irene, of whom we will now speak.[Footnote: During
the Crimean war a military hospital was built over the basement vaults and cisterns of the
palace here described. The hospital was destroyed by fire. For years it was then known as the
"Khedive's Garden," being a favorite resort for festive parties from the capital. At present
the promontory and the retreat it shelters pertain to the German Embassy, a munificent gift
from His Majesty, Sultan Abdul-Hamid.]

CHAPTER II

THE PRINCESS IRENE [Footnote: This name is of three syllables, and is pronounced as if spelled
E-ren-ay; the last syllable to rhyme with day, say, may.]

During the reign of the last Manuel, in 1412, as a writer has placed the incident--that is
to say, about thirty-nine years prior to the epoch occupying us--a naval battle occurred between
the Turks and Christians off Plati, one of the Isles of the Princes. The issue was of interest
to all the peoples who were in the habit of commercial resort in the region, to the Venetians
and Genoese as well as the Byzantines. To the latter it was of most vital moment, since defeat
would have brought them a serious interruption of communication with the islands which still
remained to the Emperor and the powers in the West upon which their dependency grew as year
after year their capacity for self-defence diminished.

The Turkish ships had been visible in the offing several days. At last the Emperor concluded
to allow his mariners to go out and engage them. His indecision had been from a difficulty
in naming a commander. The admiral proper was old and inexperienced, and his fighting impulses,
admitting they had ever really existed, had been lost in the habitudes of courtierly life.
He had become little more than a ceremonial marker. The need of the hour was a genuine sailor
who could manoeuvre a squadron. On that score there was but one voice among the seamen and
with the public--

"Manuel--give us Manuel!"

The cry, passing from the ships to the multitude in the city, assailed the palace.

The reader should understand the Manuel wanted was not the Emperor, but one of his brothers
who could lay no claim to birth in the purple. His mother had not been a lawful spouse; yet
the Manuel thus on the tongues of the many had made a hero of himself. He proved his temper
and abilities in many successful affairs on the sea, and at length became a popular idol; insomuch
that the imperial jealousy descended upon him like a cloud, and hid him away. Nor could his
admirers say he lived; he had a palace and a family, and it was not known that any of the monasteries
in the city or on the Isles of the Princes had opened to receive him.

On these shreds of evidence, affirmative and negative, slender as they may appear, it was believed
he was yet alive. Hence the clamor; and sooth to say it sufficed to produce the favorite; so
at least the commonalty were pleased to think, though a sharper speculation would have scored
the advent quite as much to the emergency then holding the Empire in its tightening grip.

Restored to active life, Manuel the sailor was given a reception in the Hippodrome; then after
a moment of gladness with his family, and another in which he was informed of the situation
and trial before him, he hurried to assume the command.

Next morning, with the rising of the sun, the squadron under oar and sail issued gallantly
from its retreat in the Golden Horn, and in order of battle sought the boastful enemy of Plati.
The struggle was long and desperate. Its circumstances were dimly under view from the seaward
wall in the vicinity of the Seven Towers. A cry of rejoicing from the anxious people at last
rose strong enough to shake the turrets massive as they were--"Kyrie Eleison! Kyrie Eleison!"
Christ had made his cause victorious. His Cross was in the ascendant. The Turks drew out of
the defeat as best they could, and made haste to beach the galleys remaining to them on the
Asiatic shore behind the low-lying islands.

Manuel the sailor became more than a hero; to the vulgar he was a savior. All Byzantium and
all Galata assembled on the walls and water along the famous harbor to welcome him when, with
many prizes and a horde of prisoners, he sailed back under the sun newly risen over the redeemed
Propontis. Trumpets answered trumpets in brazen cheer as he landed. A procession which was
a reminder of the triumphs of the ancient and better times of the Empire escorted him to the
Hippodrome. The overhanging gallery reserved for the Emperor there was crowded with the dignitaries
of the court; the factions were out with their symbols of blue and green; the scene was gorgeous;
yet the public looked in vain for Manuel the Emperor; he alone was absent; and when the dispersion
took place, the Byzantine spectators sought their homes shaking their heads and muttering of
things in store for their idol worse than had yet befallen him. Wherefore there was little
or no surprise when the unfortunate again disappeared, this time with his whole family. The
victory, the ensuing triumph, and the too evident popularity were more than the jealous Emperor
could overlook.

There was then a long lapse of years. John Palaeologus succeeded Manuel on the throne, and
was in turn succeeded by Constantine, the last of the Byzantine monarchs.

Constantine signalized his advent, the great Greek event of 1448, by numerous acts of clemency,
for he was a just man. He opened many prison doors long hopelessly shut. He conferred honors
and rewards that had been remorselessly erased from account. He condoned offences against his
predecessors, mercifully holding them wanting in evil against himself. So it came to pass that
Manuel, the hero of the sea fight off Plati, attained a second release, or, in better speech,
a second resurrection. He had been all the years practically buried in certain cells of the
convent of St. Irene on the island of Prinkipo, and now he came forth an old man, blind and
too enfeebled to walk. Borne into private audience, he was regarded by Constantine with tender
sympathy.

"And thou art that Manuel who made the good fight at Plati?"

"Say rather I am he who was that Manuel," the ancient replied. "Death despises me now because
he could not call my decease a victory."

The inquisitor, visibly affected, next spoke in an uncertain voice.

"Is what I have heard true, that at thy going into the Monastery thou hadst a family?"

The eyes of the unfortunate were not too far gone for tears; some rolled down his cheeks; others
apparently dropped into his throat.

"I had a wife and three children. It is creditable to the feeling called love that they chose
to share my fate. One only survives, and"--he paused as if feebly aware of the incoherency--"and
she was born a prisoner."

"Born a prisoner!" exclaimed Constantine. "Where is she now?"

"She ought to be here."

The old man turned as he spoke, and called out anxiously:

"Irene--Irene, where art thou, child?"

An attendant, moved like his master, explained.

"Your Majesty, his daughter is in the ante-room."

"Bring her here."

There was a painful hush in the chamber during the waiting. When the daughter appeared, all
eyes were directed to her--all but the father's, and even he was instantly aware of her presence;
for which, doubtless, the sensibility known only to the long-time blind was sufficiently alive.

"Where hast thou been?" he asked, with a show of petulance.

"Calm thee, father, I am here."

She took his hand to assure him, and then returned the look of the Emperor; only his was of
open astonishment, while hers was self-possessed.

Two points were afterwards remembered against her by the courtiers present; first, contrary
to the custom of Byzantine women, she wore no veil or other covering for the face; in the next
place, she tendered no salutation to the Emperor. Far from prostrating herself, as immemorial
etiquette required, she did not so much as kneel or bow her head. They, however, excused her,
saying truly her days had been passed in the Monastery without opportunity to acquire courtly
manners. In fact they did not at the time notice the omissions. She was so beautiful, and her
beauty reposed so naturally in an air of grace, modesty, intelligence, and purity that they
saw nothing else. Constantine recovered himself, and rising from his seat, advanced to the
edge of the dais, which in such audiences, almost wholly without state, raised him slightly
above his guests and attendants, and spoke to the father:

"I know thy history, most noble Greek--noble in blood, noble in loyalty, noble by virtue of
what thou hast done for the Empire--and I honor thee. I grieve for the suffering thou hast
endured, and wish myself surrounded with many more spirits like thine, for then, from my exalted
place, I could view the future and its portents with greater calmness of expectation, if not
with more of hope. Perhaps thou hast heard how sadly my inheritance has been weakened by enemies
without and within; how, like limbs lopped from a stately tree, the themes [Footnote: Provinces.]
richest in their yield of revenue have been wrested from the body of our State, until scarce
more than the capital remains. I make the allusion in apology and excuse for the meagreness
of what I have to bestow for thy many heroic services. Wert thou in the prime of manhood, I
would bring thee into the palace. That being impossible, I must confine myself to amends within
my power. First, take thou liberty."

The sailor sunk to his knees; then he fell upon his hands, and touched the floor with his forehead.
In that posture, he waited the further speech. Such was the prostration practised by the Greeks
in formally saluting their Basileus.

Constantine proceeded.

"Take next the house here in the city which was thine when the judgment fell upon thee. It
has been tenantless since, and may be in need of repairs; if so, report the cost they put thee
to, and I will charge the amount to my civil list." Looking then at the daughter, he added:
"On our Roumelian shore, up by Therapia, there is a summer house which once belonged to a learned
Greek who was the happy possessor of a Homer written masterfully on stainless parchment. He
had a saying that the book should be opened only in a palace specially built for it; and, being
rich, he indulged the fancy. He brought the marble from the Pentelic quarries; nothing grosser
was permitted in the construction. In the shade of a portico of many columns of Corinthian
model he passed his days reading to chosen friends, and living as the Athenians were wont to
live in the days of Pericles. In my youth I dwelt much with him, and he so loved me that at
dying he gave me the house, and the gardens and groves around it. They will help me now to
make partial amends for injustice done; and when will a claimant appear with better right than
the daughter of this brave man? In speaking but now, did he not call thee Irene?"

A flush overspread her neck and face, but she answered without other sign of feeling:

"Irene."

"The house--it may be called a palace--and all that pertains to it, are thine," he continued.
"Go thither at will, and begin thy life anew."

She took one step forward, but stopped as suddenly, her color coming and going. Never had Constantine
seen wife or maid more beautiful. He almost dreaded lest the spell she cast over him would
be broken by the speech trembling upon her lips. She moved quickly to the dais then, and taking
his hand, kissed it fervently, saying:

"Almost I believe we have a Christian Emperor."

She paused, retaining the hand, and looking up into his face.

The spectators, mostly dignitaries of high degree, with their attendants, were surprised. Some
of them were shocked; for it should be remembered the court was the most rigidly ceremonial
in the world. The rules governing it were the excerpt of an idea that the Basileus or Emperor
was the incarnation of power and majesty. When spoken to by him, the proudest of his officials
dropped their eyes to his embroidered slippers; when required to speak to him, they fell to
their knees, and kept the posture till he was pleased to bid them rise. Not one of them had
ever touched his fingers, except when he deigned to hold them out to be most humbly saluted.
Their manner at such times was more than servility; in appearance, at least, it was worship.
This explanation will enable the reader to understand the feeling with which they beheld the
young woman keep the royal hand a prisoner in hers. Some of them shuddered and turned their
faces not to witness a familiarity so closely resembling profanation.

Constantine, on his part, looked down into the eyes of his fair kinswoman, knowing her speech
was not finished. The slight inclination of his person toward her was intended for encouragement.
Indeed, he made no attempt to conceal the interest possessing him.

"The Empire may be shorn, even as thou hast said," she resumed presently, in a voice slightly
raised. "But is not this city of our fathers by site and many advantages as much the capital
of the world as ever? A Christian Emperor founded it, and his name was Constantine; may it
not be its perfect restoration is reserved for another Constantine, also a Christian Emperor?
Search thy heart, O my Lord! I have heard how noble impulses are often prophets without voices."

Constantine was impressed. From a young person, bred in what were really prison walls, the
speech was amazing. He was pleased with the opinion she was evidently forming of himself; he
was pleased with the hope she admitted touching the Empire; he was pleased with the Christian
faith, the strength of mind, the character manifested. Her loyalty to the old Greek regime
was unquestionable. The courtiers thought she might at least have made some acknowledgment
of his princely kindness; but if he thought of the want of form, he passed it; enough for him
that she was a lovely enthusiast. In the uncertainty of the moment, he hesitated; then, descending
from the dais, he kissed her hand gracefully, courteously, reverently, and said simply:

"May thy hope be God's will."

Turning from her, he helped the blind man to his feet, and declared the audience dismissed.

Alone with his secretary, the Grand Logothete, he sat awhile musing.

"Give ear," he at length said. "Write it, a decree. Fifty thousand gold pieces annually for
the maintenance of Manuel and Irene, his daughter."

The secretary at the first word became absorbed in studying his master's purple slippers; then,
having a reply, he knelt.

"Speak," said Constantine.

"Your Majesty," the secretary responded, "there are not one thousand pieces in the treasury
unappropriated."

"Are we indeed so poor?"

The Emperor sighed, but plucking spirit, went on bravely:

"It may be God has reserved for me the restoration, not only of this city, but of the Empire.
I shall try to deserve the glory. And it may be that noble impulses are speechless prophets.
Let the decree stand. Heaven willing, we will find a way to make it good."

CHAPTER III

THE HOMERIC PALACE

The reader is now informed of the history of Irene, which is to he remembered as of an important
personage in the succeeding pages. Knowing also how she became possessed of the palace we have
been at some pains to describe, he is prepared to see her at home.

The night has retreated from the European shore of the Bosphorus, although the morning is yet
very young. The sun in the cloudless sky beyond Becos, where it appears standing as if to rest
from the fatigue of climbing the hills, is lifting Therapia bodily out of its sparkling waters.
In the bay moreover there are many calls of mariner to mariner, and much creaking of windlasses,
and clashing of oars cast loose in their leather slings. To make the scene perfectly realistic
there is a smell of breakfast cooking, not unpleasant to those within its waftage who are yet
to have their appetites appeased. These sights, these sounds, these smells, none of them reach
the palace in the garden under the promontory opposite the town. There the birds are singing
their matin songs, the flowers loading the air with perfume, and vine and tree drinking the
moisture borne down to them from the unresting sea so near in the north. [Footnote: The Black Sea.]

Under the marble portico the mistress is sitting exactly in the place we can imagine the old
Greek loved most what time he read from his masterful copy of Homer. Between columns she saw
the Bosphorean expanse clear to the wooded Asiatic shore. Below was a portion of the garden
through which the walk ran, with a graceful curve, to the red kiosk by the front gate. Just
beyond it the landing lay. Around her were palm and rose trees in painted tubs, and in their
midst, springing from a tall vase carven over with mythologic figures, a jasmine vine affected
all the graces of its most delicate nature. Within reach of her right hand there were platters
of burnished brass on a table of ebony, its thin, spider legs inlaid with silver in lines.
One of the platters bore a heap of white biscuits such as at this day are called crackers;
the others supported pitchers, and some drinking cups, all of silver.

The mistress sat in an arm-chair very smooth in finish despite the lineations sunk into its
surfaces, and so roomy as to permit her to drop easily into a half-reclining posture. A footstool
dressed in dark stamped leather was ready to lend its aid to gracefulness and comfort.

We will presume now to introduce the reader to the Princess Irene, though, as the introduction
must be in the way of description, our inability to render the subject adequately is admitted
in advance.

At the moment of first sight, she is sitting erect, her head turned slightly to the left shoulder,
and both hands resting on the dog's head garnishing the right arm of the chair. She is gazing
abstractedly out at the landing, as if waiting for some one overdue. The face is uncovered;
and it is to be said here that, abhorring the custom which bound her Byzantine sisterhood to
veils, except when in the retiracy of their chambers, she was at all times brave enough to
emphasize the abhorrence by discarding the encumbrance. She was never afraid of the effects
of the sun on her complexion, and had the art of moving modestly and with composure among men,
who, on their side, were used in meeting her to conceal their admiration and wonder under cover
of grave respect.

Her figure, tall, slender, perfectly rounded, is clad in drapery of the purest classic mode.
Outwardly it consists of but two garments--a robe of fine white woollen stuff, and over it
a mantle of the same texture and hue, hanging from a yoke of close-fitting flesh-colored silk
richly embroidered with Tyrian floss. A red rope loosely twisted girdles her body close under
the breasts, from which, when she is standing, the gown in front falls to the feet, leaving
a decided train. The mantle begins at a point just in front of the arm, under which, and along
the sides, it hangs, like a long open sleeve, being cut away behind about half down the figure.
The contrivance of the yoke enabled the artist, by gathering the drapery, to determine the
lines in which it should drop, and they were few but positive. In movement, the train was to
draw the gown to the form so its outlines could be easily followed from the girdle.

The hair, of the tint of old gold, is dressed in the Grecian style; and its abundance making
the knot unusually ample, there was necessity for the two fillets of pink silk to keep it securely
in place.

The real difficulty in the description is now reached. To a reader of sharp imagination it
might be sufficient to say the face of the Princess Irene, seen the morning in question, was
perfectly regular, the brows like pencilling, the nose delicate, the eyes of violet shading
into blackness, the mouth small with deep corners and lips threads of scarlet, the cheeks and
brow precisely as the received law of beauty would have them. This would authorize a conception
of surpassing loveliness; and perhaps it were better did we stop with the suggestions given,
since the fancy would then be left to do its own painting. But patience is besought, for vastly
more than a face of unrivalled perfection, the conjuration is a woman who yet lives in history
as such a combination of intellect, spirit, character, and personal charm that men, themselves
rulers and conquerors, fell before her at sight. Under necessity therefore of going on with
the description, what words are at command to convey an idea of the complexion--a property
so wholly unartificial with her that the veins at the temples were as transparent shadows on
snow, and the coloring of the cheeks like a wash of roses? What more is there than to point
to the eyes of the healthful freshness peculiar to children of tender nurture; the teeth exquisitely
regular and of the whiteness of milk and the lustre of pearls; the ears small, critically set,
and tinted pink and white, like certain shells washed ashore last night? What more? Ah, yes!
There are the arms bare from the shoulder, long and round as a woman's should be, and terminating
in flexile wrists, and hands so gracefully modelled we shrink from thought of their doing more
than making wreaths of flowers and playing with harp strings. There too is the pose of the
head expressive of breeding and delicacy of thought and feeling, of pride and courage--the
pose unattainable by effort or affectation, and impossible except where the head, itself faultless,
is complemented by a neck long, slender, yet round, pliant, always graceful, and set upon shoulders
the despair of every one but the master who found perfection of form and finish in the lilies
of the Madonna. Finally there is the correspondence, in action as well as repose, of body,
limbs, head, and face, to which, under inspiration of the soul, the air and manner of lovely
women are always referable.

The Princess was yet intensely observing the stretch of water before her, and the rapid changes
of the light upon its face, when a boat, driven by a single oarsman, drew up to the landing,
and disembarked a passenger. That he was not the person she was expecting became instantly
apparent. She glanced at him once, and then, satisfied he was a stranger in whom she had no
interest, resumed study of the bay. He, however, after dropping something in the boatman's
hand, turned, and walked to the gateway, and through it towards the palace.

Ere long a servant, whose very venerable appearance belied the steel-pointed javelin he carried,
hobbled slowly along the floor of the portico marshalling a visitor. She touched the golden
knot at the back of her head to be assured of its arrangement, arose, shook out the folds of
her gown and mantle, and was prepared for the interruption.

The costume of the stranger was new to the Princess. A cassock of mixed white and brown wool
that had gone through a primitive loom with little of any curative process except washing,
hung from his neck to his heels. Aside from the coarseness of warp and woof, it fitted so closely
that but for a slit on each side of the skirt walking would have been seriously impeded. The
sleeves were long and loose, and covered the hands. From the girdle of untanned skin a double
string of black horn beads, each large as a walnut, dropped to his knees. The buckle of the
girdle, which might have been silver deeply oxidized, was conspicuously large, and of the rudest
workmanship. But withal much the most curious part of the garb was the cowl, if such it may
be called. Projecting over the face so far as to cast the features in shadow, it carried on
the sides of the head broad flaps, not unlike the ears of an elephant. This envelope was hideous,
yet it served to exalt the man within to giantesque proportions.

The Princess surveyed the visitor with astonishment hardly concealed. What part of the world
could produce a creature so utterly barbarous? What business could he have with her? Was he
young or old? Twice she scanned him from head to foot. He was a monk; so much the costume certified;
and while he stopped before her with one foot advanced from the edge of the skirt, and resting
lightly in the clasp of the thongs of a very old-fashioned sandal, she saw it was white, and
blue veined, and at the edges pink, like a child's, and she said to herself, "He is young--a
young monastic."

The stranger drew from his girdle a linen package carefully folded, kissed it reverently, and said:

"Would the Princess Irene be pleased if I open the favor for her?"

The voice was manly, the manner deferential.

"Is it a letter?" she asked.

"A letter from the Holy Father, the Archimandrite of the greatest of the northern Lavras."
[Footnote: Monasteries.]

"Its name?"

"Bielo-Osero."

"The Bielo-Osero? Where is it?"

"In the country of the Great Prince." [Footnote: Russia.]

"I knew not that I had an acquaintance in so distant a region as the north of Russia. You may
open the letter."

Unmindful of the indifferent air of the Princess, the monk removed the cloth, leaving its folds
hanging loosely from his hand. A sheet of vellum was exposed lying on the covered palm.

"The Holy Father bade me when I delivered the writing, O Princess, to deliver his blessing
also; which--the saying is mine, not his--is of more worth to the soul than a coffer of gold
for the wants of the body."

The pious comment was not lost; but without a word, she took the vellum, and resuming her seat,
addressed herself to the reading. First, her eyes dropped to the signature. There was a look
of surprise--another of uncertainty--then an exclamation:

"Hilarion! Not my Father Hilarion! He is but a sacred memory! He went away and died--and yet
this is his hand. I know it as I know my own."

The monk essayed to remove the doubt.

"Permit me," he said, then asked, "Is there not an island hereabouts called Prinkipo?"

She gave him instant attention.

"And on the side of the island over against the Asiatic coast, under a hill named Kamares,
is there not a convent built centuries ago by an Empress?"

"Irene," she interposed.

"Yes, Irene--and was not Father Hilarion for many years Abbot of the convent? Then, on account
of his fame for learning and piety, did not the Patriarch exalt him to attendance on his own
person as Doctor of the Gospels? Still later, was he not summoned to serve the Emperor in the
capacity of Warden of the Purple Ink?"

"From whom have you all these things?" she asked.

"Excellent Princess, from whom could I have them save the good Father himself?"

"Thou art then his messenger?"

"It becomes me better to refer you to what he has there written."

So saying, the monk stepped backward, and stood a little way off in a respectful attitude.
She raised the missive, and kissed the signature several times, exclaiming:

"Now hath God taken care of his own!"

Then she said to the monk, "Thou art indeed a messenger with good tidings."

And he, accepting the welcome, uncovered his head, by raising the hideous klobouk, [Footnote:
Cowl.] and letting it fall back pendant from his shoulders. The violet eyes of the Princess
opened wider, brightening as with a sudden influx of light. She could not remember a finer
head or a face more perfect in manly beauty, and at the same time so refined and gentle.

And he was so young--young even as herself--certainly not more than twenty. Such was her first
general impression of him. For the pleasure there was in the surprise, she would not allow
it to be observed, but said:

"The Father in his letter, no doubt, tells me thy name, but since I wish to reserve the reading,
I hope thou wilt not be offended if I ask it directly."

"The name my mother gave me is Andre; but when I came to be a deacon in our Bielo-Osero, Father
Hilarion, who presided at the raising, asked me how I wished to be known in the priesthood,
and I answered him, Sergius. Andre was a good christening, and serves well to remind me of
my dear mother; but Sergius is better, because at hearing it I am always reminded that by vows
and solemn rites of ordination I am a servant of God."

"I will endeavor to remember thy preference," the Princess said; "but just now, good Sergius,
it is of next importance to know if thou hast yet had breakfast?"

A smile helped his face to even more of pleasantness.

"No," he answered, "but I am used to fasting, and the great city is not more than two hours away."

She looked concerned.

"Thy patron Saint hath not deserted thee. Here is a table already set. He for whom I held it
is long on the road; thou shalt take his place, and be not less welcome." To the old servant
she added: "We have a guest, not an enemy, Lysander. Put up thy javelin, and bring a seat for
him; then stand behind him, lest it happen one service of the cups be not enough."

Directly the two were at the table opposite each other.

CHAPTER IV

THE RUSSIAN MONK

Sergius took a glass of red wine from the old attendant, and said:

"I should like your permission, O Princess, to make a confession."

His manner was that of one unused to the society of women. He was conscious she was studying
him, and spoke to divert her. As she was slow answering, he added: "That you may not think
me disposed to abuse the acquaintance you honor me with, especially as you have not yet read
the letter of the good Father Hilarion upon which I rely for your better regard, I ask the
permission rather to show the degree of your kindness to me. It may interest you also to learn
of the confirmation of a certain faith you are perhaps unwittingly lending a novice in the
ways of the world."

She had been studying him, and her first impression was now confirmed. His head in shape and
pose was a poet's; the long, wavy, flaxen hair, parted in the middle, left small space for
the forehead, which was nevertheless broad and white, with high-arched, well-defined brows
for base. The eyes were gray. In repose they had a dreamy introspectional expression. The mustache
and beard, the first growth of youth spent entirely indoors, were as yet too light to shade
any part of the face. The nose was not enough retrousse to be irregular. In brief, the monk
was of the type now well known as Russian. Aside from height and apparent muscularity, he very
nearly realized the Byzantine ideal of Christ as seen in the cartoons excellently preserved
in a mosque of Stamboul not far from the gate anciently San Romain now Top Kapoussi.

The appearance of the young monk, so strikingly suggestive of the being most sacred in the
estimation of the Princess, was at the moment less curious to her than a certain habit observable
in him. The look of brightness attendant upon the thought he was putting into form would, when
the utterance was through, suffer a lapse which, for want of strictly definite words, may be
described as a sombering of the eyes when they were widest open, a gazing beyond at something
else than the opposite speaker; implying that the soul was become mysteriously occupied apart
from the mind. The effect was as if she had before her two widely different characters making
themselves present at the same time in one person. Unquestionably, though rarely, there is
a duality of nature in men, by which, to put it extremely, a seeming incapable may be vastly
capable, outward gentleness a mask for a spirit of Neronian violence, dulness a low-lying cloud
surcharged with genius. What shall be done with such a nature? When may it be relied upon?
Who shall ever come to really know it?

Occupied with the idea, the Princess heard but the conclusion of the monk's somewhat awkward
apology, and she answered:

"The confession must be of something lighter than a sin. I will listen."

"A sin!" he exclaimed, with a blush. "Pardon me, O Princess. It was a trifle of which I spoke
too seriously. I promise thou shalt take from it nothing worse than a laugh at my simplicity.
See thou these things?"

He gave her a glance full of boyish humor, and from a breast pocket of his cassock drew a bag
of coarse yellow silk; thrusting a hand into its mouth, he then brought out a number of square
leathern chips stamped with sunken letters, and laid them on the table before her.

"This you must know is our money." The Princess examined the pieces, and said:

"I doubt if our tradesmen would accept them."

"They will not. I am a witness to the fact. Nevertheless they will carry a traveller, go he
either way, from one end of our Great Prince's realm to the other. When I left the Lavra, setting
out on my journey, Father Hilarion gave me the bag, saying, as he put it into my hand, 'Now
upon coming to the port where the ship awaits thee, be sure to exchange the money with the
merchants there for Byzantine gold; else, unless God come to thy aid, thou wilt be turned into
a mendicant.' And so I fully meant to do; but when I reached the port, I found it a city large,
and full of people and sights wonderful to me, demanding to be seen. I forgot the injunction.
Indeed I never thought of it until this morning."

Here he laughed at himself, proving he was not yet seriously alive to the consequences of his
negligence. Presently he resumed:

"I landed only last night, and sick from the tossing of the sea, put up at an inn in the town
yonder. I ordered breakfast, and, according to a custom of my people, offered to pay before
tasting. The master of the house looked at my money, and told me to show him coin of gold;
if not that, then copper or brass, or even iron, in pieces bearing the name of the Emperor.
Being told I had only this, he bade me look elsewhere for breakfast. Now I had designed going
to the great city to kiss the hand of the Patriarch, of whom I have always heard as the wisest
of men, before coming to thee; but the strait I was in was hard. Could I expect better of the
innkeepers there? I had a button of gold--a memorial of my entry into the Lavra. That day Father
Hilarion blessed it three times; and it bore a cross upon its face which I thought might make
it acceptable as if it were lettered with the name of Constantine. A boatman consented to take
it for rowing me to thy landing. Behold! Thou hast my confession!"

His speech to this time had been in Greek singularly pure and fluent; now he hesitated, while
his eyes, open to the full, sombered, as if from a field in the brain back of them a shadow
was being cast through his face. When next he spoke it was in his native tongue.

The Princess observed her guest with increasing interest; for she was wholly unused to such
artlessness in men. How could Father Hilarion have intrusted business of importance to an envoy
so negligent? His confession, as he termed it, was an admission, neither more nor less, that
he had no money of the country into which he was come. And further, how could the habit of
lapsing in thought, or more simply, of passing abruptly from the present subject, be explained
except on the theory of something to which he had so given himself it had become overmastering
and all absorbent? This, she saw intuitively, would prove the key to the man; and she set about
finding it out.

"Your Greek, good Sergius, is excellent; yet I did not understand the words with which you
concluded."

"I beg pardon," he replied, with a change of countenance. "In my mother's tongue I repeated
a saying of the Psalmist, which you shall have voice and look as Father Hilarion has given
it to me oftener than I am days old." Then his voice lowered into a sweet intensity fitting
the text: "'The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.' Those were the words, Princess; and
who shall say they do not comprehend all there is of religion?"

The answer was unexpected, the manner affecting; never had she heard conviction and faith more
perfectly affirmed. More than a monk, the young man might be a preacher! And Father Hilarion
might have grown wiser of his years! Perhaps he knew, though at a vast distance, that the need
of the hour in Constantinople was not a new notable--a bishop or a legate--so much as a voice
with power of persuasion to still the contentions with which her seven hills were then resounding.
The idea, though a surmise, was strong enough to excite a desire to read the holy man's letter.
She even reproached herself for not having done so.

"The worthy priest gave me the same saying in the same words," she said, rising, "and they
lose nothing of their meaning by thy repetition. We may speak of them hereafter. For the present,
to keep thee from breakfast were cruel. I will go and make terms with my conscience by reading
what thou hast brought me from the Father. Help thyself freely as if thou wert the most favored
of guests; or rather "--she paused to emphasize the meaning--"as though I had been bidden to
prepare for thy coining. Should there be failure in anything before thee, scruple not to ask
for more. Lysander will be at thy service. I may return presently."

The monk arose respectfully, and stood until she disappeared behind the vases and flowers,
leaving in his memory a fadeless recollection of graciousness and beauty, which did not prevent
him from immediately addressing himself as became a hungry traveller.

CHAPTER V

A VOICE FROM THE CLOISTER

While the Princess Irene traversed the portico, she repeated the words, The Lord is my shepherd;
I shall not want; and she could see how the negligent, moneyless monk, turned away at the inn,
was provided for in his moment of need, and also that she was the chosen purveyor; if so, by
whom chosen? The young man had intended calling on the Patriarch first; who brought him to
her? The breakfast was set for an invited guest; what held him back, if not the power that
led the stranger to her gate?

In saying now that one of the consequences of the religious passion characteristic of the day
in the East--particularly in Constantinople--a passion so extreme as to induce the strongest
minds to believe God, and the Son, and even the Holy Mother discernible in the most commonplace
affairs--our hope is to save the Princess from misjudgment. Really the most independent and
fearless of spirits, if now and then she fell into the habit of translating the natural into
the supernatural, she is entitled to mercy, since few things are harder to escape than those
of universal practice.

Through a doorway, chiselled top and jambs, she entered a spacious hall nude of furniture,
though richly frescoed, and thence passed into a plain open, court coolly shaded, having in
the centre a jet of water which arose and fell into a bowl of alabaster. The water overflowing
the bowl was caught again in a circular basin which, besides the ornamental carving on the
edge and outside, furnished an ample pool for the gold fish disporting in it.

In the court there were also a number of women, mostly young Greeks, sewing, knitting, and
embroidering vestments. Upon her entrance they arose, let their work drop on the spotless white
marble at their feet, and received her in respectful silence. Signing them to resume their
labor, she took a reserved chair by the fountain. The letter was in her hand, but a thought
had the precedence.

Admitting she had been chosen to fulfil the saying quoted, was the call for the once only?
When the monk went up to the city, was her ministry to end? Would not that be a half-performance?
How much farther should she go? She felt a little pang of trouble, due to the uncertainty that
beset her, but quieted it by an appeal to the letter. Crossing herself, and again kissing the
signature, she began the reading, which, as the hand was familiar to her, and the composition
in the most faultless Greek of the period, was in nowise a perplexity.

"BIELO-OSERO, 3d June, 1452.

"From Hilarion, the Hegumen, to Irene, his well-beloved daughter.

"Thou hast thought of me this longtime as at rest forever--at rest with the Redeemer. While
there is nothing so the equivalent of death as silence, there is no happiness so sweet as that
which springs upon us unexpectedly. In the same sense the resurrection was the perfect complement
of the crucifixion. More than all else, more than the sermon on the mount, more than His miracles,
more than His unexampled life, it lifted our Lord above the repute of a mere philosopher like
Socrates. We have tears for His much suffering; but we sing as Miriam sang when we think of
His victory over the grave. I would not compare myself to Him; yet it pleases me believing
these lines, so unexpected, will give thee a taste of the feeling the Marys had, when, with
their spices in hand, they sought the sepulchre and found only the Angels there.

"Let me tell thee first of my disappearance from Constantinople. I repented greatly my taking
from the old convent by the Patriarch; partly because it separated me from thee at a time when
thy mind was opening to receive the truth and understand it. Yet the call had a sound as if
from God. I feared to disobey it.

"Then came the summons of the Emperor. He had heard of my life, and, as a counteraction of
vice, he wanted its example in the palace. I held back. But the Patriarch prevailed on me,
and I went up and suffered myself to be installed Keeper of the Purple Ink. Then indeed I became
miserable. To such as I, what is sitting near the throne? What is power when not an instrument
of mercy, justice and charity? What is easy life, except walking in danger of habits enervating
to the hope of salvation? Oh, the miseries I witnessed! And how wretched the sight of them,
knowing they were beyond my help! I saw moreover the wickedness of the court. Did I speak,
who listened except to revile me? Went I to celebrations in this or that church, I beheld only
hypocrisy in scarlet. How often, knowing the sin-stains upon the hands of the celebrants at
the altar in Sta. Sophia, the house in holiness next to the temple of Solomon--how often, seeing
those hands raise the blood of Christ in the cup before the altar, have I trembled, and looked
for the dome above to let consuming vengeance in upon us, the innocent with the guilty!

"At last fear filled all my thoughts, and forbade sleep or any comfort. I felt I must go, and
quickly, or be lost for denial of covenants made with Him, the ultimate Judge, in whose approval
there is the peace that passeth understanding. I was like one pursued by a spirit making its
presence known to me in sobs and plaints, stinging as conscience stings.

"Consent to my departure was not to be expected; for great men dislike to have their favors
slighted. It was not less clear that formal resignation of the official honor I was supposed
to be enjoying would be serviceable to the courtiers who were not so much my enemies personally
as they were enemies of religion and contemners of all holy observances. And there were so
many of them! Alas, for the admission! What then was left but flight?

 "Whither? I thought first of Jerusalem; but who without abasement can
inhabit with infidels? Then Hagion Oras, the Holy Hill, occurred to me;
the same argument applied against it as against return to the convent of
Irene-I would be in reach of the Emperor's displeasure. One can study
his own heart. Holding mine off, and looking at it alive with desires
holy and unholy, I detected in it a yearning for hermitage. How
beautiful solitude appears! In what condition can one wishing to change
his nature for the better more certainly attain the end than without
companionship except of God always present? The spirit of prayer is a
delicate minister; where can we find purer nourishment for it than in
the silence which at noon is deep as at midnight?

"In this mood the story of the Russian St. Sergius reverted to me. He was born at Rostoff.
Filled with pious impulses more than dissatisfied with the world, of which he knew nothing,
with a brother, he left his father's house when yet a youth and betook himself to a great woods
in the region Radenego; there he dwelt among savage beasts and wild men, fasting and praying
and dependent like Elijah of old. His life became a notoriety. Others drew to him. With his
own hands he built a wooden church for his disciples, giving it the name of Troitza or Thrice
Holy Trinity. Thither I wandered in thought. A call might be there for me, so weary of the
egotism, envy, detraction, greed, grind and battle of the soulless artificiality called society.

"I left Blacherne in the night, and crossing the sea in the north--no wonder it is so terrible
to the poor mariner who has to hunt his daily bread upon its treacherous waves--I indulged
no wait until, in the stone church of the Holy Trinity, I knelt before the remains of the revered
Russian hermit, and thanked God for deliverance and freedom.

"The Troitza was no longer the simple wooden church of its founder. I found it a collection
of monasteries. The solitude of my dreams was to be sought northward further. Some years before,
a disciple of Sergius--Cyrill by name, since canonized--unterrified by winters which dragged
through three quarters of the year, wandered off to a secluded place on the shore of the White
Lake, where he dwelt until, in old age, a holy house was required to accommodate his following.
He called it Bielo-Osero. There I installed myself, won by the warmth of my welcome.

"Now when I departed from Blacherne, I took with me, besides the raiment I wore, two pieces
of property; a copy of the Rule of the Studium Monastery, and a panagia given me by the Patriarch--a
medallion portrait of the Blessed Mother of our Lord the Saviour, framed in gold, and set in
brilliants. I carry it hanging from my neck. Even in sleep it is always lying just above my
heart. The day is not far now when my need of it will be over; then I will send it to thee
in notice that I am indeed at rest, and that in dying I wished to lend thee a preservative
against ills of the soul and fear of death.

"The Rule was acceptable to the Brotherhood. They adopted it, and its letter and spirit prevailing,
the house came in time to be odorous for sanctity. Eventually, though against my will, they
raised me their Hegumen. And so my story reaches its end. May it find thee enjoying the delight
of the soul's rest I have been enjoying without interruption since I began life anew in this
retreat, where the days are days of prayer, and the nights illuminated by visions of Paradise
and Heaven.

"In the next place, I pray thou wilt take the young brother by whom this will be delivered
into friendly care. I myself raised him to a deaconship of our Monastery. His priestly name
is Sergius. He was scarcely out of boyhood when I came here; it was not long, however, before
I discovered in him the qualities which drew me to thee during thy prison life at the old convent
of Irene--a receptive mind, and a native proneness to love God. I made his way easy. I became
his teacher, as I had been thine; and as the years flew by he reminded me more and more of
thee, not merely with respect to mental capacity, but purity of soul and aspiration as well.
Need I say how natural it was for me to love him? Had I not just come from loving thee?

"The brethren are good men, though unmannerly, and for the most part the Word reaches them
from some other's tongue. Filling the lad's mind was like filling a lamp with oil. How precious
the light it would one day shed abroad! And how much darkness there was for it to dispel! And
in the darkness--Mercy, Mercy! How many are in danger of perishing!

"Never did I think myself so clearly a servant of God as in the time Sergius was under my instruction.
Thou, alas! being a woman, wert like a strong-winged bird doomed at best to a narrow cage.
The whole world was before him.

"Of the many notes I have been compelled to take of the wants of religion in this our age,
none so amazes me as the lack of preachers. We have priests and monks. Their name is Legion.
Who of them can be said to have been touched with the fire that fell upon the faithful of the
original twelve? Where among them is an Athanasius? Or a Chrysostom? Or an Augustine? Slowly,
yet apace with his growth, I became ambitious for the young man. He showed quickness and astonishing
courage. No task appalled him. He mastered the tongues of the nationalities represented around
him as if he were born to them. He took in memory the Gospels, the Psalms, and the prophetic
books of the Bible. He replies to me in Greek undistinguishable from mine. I began to dream
of him a preacher like St. Paul. I have heard him talking in the stone chapel, when the sleet-ridden
winds without had filled it with numbing frost, and seen the Brotherhood rise from their knees,
and shout, and sing, and wrestle like madmen. It is not merely words, and ideas, and oratorical
manner, but all of them, and more--when aroused, he has the faculty of pouring out his spirit,
so that what he says takes hold of a hearer, making him calm if in a passion, and excited if
in a calm. The willing listen to him from delight, the unwilling and opposite minded because
he enchains them.

"The pearl seemed to me of great price. I tried to keep it free of the dust of the world. With
such skill as I possess, I have worn its stains and roughnesses away, and added to its lustre.
Now it goes from me.

"You must not think because I fled to this corner of the earth, there is any abatement of my
affection for Constantinople; on the contrary, absence has redoubled the love for it with which
I was born. Is it not still the capital of our holy religion? Occasionally a traveller comes
this way with news of the changes it has endured. Thus one came and reported the death of the
Emperor John, and the succession of Constantine; another told of justice finally done thy heroic
father, and of thy prosperity; more lately a wandering monk, seeking solitude for his soul's
sake, joined our community, and from him I hear that the old controversy with the Latins has
broken out anew, and more hotly than ever; that the new Emperor is an azymite, and disposed
to adhere to the compact of union of the churches east and west made with the Pope of Rome
by his predecessor, leaving heart-blisters burning as those which divided the Jews. Indeed,
I much fear the likeness may prove absolute. It certainly will when the Turk appears before
our holy city as Titus before Jerusalem.

"This latest intelligence induced me at last to yield to Sergius' entreaties to go down to
Constantinople, and finish there the courses begun here. It is true he who would move the world
must go into the world; at the same time I confess my own great desire to be kept informed
of the progress of the discussion between the churches had much to do with my consent to his
departure. He has instructions to that effect, and will obey them. Therefore I pray thee receive
him kindly for his own sake, for mine, and the promise of good in him to the cause of Jesus,
our beloved Master.

"In conclusion, allow me, daughter--for such thou wert to thy father, to thy mother, and to
me--allow me to recur to circumstances which, after calm review, I pronounce the most interesting,
the most delightful, the most cherished of my life.

"The house under the Kameses hill at Prinkipo was a convent or refuge for women rather than
men; yet I was ordered thither when thy father was consigned to it after his victory over the
Turks. I was then comparatively young, but still recollect the day he passed the gate going
in with his family. Thenceforward, until the Patriarch took me away, I was his confessor.

"Death is always shocking. I remember its visits to the convent while I was of its people;
but when it came and took thy sisters we were doubly grieved. As if the ungrateful Emperor
could not be sufficiently cruel, it seemed Heaven must needs help him. The cloud of those sad
events overhung the community a long time; at length there was a burst of sunshine. One came
to my cell and said, 'Come, rejoice with us--a baby is born in the house.' Thou wert the baby;
and thy appearance was the first of the great gladnesses to which I have referred.

"And not less distinctly I live over the hour we met in the chapel to christen thee. The Bishop
was the chief celebrant; but not even the splendor of his canonicals--the cope with the little
bells sewn down the sides and along the sleeves, the ompharium, the panagia, the cross, the
crozier--were enough to draw my eyes from the dimpled pink face half-hidden in the pillow of
down on which they held thee up before the font. And now the Bishop dipped his fingers in the
holy water--'By what name is this daughter to be known?' And I answered, 'Irene.' Thy parents
had been casting about for a name. 'Why not call her after the convent?' I asked. They accepted
the suggestion; and when I gave it out that great day--to the convent it was holiday--it seemed
a door in my heart of which I was unknowing opened of itself, and took thee into a love-lined
chamber to be sweet lady at home forever. Such was the second of my greatest happinesses.

"And then afterwhile thy father gave thee over to me to be educated. I made thy first alphabet,
illuminating each letter with my own hand. Dost thou remember the earliest sentence I heard
thee read? Or, if ever thou dost think of it now, be reminded it was thy first lesson in writing
and thy first in religion--'The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.' And thence what delight
I found in helping thee each day a little further on in knowledge until at length we came to
where thou couldst do independent thinking.

"It was in Sta. Sophia--in my memory not more than an occurrence of yesterday. Thou and I had
gone from the island up to the holy house, where we were spectators of a service at which the
Emperor, as Basileus, and the Patriarch were celebrants. The gold on cope and ompharium cast
the space about the altar into a splendor rich as sunshine. Then thou asked me, 'Did Christ
and His Disciples worship in a house like this? And were they dressed as these are?' I was
afraid of those around us, and told thee to use eye and ear, but the time for questions and
answers would be when we were back safely in the old convent.

"When we were there, thou didst renew the questions, and I did not withhold the truth. I told
thee of the lowliness and simple ways of Jesus--how He was clothed--how the out-doors was temple
sufficient for Him. I told thee of His preaching to the multitude on the shore of the Galilean
sea--I told of His praying in the garden of Gethsemane--I told of the attempt to make a King
of Him whether He would or not, and how He escaped from the people--of how He set no store
by money or property, titles, or worldly honors.

"Then thou didst ask, 'Who made worship so formal?' And again I answered truthfully, there
was no Church until after the death of our Lord; that in course of two hundred years kings,
governors, nobles and the great of the earth were converted to the faith, and took it under
their protection; that then, to conform it to their tastes and dignity, they borrowed altars
from pagans, and recast the worship so sumptuously in purple and gold the Apostles would not
have recognized it. Then, in brief, I began telling thee of the Primitive Church of Christ,
now disowned, forgotten or lost in the humanism of religious pride.

"Oh, the satisfaction and happiness in that teaching! At each lesson it seemed I was taking
thee closer to the dear Christ from whom the world is every year making new roads to get further
away--the dear Christ in search of whom I plunged into this solitude.

"How is it with thee now, my daughter? Dost thou still adhere to the Primitive Church? Do not
fear to speak thy mind to Sergius. He too is in the secret of our faith, believing it best
to love our Lord from what our Lord hath Himself said.

"Now I bring this letter to a close. Let me have reply by Sergius, who, when he has seen Constantinople,
will come back to me, unless He who holds every man's future in keeping discovers for him a
special use.

"Do not forget me in thy prayers.

"Blessings on thee! HILARION."

The Princess read the letter a second time. When she came to the passage referring to the Primitive
Church, her hands dropped into her lap, and she thought:

"The Father planted right well--better than he was aware, as he himself would say did he know
my standing now."

A glow which might have been variously taken for half-serious, half-mocking defiance shone
in her eyes as the thought ran on:

"Ay, dear man! Did he know that for asserting the Primitive Church as he taught it to me in
the old convent, the Greeks and the Latins have alike adjudged me a heretic; that nothing saves
me from the lions of the Cynegion, except my being a woman--a woman forever offending by going
when and where I wist with my face bare, and therefore harmless except to myself. If he knew
this, would he send me his blessing? He little imagined--he who kept his opinion to himself
because he could see no good possible from its proclamation--that I, the prison-bred girl he
so loved, and whom he helped make extreme in courage as in conviction, would one day forget
my sex and condition, and protest with the vehemence of a man against the religious madness
into which the Christian world is being swept. Oh, that I were a man!"

Folding the letter hastily, she arose to return to her guest. There was fixedness of purpose
in her face.

"Oh, that I were a man!" she repeated, while passing the frescoed hall on the way out.

In the portico, with the white light of the marble whitening her whole person, and just as
the monk, tall, strong, noble looking, despite the grotesqueness of his attire, was rising
from the table, she stopped, and clasped her hands.

"I have been heard!" she thought, trembling. "That which it refused to make me, Heaven has
sent me. Here is a man! And he is certified as of my faith, and has the voice, the learning,
the zeal and courage, the passion of truth to challenge a hearing anywhere. Welcome Sergius!
In want thou camest; in want thou didst find me. The Lord is shepherd unto us both."

She went to him confidently, and offered her hand. Her manner was irresistible; he had no choice
but to yield to it.

"Thou art not a stranger, but Sergius, my brother. Father Hilarion has explained everything."

He kissed her hand, and replied:

"I was overbold, Princess; but I knew the Father would report me kindly; and I was hungry."

"It is my part now to see the affliction comes not back again. So much has the Shepherd already
determined. But, speaking as thy sister, Sergius, thy garments appear strange. Doubtless they
were well enough in the Bielo-Osero, where the Rule of the Studium is law instead of fashion;
but here we must consult customs or be laughed at, which would be fatal to the role I have
in mind for thee." Then with a smile, she added, "Observe the dominion I have already assumed."

He answered with a contented laugh: whereupon she went on, but more gravely:

"We have the world to talk over; but Lysander will now take you to your room, and you will
rest until about mid-afternoon, when my boat will come to the landing to carry us to the city.
The cowl you must exchange for a hat and veil, the sandals for shoes, the coarse cassock for
a black gown; and, if we have time, I will go with you to the Patriarch."

Sergius followed Lysander submissively as a child.

CHAPTER VI

WHAT DO THE STARS SAY?

The sun which relieved the bay of Therapia from the thraldom of night did the same service
for the Golden Horn; only, with a more potential voice, it seemed to say to the cities which
were the pride of the latter, Awake! Arise! And presently they were astir indoor and out.

Of all the souls who, obedient to the early summons, poured into the street, and by the south
window of the study of the Prince of India, some going this direction, some that, yet each
intent upon a particular purpose, not one gave a thought to the Prince, or so much as wondered
if he were awake. And the indifference of the many was well for him; it gave him immunity to
pursue his specialty. But as we, the writer and the reader, are not of the many, and have an
interest in the man from knowing more about him than they, what would have been intrusion in
them may be excused in us.

Exactly at midnight the Prince, aroused by Syama, had gone to the roof, where there was a table,
with a lamp upon it which he could shade at pleasure, an hour-glass, and writing materials.
An easy chair was also set for him.

The view of the city offered for his inspection was circumscribed by the night. The famous
places conspicuous in daytime might as well have been folded up and put away in a closet; he
could not see so much as a glimmer of light from any of them. Pleased thereby, and arguing
that even the wicked are good when asleep, he swept the heavens with a glance so long and searching
there could be no doubt of the purpose which had brought him forth.

Next, according to the habit of astrologers, he proceeded to divide the firmament into Angles
and Houses, and taking seat by the table, arranged the lamp to suit him, started the hour-glass
running, and drew a diagram familiar to every adept in divinatory science--a diagram of the
heavens with the Houses numbered from one to twelve inclusive.

In the Houses he then set the mystic symbols of the visible planets as they were at the moment
in position, mindful not merely of the parallels, but of the degrees as well. Verifying the
correctness of the diagram by a second survey of the mighty overarch more careful even than
the first, he settled himself in the chair, saying complacently:

"Now, O Saturn, thou, the coldest and highest! Thy Houses are ready--come, and at least behold
them. I wait the configurations."

Thereupon, perfectly at ease, he watched the stellar hosts while, to their own music, they
marched past the Thrones of the Most High Planets unchallenged except by him.

Occasionally he sat up to reverse the hour-glass, though more frequently he made new diagrams,
showing the changes in position of the several influential bodies relatively to each other
and to the benefic or malific signs upon which so much of result depended; nor did his eyes
once weary or his zeal flag.

Finally when the sun, yet under the horizon behind the heights of Scutari, began to flood the
sky with a brilliance exceeding that of the bravest of the stars, he collected the drawings,
extinguished the lamp, and descended to his study, but not to rest.

Immediately that the daylight was sufficient, he addressed himself to mathematical calculations
which appeared exhaustive of every rule and branch of the disciplinary science. Hours flew
by, and still he worked. He received Syama's call to breakfast; returning from the meal, always
the simplest of the day with him, he resumed the problem. Either he was prodigiously intent
on a scheme in mind, or he was occupying himself diligently in order to forget himself.

About noon he was interrupted.

"My father."

Recognizing the voice, he pushed the proofs of labor from him almost to the other side of the
table, turned in his seat, and replied, his face suffused with pleasure:

"Thou enemy to labor! Did not some one tell thee of what I have on hand, and how I am working
to finish it in time to take the water with thee this afternoon? Answer, O my Gul-Bahar, more
beautiful growing as the days multiply!"

The Lael of the son of Jahdai, the Gul-Bahar of the mysterious Prince, was much grown, and
otherwise greatly changed since we saw her last. Each intervening year had in passing left
her a benediction. She was now about sixteen, slight, and Jewish in eyes, hair, and complexion.
The blood enriched her olive cheeks; the lips took a double freshness from health; the smile
resting habitually on the oval face had a tale it was always telling of a nature confiding,
happy, satisfied with its conditions, hopeful of the future, and unaware from any sad experience
that life ever admitted of changes. Her beauty bore the marks of intelligence; her manner was
not enough self-contained to be called courtly; yet it was easy, and carried its own certificate
of culture; it yielded too much to natural affection to deserve the term dignified. One listening
to her, and noticing the variableness of her mood, which in almost the same instant could pass
from gay to serious without ever reaching an extreme, would pronounce her too timid for achievement
outside the purely domestic; at the same time he would think she appeared lovable to the last
degree, and might be capable of loving in equal measure.

She was dressed in Byzantine fashion. In crossing the street from her father's house, she had
thrown a veil over her head, but it was now lying carelessly about her neck. The wooden sandals
with blocks under them, like those yet worn by women in Levantine countries to raise them out
of the dust and mud when abroad, had been shaken lightly from her feet at the top of the stairs.
Perfectly at home, she advanced to the table, and put one of her bare arms around the old man's
neck, regardless of the white locks it crushed close down, and replied:

"Thou flatterer! Do I not know beauty is altogether in the eye of the beholder, and that all
persons do not see alike? Tell me why, knowing the work was to be done, you did not send for
me to help you? Was it for nothing you made me acquainted with figures until--I have your authority
for the saying--I might have stood for professor of mathematics in the best of the Alexandrian
schools? Do not shake your head at me--or"--

With the new idea all alight in her face, she ran around the table, and caught up one of the
diagrams.

"Ah, it is as I thought, father! The work I love best, and can do best! Whose is the nativity?
Not mine, I know; for I was born in the glad time when Venus ruled the year. Anael, her angel,
held his wings over me against this very wry-faced, snow-chilled Saturn, whom I am so glad
to see in the Seventh House, which is the House of Woe. Whose the nativity, I say?"

"Nay, child--pretty child, and wilful--you have a trick of getting my secrets from me. I sometimes
think I am in thy hands no more than tawdry lace just washed and being wrung preparatory to
hanging in the air from thy lattice. It is well for you to know there are some things out of
your reach--for the time at least."

"That is saying you will tell me."

"Yes--some day."

"Then I will be patient."

Seeing him become thoughtful, and look abstractedly out of the window, she laid the diagram
down, went back, and again put her arm around his neck.

"I did not come to interrupt you, father, but to learn two things, and run away."

"You begin like a rhetorician. What subdivisions lie under those two things? Speak!"

"Thank you," she replied, quickly. "First, Syama told me you were at some particular task,
and I wanted to know if I could help you."

"Dear heart!" he said, tenderly.

"Next--and this is all--I did not want you to forget we are to go up the Bosphorus this afternoon--up
to Therapia, and possibly to the sea."

"You wish to go?" he asked.

"I dreamt of it all night."

"Then we will; and to prove I did not forget, the boatmen have their orders already. We go
to the landing directly after noon."

"Not too soon," she answered, laughing. "I have to dress, and make myself gorgeous as an empress.
The day is soft and kind, and there will he many people on the water, where I am already known
quite as well as here in the city as the daughter of the Prince of India."

He replied with an air of pride:

"Thou art good enough for an emperor."

"Then I may go and get ready."

She withdrew her arm, kissed him, and started to the door, but returned, with a troubled look.

"One thing more, father."

He was recovering his work, but stopped, and gave her ear.

"What is it?"

"You have said, good father, that as my studies were too confining, it would be well if I took
the air every day in my sedan. So, sometimes with Syama, sometimes with Nilo, I had the men
carry me along the wall in front of the Bucoleon. The view over the sea toward Mt. Ida is there
very beautiful; and if I look to the landward side, right at my feet are the terraced gardens
of the palace. Nowhere do the winds seem sweeter to me. For their more perfect enjoyment I
have at moments alighted from the chair, and walked; always avoiding acquaintances new and
old. The people appear to understand my preference, and respect it. Of late, however, one person--hardly
a man--has followed me, and stopped near by when I stopped; he has even persisted in attempts
to speak to me. To avoid him, I went to the Hippodrome yesterday, and taking seat in front
of the small obelisks in that quarter, was delighted with the exhibition of the horsemen. Just
when the entertainment was at its height, and most interesting, the person of whom I am speaking
came and sat on the same bench with me. I arose at once. It is very annoying, father. What
shall I do?"

The Prince did not answer immediately, and when he did, it was to ask, suggestively:

"You say he is young?"

"Yes."

"His dress?"

"He seems to be fond of high colors."

"You asked no question concerning him?"

"No. Whom could I ask?"

Again the Prince reflected. Outwardly he was unconcerned; yet his blood was more than warm--the
blood of pride which, as every one knows, is easily started, and can go hissing hot. He did
not wish her to think of the affair too much; therefore his air of indifference; nevertheless
it awoke a new train of thought in him.

If one were to insult this second Lael of his love, what could he do? The idea of appeal to
a magistrate was irritating. Were he to assume punishment of the insolence, from whom could
he hope justice or sympathy--he, a stranger living a mysterious life?

He ran hastily over the resorts at first sight open to him. Nilo was an instrument always ready.
A word would arouse the forces in that loyal but savage nature, and they were forces subject
to cunning which never slept, never wearied, and was never in a hurry--a passionless cunning,
like that of the Fedavies of the Old Man of the Mountain.

It may be thought the Prince was magnifying a fancied trouble; but the certainty that sorrow
must overtake him for every indulgence of affection was a haunting shadow always attending
the most trifling circumstance to set his imagination conjuring calamities. That at such times
his first impulse was toward revenge is explicable; the old law, an eye for an eye, was part
of his religion; and coupling it with personal pride which a thought could turn into consuming
heat, how natural if, while the anticipation was doing its work, his study should be to make
the revenge memorable!

Feeling he was not entirely helpless in the affair, he thought best to be patient awhile, and
learn who was the offender; a conclusion followed by a resolution to send Uel with the girl
next time she went to take the air.

"The young men of the city are uncontrolled by respect or veneration," he said, quietly. "The
follies they commit are sometimes ludicrous. Better things are not to be looked for in a generation
given to dress as a chief ambition. And then it may be, O my Gul-Bahar"--he kissed her as he
uttered the endearment--"it may be he of whom you complain does not know who you are. A word
may cure him of his bad manners. Do not appear to notice him. Have eyes for everything in the
world but him; that is the virtuous woman's defence against vulgarity and insult under every
circumstance. Go now, and make ready for the boat. Put on your gayest; forget not the last
necklace I gave you--and the bracelets--and the girdle with the rubies. The water from the
flying oars shall not outflash my little girl. There now--Of course we will go to the landing
in our chairs."

When she disappeared down the stairs, he went back to his work.

CHAPTER VII

THE PRINCE OF INDIA MEETS CONSTANTINE

It is to be remembered now, as very material to our story, that the day the Prince of India
resolved on the excursion up the Bosphorus with Lael the exquisite stretch of water separated
the territorial possessions of the Greek Emperor and the Sultan of the Turks.

In 1355 the utmost of the once vast Roman dominions was "a corner of Thrace between the Propontis
(Marmora) and the Black Sea, about fifty miles in length and thirty in breadth." [Footnote:
Gibbon.]

When Constantine Dragases--he of whom we are writing--ascended the throne, the realm was even
more diminished.

Galata, just across the Golden Horn, had become a Genoese stronghold.

Scutari, on the Asiatic shore almost vis-a-vis with Constantinople, was held by a Turkish garrison.

With small trouble the Sultan could have converted the pitiful margin between Galata and the
Cyanean rocks on the Black Sea.

Once indeed he set siege to Constantinople, but was beaten off, it was said, by the Mother
of God, who appeared upon the walls of the city, and in person took part in the combat. Thereafter
he contented himself with a tribute from the Emperors Manuel and John Palaeologus.

The relations of the Christian and Moslem potentates being thus friendly, it can be seen how
the Princess Irene could keep to her palace by Therapia and the Prince of India plan jaunts
along the Bosphorus.

Still there is a point to be borne in mind. Ships under Christian flags seldom touched at a
landing upon the Asiatic shore. Their captains preferred anchoring in the bays and close under
the ivy-covered heights of Europe. This was not from detestation or religious intolerance;
at bottom there was a doubt of the common honesty of the strong-handed Turk amounting to fear.
The air was rife with stories of his treachery. The fishermen in the markets harrowed the feelings
of their timid customers with tales of surprises, captures, and abductions. Occasionally couriers
rushed through the gates of Constantinople to report red banners in motion, and the sound of
clarions and drums, signifying armies of Moslems gathering for mysterious purposes.

The Moslems, on their part, it is but fair to say, were possessed of the same doubts of the
Christians, and had answers to accusations always ready. The surprises, captures, and abductions
were the unlicensed savageries of brigands, of whom they never knew one not a Greek; while
the music and flags belonged to the militia.

Six or seven miles above Scutari a small river, born in the adjacent highlands, runs merrily
down to meet and mingle with the tideless Bosphorus. The water it yields is clear and fresh;
whence the name of the stream, The Sweet Waters of Asia. On its south side there is a prairie-like
stretch, narrow, but green and besprent with an orchard of sycamores old and gnarled, and now
much frequented on Mohammedan Sundays by ladies of the harems, who contrive to make it very
gay. No doubt the modest river, and the grass and great trees were just as attractive ages
before the first Amurath, with an army at his heels, halted there for a night. From that time,
however, it was banned by the Greeks; and for a reason.

On the north bank of the little river there was a fortress known as the White Castle. An irregular,
many-angled pile of undressed stone heavily merloned on top, its remarkable feature was a tall
donjon which a dingy white complexion made visible a great distance, despite its freckling
of loopholes and apertures for machine artillery. Seeing its military importance, the Sultan
left a garrison to hold it. He was also pleased to change its name to Acce-Chisar.

The blood-red flag on this donjon was, at the era engaging us, the disenchanter of the Greeks;
insomuch that in passing the Sweet Waters of Asia they hugged the opposite shore of the Bosphorus,
crossing themselves and muttering prayers often of irreligious compound. A stork has a nest
on the donjon now. As an apparition it is not nearly so suggestive as the turbaned sentinel
who used to occupy its outlook.

The popular imagination located dungeons under the grim old Castle, whence, of the many Christian
men and women immured there, it was said none ever came forth alive.

But for these things, whether true or false, the Prince of India cared little. He was not afraid
of the Turks. If the Asiatic shore had been festooned with red flags from the City of the Blind
down by the Isles of the Princes to the last of the gray fortresses overlooking the Symplegades,
it would not have altered a plan of his jot or tittle. Enough that Lael wanted and needed an
outing on the glorious Bosphorus.

Accordingly, shortly after noon two chairs were brought and set down in his house. That is
to say, two upright boxes fixed centrally on poles, and differing in nowise from the sedans
still the mode of carriage affected by ladies of Constantinople unless it might be in their
richer appointments. Inside, all was silk, lace and cushions; outside, the inlaying of mother
of pearl and vari-colored woods was suggestive of modern papier-mache. The entrance was by
a door in the front. A window in the door, and lesser ones on the sides, afforded the inmate
air and opportunity for speech. Not wanting to be seen, she had only to draw the curtains together.
In this instance it must be said the decoration of the carriages had been carried to an extreme.

Soon as the chairs were set down in the house, the Prince and Lael descended the stairs. The
latter was attired in a semi-Greek costume, very rich and becoming; to embroidery of gold,
she added bracelets, and a necklace of large pearls strung between spheres of gold equally
large. A coronet graced her head, and it was so bejewelled that in bright light it seemed some
one was sprinkling her with an incessant shower of sparkles.

The two took their seats. The carriers, two to each litter, stalwart men, uniformly clad in
loose white garments, raised the poles on their shoulders. Syama threw the door of the house
open, and at a signal from the Prince the procession sallied into the street. The crowd, in
expectant waiting there, received it in silent wonder.

It is due the truth to say now that the common eye was attracted by the appearance of Nilo
as much as by the rarities wrought in the panelling of the carriages. He strode ten or twelve
feet in advance of Lael who, in the place of honor, was completely under the Prince's observation.
The negro's costume was of a King of Kash-Cush. The hair stood on end in stiff cues, sharply
pointed, and held by a chain of silver medals; an immense ring of silver hung from the cartilage
of his nose. The neck was defended by a gorget of leather bristling with the fangs and claws
of tigers in alternating rows. A robe of scarlet cloth large enough to envelop the man was
thrown behind the massive shoulders. The body, black as polished ebony, was naked to the waist,
whence a white skirt fell to the knees. The arms and legs were adorned with bracelets and anklets
of ivory, while the straps of the heavy sandals were bordered with snail-shells. On the left
arm he bore a round shield of rhinoceros hide embossed in brass; in the right hand, a pointless
lance. Towering high above the heads of the crowd which opened before him with alacrity, the
admiration received by the Prince's ally and friend was but a well-deserved tribute.

"A tiger-hunter!" said one, to a friend at his elbow.

"I should call him king of the tiger-hunters," the friend replied.

"Only a Prince of India would carry such a pensioner with him," another remarked.

"What a man!" said a woman, half afraid.

"An infidel, no doubt," was the answer.

"It is not a Christian wish, I know," the first added; "still I should like to see him face
a lion in the Cynegion."

"Ay, him they call Tamerlane, because he is shorn of two toes."

The Prince, casting a glance of scarce concealed contempt over the throng, sighed, as he muttered,
"If now I could meet the Emperor!"

The exclamation was from his heart.

We have seen the idea which lured him to Mecca, and brought him to Constantinople. In the years
since flown, it was held subordinate to his love of Lael--subordinate merely. Latterly it had
revived with much of its original force, and he was now for the first time seriously scheming
for an interview with the Emperor. No doubt a formal request would have secured the honor;
but it was in his view better policy to be sought than seek, and with all his wealth, there
was nothing he could so well afford to pay for success as time. In his study, he was continually
saying to himself:

"It cannot be that the extravagances to which I am going will fail. He will hear of me, or
we may meet--then the invitation!--And then I will propose the Brotherhood--God help me! But
it is for him to invite me. Patience, O my soul!"

Extravagances!

The exclamation helps us to an understanding of the style he was carrying before the public--the
silvering on his own black velvet robe, the jewels in Lael's coronet bursting with light, the
gorgeous finish of the sedans, the barbaric costuming of Nilo. They were not significant of
his taste. Except for what they might bring him, he did not care for jewels. And as for Lael,
he would have loved her for her name's sake, and her honest, untarnished Jewish blood. Let
us believe so at least until we find otherwise.

Nilo, by this time familiar with every quarter of the city, was told the boat was in readiness
for the party at a landing near the Grand Gate of Blacherne; to make which, it being on the
Golden Horn well up in the northwest, he must turn the hill back of the Prince's residence,
and pursue one of the streets running parallel with the wall. Thither he accordingly bent his
steps, followed by the porters of the sedans, and an increasing but respectful assemblage of
curious citizens.

Scarcely had the progress begun before the Prince, watching through his front window, saw a
man approach the side of Lael's chair, and peer into it. His wit served him well and instantly.

"'Tis he--the insolent!--Close up!" he cried, to his porters.

The intruder at the sound of his voice looked at him once, then disappeared in the throng.
He was young, handsome, showily dressed, and beyond question the person of whom Lael had complained.
Though smarting under the insult, and a suspicion, suddenly engendered, of a watch kept over
his house, the Prince concluded the stranger was of noble connection, and that the warrant
for his boldness was referable to family influence. While his subtle mind was pothering with
schemes of detection, the affair presented itself in another light, and he laughed at his own
dulness.

"'Tis nothing," he reflected--"nothing! The boy is in love, and allowing his passion to make
a fool of him. I have only to see my pretty Gul-Bahar does not return the madness."

Deciding then to make inquiry and satisfy himself who the young admirer was, he dismissed the
subject.

Presently Nilo turned into a street of some width compared with the generality of thoroughfares
in the city. On the left hand were shops and pretentious houses; on the right, towered the
harbor wall. The people attending the procession increased instead of dispersing; but as they
continued in good nature, they gave him no concern. Their comments amongst themselves were
about equally divided between Nilo and Lael.

"Beautiful, beautiful!" one said, catching sight of the latter through the windows of the chair.

"Who is she?"

"A daughter of a Prince of India."

"And the Prince--Who is he?"

"Ask some one who knows. There he is in the second chair."

Once a woman went close to Lael, snatched a look, and stepped back, with clasped hands, crying:

"'Tis the Sweet Mother herself!"

Without other incident, the procession passed the gate of St. Peter, and was nearing that of
Blacherne, when a flourish of trumpets announced a counter pageant coming down the street from
the opposite direction. A man near by shouted:

"The Emperor! The Emperor!"

Another seconded him.

"Long live the good Constantine!"

The words were hardly uttered before they were answered:

"The azymite! The azymite! Down with the betrayer of Christ!"

In less than a minute the Prince was being borne along in the midst of two howling factions.
Scarcely knowing whether to take Lael into a house or go on, he tried to communicate with Nilo;
but in unconsciousness of the tempest so suddenly risen, that grandson of a king marched on
in unremitted stateliness, until directly a band of trumpeters in magnificent livery confronted
him.

The astonishment was mutual. Nilo halted, dropping his headless lance in defence; the trumpeters
quit blowing, and, opening order, filed hastily by him, their faces saying with a distinctness
words could not have helped:

"A son of Satan! Beware!"

The chairs were also brought to a halt.

Thereupon the people, now a mob apparently ready to tear each other into bloody ribbons, refused
to give way to the trumpeters. Nilo finally comprehending the situation returned to Lael just
as the Prince on foot came up to her. She was pale and trembling with fear.

The deadlock between the musicians and the mob was brought to an end by the appearance of a
detachment of the Imperial guard. A mounted officer, javelin in hand, rode up and shouted:

"The Emperor! Make way for the Emperor!"

While he was speaking, the horsemen behind him came on steadily. There was irresistible persuasion
in the glitter of their spears; besides it was matter of universal knowledge that the steel
panoply of each rider concealed a mercenary foreigner who was never so happy as when riding
over a Greek. One yell louder and more defiant than any yet uttered--"The azymite, the azymite!"--and
the mob broke and fled. At a signal from the officer, the guards, as they came on, opened right
and left of the chairs, and passed them with scarce notice.

A few words from the Prince to Lael dispelled her fears.

"It is an every-day affair," he said, lightly; "an amusement of the people, the Roman factionists
against the Greek. Nobody is ever hurt, except in howling he opens his jaws too wide."

The levity was affected, but mastering the irritation he really felt, the Prince was about
to make acknowledgment to the officer for his timely intervention, when another personage appeared,
claiming his attention. Indeed his heart began beating unusually fast, and in spite of himself
his face flushed--he knew he had his wish--the meeting with Constantine was come!

The last Emperor of the Byzantines sat in an open chair borne upon the shoulders of eight carriers
in striking livery--a handsome man in his forty-sixth year, though apparently not more than
thirty-eight or forty. His costume was that of Basileus, which was a religious dignity.

A close-fitting cap of red velvet covered his head, with a knot of purple silk triply divided
on the top; while a pliable circlet of golden scales, clearing the brows, held the cap securely
in place. On each scale a ruby of great size sparkled in solitaire setting. The circlet was
further provided with four strings of pearls, two by each ear, dangling well down below in
front of the shoulders. A loose drab robe or gown, drawn close at the waist, clothed him, neck,
arms, body and nether limbs, answering excellently as ground for a cope the color of the cap,
divided before and behind into embroidered squares defined by rows of pearls. Boots of purple
leather, also embroidered, gave finish to the costume. Instead of sword or truncheon, he carried
a plain ivory crucifix. The people staring at him from the doors and windows knew he was going
to Sancta Sophia intent on some religious service.

While the Emperor was thus borne down upon the Prince, his dark eyes, kindly looking, glanced
from Nilo to Lael, and finally came to rest full upon the face of the master. The officer returned
to him. A few paces off, the imperial chair stopped, and a conversation ensued, during which
a number of high officials who were of the sovereign's suite on foot closed up in position
to separate their Lord from a mounted rear guard.

The Prince of India kept his mind perfectly. Having exchanged glances with the Emperor, he
was satisfied an impression was made strong enough to pique curiosity, and at the same time
fix him in the royal memory. With a quick sense of the proprieties, he thereupon addressed
himself to moving his carriages to the left, that when the conference with the officers was
concluded the Emperor might have the right of way with the least possible obstruction.

Presently the Acolyte--such the officer proved to be--approached the Prince.

"His Imperial Majesty," he said, courteously, "would be pleased could I inform him the name
and title of the stranger whose progress he has been so unfortunate as to interrupt."

The Prince answered with dignity:

"I thank you, noble sir, for the fair terms in which you couch the inquiry, not less than the
rescue I and my daughter owe you from the mob."

The Acolyte bowed.

"And not to keep his Imperial Majesty waiting," the Prince continued, "return him the compliments
of a Prince of India, at present a resident of this royal and ancient capital. Say also it
will give me happiness far beyond the power of words when I am permitted to salute him, and
render the veneration and court to which his character and place amongst the rulers of the
earth entitle him."

At the conclusion of the complex, though courtierly reply, the speaker walked two steps forward,
faced the Emperor, and touched the ground with his palms, and rising, carried them to his forehead.

The answer duly delivered, the Emperor responded to the salaam with a bow and another message.

"His Imperial Majesty," the Acolyte said, "is pleased at meeting the Prince of India. He was
not aware he had a guest of such distinction in his capital. He desires to know the place of
residence of his noble friend, that he may communicate with him, and make amends for the hindrance
which has overtaken him to-day."

The Prince gave his address, and the interview ended.

It is of course the reader's privilege to pass judgment upon the incidents of this rencounter;
at least one of the parties to it was greatly pleased, for he knew the coveted invitation would
speedily follow.

While the Emperor was borne past, Lael received his notice more especially than her guardian;
when they were out of hearing, he called the Acolyte to his side.

"Didst thou observe the young person yonder?" he asked.

"The coronet she wears certifies the Prince of India to be vastly rich," the other answered.

"Yes, the Princes of India, if we may judge by common report, are all rich; wherefore I thought
not of that, but rather of the beauty of his daughter. She reminded me of the Madonna on the
Panagia in the transept of our church at Blacherne."

CHAPTER VIII

RACING WITH A STORM

One who has seen the boats in which fishermen now work the eddies and still waters of the Bosphorus
will not require a description of the vessel the Prince and Lael stepped into when they arrived
at the Grand Gate of Blacherne. He need only be told that instead of being pitch-black outside
and in, it was white, except the gunwale which was freshly gilt. The untravelled reader, however,
must imagine a long narrow craft, upturned at both ends, graceful in every line, and constructed
for speed and beauty. Well aft there was a box without cover, luxuriously cushioned, lined
with chocolate velvet, and wide enough to seat two persons comfortably; behind it, a decked
space for a servant, pilot or guard. This arrangement left all forward for the rowers, each
handling two oars.

Ten rowers, trained, stout, and clad in white headkerchiefs, shirts and trousers of the same
hue, and Greek jackets of brilliant scarlet, profusely figured over with yellow braid, sat
stolidly, blades in hand and ready dipped, when the passengers took their places, the Prince
and Lael in the box, and Nilo behind them as guard. The vessel was too light to permit a ceremonious
reception.

In front of the party, on the northern shore of the famous harbor, were the heights of Pera.
The ravines and grass-green benches into which they were broken, with here and there a garden
hut enclosed in a patch of filbert bushes--for Pera was not then the city it now is--were of
no interest to the Prince; dropping his eyes to the water, they took in a medley of shipping,
then involuntarily turned to the cold gray face of the wall he was leaving. And while seeing
in vivid recollection the benignant countenance of Constantine bent upon him from the chair
in the street, he thought of the horoscope he had spent the night in taking and the forenoon
in calculating. With a darkened brow, he gave the word, and the boat was pushed off and presently
seeking the broader channel of the Bosphorus.

The day was delightful. A breeze danced merrily over the surface of the water. Soft white summer
clouds hung so sleepily in the southwest they scarce suggested motion. Seeing the color deepen
in Lael's cheeks, and listening to her questions, he surrendered himself to the pleasures of
the situation, not the least being the admiration she attracted.

By ships at anchor, and through lesser craft of every variety they sped, followed by exclamations
frequently outspoken:

"Who is she? Who can she be?"

Thus pursued, they flew past the gate of St. Peter, turned the point of Galata, and left the
Fish Market port behind; proceeding then in parallelism with the north shore, they glided under
the great round tower so tall and up so far overhead it seemed a part of the sky. Off Tophane,
they were in the Bosphorus, with Scutari at their right, and Point Serail at their backs.

Viewed from the harbor on the sea, the old historic Point leaves upon the well informed an
impression that in a day long gone, yielding to a spasm of justice, Asia cast it off into the
waves. Its beauty is Circean. Almost from the beginning it has been the chosen place in which
men ran rounds gay and grave, virtuous and wanton, foolish and philosophic, brave and cowardly--where
love, hate, jealousy, avarice, ambition and envy have delighted to burn their lights before
Heaven--where, possibly with one exception, Providence has more frequently come nearer lifting
its veil than in any other spot of earth.

Again and again, the Prince, loth to quit the view, turned and refilled his eyes with Sancta
Sophia, of which, from his position, the wall at the water's edge, the lesser churches of the
Virgin Hodegetria and St. Irene, and the topmost sections far extending of the palaces of Bucoleon
seemed but foundations. The edifice, as he saw it then, depended on itself for effect, the
Turk having not yet, in sign of Mohammedan conversion, broken the line of its marvellous dome
with minarets. At length he set about telling stories of the Point.

Off the site of the present palace of Dolma-Batchi he told of Euphrosyne, the daughter of the
Empress Irene; and seeing how the sorrowful fortune of the beautiful child engaged Lael's sympathies,
he became interested as a narrator, and failed to notice the unusual warmth tempering the air
about Tchiragan. Neither did he observe that the northern sky, before so clear and blue, was
whitening with haze.

To avoid the current running past Arnoot-Kouy, the rowers crossed to the Asiatic side under
the promontory of Candilli.

Other boats thronged the charming expanse; but as most of them were of a humbler class sporting
one rower, the Prince's, with its liveried ten, was a surpassing attraction. Sometimes the
strangers, to gratify their curiosity, drew quite near, but always without affronting him;
knowing the homage was to Lael, he was happy when it was effusively rendered.

His progress was most satisfactory until he rounded Candilli. Then a flock of small boats came
down upon him pell-mell, the rowers pulling their uttermost, the passengers in panic.

The urgency impelling them was equally recognized by the ships and larger vessels out in the
channel. Anchors were going down, sails furling, and oars drawing in. Above them, moreover,
much beyond their usual levels of flight troops of gulls were circling on rapid wings screaming
excitedly.

The Prince had reached the part of greatest interest in the story he was telling--how the cruel
and remorseless Emperor Michel, determined to wed the innocent and helpless Euphrosyne, shamelessly
cheated the Church and cajoled the Senate--when Nilo touched his shoulder, and awoke him to
the situation. A glance over the water--another at the sky--and he comprehended danger of some
kind was impending. At the same moment Lael commenced shivering and complaining of cold. The
air had undergone a sudden change. Presently Nilo's red cloak was sheltering her.

The boat was in position to bring everything into view, and he spoke to the rowers:

"A storm is rising."

They ceased work, and looked over their shoulders, each for himself.

"A blow from the sea, and it comes fast. What we shall do is for my Lord to say," one of them
returned.

The Prince grew anxious for Lael. What was done must be for her--he had no thought else.

A cloud was forming over the whole northeastern quarter of the sky, along the horizon black,
overhead a vast gray wave, in its heart copper-hued, seething, interworking, now a distended
sail, now a sail bursted; and the wind could he heard whipping the shreds into fleece, and
whirling them a confusion of vaporous banners. Yet glassy, the water reflected the tint of
the cloud. The hush holding it was like the drawn breath of a victim waiting the first turn
of the torturous wheel.

The Asiatic shore offered the Prince a long stretch, and he persisted in coasting it until
the donjon of the White Castle--that terror to Christians--arrested his eye. There were houses
much nearer, some of them actually overhanging the water; but the donjon seemed specially inviting;
at all events, he coolly reflected, if the Governor of the Castle denied him refuge, the little
river near by known as the Sweet Waters of Asia would receive him, and getting under its bank,
he might hope to escape the fury of the wind and waves. He shouted resolutely:

"To the White Castle! Make it before the wind strikes, my men, and I will double your hire."

"We may make it," the rower answered, somewhat sullenly, "but"--

"What?" asked the Prince.

"The devil has his lodgings there. Many men have gone into its accursed gates on errands of
peace, and never been heard of again."

The Prince laughed.

"We lose time--forward! If there be a fiend in the Castle, I promise you he is not waiting for us."

The twenty oars fell as one, and the boat jumped like a steed under a stab of the spur.

Thus boldly the race with the storm was begun. The judgment of the challenger, assuming the
Prince to be such, may be questioned. The river was the goal.

Could he reach it before the wind descended in dangerous force?--That was the very point of
contest.

The chances, it is to be remembered next, were not of a kind to admit weighing with any approach
to certainty; it was difficult even to marshal them for consideration. The distance was somewhat
less than three-quarters of a mile; on the other part, the competing cloud was wrestling with
the mountain height of Alem Daghy, about four miles away. The dead calm was an advantage; unfortunately
it was more than offset by the velocity of the current which, though not so strong by the littoral
of Candilli as under the opposite bluffs of Roumeli-Hissar, was still a serious opposing force.
The boatmen were skilful, and could be relied upon to pull loyally; for, passing the reward
offered in the event of their winning, the dangers of failure were to them alike. Treating
the contest as a race, with the storm and the boat as competitors, the Prince was not without
chances of success.

But whatever the outcome of the venture, Lael would be put to discomfort. His care of her was
so habitually marked by tender solicitude one cannot avoid wondering at him now.

After all he may have judged the affair more closely than at first appears. The sides of the
boat were low, but danger from that cause might be obviated by the skill of the rowers; and
then Alem Daghy was not a trifling obstacle in the path of the gale. It might be trusted to
hold the cloud awhile; after which a time would be required by the wind to travel the miles
intervening.

Certainly it had been more prudent to make the shore, and seek refuge in one of the houses
there. But the retort of the spirited Jew of that day, as in this, was a contemptuous refusal
of assistance, and the degree to which this son of Israel was governed by the eternal resentment
can be best appreciated by recalling the number of his days on earth.

At the first response to the vigorous pull of the oarsmen, Lael drew the red cloak over her
face, and laid her head against the Prince. He put his arm around her, and seeing nothing and
saying nothing, she trusted in him.

The rowers, pulling with strength from the start, gradually quickened the stroke, and were
presently in perfect harmony of action. A short sough accompanied each dip of the blades; an
expiration, like that of the woodman striking a blow with his axe, announced the movement completed.
The cords of their brawny necks played fast and free; the perspiration ran down their faces
like rain upon glass. Their teeth clinched. They turned neither right nor left; but with their
straining eyes fixed upon him, by his looks they judged both their own well-doing and the progress
of their competitor.

Seeing the boat pointed directly toward the Castle, the Prince watched the cloud. Occasionally
he commended the rowers.

"Well done, my men!--Hold to that, and we will win!"

The unusual brightness of his eyes alone betrayed excitement. Once he looked over the yet quiet
upper field of water. His was the only vessel in motion. Even the great ships were lying to.
No--there was another small boat like his own coming down along the Asiatic shore as if to
meet him. Its position appeared about as far above the mouth of the river as his was below
it; and its three or five rowers were plainly doing their best. With grim pleasure, he accepted
the stranger as another competitor in the race.

The friendly heights of Alem, seen from the Bosphorus, are one great forest always beautifully
green. Even as the Prince looked at them, they lost color, as if a hand out of the cloud had
suddenly dropped a curtain of white gauze over them. He glanced back over the course, then
forward. The donjon was showing the loopholes that pitted its southern face. Excellent as the
speed had been, more was required. Half the distance remained to be overcome--and the enemy
not four miles away.

"Faster, men!" he called out. "The gust has broken from the mountain. I hear its roaring."

They turned involuntarily, and with a look measured the space yet to be covered, the distance
of the foe, and the rate at which he was coming. Nor less did they measure the danger. They
too heard its warning, the muffled roar as of rocks and trees snatched up and grinding to atoms
in the inner coils of the cloud.

"It is not a blow," one said, speaking quick, "but a"--

"Storm."

The word was the Prince's.

"Yes, my Lord."

Just then the water by the boat was rippled by a breath, purring, timorous, but icy.

The effect on the oarsmen was stronger than any word from the master could have been. They
finished a pull long and united; then while the oars swung forward taking reach for another,
they all arose to their feet, paused a moment, dipped the blades deeper, gave vent to a cry
so continuous it sounded like a wail, and at the same time sunk back into their seats, pulling
as they fell. This was their ultimate exertion. A jet of water spurted from the foot of the
sharp bow, and the bubbles and oar eddies flew behind indistinguishably.

"Well done!" said the Prince, his eyes glowing.

Thenceforward the men continued to rise at the end of a stroke, and fall as they commenced
delivery of another. Their action was quick, steady, machine-like; they gripped the water deep,
and made no slips; with a thought of the exhilaration an eagle must feel when swooping from
his eyrie, the Prince looked at the cloud defiantly as a challenger might. Each moment the
donjon loomed up more plainly. He saw now, not merely the windows and loopholes, but the joinery
of the stones in their courses. Suddenly he beheld another wonder--an army of men mounted and
galloping along the river bank toward the Castle.

The array stretched back into the woods. In its van were two flags borne side by side, one
green, the other red. Both were surrounded by a troop in bright armor. No need for him to ask
to whom they belonged. They told him of Mecca and Mahomet--on the red, he doubted not seeing
the old Ottomanic symbols, in their meaning poetic, in their simplicity beautiful as any ever
appropriated for martial purposes. The riders were Turks. But why the green flag? Where it
went somebody more than the chief of a sanjak, more than the governor of a castle, or even
a province, led the way.

The number trailing after the flags was scarcely less mysterious. They were too many to be
of the garrison; and then the battlements of the Castle were lined with men also under arms.
Not daring to speak of this new apparition lest his oarsmen might take alarm, the Prince smiled,
thinking of another party to the race--a fourth competitor.

He sought the opposing boat next. It had made good time. There were five oarsmen in it; and,
like his own, they were rising and falling with each stroke. In the passengers' place, he could
make out two persons whom he took to be women.

A roll of thunder from the cloud startled the crew. Clear, angry, majestic, it filled the mighty
gorge of the Bosphorus. Under the sound the water seemed to shrink away. Lael looked out from
her hiding, but as quickly drew back, crowding closer to the Prince. To calm her he said, lightly,

"Fear nothing, O my Gul Bahar! A pretty race we are having with the cloud yonder; we are winning,
and it is not pleased. There is no danger."

She answered by doubling the folds of the gown about her head.

Steadily, lithely, and with never an error the rowers drove through the waves--steadily, and
in exact time, their cry arose cadencing each stroke. They did their part truly. Well might
the master cry them, "Good, good." But all the while the wind was tugging mightily at its cloudy
car; every instant the rattle of its wheels sounded nearer. The trees on the hills behind the
Castle were bending and bowing; and not merely around the boat, but far as could be seen the
surface of the ancient channel was a-shirr and a-shatter under beating of advance gusts.

And now the mouth of the Sweet Waters, shallowed by a wide extended osier bank, came into view;
and the Castle was visible from base to upper merlon, the donjon, in relief against the blackened
sky, rising more ghostly than ever. And right at hand were the flags, and the riders galloping
with them. And there, coming bravely in, was the competing boat.

Over toward Roumeli-Hissar the sea birds congregated in noisy flocks, alarmed at the long line
of foam the wind was whisking down the current. Behind the foam, the world seemed dissolving
into spray.

Then the boats were seen from the Castle, and a company of soldiers ran out and down the bank.
A noise like the rushing of a river sounded directly overhead. The wind struck the Castle,
and in the thick of the mists and flying leaves hurled at it, the donjon disappeared.

"We win, we win, my men!" the Prince shouted. "Courage--good spirit--brave work--treble wages!
Wine and wassail to-morrow!"

The boat, with the last word, shot into the little river, and up to the landing of the Castle
just as the baffled wind burst over the refuge. And simultaneously the van of the army galloped
under the walls and the competing boat arrived.

CHAPTER IX

IN THE WHITE CASTLE

The landing was in possession of dark-faced, heavily bearded men, with white turbans, baggy
trousers, gray and gathered at the ankles, and arms of every kind, bows, javelins, and cimeters.

The Prince, stepping from his boat, recognized them as Turkish soldiers. He had hardly time
to make the inspection, brief as it was, before an officer, distinguished by a turban, kettle-shaped
and elaborately infolded, approached him.

"You will go with me to the Castle," he said.

The official's tone and manner were imperative. Suppressing his displeasure, the Prince replied,
with dignity:

"The Governor is courteous. Return to him with my thanks, and say that when I decided to come
on in the face of the storm, I made no doubt of his giving me shelter until it would be safe
to resume my journey. I fear, however, his accommodations will be overtaxed; and since the
river is protected from the wind, it would be more agreeable if he would permit me to remain here."

The response betrayed no improvement in manner:

"My order is to bring you to the Castle."

Some of the boatmen at this raised their eyes and hands toward heaven; others crossed themselves,
and, like men taking leave of hope, cried out, "O Holy Mother of God!"

Yet the Prince restrained himself. He saw contention would be useless, and said, to quiet the
rowers: "I will go with you. The Governor will be reasonable. We are unfortunates blown to
his hands by a tempest, and to make us prisoners under such circumstances would be an abuse
of one of the first and most sacred laws of the Prophet. The order did not comprehend my men;
they may remain here."

Lael heard all this, her face white with fear.

The conversation was in the Greek tongue. At mention of the law, the Turk cast a contemptuous
look at the Prince, much as to say, Dog of an unbeliever, what dost thou with a saying of the
Prophet? Then dropping his eyes to Lael and the boatmen, he answered in disdain of argument
or explanation:

"You--they--all must go."

With that, he turned to the occupants of the other boat, and raising his voice the better to
be heard, for the howling of the wind was very great, he called to them:

"Come out."

They were a woman in rich attire, but closely veiled, and a companion at whom he gazed with
astonishment. The costume of the latter perplexed him; indeed, not until that person, in obedience
to the order, erected himself to his full stature upon the landing, was he assured of his sex.

They were the Princess Irene and Sergius the monk.

The conversation between them in the Homeric palace has only to be recalled to account for
their presence. Departing from Therapia at noon, according to the custom of boatmen wishing
to pass from the upper Bosphorus, they had been carried obliquely across toward the Asiatic
shore where the current, because of its greater regularity, is supposed to facilitate descent.
When the storm began to fill the space above Alem Daghy, they were in the usual course; and
then the question that had been put to the Prince of India was presented to the Princess Irene.
Would she land in Asia or recross to Europe?

The general Greek distrust of the Turks belonged to her. From infancy she had been horrified
with stories of women prisoners in their hands. She preferred making Roumeli-Hissar; but the
boatmen protested it was too late; they said the little river by the White Castle was open,
and they could reach it before the storm; and trusting in their better judgment, she submitted
to them.

Sergius, on the landing, pushed the cowl back, and was about to speak, but the wind caught
his hair, tossing the long locks into tangle. Seeing him thus in a manner blinded, the Princess
took up the speech. Drawing the veil aside, she addressed the officer:

"Art thou the Governor of the Castle?"

"No."

"Are we to be held guests or prisoners?"

"That is not for me to say."

"Carry thou then a message to him who may be the Governor. Tell him I am the Princess Irene,
by birth near akin to Constantine, Emperor of the Greeks and Romans; that, admitting this soil
is lawfully the property of his master the Sultan, I have not invaded it, but am here in search
of temporary refuge. Tell him if I go to his Castle a prisoner, he must answer for the trespass
to my royal kinsman, who will not fail to demand reparation; on the other hand, if I become
his guest, it must be upon condition that I shall be free to depart as I came, with my friend
and my people, the instant the wind and waves subside. Yes, and the further condition, that
he wait upon me as becomes my station, and personally offer such hospitality as his Castle
affords. I shall receive his reply here."

The officer, uncouth though he was, listened with astonishment not in the least disguised;
and it was not merely the speech which impressed him, nor yet the spirit with which it was
given; the spell was in the unveiled face. Never in his best dream of the perfected Moslem
Paradise had he seen loveliness to compare with it. He stood staring at her.

"Go," she repeated. "There will be rain presently."

"Who am I to say thou art?" he asked.

"The Princess Irene, kinswoman of the Emperor Constantine."

The officer made a low salaam to her, and walked hurriedly off to the Castle.

His soldiers stood in respectful remove from the prisoners--such the refugees must for the
present be considered--leaving them grouped in close vicinity, the Prince and the monk ashore,
the Princess and Lael seated in their boats.

Calamity is a rough master of ceremonies; it does not take its victims by the hand, and name
them in words, but bids them look to each other for help. And that was precisely what the two
parties now did.

Unsophisticated, and backward through inexperience, Sergius was nevertheless conscious of the
embarrassing plight of the Princess. He had also a man's quick sense of the uselessness of
resistance, except in the way of protest. To measure the stranger's probable influence with
the Turks, he looked first at the Prince, and was not, it must be said, rewarded with a return
on which to found hope or encouragement. The small, stoop-shouldered old man, with a great
white beard, appeared respectable and well-to-do in his black velvet cap and pelisse; his eyes
were very bright, and his cheeks hectic with resentment at the annoyance he was undergoing;
but that he could help out of the difficulty appeared absurd.

Having by this time rescued his hair from the wind, and secured it under his cowl, he looked
next at Lael. His first thought was of the unfitness of her costume for an outing in a boat
under the quietest of skies. A glance at the Princess, however, allayed the criticism; while
the display of jewelry was less conspicuous, her habit was quite as rich and unsubstantial.
It dawned upon him then that custom had something to do with the attire of Greek women thus
upon the water. That moment Lael glanced up at him, and he saw how childlike her face was,
and lovely despite the anxiety and fear with which it was overcast. He became interested in
her at once.

The monk's judgment of the little old man was unjust. That master of subtlety had in mind run
forward of the situation, and was already providing for its consequences.

He shared the surprise of the Turk when the Princess raised her veil. Overhearing then her
message to the Governor, delivered in a manner calm, self-possessed, courageous, dignified,
and withal adroit, he resolved to place Lael under her protection.

"Princess," he said, doffing his cap unmindful of the wind, and advancing to the side of her
boat, "I crave audience of you, and in excuse for my unceremoniousness, plead community in
misfortune, and a desire to make my daughter here safe as can be."

She surveyed him from head to foot; then turned her eyes toward Lael, sight of whom speedily
exorcised the suspicion which for the instant held her hesitant.

"I acknowledge the obligation imposed by the situation." she replied; "and being a Christian
as well as a woman, I cannot without reason justifiable in sight of Heaven deny the help you
ask. But, good sir, first tell me your name and country."

"I am a Prince of India exercising a traveller's privilege of sojourning in the imperial city."

"The answer is well given; and if hereafter you return to this interview, O Prince, I beg you
will not lay my inquiry to common curiosity."

"Fear not," the Prince answered; "for I learned long ago that in the laws prescribed for right
doing prudence is a primary virtue; and making present application of the principle, I suggest,
if it please you to continue a discourse which must be necessarily brief, that we do so in
some other tongue than Greek."

"Be it in Latin then," she said, with a quick glance at the soldiers, and observing his bow
of acquiescence, continued, "Thy reverend beard, O Prince, and respectable appearance, are
warranties of a wisdom greater than I can ever attain; wherefore pray tell me how I, a feeble
woman, who may not be able to release herself from these robbers, remorseless from religious
prejudice, can be of assistance to thy daughter, now my younger sister in affliction."

She accompanied the speech with a look at Lael so kind and tender it could not be misinterpreted.

"Most fair and gentle Princess, I will straight to the matter. Out on the water, midway this
and the point yonder, when too late for me to change direction or stay my rowers, I saw a body
of horsemen, whom I judged to be soldiers, moving hurriedly down the river bank toward the
Castle. A band richly caparisoned, carrying two flags, one green, the other red, moved at their
head. The former, you may know, has a religious signification, and is seldom seen in the field
except a person of high rank be present. It is my opinion, therefore, that our arrest has some
reference to the arrival of such a personage. In confirmation you may yet hear the musical
flourish in his honor."

"I hear drums and trumpets," she replied, "and admit the surmise an ingenious accounting for
an act otherwise unaccountable."

"Nay, Princess, with respect to thyself at least, call it a deed intolerable, and loud with
provocation."

"From your speech, O Prince, I infer familiarity with these faithless barbarians. Perhaps you
can make your knowledge of them so far serviceable as to tell me the great man's name."

"Yes, I have had somewhat to do with Turks; yet I cannot venture the name, rank or purpose
of the newcomer. Pursuing the argument, however, if my conjecture be true, then the message
borne the Governor, though spirited, and most happily accordant with your high degree, will
not accomplish your release, simply because the reason of the capture in the first place must
remain a reason for detaining you in the next. In brief, you may anticipate rejection of the
protest."

"What, think you they will hold me prisoner?"

"They are crafty."

"They dare not!" and the Princess' cheek reddened with indignation. "My kinsman is not powerless--and
even the great Amurath"--

"Forgive me, I pray; but there was never mantle to cover so many crimes as the conveniences
kings call 'reasons of state.'"

She looked vaguely up the river which the tempest was covering with promiscuous air-blown drifting;
but recovering, she said: "It is for me to pray pardon, Prince. I detain you."

"Not at all," he answered. "I have to remark next, if my conjecture prove correct, a lady of
imperial rank might find herself ill at ease and solitary in a hold like this Castle, which,
speaking by report, is now kept to serve some design of war to come more particularly than
domestic or social life."

The imagination of the Princess caught the idea eagerly, and, becoming active, presented a
picture of a Moslem lair without women or apartments for women. Her mind filled with alarm.

"Oh, that I could recall the message!" she exclaimed. "I should not have tempted the Governor
by offering to become his guest upon any condition."

"Nay, do not accuse yourself. The decision was brave and excellent in every view," he said,
perceiving his purpose in such fair way. "For see--the storm increases in strength; yonder"--he
pointed toward Alem Daghy--"the rain comes. Not by thy choice, O Princess, but the will of
God, thou art here!"

He spoke impressively, and she bent her head, and crossed herself twice.

"A sad plight truly," he continued. "Fortunately it may be in a measure relieved. Here is my
daughter, Lael by name. The years have scarcely outrun her childhood. More at mercy than thyself,
because without rank to make the oppressor careful, or an imperial kinsman to revenge a wrong
done her, she is subject to whatever threatens you--a cell in this infidel stronghold, ruffians
for attendants, discomforts to cast her into fever, separation from me to keep her afraid.
Why not suffer her to go with you? She can serve as tirewoman or companion. In villany the
boldest often hesitate when two are to be overcome."

The speech was effective.

"O Prince, I have not words to express my gratitude. I am thy debtor. Heaven may have brought
this crisis, but it has not altogether deserted me--And in good time! See--my messenger, with
a following! Let thy daughter come, and sit with me now--and do thou stand by to lend me of
thy wisdom in case appeal to it become necessary. Quick! Nay, Prince, Sergius is young and
strong. Permit him to bring the child to me."

The monk made haste. Drawing the boat close to the shore, he gave Lael his strong hand. Directly
she was delivered to the Princess, and seated beside her.

"Now they may come!"

Thus the Princess acknowledged the strength derivable from companionship. The result was perceptible
in her voice once more clear, and her face actually sparkling with confidence and courage.

Then, drawn together in one group, the refugees awaited the officer.

"The Governor is coming," that worthy said, saluting the Princess.

Looking toward the Castle, the expectants beheld a score or more men issuing from the gate
on foot. They were all in armor, and each complemented the buckler on his arm with a lance
from which a colored pennon blew out straight and stiff as a panel. One walked in front singly,
and immediately the Prince and Princess fixed upon him as the Governor, and kept him in eye
curiously and anxiously.

That instant rain in large drops began to fall. The Governor appeared to notice the premonition,
for looking at the angry sky he halted, and beckoned to his followers, several of whom ran
to him, received an order, and then hastily returned to the Castle. He came on in quickened gait.

Here the Prince, with his greater experience, noticed a point which escaped his associates;
and that was the extraordinary homage paid the stranger.

At the landing the officer and soldiers would have prostrated themselves, but with an imperious
gesture, he declined the salutation.

The observers, it may be well believed, viewed the man afar with interest; when near, they
scanned him as persons under arraignment study the judge, that from his appearance they may
glean something of his disposition. He was above the average height of men, slender, and in
armor--the armor of the East, adapted in every point to climate and light service. A cope or
hood, intricately woven of delicate steel wire, and close enough to refuse an arrow or the
point of a dagger, defended head, throat, neck, and shoulders, while open at the face; a coat,
of the same artistic mail, beginning under the hood, followed closely the contour of the body,
terminating just above the knees as a skirt. Amongst Teutonic and English knights, on account
of its comparative lightness, it would have been distinguished from an old-fashioned hauberk,
and called haubergeon. A sleeveless surcoat of velvet, plain green in color, overlaid the mail
without a crease or wrinkle, except at the edge of the skirt. Chausses, or leggins, also of
steel, clothed the nether limbs, ending in shoes of thin lateral scales sharply pointed at
the toes. A slight convexity on top, and the bright gold-gilt band by which, with regular interlacement,
the cope was attached, gave the cap surmounting the head a likeness to a crown.

In style this armor was common. The preference Eastern cavaliers showed it may have been due
in part at least to the fact that when turned out by a master armorer, after years of painstaking,
it left the wearer his natural graces of person. Such certainly was the case here.

The further equipment of the man admits easy imagining. There were the gauntlets of steel,
articulated for the fingers and thumbs; a broad flexible belt of burnished gold scales, intended
for the cimeter, fell from the waist diagonally to the left hip; light spurs graced the heels;
a dagger, sparkling with jewels, was his sole weapon, and it served principally to denote the
peacefulness of his errand. As there was nothing about him to rattle or clank his steps were
noiseless, and his movements agile and easy.

These martial points were naturally of chief attraction to the Prince of India, whose vast
acquaintanceship with heroes and famous warriors made comparison a habit. On her side, the
Princess, to whom accoutrement and manner were mere accessories, pleasing or otherwise, and
subordinate, sought the stranger's face. She saw brown eyes, not very large, but exceedingly
bright, quick, sharp, flying from object to object with flashes of bold inquiry, and quitting
them as instantly; a round forehead on brows high-arched; a nose with the curvature of a Roman's;
mouth deep-cornered, full-lipped, and somewhat imperfectly mustached and bearded; clear, though
sunburned complexion--in brief, a countenance haughty, handsome, refined, imperious, telling
in every line of exceptional birth, royal usages, ambition, courage, passion, and confidence.
Most amazing, however, the stranger appeared yet a youth. Surprised, hardly knowing whether
to be pleased or alarmed, yet attracted, she kept the face in steady gaze.

Halting when a few steps from the group, the stranger looked at them as if seeking one in especial.

"Have a care, O Princess! This is not the Governor, but he of whom I spoke--the great man."

The warning was from the Prince of India and in Latin. As if to thank him for a service done--possibly
for identifying the person he sought-- the subject of the warning slightly bowed to him, then
dropped his eyes to the Princess. A light blown out does not vanish more instantly than his
expression changed. Wonder--incredulity--astonishment--admiration chased each other over his
face in succession. Calling them emotions, each declared itself with absolute distinctness,
and the one last to come was most decided and enduring. Thus he met her gaze, and so ardent,
intense and continuous was his, that she reddened cheek and forehead, and drew down the veil;
but not, it should be understood, resentfully.

The disappearance of the countenance, in effect like the sudden extinguishment of a splendor,
aroused him. Advancing a step, he said to her, with lowered head and perceptible embarrassment:

"I come to offer hospitality to the kinswoman of the Emperor Constantine. The storm shows no
sign of abatement, and until it does, my Castle yonder is at her order. While not sumptuous
in appointment as her own palace, fortunately there are comfortable apartments in it where
she can rest securely and with reserve. The invitation I presume to make in the name of my
most exalted master Sultan Amurath, who takes delight in the amity existing between him and
the Lord of Byzantium. To lay all fear, to dispel hesitation, in his name again, together with
such earnest of good faith as lies in an appeal to the most holy Prophet of God, I swear the
Princess Irene shall be safe from interruption while in the Castle, and free to depart from
it at her pleasure. If she chooses, this tender of courtesy may, by agreement, here in the
presence of these witnesses, be taken as an affair of state. I await her answer."

The Prince of India heard the speech more astonished by the unexceptional Latin in which it
was couched than the propriety of the matter or the grace of its delivery, though, he was constrained
to admit, both were very great. He also understood the meaning of the look the stranger had
given him at the conclusion of his warning to the Princess, and to conceal his vexation, he
turned to her.

That moment two covered chairs, brought from the Castle, were set down near by, and the rain
began to fall in earnest.

"See," said the Governor, "the evidence of my care for the comfort of the kinswoman of the
most noble Emperor Constantine. I feared it would rain before I could present myself to her;
nor that alone, fair Princess--the chair must convict me of a wholesome dread of accusation
in Constantinople; for what worse could be said than that I, a faithful Moslem, to whom hospitality
is an ordination of religion, refused to open my gates to women in distress because they were
Christians. Most noble and fair lady, behold how much I should esteem acceptance of my invitation!"

Irene looked at the Prince of India, and seeing assent in his face, answered:

"I will ask leave to report this courtesy as an affair of state that my royal kinsman may acknowledge
it becomingly."

The Governor bowed very low while saying:

"I myself should have suggested the course."

"Also that my friends"--she pointed to the Prince of India, and the monk--"and all the boatmen,
be included in the safeguard."

This was also agreed to; whereupon she arose, and for assistance offered her hand to Sergius.
Lael was next helped from the boat. Then, taking to the chairs, the two were carried into the
Castle, followed by the Prince and the monk afoot.

CHAPTER X

THE ARABIAN STORY-TELLER

The reader will doubtless refer the circumstance to the jealousy which is supposed to prompt
the Faithful where women are required to pass before men; yet the best evidence of the Governor's
thoughtfulness for his female guests met them at their approach to the Castle. There was not
a man visible except a sentinel on the battlement above the gate, and he stood faced inwardly,
making it impossible for him to see them when they drew near.

"Where are the horsemen of whom you spoke? And the garrison, where are they?" Sergius asked
the Prince.

The latter shrugged his shoulders, as he answered:

"They will return presently."

Further proof of the same thoughtfulness was presented when the two chairs were set down in
the broad stone-paved passage receiving from the front door. The sole occupant there was a
man, tall as the monk, but unnaturally slender; indeed, his legs resembled those of a lay figure,
so thin were they, while the residue of his person, although clad in a burnoose gorgeously
embroidered, would have reminded a modern of the skeletons surgeons keep for office furniture.
Besides blackness deep as the unlighted corner of a cellar, he had no beard. The Prince of
India recognized him as one of the indispensables of an Eastern harem, and made ready to obey
him without dissent--only the extravagance of the broidery on the burnoose confirmed him in
the opinion that the chief just arrived outranked the Governor. "This is the Kislar Aga of
a Prince," he said to himself.

The eunuch, like one accustomed to the duty, superintended the placement of the chairs; then,
resting the point of a very bright crescent-shaped sword on the floor, he said, in a voice
more incisive than the ordinary feminine tenor:

"I will now conduct the ladies, and guard them. No one will presume to follow."

The Prince replied: "It is well; but they will be comforted if permitted to abide together."

He spoke with deference, and the black responded:

"This is a fort, not a palace. There is but one chamber for the two."

"And if I wish to communicate with them or they with me?"

"Bismillah!" the eunuch replied. "They are not prisoners. I will deliver what thou hast for
them or they for thee."

Thereupon the Princess and Lael stepped from the chairs, and went with their guide. When they
were gone, word sped through the Castle, and with clamor and clangor, doors opened, and men
poured forth in companies. And again the Prince reflected: "Such discipline pertains to princes
only."

Now the office of eunuch was by no means an exclusive pagan institution; time out of mind it
had been a feature of Byzantine courts; and Constantine Dragases, the last, and probably the
most Christian of Greek emperors, not only tolerated, but recognized it as honorable. With
this explanation the reader ought not to be surprised if the Princess Irene accepted the guidance
offered her without fear or even hesitation. Doubtless she had been in similar keeping many times.

Climbing a number of stairways, the eunuch brought his fair charges into a part of the Castle
where there were signs of refinement. The floors were swept; the doors garnished with rugs;
a delicate incense lingered in the air; and to rescue the tenants, whoever they might be, from
darkness, lighted lamps swung from the ceiling, and were affixed to the walls. Stopping finally
before a portiere, he held it aside while saying:

"Enter here, and be at home. Upon the table yonder there is a little bell; ring, and I will
answer."

And seeing Lael clinging closely to the Princess, he added: "Be not afraid. Know ye rather
that my master, when a child, heard the story of Hatim, a warrior and poet of the Arabs, and
ever since he has lived believing hospitality a virtue without which there can be no godliness.
Do not forget the bell."

They entered and were alone.

To their amazement the room was more than comfortably furnished. What may be termed a chandelier
swung from the ceiling with many lamps ready for lighting; under it there was a circular divan;
then along the four sides a divan extended continuously, with pillows at the corners in heaps.
Matting covered the floor, and here and there rugs of gay dyes offered noticeable degrees of
warmth and coloring. Large trays filled the deep recesses of the windows, and though the smell
of musk overpowered the sweet outgivings of the roses blooming in them, they sufficed to rouge
the daylight somewhat scantily admitted. The roughness and chill of the walls were provided
against by woollen drapery answering for arras.

They went first to one of the windows, and peered out. Below them the world was being deluged
with fiercely driven rain. There was the Bosphorus lashed into waves already whitened with
foam. The European shore was utterly curtained from sight. Gust after gust raved around the
Castle, whistling and moaning; and as she beheld the danger escaped, the Princess thought of
the saying of the Prince of India and repeated it in a spirit of thanksgiving: "By the will
of God thou art here."

The reflection reconciled her to the situation, and led on till presently the face and martial
figure of the Governor reproduced themselves to her fancy. How handsome he appeared--how courteous--how
young!--scarcely older than herself! How readily she had yielded to his invitation! She blushed
at the thought.

Lael interrupted the revery, which was not without charm, and for that reason would likely
return, by bringing her a child's slipper found near the central divan; and while examining
the embroidery of many-colored beads adorning it, she divined the truth.

Isolated as the Castle was on a frontier of the Islamic world, and crowded with men and material
of war, yet the Governor was permitted his harem, and this was its room in common. Here his
wives, many or few, for the time banished to some other quarters, were in the habit of meeting
for the enjoyment of the scant pleasantries afforded by life like theirs.

Again she was interrupted. The arras over one of the walls was pushed aside, and two women
came in with refreshments. A third followed with a small table of Turkish pattern which she
placed on the floor. The viands, very light and simple, were set upon the table; then a fourth
one came bringing an armful of shawls and wraps. The last was a Greek, and she explained that
the Lord of the Castle, her master, was pleased to make his guests comfortable. In the evening
later a more substantial repast would be served. Meantime she was appointed to wait on them.

The guests, assured by the presence of other women in the Castle, partook of the refection;
after which the table was removed, and the attendants for the present dismissed. Wrapping themselves
then in shawls, for they had not altogether escaped the rain, and were beginning to feel the
mists stealing into the chamber through the unglazed windows, they took to the divan, piling
the cushions about them defensively.

In this condition, comfortable, cosey, perfectly at rest, and with the full enjoyment of the
sensations common to every one in the midst of a novel adventure, the Princess proceeded to
draw from Lael an account of herself; and the ingenuousness of the girl proved very charming,
coupled as it was with a most unexpected intelligence. The case was the not unusual one of
education wholly unsupported by experience. The real marvel to the inquisitor was that she
should have made discovery of two such instances the same day, and been thrown into curious
relation with them. And as women always run parallels between persons who interest them, the
Princess was struck with the similarities between Sergius and Lael. They were both young, both
handsome, both unusually well informed and at the same time singularly unsophisticated. In
the old pagan style, what did Fate mean by thus bringing them together? She determined to keep
watch of the event.

And when, in course of her account, Lael spoke of the Prince of India, Irene awoke at once
to a mystery connected with him. Lacking the full story, the narrator could give just enough
of it to stimulate wonder. Who was he? Where was Cipango? He was rich--learned--knew all the
sciences, all the languages--he had visited countries everywhere, even the inhabited islands.
To be sure, he had not appeared remarkable; indeed, she gave him small attention when he was
before her; she recalled him chiefly by his eyes and velvet pelisse. While she was mentally
resolving to make better study of him, the eunuch appeared under the portiere, and, coming
forward, said, with a half salaam to the Princess:

"My master does not wish his guests to think themselves forgotten. The kinswoman of the most
august Emperor Constantine, he remembers, is without employment to lighten the passage of a
time which must be irksome to her. He humbly prays her to accept his sympathy, and sends me
to say that a famous story-teller, going to the court of the Sultan at Adrianople, arrived
at the Castle to-day. Would the Princess be pleased to hear him?"

"In what tongue does he recite?" she asked.

"Arabic, Turkish, Greek, Latin, Hebrew," was the reply.

"Oh, a most wise man!"

Irene consulted Lael, and thinking to offer her amusement, assented to the suggestion, with
thanks to the Governor.

"Have the veils ready," the eunuch said, as he retreated backward to the door. "The story-teller
is a man, and he will come directly."

The story-teller was ushered in. He walked to the divan where his auditors sat, slowly, as
if he knew himself under close observation, and courted it.

Now caravans were daily shows in Constantinople. The little bell of the donkey leading its
string of laden camels through the narrow streets might be heard any hour, and the Shaykh in
charge was almost invariably an Arab. So the Princess had seen many of the desert-born, and
was familiar with their peculiarities; never, however, had chance brought a nobler specimen
of the race before her. As he approached, stepping as modern stage heroes are wont, she saw
the red slippers, the white shirt falling to the ankles and girdled at the waist, its bosom
a capacious pocket, the white and red striped cloak over the shoulders. She marked the material
of which they were made, the shirt of selected Angora wool, the cloak of camel's hair, in its
fineness iridescent and soft as velvet. She saw in the girdle an empty scabbard for a yatagan
elaborately covered with brilliants. She saw on the head a kerchief of mixed silk and cotton,
tasselled, heavily striated red and yellow, and secured by the usual cord; but she scarcely
more than noticed them--the air of the man, high, stately, king-like, was a superior attraction,
and she gazed at his face unconscious that her own was uncovered.

The features were regular, the complexion sunburned to the hue of reddish copper, the beard
thin, the nose sharp, the cheeks hollow, the eyes, through the double shade of brows and kerchief,
glittered like balls of polished black amber. His hands were crossed above the girdle after
the manner of Eastern servants before acknowledged superiors; his salutation was expressive
of most abject homage; yet when he raised himself, and met the glance of the Princess, his
eyes lingered, and brightened, and directly he cast off or forgot his humility, and looked
lordlier than an Emir boasting of his thousand tents, with ten spears to each, and a score
of camels to the spear. She endured the gaze awhile; for it seemed she had seen the face before--where,
she could not tell; and when, as presently happened, she began to feel the brightness of the
eyes intenser growing, the sensation reminded her of the Governor at the landing. Could this
be he? No, the countenance here was of a man already advanced in life. And why should the Governor
resort to disguise? The end, nevertheless, was the same as on the landing--she drew down the
veil. Then he became humble again, and spoke, his eyes downcast, his hands crossed:

"This faithful servant"--he pointed to the eunuch "my friend"--the eunuch crossed his hands,
and assumed an attitude of pleased attention--"brought me from his master--may the most Merciful
and Compassionate continue a pillow to the good man here and to his soul hereafter!--how a
kinswoman of the Emperor whose capital is to the earth a star, and he as the brightness thereof,
had taken refuge with him from the storm, and was now his guest, and languishing for want of
amusement. Would I tell her a story? I have a horde of parables, tales, and traditions, and
many nations have contributed to it; but, alas, O Princess! they are simple, and such as beguile
tentmen and tentwomen shut in by the desert, their fancies tender as children's. I fear your
laughter. But here I am; and as the night bird sings when the moon is risen, because the moon
is beautiful and must be saluted, even so I am obedient. Command me."

The speech was in Greek, with the slightest imperfection of accent; at the conclusion the Princess
was silent.

"Knowest thou"--she at length said--"knowest thou of one Hatim, renowned as a warrior and poet
of the Arabs?"

The eunuch saw the reference, and smiled. Asking of Hatim now was only another form of inquiry
after his master; not merely had the latter been in her mind; she wished to know more about
him. On his part, the story-teller arose from his servile posture, and asked with the animation
of one to whom a favorite theme is presented:

"Noble lady, know you aught of the desert?"

"I have never been there," the Princess answered.

"Though not beautiful, it is the home of mysteries," he said, with growing enthusiasm. "When
he whom in the same breath you worship as God and the Son of God--an opposition beyond the
depth of our simple faith--made ready to proclaim himself, he went for a time into the Wilderness,
and dwelt there. So likewise our Prophet, seeing the dawn of his day, betook himself to Hiva,
a rock, bleak, barren, waterless. Why, O Princess, if not for purification, and because God
of preference has founded his dwelling there, wasting it indeed the better to nurse his goodness
in a perfected solitude? Granting this, why may I not assert without shocking you that the
sons of the desert are the noblest of men?--

"Such was Hatim!

"In the Hijaz and the Nejd, they tell of him thus:

"In the day the Compassionate set about world-making, which is but a pastime with him, nor
nearly so much as nest-building to a mother-dove, he rested. The mountains and rivers and seas
were in their beds, and the land was variegated to please him, here a forest, there a grassy
plain; nothing remained unfinished except the sand oceans, and they only wanted water. He rested.

"Now, if, with their sky, a sun-field in the day, a gallery of stars at night, and their winds,
flying from sea to sea, but gathering no taint, the deserts are treeless, and unknowing the
sweetness of gardens and the glory of grass, it was not by accident or forgetfulness; for with
him, the Compassionate, the Merciful, there are no accidents or lapses of any kind. He is all
attention and ever present. Thus the Throne verse--'Drowsiness overcomes him not nor sleep....
His firmament spans the Heaven and the Earth, and the care of them does not distress him.'

"Why then the yellowness and the burning, the sameness and solitude, and the earth intolerant
of rain and running stream, and of roads and paths--why, if there was neither accident nor
forgetfulness?

"He is the High and the Great! Accuse him not!

"In that moment of rest, not from weariness or overburden, but to approve the work done, and
record the approval as a judgment, he said, speaking to his Almightiness as to a familiar:
'As it is it shall stay. A time will come when with men I, and the very name of me, shall go
out utterly like the green of last year's leaf. He who walks in a garden thinks of it only;
but he who abides in a desert, wanting to see the beautiful, must look into the sky, and looking
there he shall be reminded of me, and say aloud and as a lover, 'There is no God but him, the
Compassionate, the Merciful.... The eyes see him not, but he seeth the eyes; and He is the
Gracious, the Knowing'.... So also comes a time when religion shall be without heart, dead,
and the quickening of worship lost in idolatry; when men shall cry, God, my God, to stones
and graven images, and sing to hear their singing, and the loud music it goes with. And that
time shall be first in lands of growth and freshness, in cities where comforts and luxuries
are as honey in hives after the flowering of palms. Wherefore--Lo, the need of deserts. There
I shall never be forgotten. And out of them, out of their hardness and heat, out of their yellow
distances and drouth, religion shall arise again, and go forth purified unto universality;
for I shall be always present there, a life-giver. And against those days of evil, I shall
keep men there, the best of their kind, and their good qualities shall not rust; they shall
be brave, for I may want swords; they shall keep the given word, for as I am the Truth, so
shall my chosen be; there shall be no end to charity among them, for in such lands charity
is life, and must take every form, friendship, love of one another, love of giving, and hospitality,
unto which are riches and plenty. And in their worship, I shall be first, and honor next. And
as Truth is the Soul of the World, it being but another of my names, for its salvation they
shall speak with tongues of fire, this one an orator, that one a poet; and living in the midst
of death, they shall fear me not at all, but dishonor more. Mine are the Sons of the Desert--the
Word-Keepers!--the Unconquered and Conquerless! For my name's sake, I nominate them Mine, and
I alone am the High and the Great.... And there shall be amongst them exemplars of this virtue
and that one singly; and at intervals through the centuries standards for emulation among the
many, a few, in whom all the excellences shall be blent in indivisible comeliness.'

"So came Hatim, of the Bene-Tayyi, lustrous as the moon of Ramazan to eager watchers on high
hilltops, and better than other men, even as all the virtues together are better than any one
of them, excepting charity and love of God.

"Now Hatim's mother was a widow, poor, and without relations, but beloved by the Compassionate,
and always in his care, because she was wise beyond the men of her time, and kept his laws,
as they were known, and taught them to her son. One day a great cry arose in the village. Everybody
rushed to see the cause, and then joined in the clamor.

"Up in the north there was an appearance the like of which had never been beheld, nor were
there any to tell what it was from hearsay. Some pooh-poohed, saying, contemptuously:

"'Tis only a cloud.'

"Others, observing how rapidly it came, in movement like a bird sailing on outspread motionless
wings, said:

"'A roc! A roc!'

"When the object was nearer, a few of the villagers, in alarm, ran to their houses, shrieking:

"'Israfil, Israfil! He is bringing the end of time!'

"Soon the sight was nearly overhead; then it was going by, its edge overhead, the rest of it
extending eastwardly; and it was long and broad as a pasture for ten thousand camels, and horses
ten thousand. It had no likeness earthly except a carpet of green silk; nor could those standing
under describe what bore it along. They thought they heard the sound of a strong wind, but
as the air above far and near was full of birds great and small, birds of the water as well
as the land, all flying evenly with the carpet, and making a canopy of their wings, and shade
deeper than a cloud's, the beholders were uncertain whether the birds or the wind served it.
In passing, it dipped gently, giving them a view of what it carried--a throne of pearl and
rainbow, and a crowned King sitting in majesty; at his left hand, an army of spirits, at his
right, an army of men in martial sheen.

"While the prodigy was before them, the spectators stirred not; nor was there one brave enough
to speak; most of them with their eyes devoured it all, King and throne, birds, men and spirits;
though afterwards there was asking:

"'Did you see the birds?'

"'No.'

"'The spirits?'

"'No.'

"'The men?'

"'I saw only the King upon His throne.'

"In the passing, also, a man, in splendor of apparel, stood on the carpet's edge and shouted:

"'God is great! I bear witness there is no God but God.'

"The same instant something fell from his hand. When the marvel was out of sight in the south,
some bethought them, and went to see what it was which fell. They came back laughing, 'It was
only a gourd, and as we have much better on our camel-saddles, we threw it away.'

"But the mother of Hatim, listening to the report, was not content. In her childhood she heard
what was tradition then; how Solomon, at the completion of his temple in Jerusalem, journeyed
to Mecca upon a carpet of silk wafted by the wind, with men, spirits, and birds. Wherefore,
saying to herself, 'It was Solomon going to Mecca. Not for nothing threw he the gourd,' she
went alone, and brought it in, and opened it, finding three seeds--one red, like a ruby; a
second blue, like a sapphire; the third green, like an emerald.

"Now she might have sold the seeds, for they were beautiful as gems cut for a crown, and enriched
herself; but Hatim was all the world to her. They were for him, she said, and getting a brown
nut such as washes up from vines in the sea, she cut it, put the treasures into it, sealed
them there, and tied them around the boy's neck.

"'Thanks, O Solomon,' she said. 'There is no God but God; and I shall teach the lesson to my
Hatim in the morning, when al hudhud flies for water; at noon, when it whistles to itself in
the shade; and at night, when it draws a wing over its head to darken the darkness, and sleep.'

"And from that day through all his days Hatim wore the brown nut with the three seeds in it;
nor was there ever such an amulet before or since; for, besides being defended by the genii
who are Solomon's servants, he grew one of the exemplars promised by God, having in himself
every virtue. No one braver than he; none so charitable; none so generous and merciful; none
so eloquent; none on whose lips poetry was such sweet speech for the exalting of souls; above
all, never had there been such a keeper of his word of promise.

"And of this judge you by some of the many things they tell of him.

"A famine fell upon the land. It was when Hatim had become Sheik of his tribe. The women and
children were perishing. The men could no more than witness their suffering. They knew not
whom to accuse; they knew no one to receive a prayer. The time predicted was come--the name
of God had gone out utterly, like the green of last year's leaf. In the Sheik's tent even,
as with the poorest, hunger could not be allayed--there was nothing to eat. The last camel
had been devoured--one horse remained. More than once the good man went out to kill him, but
the animal was so beautiful--so affectionate--so fleet! And the desert was not wide enough
to hold his fame! How much easier to say, 'Another day--to-morrow it may rain.'

"He sat in his tent telling his wife and children stories, for he was not merely the best warrior
of his day; he was the most renowned poet and storyteller. Riding into battle, his men would
say, 'Sing to us, O Hatim--sing, and we will fight.' And they he loved best, listening to him,
had nigh forgot their misery, when the curtain of the tent was raised.

"'Who is there?' he asked.

"'Thy neighbor,' and the voice was a woman's. 'My children are anhungred and crying, and I
have nothing for them. Help, O Sheik, help or they die.'

"'Bring them here,' he said, rising.

"'She is not worse off than we,' said his wife, 'nor are her children more hungry than ours.
What will you do?'

"'The appeal was to me,' he answered.

"And passing out, he slew the horse, and kindled a fire; then, while the stranger and her children
were sharing piece by piece with his own, 'Shame, shame!' he said, 'that ye alone should eat;'
and going through the dowar, he brought the neighbors together, and he only went hungry. There
was no more of the meat left. Was ever one merciful like Hatim? In combat, he gave lives, but
took none. Once an antagonist under his foot, called to him: 'Give me thy spear, Hatim,' and
he gave it.

"'Foolish man!' his brethren exclaimed.

"'What else was there?' he answered. 'Did not the poor man ask a gift of me?'

"Never a captive besought his help vainly. On a journey once, a prisoner begged him to buy
his liberty; but he was without the money required, and on that account he was sorely distressed.
To his entreaties, the strangers listened hard-heartedly; at last he said to them:

"Am not I--Hatim--good as he? Let him go, and take me.'

"And knocking the chains from the unfortunate, he had them put on himself, and wore them until
the ransom came.

"In his eyes a poet was greater than a king, and than singing a song well the only thing better
was being the subject of a song. Perpetuation by tombs he thought vulgar; so the glory unremembered
in verse deserved oblivion. Was it wonderful he gave and kept giving to story-tellers, careless
often if what he thus disposed of was another's?

"Once in his youth--and at hearing this, O Princess, the brown-faced sons of the desert, old
and young, laugh, and clap their hands--he gave of his grandfather's store until the prudent
old man, intending to cure him of his extravagance, sent him to tend his herds in the country.
Alas!

"Across the plain Hatim one day beheld a caravan, and finding it escorting three poets to the
court of the King of El-Herah, he invited them to stop with him, and while he killed a camel
for each of them, they recited songs in his praise, and that of his kin. When they wished to
resume the journey, he detained them.

"'There is no gift like the gift of song,' he said. 'I will do better by you than will he,
the King to whom you are going. Stay with me, and for every verse you write I will give you
a camel. Behold the herd!'

"And at departing, they had each a hundred camels, and he three hundred verses.

"'Where is the herd?' the grandfather asked, when next he came to the pasture.

"'See thou. Here are songs in honor of our house,' Hatim answered, proudly--'songs by great
poets; and they will be repeated until all Arabia is filled with our glory.'

"'Alas! Thou hast ruined me!' the elder cried, beating his breast.

"'What!' said Hatim, indignantly. 'Carest thou more for the dirty brutes than for the crown
of honor I bought with them?'"

Here the Arab paused. The recitation, it is to be remarked, had been without action, or facial
assistance--a wholly unornate delivery; and now he kept stately silence. His eyes, intensely
bright in the shadow of the kufiyeh, may have produced the spell which held the Princess throughout;
or it may have been the eyes and voice; or, quite as likely, the character of Hatim touched
a responsive chord in her breast.

"I thank you," she said, adding presently: "In saying I regret the story ended so soon, I pray
you receive my opinion of its telling. I doubt if Hatim himself could have rendered it better."

The Arab recognized the compliment with the faintest of bows, but made no reply in words. Irene
then raised her veil, and spoke again.

"Thy Hatim, O eloquent Arab, was warrior and poet, and, as thou hast shown him to me, he was
also a philosopher. In what age did he live?"

"He was a shining light in the darkness preceding the appearance of the Prophet. That period
is dateless with us."

"It is of little consequence," she continued. "Had he lived in our day, he would have been
more than poet, warrior and philosopher--he would be a Christian. His charity and love of others,
his denial of self, sound like the Christ. Doubtless he could have died for his fellow-men.
Hast thou not more of him? Surely he lived long and happily."

"Yes," said the Arab, with a flash of the eyes to denote his appreciation of the circumstance.
"He is reported to have been the most wretched of men. His wife--I pray you will observe I
am speaking by the tradition-- his wife had the power, so dreadful to husbands, of raising
Iblis at pleasure. It delighted her to beat him and chase him from his tent; at last she abandoned
him."

"Ah!" the Princess exclaimed. "His charities were not admirable in her eyes."

"The better explanation, Princess, may be found in a saying we have in the desert--'A tall
man may wed a small woman, but a great soul shall not enter into bonds with a common one.'"

There was silence then, and as the gaze of the story-teller was again finding a fascination
in her face, Irene took refuge behind her veil, but said, presently:

"With permission, I will take the story of Hatim for mine; but here is my friend--what hast
thou for her?"

The story-teller turned to Lael.

"Her pleasure shall be mine," he said.

"I should like something Indian," the girl answered, timidly, for the eyes oppressed her also.

"Alas! India has no tales of love. Her poetry is about gods and abstract religions. Wherefore,
if I may choose, I will a tale from Persia next. In that country there was a verse-maker called
Firdousi, and he wrote a great poem, The Shah Nameh, with a warrior for hero. This is how Rustem,
in single combat, killed Sohrab, not knowing the youth was his son until after the awful deed
was done."

The tale was full of melancholy interest, and told with singular grace; but it continued until
after nightfall; of which the party was admonished by the attendants coming to light the lamps.
At the conclusion, the Arab courteously apologized for the time he had wrested from them.

"In dealing with us, O Princess," he said, "patience is full as lovely as charity."

Lifting the veil again, she extended her hand to him, saying, "The obligation is with us. I
thank you for making light and pleasant an afternoon which else had been tedious."

He kissed her hand, and followed the eunuch to the door. Then the supper was announced.

CHAPTER XI

THE TURQUOISE RING

The Prince of India, left in the passage of the Castle with Sergius, was not displeased with
the course the adventure appeared to be taking. In the first place, he felt no alarm for Lael;
she might be uncomfortable in the quarter to which she had been conducted, but that was all,
and it would not last long. The guardianship of the eunuch was in his view a guaranty of her
personal safety. In the next place, acquaintance with the Princess might prove serviceable
in the future. He believed Lael fitted for the highest rank; she was already educated beyond
the requirements of the age for women; her beauty was indisputable; as a consequence, he had
thought of her a light in the court; and not unpleasantly it occurred to him now that the fair
Princess might carry keys for both the inner and outer doors of the royal residence.

Generally the affair which was of concern to Lael was an affair of absorbing interest to the
Prince; in this instance, however, another theme offered itself for the moment a superior attraction.

The impression left by the young master of ceremonies in the reception at the landing was of
a kind to arouse curiosity. His appearance, manner, speech and the homage paid him denoted
exalted rank; while the confidence with which he spoke for Sultan Amurath was most remarkable.
His acceptance of the terms presented by the Princess Irene was little short of downright treaty-making;
and what common official dared carry assumption to such a height? Finally the Prince fell to
thinking if there was any person the actual governor of the Castle would quietly permit to
go masquerading in his authority and title.

Then everything pointed him to Prince Mahommed. The correspondence in age was perfect; the
martial array seen galloping down the bank was a fitting escort for the heir-apparent of the
gray Sultan; and he alone might with propriety speak for his father in a matter of state.

"A mistake cannot be serious," said the Prince to himself, at the end of the review. "I will
proceed upon the theory that the young man is Prince Mahommed."

This was no sooner determined than the restless mind flew forward to an audience. The time
and place--midnight in the lonesome old Castle--were propitious, and he was prepared for it.

Indeed it was the very purpose he had in view the night of the repast in his tent at El Zaribah
where he so mysteriously intrusted the Emir Mirza with revelations concerning the doom of Constantinople.

Once more he ran over the scheme which had brought him from Cipango. If Islam could not be
brought to lead in the project, Christendom might be more amenable to reason. The Moslem world
was to be reached through the Kaliph whom he expected to find in Egypt; wherefore his contemplated
trip down the Nile from Kash-Cush. If driven to the Christian, Constantine was to be his operator.
Such in broadest generality was the plan of execution he had resolved upon.

But to these possibilities he had appended another of which it is now necessary to speak.

Enough has been given to apprise the reader of the things to which the Prince preferably devoted
himself. These were international affairs, and transcendently war. If indeed the latter were
not the object he had always specially in mind, it was the end to which his management usually
conducted. For mere enjoyment in the sight of men facing the death which strangely passed him
by, he delighted in hovering on the edge of battle until there was a crisis, and then plunging
into its heated heart.

He had also a peculiar method of bringing war about. This consisted in providing for punishments
in case his enterprises miscarried. Invariably somebody suffered for such failures. In that
way he soothed the pangs of wounded vanity.

When he was inventing the means for executing his plots, and forming the relations essential
to them, it was his habit to select instruments of punishment in advance.

Probably no better illustration of this feature of his dealings can be given than is furnished
by the affair now engaging him. If he failed to move the Kaliph to lead the reform, he would
resort to Constantine; if the Emperor also declined, he would make him pay the penalty; then
came the reservation. So soon after his arrival from Cipango as he could inform himself of
the political conditions of the world to which he was returning, he fixed upon Mahommed to
avenge him upon the offending Greek.

The meeting with Mirza at El Zaribah was a favorable opportunity to begin operating upon the
young Turk. The tale the Emir received that night under solemn injunctions of secrecy was really
intended for his master. How well it was devised for the end in view the reader will be able
to judge from what is now to follow.

The audience with Mahommed determined upon by the Prince of India, our first point of interest
is in observing how he set about accomplishing it. His promptness was characteristic.

Directly the ladies had disappeared with the eunuch, the soldiers poured from their hiding
places in the Castle, and seeing one whom he judged an officer, the Prince called to him in
Turkish:

"Ho, my friend!"

The man was obliging.

"Present my salutations to the Governor of the Castle, and say the Prince of India desires
speech with him."

The soldier hesitated.

"Understand," said the Prince, quickly, "my message is not to the great Lord who received me
at the landing. But the Governor in fact. Bring him here."

The confident manner prevailed.

Presently the messenger returned with a burly, middle-aged person in guidance. A green turban
above a round face, large black eyes in muffling of fleshy lids, pallid cheeks lost in dense
beard, a drab gown lined with yellow fur, a naked cimeter in a silk-embroidered sash, bespoke
the Turk; but how unlike the handsome, fateful-looking masquerader at the river side!

"The Prince of India has the honor of speech with the Governor of the Castle?"

"God be praised," the Governor replied. "I was seeking your Highness. Besides wishing to join
in your thanks for happy deliverance from the storm, I thought to discharge my duty as a Moslem
host by conducting you to refreshments and repose. Follow me, I pray."

A few steps on the way, the Governor stopped:

"Was there not a companion--a younger man--a Dervish?"

"A monk," said the Prince; "and the question reminds me of my attendant, a negro. Send for
him--or better, bring them both to me. I wish them to share my apartment."

In a short time the three were in quarters, if one small room may be so dignified. The walls
were cold gray stone; one oblong narrow port-hole admitted scanty light; a rough bench, an
immense kettle-drum shaped like the half of an egg-shell, and propped broadside up, some piles
of loose straw, each with folded sheepskins on it, constituted the furnishment.

Sergius made no sign of surprise or disappointment. Possibly the chamber and its contents were
reproductions of his cell up in Bielo-Osero. Nilo gave himself to study of the drum, reminded,
doubtless, of similar warlike devices in Kash-Cush. The Prince alone expostulated. Taking a
stand between the Governor and the door, he said:

"A question before thou goest hence."

The Turk gazed at him silently.

"To what accommodations have the Princess Irene and her attendant been taken? Are they vile
as these?"

"The reception room of my harem is the most comfortable the Castle affords," the Governor answered.

"And they?"

"They are occupying it."

"Not by courtesy of thine. He who could put the hospitality of the Prince Mahommed to shame
by maltreating one of his guests."

He paused, and grimly surveyed the room.

"Such a servant would be as evil-minded to another guest; and that the other is a woman, would
not affect his imbruited soul."

"The Prince Mahommed!" the Governor exclaimed.

"Yes. What brings him here, matters not; his wish to keep the Romans in ignorance of his near
presence, I know as well as thou; none the less, it was his royal word we accepted. As for
thee--thou mightest have promised faith and hospitality with thy hand on the Prophet's beard,
yet would I have bidden the Princess trust herself to the tempest sooner."

Sergius was now standing by, but the conversation being in Turkish, he listened without understanding.

"Thou ass!" the Prince continued. "Not to know that the kinswoman of the Roman Emperor, under
this roof by treaty with the mighty Amurath, his son the negotiator, is our guardian! When
the storm shall have spent itself, and the waters quieted down, she will resume her journey.
Then--it may be in the morning--she will first ask for us, and then thy master will require
to know how we have passed the night. Ah, thou beginnest to see!"

The Governor's head was drooping; his hands crossed themselves upon his stomach; and when he
raised his eyes, they were full of deprecation and entreaty.

"Your Highness--most noble Lord--condescend to hear me."

"Speak. I am awake to hear the falsehood thou hast invented in excuse of thy perfidy to us,
and thy treason to him, the most generous of masters, the most chivalrous of knights."

"Your Highness has greatly misconceived me. In the first place you have forgotten the crowded
state of the Castle. Every room and passage is filled with the suite and escort of"--

He hesitated, and turned pale, like a man dropped suddenly into a great danger. The shrewd
guest caught at the broken sentence and finished it:

"Of Prince Mahommed!"

"With the suite and escort," the Governor repeated.... "In the next place, it was not my intention
to leave you unprovided. From my own apartments, light, beds and seats were ordered to be brought
here, with meats for refreshment, and water for cleansing and draught. The order is in course
of execution now. Indeed, your Highness, I swear by the first chapter of the Koran"--

"Take something less holy to swear by," cried the Prince.

"Then, by the bones of the Faithful, I swear I meant to make you comfortable, even to my own
deprivation."

"By thy young master's bidding?"

The Governor bent forward very low.

"Well," said the Prince, softening his manner--"the misconception was natural."

"Yes--yes."

"And now thou hast only to prove thy intention by making it good."

"Trust me, your Highness."

"Trust thee? Ay, on proof. I have a commission"--

The Prince then drew a ring from his finger.

"Take this," he said, "and deliver it to the Emir Mirza."

The assurance of the speech was irresistible; so the Turk held out his hand to receive the token.

"And say to the Emir, that I desire him to thank the Most Compassionate and Merciful for the
salvation of which we were witnesses at the southwest corner of the Kaaba."

"What!" exclaimed the Governor. "Art thou a Moslem?"

"I am not a Christian."

The Governor, accepting the ring, kissed the hand offering it, and took his departure, moving
backward, and with downcast eyes, his manner declarative of the most abject humility.

Hardly was the door closed behind the outgoing official, when the Prince began to laugh quietly
and rub his hands together--quietly, we say, for the feeling was not merriment so much as self-gratulation.

There was cleverness in having doubted the personality of the individual who received the refugees
at the landing; there was greater cleverness in the belief which converted the Governor into
the Prince Mahommed; but the play by which the fact was uncovered--if not a stroke of genius,
how may it be better described? The Prince of India thought as he laughed:

"Not long now until Amurath joins his fathers, and then--Mahommed."

Presently he stopped, a step half taken, his gaze upon the floor, his hands clasped behind
him. He stood so still it would not have been amiss to believe a thought was all the life there
was in him. He certainly did believe in astrology. Had not men been always ruled by what they
imagined heavenly signs? How distinctly he remembered the age of the oracle and the augur!
Upon their going out he became a believer in the stars as prophets, and then an adept; afterwhile
he reached a stage when he habitually mistook the commonest natural results, even coincidences,
for confirmations of planetary forecasts. And now this halting and breathlessness was from
sudden recollection that the horoscope lying on his table in Constantinople had relation to
Mahommed in his capacity of Conqueror. How marvellous also that from the meeting with Constantine
in the street of the city, he should have been blown by a tempest to a meeting with Mahommed
in the White Castle!

These circumstances, trifling to the reader, were of deep influence to the Prince of India.
While he stands there rigid as a figure marbleized in mid action, he is saying to himself:

"The audience will take place--Heaven has ordered it. Would I knew what manner of man this
Mahommed is!"

He had seen a handsome youth, graceful in bearing, quick and subtle in speech, cultivated and
evidently used to governing. Very good, but what an advantage there would be in knowing the
bents and inclinations of the royal lad beforehand.

Presently the schemer's head arose. The boyish Prince was going about in armor when soft raiment
would be excusable--and that meant ambition, dreams of conquest, dedication to martial glory.
Very good indeed! And then his manner under the eyes of the girlish Princess--how quickly her
high-born grace had captivated him! Something impossible were he not of a romantic turn, a
poet, sentimentalist, knight errant.

The Prince clapped his hands. He knew the appeals effective with such natures. Let the audience
come.... Ah, but--

Again he sunk into thought. Youths like Mahommed were apt to be wilful. How was he to be controlled?
One expedient after another was swiftly considered and as swiftly rejected. At last the right
one! Like his ancestors from Ertoghrul down, the young Turk was a believer in the stars. Not
unlikely he was then in the Castle by permission of his astrologer. Indeed, if Mirza had repeated
the conversation and predictions at El Zaribah, the Prince of India was being waited for with
an impatience due a master of the astral craft. Again the Wanderer cried, "Let the audience
come!" and peace and confidence were possessing him when a loud report and continuous rumble
in the room set the solid floor to quaking. He looked around in time to see the big drum quivering
under a blow from Nilo.

From the negro his gaze wandered to Sergius standing before the one loophole by which light
and air were let into the dismal chamber; and recalling the monk as the sole attendant of the
Princess Irene, he thought it best to speak to him.

Drawing near, he observed the cowl thrown back, and that the face was raised, the eyes closed,
the hands palm to palm upon the breast. Involuntarily he stopped, not because he was one of
those who always presume the most Holy Presence when prayer is being offered--he stopped, wondering
where he had seen that countenance. The delicate features, the pallid complexion, the immature
beard, the fair hair parted in the middle, and falling in wavy locks over the shoulders, the
aspect manly yet womanly in its refinement, were strangely familiar to him. It was his first
view of the monk's face. Where had he seen it? His memory went back, far back of the recent.
A chill struck his heart. The features, look, air, portrait, the expression indefinable except
as a light of outcoming spirit, were those of the man he had helped crucify before the Damascus
gate in the Holy City, and whom he could no more cast out of mind than he could the bones from
his body. His feet seemed rooting into the flinty flags beneath them. He heard the centurion
call to him: "Ho, there! If thou knowest the Golgotha, come show it." He felt the sorrowful
eyes of the condemned upon him. He struck the bloody cheek, and cried as to a beast: "Go faster,
Jesus!" And then the words, wrung from infinite patience at last broken:

"I am going, but do thou TARRY TILL I COME."

For relief, he spoke:

"What dost thou, my friend?"

Sergius opened his eyes and answered simply, "I am praying."

"To whom?"

"To God."

"Art thou a Christian?"

"Yes."

"God is for the Jew and the Moslem."

"Nay," said Sergius, looking at the Prince without taking down his hands, "all who believe
in God find happiness and salvation in Him--the Christian as well as the Jew and the Moslem."

The questions had been put with abrupt intensity; now the inquisitor drew back astonished.
He heard the very postulate of the scheme to which he was devoting himself--and from a boy
so like the dead Christ he was working to blot out of worship he seemed the Christ arisen!

The amazement passed slowly, and with its going the habitual shrewdness and capacity to make
servants of circumstances apparently the most untoward returned. The youth had intellect, impressiveness,
aptitude in words, and a sublime idea. But what of his spirit--his courage--his endurance in
the Faith?

"How came this doctrine to thee?"

The Prince spoke deferentially.

"From the good father Hilarion."

"Who is he?"

"The Archimandrite of Bielo-Osero."

"A monastery?"

"Yes."

"How did he receive it?"

"From the Spirit of God, whence Christ had his wisdom--whence all good men have their goodness--by
virtue of which they, like Him, become sons of God."

"What is thy name?"

"Sergius."

"Sergius"--the Prince, now fully recovered, exerted his power of will-- "Sergius, thou art
a heretic."

At this accusation, so terrible in those days, the monk raised the rosary of large beads dangling
from his girdle, kissed the cross, and stood surveying the accuser with pity.

"That is," the Prince continued with greater severity, "speak thou thus to the Patriarch yonder"--he
waved a hand toward Constantinople--"dare repeat the saying to a commission appointed to try
thee for heresy, and thou wilt thyself taste the pangs of crucifixion or be cast to the beasts."

The monk arose to his great height, and replied, fervently:

"Knowest thou when death hath the sweetness of sleep? I will tell thee"-- A light certainly
not from the narrow aperture in the wall collected upon his countenance, and shone visibly--"It
is when a martyr dies knowing both of God's hands are a pillow under his head."

The Prince dropped his eyes, for he was asking himself, was such sweetness of sleep appointed
for him? Resuming his natural manner, he said: "I understand thee, Sergius. Probably no man
in the world, go thou East or West, will ever understand thee better. God's hands under my
head, welcome death!--Let us be friends."

Sergius took his offered hand.

Just then there was a noise at the door, and a troop of servants entered with lighted lamps,
rugs, a table, stools, and beds and bedding, and it was not long until the apartment was made
habitable. The Prince, otherwise well satisfied, wanted nothing then but a reply from Mirza;
and in the midst of his wonder at the latter's delay, a page in brilliant costume appeared,
and called out:

"The Emir Mirza!"

CHAPTER XII

THE RING RETURNS

The Prince, at the announcement of Mirza, took position near the centre of the room where the
light was ample. His black velvet pelisse contrasting strongly with his white hair and beard,
he looked a mysterious Indian potentate to whom occult Nature was a familiar, and the stars
oracular friends.

Mirza's cheeks were scarcely so sun and sand stained as when we first beheld him in conduct
of the caravan to Mecca; in other respects he was unchanged. His attire, like the lord Mahommed's
at the reception on the landing, was of chain mail very light and flexible. He carried a dagger
in his belt, and to further signify confidence in the Prince, the flat steel cap forming his
headgear was swinging loosely from his left arm; or he might have intended to help his friend
to a more ready recognition by presenting himself bareheaded. He met his survey with unaffected
pleasure, took the hand extended in greeting, and kissed it reverentially.

"Forgive me, O Prince, if my first greeting have the appearance of a reproach," Mirza said,
as he gave up the hand. "Why have you kept us waiting so long?"

The Prince's countenance assumed a severe expression.

"Emir, I gave you confidence under seal."

The Emir flushed deeply.

"Was it knightly to betray me? To whom have you told the secret? How many have been waiting
for my coming?"

"Be merciful, I pray."

"But the stars. You have made me culprit with them. I may pardon you; can you assure me of
their pardon?"

The Emir raised his head, and with an expostulatory gesture, was about to reply, when the Prince
continued, "Put thy words in the tongue coinage of Italy, for to be overheard now were to make
me an offender like unto thyself."

Mirza glanced hastily at Sergius, still praying before the loophole, and at Nilo; then he surveyed
the cell critically, and said, in Italian, "This is the prison of the Castle--and thou--can
it be I see thee a prisoner?"

The Prince smiled. "The Governor led me here with my friends; and what you behold of accommodations
he sent in afterwards, saying the better rooms were filled with soldiery."

"He will rue the deed. My Lord is swift at righting a wrong, and trust me, O Prince, to make
report. But to return"--Mirza paused, and looked into the Prince's eyes earnestly--"Is your
accusation just? Hear me; then by the motive judge. When I stood before my master, Prince Mahommed,
a returned pilgrim, if not taller in fact, his bearing was more majestic. I kissed his hand
wondering if some servant of the Compassionate, some angel or travelling Jinn, had not arrived
before me, and whispered him of what you told me, speaking for the stars. And when we were
alone, he would have account of the countries journeyed through, of the people met, of Medina
and Mecca, and the other holy places; nor would he rest until he had from me the sayings I
had heard on the way, everything from calls to prayer to the Khatib's sermon. When I told him
I had not heard the sermon, nor seen the preacher or his camel, he demanded why, and--what
else was there to do, O Prince?--I related how we had been pursued by the terrible Yellow Air;
how it had overtaken me; how I fell down dying at the corner of the Kaaba, and by whom I was
saved even as the life was departing. This last directed him to you. My efforts to put him
off but whetted his desire. He would not be diverted or denied. He insisted-- urged--threatened.
At last I told him all--of your joining us with the Hajj from El Khatif--your rank and train--your
marches in the rear--the hundreds of miserables you saved from the plague--of our meeting at
Zaribah, your hospitality, your learning in all that pertains to the greatest of the prophets,
your wisdom above the wisdom of other men. And you grew upon him as I proceeded. 'Oh, a good
man truly!' 'What courage!' 'What charity!' 'The Prophet himself!' 'Oh, that I had been you!'
'O foolish Mirza, to suffer such a man to escape!' With such exclamations he kept breaking
up my story. It was not long until he fastened upon our meeting in the tent. He plied me to
know of what we talked--what you said, and all you said. O Prince, if you did but know him;
if you knew the soul possessing him, the intellectual things he has mastered, his sagacity,
his art, his will, his day-dreams pursuing him in sleep, the deeds he is prepared to do, the
depth and strength of his passions, his admiration for heroes, his resolve to ring the world
with the greatness of his name--Oh, knew you the man as I do, were you his lover as I am, his
confidant--had you, for teaching him to ride and strike with sword and spear, his promise of
a share in the glory beckoning him on, making his mighty expectations a part of you even as
they are of him, would you --ah, Prince, could you have withheld the secret? Think of the revelation!
The old East to awake, and march against the West! Constantinople doomed! And he the leader
for whom the opportunity is waiting! And to call my weakness betrayal! Unsay it, unsay it, Prince!"

The face of the auditor as Mirza proceeded with his defence would have been a profitable study.
He saw himself succeeding in the purpose of his affected severity; he was drawing from Mahommed's
intimate the information he most desired; and thus advised in advance, his role in the interview
coming would be of easy foresight and performance. Not to appear too lightly satisfied, however,
he said gravely, "I see the strain you underwent, my gallant friend. I see also the earnestness
of your affection for your most noble pupil. He is to be congratulated upon the possession
of a servant capable of such discernment and devotion. But I recall my question--How many are
there waiting for me?"

"Your revelations, O Prince, were imparted to my master alone; and with such certainty as you
know yourself, you may believe them at rest in his bosom. No one better than he appreciates
the importance of keeping them there under triple lock. More than one defeat--I think he would
permit the confession--has taught him that secrecy is the life of every enterprise."

"Say you so, Emir? I feel warmth returning to my hope. Nay, listening to you, and not believing
in improvised heroes, I see how your course may have been for the best. The years gone since
you yielded to his importunities, wisely used, have doubtless served him providentially."

The Prince extended his hand again, and it was ardently taken; then, on his part, more than
pleased, Mirza said, "I bring you a message from my Lord Mahommed. I was with him when the
Governor came and delivered your ring to me--and, lest I forget a duty, Prince, here it is--take
it at some future time it may be serviceable as today."

"Yes, well thought!" the Jew exclaimed, replacing the signet on his finger, and immediately,
while looking at the turquoise eye, he dropped his tone into the solemn, "Ay, the obligations
of the Pentagram endure--they are like a decree of God."

The words and manner greatly impressed Mirza.

"My Lord Mahommed," he said, "observed the delivery of the ring to me by the Governor; and
when we were alone, and I had recounted the story of the jewels, 'What!' my Lord cried, quite
as transported as myself. 'That wonderful man--he here--here in this Castle! He shall not escape
me. Send for him at once. I brook no delay.' He stamped his foot. 'Lest he vanish in the storm--go!'
When I was at the door, he bade me come back. 'The elder man with the white beard and black
eyes, said you? It were well for me to begin by consulting his comfort. He may be tired, and
in want of repose; his accommodations may be insufficient; wherefore go see him first, and
ascertain his state and wishes.' And as I was going, he summoned me to return again. 'A moment--stay!'
he said.'The circumstance enlarges with thought. Thou knowest, Mirza, I did not come here with
a special object; I was drawn involuntarily; now I see it was to meet him. It is a doing of
the stars. I shall hear from them!' O Prince"--Mirza's eyes sparkled, arid he threw up both
his hands--"if ever man believed what he said, my master did."

"A wise master truly," said the Jew, struggling with his exultation. "What said he next?"

"'While I am honoring their messenger'--thus my Lord continued--'why not honor the stars? Their
hour is midnight, for then they are all out, from this horizon and that calling unto each other,
and merging their influences into the harmony the preachers call the Will of the Most Merciful.
A good hour for the meeting. Hear, Mirza--at midnight--in this room. Go now.' And so it is
appointed."

"And well appointed, Emir."

"Shall I so report?"

"With my most dutiful protestations."

"Look for me then at midnight."

"I shall be awake, and ready."

"Meantime, Prince, I will seek an apartment more in correspondence with the degree of my Lord's
most honored guest."

"Nay, good Mirza, suffer me to advise in that matter. The bringing me into this place was a
mistake of the Governor's. He could not divine the merit I have in your master's eyes. He took
me for a Christian. I forgive him, and pray he may not be disturbed. He may be useful to me.
Upon the springing of a mischance--there is one such this instant in my mind's eye--I may be
driven to come back to this Castle. In such an event, I prefer him my servant rather than my
enemy."

"O Prince!"

"Nay, Emir, the idea is only a suggestion of one of the Prophets whom Allah stations at the
turns in every man's career."

"But every man cannot see the Prophets."

The Jew finished gravely: "Rather than disturb the Governor further, soothe him for me; and
when the Lord Mahommed goes hence, do thou see an instruction is left putting the Castle and
its chief at my order. Also, as thou art a grateful friend, Mirza, serve me by looking into
the kettles out of which we are to have our refreshment, and order concerning them as for thyself.
I feel a stir of appetite."

The Emir backed from the apartment, leaving a low salaam just outside the door.

If the reader thinks the Prince content now, he is not mistaken. True he paced the floor long
and rapidly; but, feeling himself close upon a turn in his course, he was making ready for
it perfectly as possible by consulting the Prophet whom he saw waiting there.

And as the Lord Mahommed failed not to remember them what time he betook himself to supper,
the three guests up in the prison fared well, nor cared for the howling of the wind, and the
bursting and beating of the rain still rioting without the walls.

CHAPTER XIII

MAHOMMED HEARS FROM THE STARS

The second recall of the Emir Mirza departing with the appointment for the Prince of India
was remarkable, considering Mahommed's usual quickness of conclusion and steadiness of purpose;
and the accounting for it is noteworthy.

So completely had the young Turk been taken up by study and military service that leisure for
love had been denied him; else he either despised the passion or had never met a woman to catch
his fancy and hold it seriously.

We have seen him make the White Castle by hard galloping before the bursting of the storm.
While at the gate, and in the midst of his reception there, the boats were reported making
all speed to the river landing; and not wishing his presence at the Castle to be known in Constantinople,
he despatched an under officer to seize the voyagers, and detain them until he had crossed
the Bosphorus en route to Adrianople. However, directly the officer brought back the spirited
message of the Princess Irene to the Governor of the Castle, his mind underwent a change.

"What," he asked, "sayst thou the woman is akin to the Emperor Constantine?"

"Such is her claim, my Lord, and she looks it."

"Is she old?"

"Young, my Lord--not more than twenty."

Mahommed addressed the Governor:

"Stay thou here. I will take thy office, and wait upon this Princess."

Dismounting, then, in the capacity of Governor of the Castle, he hastened to the landing, curious
as well as desirous of offering refuge to the noble lady.

He saw her first a short way off, and was struck with her composed demeanor. During the discussion
of his tender of hospitality, her face was in fair view, and it astonished him. When finally
she stepped from the boat, her form, delicately observable under the rich and graceful drapery,
and so exquisitely in correspondence with her face, still further charmed him.

Before the chairs were raised, he sent a messenger to the Castle with orders to place everybody
in hiding, and for his Kislar-Aga, or chief eunuch, to be in the passage of entrance to receive
and take charge of the kinswoman of the Emperor and her attendant. By a further order the Governor
proper was directed to vacate his harem apartments for her accommodation.

In the Castle, after the Princess had been thus disposed of, the impression she made upon him
increased.

"She is so high-born!--so beautiful!--She has such spirit and mind!--She is so calm under trial--so
courageous--so decorous--so used to courtly life!"

Such exclamations attested the unwonted ferment going on in his mind. Gradually, as tints under
the brush of a skilful painter lose themselves in one effect, his undefined ideas took form.

"O Allah! What a Sultana for a hero!"

And by repetition this ran on into what may be termed the chorus of a love song--the very first
of the kind his soul had ever sung.

Such was Mahommed's state when Mirza received the turquoise ring, and, announcing the Prince
of India, asked for orders. Was it strange he changed his mind? Indeed he was at the moment
determining to see again the woman who had risen upon him like a moon above a lake; so, directly
he had despatched the Emir to the Prince of India with the appointment for midnight, he sent
for an Arab Sheik of his suite, arrayed himself in the latter's best habit, and stained his
hands, neck, and face-turned himself, in brief, into the story-teller whom we have seen admitted
to amuse the Princess Irene.

At midnight, sharply as the hour could be determined by the uncertain appliances resorted to
by the inmates of the Castle, Mirza appeared at his master's door with the mystical Indian,
and, passing the sentinel there, knocked like one knowing himself impatiently awaited. A voice
bade them enter.

The young Turk, upon their entrance, arose from a couch of many cushions prepared for him under
a canopy in the centre of the room.

"This, my Lord, is the Prince of India" said Mirza; then, almost without pause, he turned to
the supposed Indian, and added more ceremoniously: "Be thou happy, O Prince! The East hath
not borne a son so worthy to take the flower from the tomb of Saladin, and wear it, as my master
here --the Lord Mahommed."

Then, his duty done, the Emir retired.

Mahommed was in the garb used indoors immemorially by his race--sharply pointed slippers, immense
trousers gathered at the ankles, a yellow quilted gown dropping below the knees, and a turban
of balloon shape, its interfolding stayed by an aigrette of gold and diamonds. His head was
shaven up to the edge of the turban, so that, the light falling from a cluster of lamps in
suspension from the ceiling, every feature was in plain exposure. Looking into the black eyes
scarcely shaded by the upraised arching brows, the Prince of India saw them sparkle with invitation
and pleasure, and was himself satisfied.

He advanced, and saluted by falling upon his knees, and kissing the back of his hands laid
palm downward on the floor. Mahommed raised him to his feet.

"Rise, O Prince!" he said--"rise, and come sit with me."

From behind the couch, the Turk dragged a chair of ample seat, railed around except at the
front, and provided with a cushion of camel's hair--a chair such as teachers in the Mosques
use when expounding to their classes. This he placed so while he sat on the couch the visitor
would be directly before him, and but little removed. Soon the two were sitting cross-legged
face to face.

"A man devout as the Prince of India is reported to me," Mahommed began, in a voice admirably
seconding the respectful look he fixed upon the other, "must be of the rightly guided, who
believe in God and the Last Day, and observe prayer, and pay the alms, and dread none but God--who
therefore of right frequent the temples."

"Your words, my Lord, are those of the veritable messenger of the most high Heaven," the Wanderer
responded, bending forward as if about to perform a prostration. "I recognize them, and they
give me the sensation of being in a garden of perpetual abode, with a river running beneath
it." Mahommed, perceiving the quotation from the Koran, bent low in turn, saying: "It is good
to hear you, for as I listen I say to myself, This one is of the servants of the Merciful who
are to walk upon the earth softly. I accost you in advance, Welcome and Peace."

After a short silence, he continued: "A frequenter of mosques, you will see, O Prince, I have
put you in the teacher's place. I am the student. Yours to open the book and read; mine to
catch the pearls of your saying, lest they fall in the dust, and be lost."

"I fear my Lord does me honor overmuch; yet there is a beauty in willingness even where one
cannot meet expectation. Of what am I to speak?"

Mahommed knit his brows, and asked imperiously, "Who art thou? Of that tell me first."

Happily for the Prince, he had anticipated this demand, and, being intensely watchful, was
ready for it, and able to reply without blenching: "The Emir introduced me rightly. I am a
Prince of India."

"Now of thy life something."

"My Lord's request is general--perhaps he framed it with design. Left thus to my own judgment,
I will be brief, and choose from the mass of my life."

There was not the slightest sign of discomposure discernible in the look or tone of the speaker;
his air was more than obliging--he seemed to be responding to a compliment.

"I began walk as a priest--a disciple of Siddhartha, whom my Lord, of his great intelligence,
will remember as born in Central India. Very early, on account of my skill in translation,
I was called to China, and there put to rendering the Thirty-five Discourses of the father
of the Budhisattwa into Chinese and Thibettan. I also published a version of the Lotus of the
Good Law, and another of the Nirvana. These brought me a great honor. To an ancestor of mine,
Maha Kashiapa, Buddha happened to have intrusted his innermost mysteries--that is, he made
him Keeper of the Pure Secret of the Eye of Right Doctrine. Behold the symbol of that doctrine."

The Prince drew a leaf of ivory, worn and yellow, from a pocket under his pelisse, and passed
it to Mahommed, saying, "Will my lord look?"

Mahommed took the leaf, and in the silver sunk into it saw this sign:

"I see," he said, gravely. "Give me its meaning."

"Nay, my Lord, did I that, the doctrine of which, as successor of Kashiapa, though far removed,
they made me Keeper--the very highest of Buddhistic honors--would then be no longer a secret.
The symbol is of vast sanctity. There is never a genuine image of Buddha without it over his
heart. It is the monogram of Vishnu and Siva; but as to its meaning, I can only say every Brahman
of learning views it worshipfully, knowing it the compression of the whole mind of Buddha."

Mahommed respected the narrator's compunction, and returned the symbol, saying simply, "I have
heard of such things."

"To pursue," the Prince then said, confident of the impression he was producing: "At length
I returned to my own country enriched beyond every hope. A disposition to travel seized me.
One day, passing the desert to Baalbec, some Bedouin made me prisoner, and carrying me to Mecca,
sold me to the Scherif there; a good man who respected my misfortune and learning--may the
youths ever going in Paradise forget not his cup of flowing wine!--and wrought with me over
the Book of the One God until I became a believer like himself. Then, as I had exchanged the
hope of Nirvana for the better and surer hope of Islam, he set me free.... Again in my native
land, I betook myself to astrologic studies, being the more inclined thereto by reason of the
years I had spent in contemplating the abstrusities of Siddhartha. I became an adept--something,
as my Lord may already know, impossible to such as go about unknowing the whole earth and heavens,
and the powers superior, those of the sky, and those lesser, meaning Kings, Emperors, and Sultans."

"How!" exclaimed Mahommed. "Is not every astrologer an adept?"

The Prince answered softly, seeing the drift was toward the professor in the young Turk's service.
"There is always a better until we reach the best. Even the stars differ from each other in
degree."

"But how may a man know the superior powers?"

"The sum of the observations kept by the wise through the ages, and recorded by them, is a
legacy for the benefit of the chosen few. Had my Lord the taste, and were he not already devoted
by destiny, I could take him to a college where what is now so curious to him is simple reading."

The hard and doubting expression on Mahommed's face began to soften, yet he persisted: "Knowing
the superior, why is it needful to know the inferior powers?"

"My Lord trenches now upon the forbidden, yet I will answer as his shrewdness deserves. Never
man heard from the stars in direct speech-- that were almost like words with God. But as they
are servants, they also have servants. Moreover what we have from them is always in answer.
They love to be sought after by the diligent. Some ages ago an adept seeking this and that
of them conjecturally, had reply, 'Lo! A tribe of poor wanderers in the East. Heed them, for
they shall house their dominion in palaces now the glory of the West, and they shall dig the
pit to compass the fall of the proud.' Is it this tribe? Is it that? But the seeker never knew.
The children of Ertoghrul were yet following their herds up and down the pastures they had
from Ala-ed-din, the Iconian. Not knowing their name, he could not ask of them from the decree-makers?"

The Mystic beheld the blood redden Mahommed's open countenance, and the brightening of his
eyes; and as he was speaking to his pride, he knew he was not amiss.

"The saying of the stars," he went on, "descended to succeeding adepts. Time came to their
aid. When at length your fathers seated themselves in Broussa, the mystery was in part revealed.
Anybody, even the low-browed herdsman shivering in the currents blowing from the Trojan heights,
could then have named the fortunate tribe. Still the exposure was not complete; a part remained
for finding out. We knew the diggers of the pit; but for whom was it? To this I devoted myself.
Hear me closely now--my Lord, I have traversed the earth, not once, but many times--so often,
you cannot name a people unknown to me, nor a land whither I have not been--no, nor an island.
As the grandson of Abd-el-Muttalib was a Messenger of God, I am a Messenger of the Predicting
Stars--not their prophet, only their Interpreter and Messenger. The business of the stars is
my business." Mahommed's lips moved, and it was with an effort he kept silent.

The Prince proceeded, apparently unconscious of the interest he was exciting: "Here and there
while I travelled, I kept communication with the planets; and though I had many of their predictions
to solve, I asked them oftenest after the unnamed proud one for whom thy Ottomanites were charged
to dig a pit. I presented names without number--names of persons, names of peoples, and lest
one should he overlooked, I kept a record of royal and notable families. Was a man-child horn
to any of them, I wrote down the minute of the hour of his birth, and how he was called. By
visitations, I kept informed of the various countries, their conditions, and their relations
with each other; for as the state of the earth points favorably or unfavorably to its vegetation,
so do the conditions of nations indicate the approach of changes, and give encouragement to
those predestined to bring the changes about. Again I say, my Lord, as the stars are the servants
of God, they have their servants, whom you shall never know except as you are able to read
the signs their times offer you for reading. Moreover the servants are sometimes priests, sometimes
soldiers, sometimes kings; among them have been women, and men of common origin; for the seed
of genius falls directly from God's hand, and He chooses the time and field for the sowing;
but whether high or low, white or black, good or bad, how shall a Messenger interpret truly
for the stars except by going before their elect, and introducing them, and making their paths
smooth? Must he not know them first?"

A mighty impulsion here struck Mahommed. Recurring rather to what he had heard from Mirza of
the revelation dropped by the strange person met by him during the pilgrimage, he felt himself
about to be declared of the elect, and unable to control his eagerness, he asked abruptly:

"Knowest thou me, O Prince?"

The manner of the Mystic underwent a change. He had been deferential, even submissive; seldom
a teacher so amiable and unmasterful; now he concentrated his power of spirit, and shot it
a continuing flash from his large eyes.

"Know thee, Lord Mahommed?" he answered, in a low voice, but clear and searching, and best
suited to the conflict he was ushering in--the conflict of spirit and spirit. "Thou knowest
not thyself as well."

Mahommed shrank perceptibly--he was astonished.

"I mean not reference to thy father--nor to the Christian Princess, thy mother,--nor to thy
history, which is of an obedient son and brave soldier,--nor to thy education, unusual in those
born inheritors of royal power--I mean none of these, for they are in mouths everywhere, even
of the beggars nursing their sores by the waysides.... In thy father's palace there was a commotion
one night--thou wert about to be born. A gold-faced clock stood in the birth chamber, the gift
of a German King, and from the door of the chamber eunuchs were stationed. Exactly as the clock
proclaimed midnight, mouth and mouth carried the cry to a man on the roof--'A Prince is born!
A Prince is born! Praised be Allah!' He on the roof was seated at a table studying a paper
with the signs of the Zodiac in the usual formulary of a nativity. At the coming of the cry,
he arose, and observed the heavens intently; then he shouted, 'There is no God but God! Lo,
Mars, Lord of the Ascendant--Mars, with his friends, Saturn, Venus, and Jupiter in happy configuration,
and the moon nowhere visible. Hail the Prince!' And while his answer was passing below, the
man on the roof marked the planets in their Houses exactly as they were that midnight between
Monday and Tuesday in the year 1430. Have I in aught erred, my lord?"

"In nothing, O Prince."

"Then I proceed.... The nativity came to me, and I cast and recast it for the aspects, familiarities,
parallels and triplicities of the hour, and always with the same result. I found the sun, the
angles and the quality of the ambient signs favorable to a career which, when run, is to leave
the East radiant with the glory of an unsetting sun."

Here the Jew paused, and bowed--"Now doth my Lord doubt if I know him best?"

CHAPTER XIV

DREAMS AND VISIONS

Mahommed sat awhile in deep abstraction, his face flushed, his hands working nervously in their
own clasp. The subject possessing him was very pleasurable. How could it be else?

On his side the Prince waited deferentially, but very observant. He was confident of the impression
made; he even thought he could follow the young Turk's reflections point by point; still it
was wisest to let him alone, for the cooling time of the sober second thought would come, and
then how much better if there were room for him to believe the decision his own.

"It is very well, Prince," Mahommed said, finally, struggling to keep down every sign of excitement.
"I had accounts of you from Mirza the Emir, and it is the truth, which neither of us will be
the worse of knowing, that I see nothing of disagreement in what he told me, and in what you
now tell me of yourself. The conceptions I formed of you are justified: you are learned and
of great experience; you are a good man given to charity as the Prophet has ordered, and a
believer in God. At various times in the world's history, if we may trust the writers, great
men have had their greatness foretold them; now if I think myself in the way of addition to
the list of those so fortunate, it is because I put faith in you as in a friendly Prophet."

At this the Prince threw up both hands.

"Friendly am I, my lord, more than friendly, but not a Prophet. I am only a Messenger, an Interpreter
of the Superior Powers."

Much he feared the demands upon him if he permitted the impression that he was a Prophet to
go uncontradicted; as an astrologer, he could in need thrust the stars between him and the
unreasonable. And his judgment was quickly affirmed.

"As you will, O Prince," said Mahommed. "Messenger, interpreter, prophet, whichever pleases
you, the burden of what you bring me is nevertheless of chiefest account. Comes a herald, we
survey him, and ask voucher for his pretensions; are we satisfied with them, why then he gives
place in our interest, and becomes secondary to the matter he bears. Is it not so?"

"It is righteously said, my Lord."

"And when I take up this which you have brought me"--Mahommed laid a hand upon his throat as
if in aid of the effort he was making to keep calm and talk with dignity--"I cannot deny its
power; for when was there an imaginative young man who first permitted ambition and love of
glory to build golden palaces for their abiding in his heart, with self-control to stop his
ears to promises apparently from Heaven? O Prince, if you are indeed my friend, you will not
laugh at me when you are alone!... Moreover I would not you should believe your tidings received
carelessly or as a morsel sweet on my tongue; but as wine warms to the blood coursing to the
brain, it has started inquiries and anxieties you alone can allay. And first, the great glory
whose running is to fill the East, like an unsetting sun, tell me of it; for, as we all know,
glory is of various kinds; there is one kind reserved for poets, orators, and professors cunning
in the arts, and another for cheer of such as find delight in swords and bossy shields, and
armor well bedight, and in horses, and who exult in battle, and in setting armies afield, in
changing boundary lines, and in taking rest and giving respite in the citadels of towns happily
assaulted. And as of these the regard is various, tell me the kind mine is to be."

"The stars speak not doubtfully, my Lord. When Mars rises ascendant in either of his Houses,
they that moment born are devoted to war, and, have they their bent, they shall be soldiers;
nor soldiers merely, but as the conjunctions are good, conquerors, and fortunate, and Samael,
his angel, becomes their angel. Has my Lord ever seen his nativity?"

"Yes."

"Then he knows whereof I speak."

Mahommed nodded affirmatively, and said, "The fame is to my taste, doubt not; but, Prince,
were thy words duly weighed, then my glory is to be surpassing. Now, I am of a line of heroes.
Othman, the founder; Orchan, father of the Janissaries; Solyman, who accepted the crescent
moon seen in a dream by the sea at Cyzicus as Allah's bidding to pass the Hellespont to Tzympe
in Europe; Amurath, conqueror of Adrianople; Bajazet, who put an end to Christian crusading
in the field of Nicopolis --these filled the East with their separate renowns; and my father
Amurath, did he not subdue Hunyades? Yet, Prince, you tell me my glory is to transcend theirs.
Now--because I am ready to believe you--say if it is to burst upon me suddenly or to signalize
a long career. The enjoyment of immortality won in youth must be a pleasant thing."

"I cannot answer, my Lord"

"Cannot?"

And Mahommed's eagerness came near getting the better of his will.

"I have nothing from the stars by which to speak, and I dare not assume to reply for myself."

Then Mahommed's eyes became severely bright, and the bones of his hands shone white through
the skin, so hard did he compress them.

"How long am I to wait before the glory you promise me ripens ready for gathering? If it requires
long campaigns, shall I summon the armies now?"

A tone, a stress of voice in the question sent a shiver through the Prince despite his self-command.
His gaze upon Mahommed's countenance, already settled, intensified, and almost before the last
word passed he saw the idea he was expected to satisfy, and that it was the point to which
his interrogator had been really tending from the commencement of the interview. To gain a
moment, he affected not to clearly understand; after a repetition, he in turn asked, with a
meaning look:

"Is not thy father, O Prince, now in his eighty-fifth year?"

Mahommed leaned further forward.

"And is it not eight and twenty years since he began reigning wisely and well?"

Mahommed nodded assent.

"Suffer me to answer now. Besides his age which pleads for him, your father has not allowed
greatness and power to shade the love he gave you heartily the hour he first took you in his
arms. Nature protests against his cutting off, and in this instance, O Prince, the voice of
Nature is the voice of Allah. So say I speaking for myself."

Mahommed's face relaxed its hardness, and he moved and breathed freely while replying: "I do
not know what the influences require of me."

"Speak you of the stars, my Lord," the other returned, "hear me, and with distinctness. As
yet they have intrusted me with the one prediction, and that you have. In other words, they
are committed to a horoscope based upon your nativity, and from it your glory has been rightly
delivered. So much is permitted us by the astrologic law we practise. But this now asked me,
a circumstance in especial, appertains to you as chief of forces not yet yours. Wherefore--heed
well, my Lord--I advise you to make note of the minute of the hour of the day you gird yourself
with the sword of sovereignty which, at this speaking, is your great father's by sanction of
Heaven; then will I cast a horoscope for Mahommed the Sultan, not Mahommed, son of Amurath
merely--then, by virtue of my office of Interpreter of the Stars, having the proper writing
in my hand, I will tell you this you now seek, together with all else pertaining to your sovereignty
intrusted me for communication. I will tell you when the glory is open to you, and the time
for setting forward to make it yours--even the dawning of the term of preparation necessarily
precedent to the movement itself. Now am I understood? Will my Lord tell me I am understood?"

An observation here may not be amiss. The reader will of course notice the clever obtrusion
of the stars in the speech; yet its real craft was in the reservations covered. Presuming it
possible for the Prince to have fixed a time to Mahommed's satisfaction, telling it would have
been like giving away the meat of an apple, and retaining the rind. The wise man who sets out
to make himself a need to another will carefully husband his capital. Moreover it is of importance
to keep in mind through this period of our story that with the Prince of India everything was
subsidiary to his scheme of unity in God. To which end it was not enough to be a need to Mahommed;
he must also bring the young potentate to wait upon him for the signal to begin the movement
against Constantinople; for such in simplicity was the design scarcely concealed under the
glozing of "the East against the West." That is to say, until he knew Constantine's disposition
with respect to the superlative project, his policy was delay. What, in illustration, if the
Emperor proved a friend? In falconry the hawk is carried into the field hooded, and cast off
only when the game is flushed. So the Prince of India thought as he concluded his speech, and
looked at the handsome face of the Lord Mahommed.

The latter was disappointed, and showed it. He averted his eyes, knit his brows, and took a
little time before answering; then a flash of passion seized him.

"With all thy wisdom, Prince, thou knowest not how hard waiting will be. There is nothing in
Nature sweeter than glory, and on the other hand nothing so intolerably bitter as hungering
for it when it is in open prospect. What irony in the providence which permits us to harvest
greatness in the days of our decline! I dream of it for my youth, for then most can be made
of it. There was a Greek--not of the Byzantine breed in the imperial kennel yonder"--he emphasized
the negative with a contemptuous glance in the direction of Constantinople--"a Greek of the
old time of real heroes, he who has the first place in history as a conqueror. Think you he
was happy because he owned the world? Delight in property merely, a horse, a palace, a ship,
a kingdom, is vulgar: any man can be owner of something; the beggar polishes his crutch for
the same reason the king gilds his throne--it belongs to him. Possession means satiety. But
achieve thou immortality in thy first manhood, and it shall remain to thee as the ring to a
bride or as his bride to the bridegroom.--Let it be as you say. I bow to the stars. Between
me and the sovereignty my father stands, a good man to whom I give love for love; and he shall
not be disturbed by me or any of mine. In so far I will honor your advice; and in the other
matter also, there shall be one ready to note the minute of the hour the succession falls to
me. But what if then you are absent?"

"A word from my Lord will bring me to him; and His Majesty is liable to go after his fathers
at any moment"--

"Ay, and alas!" Mahommed interposed, with unaffected sorrow, "a king may keep his boundaries
clean, and even extend them thitherward from the centre, and be a fear unto men; yet shall
death oblige him at last. All is from God."

The Prince was courtier enough to respect the feeling evinced.

"But I interrupted you," Mahommed presently added. "I pray pardon."

"I was about to say, my Lord, if I am not with you when His Majesty, your father, bows to the
final call--for the entertainment of such was Paradise set upon its high hill!--let a messenger
seek me in Constantinople; and it may even serve well if the Governor of this Castle be instructed
to keep his gates always open to me, and himself obedient to my requests."

"A good suggestion! I will attend to it. But"--

Again he lapsed into abstraction, and the Prince held his peace watchfully.

"Prince," Mahommed said at length, "it is not often I put myself at another's bidding, for
freedom to go where one pleases is not more to a common man than is freedom to do what pleases
him to a sovereign; yet so will I with you in this matter; and as is the custom of Moslems
setting out on a voyage I say of our venture, 'In the name of God be its courses and its moorings.'
That settled, hearken further. What you have given me is not all comprehensible. As I understand
you, I am to find the surpassing glory in a field of war. Tell me, lies the field far or near?
Where is it? And who is he I am to challenge? There will be room and occasion for combat around
me everywhere, or, if the occasion exist not, my Spahis in a day's ride can make one. There
is nothing stranger than how small a cause suffices us to set man against man, life or death.
But--and now I come to the very difficulty--looking here and there I cannot see a war new in
any respect, either of parties, or objects, or pretence, out of which such a prodigious fame
is to be plucked. You discern the darkness in which I am groping. Light, O Prince--give me light!"

For an instant the mind of the Jew, sown with subtlety as a mine with fine ore, was stirred
with admiration of the quality so strikingly manifested in this demand; but collecting himself,
he said, calmly, for the question had been foreseen:

"My Lord was pleased to say a short while ago that the Emir Mirza, on his return from the Hajj,
told him of me. Did Mirza tell also of my forbidding him to say anything of the predictions
I then intrusted him?"

"Yes," Mahommed answered, smiling, "and I have loved him for the disobedience. He satisfied
me to whom he thought his duty was first owing.