A crowd suggested one thing to Peter. For seven years of his young life he had been assistant
to Pericles Priam, and had traveled over America selling Priam's Peerless Pain Paralyzer; they
had ridden in an automobile, and wherever there was a fair or a convention or an excursion
or a picnic, they were on hand, and Pericles Priam would stop at a place where the crowds were
thickest, and ring a dinner bell, and deliver his super-eloquent message to humanity--the elixir
of life revealed, suffering banished from the earth, and all inconveniences of this mortal
state brought to an end for one dollar per bottle of fifteen per cent opium. It had been Peter's
job to handle the bottles and take in the coin; and so now, when he saw the crowd, he looked
about him eagerly. Perhaps there might be here some vender of corn-plasters or ink-stain removers,
or some three card monte man to whom Peter could attach himself for the price of a sandwich.

Peter wormed his way thru the crowd for two or three blocks, but saw nothing more promising
than venders of American flags on little sticks, and of patriotic buttons with "Wake up America!"
But then, on the other side of the street at one of the crossings Peter saw a man standing
on a truck making a speech, and he dug his way thru the crowd, elbowing, sliding this way and
that, begging everybody's pardon--until at last he was out of the crowd, and standing in the
open way which had been cleared for the procession, a seemingly endless road lined with solid
walls of human beings, with blue-uniformed policemen holding them back. Peter started to run
across--and at that same instant came the end of the world.

Section 2

One who seeks to tell about events in words comes occasionally upon a fundamental difficulty.
An event of colossal and overwhelming significance may happen all at once, but the words which
describe it have to come one by one in a long chain. The event may reveal itself without a
moment's warning; but if one is to give a sense of it in words, one must prepare for it, build
up to it, awaken anticipation, establish a climax. If the description of this event which fate
sprung upon Peter Gudge as he was crossing the street were limited to the one word "BANG" in
letters a couple of inches high across the page, the impression would hardly be adequate.

The end of the world, it seemed to Peter, when he was able to collect enough of his terrified
wits to think about it. But at first there was no thinking; there was only sensation--a terrific
roar, as if the whole universe had suddenly turned to sound; a blinding white glare, as of
all the lightnings of the heavens; a blow that picked him up as if he had been a piece of thistledown,
and flung him across the street and against the side of a building. Peter fell upon the sidewalk
in a heap, deafened, blinded, stunned; and there he lay--he had no idea how long-until gradually
his senses began to return to him, and from the confusion certain factors began to stand out:
a faint gray smoke that seemed to lie upon the ground, a bitter odor that stung the nostrils
and tongue, and screams of people, moaning and sobbing and general uproar. Something lay across
Peter's chest, and he felt that he was suffocating, and struggled convulsively to push it away;
the hands with which he pushed felt something hot and wet and slimy. and the horrified Peter
realized that it was half the body of a mangled human being.

