  Have the love and the fear of God ever before your eyes.  And may
God confirm your faith in Christ.  Observe the manner of trade: how they make wine and vinegar,
and keep a note of all that for me.  Be courteous and humble in all your conversation, and
of good manners: which he that learneth not in France travaileth in vain.  When at sea read
good books.  Without good books time cannot be well spent in those great ships.  Learn the
stars also: the particular coasts: the depth of the road-steads: and the risings and fallings
of the land.  Enquire further about the mineral water: and take notice of such plants as you
meet with.  I am told that you are looked on in the Service as exceeding faithful, valiant,
diligent, generous, vigilant, observing, very knowing, and a scholar. When you first took to
this manner of life, you cannot but remember that I caused you to read all the sea-fights of
note in Plutarch: and, withal, gave you the description of fortitude left by Aristotle.  In
places take notice of the government of them, and the eminent persons.  The merciful providence
of God ever go with you, and direct and bless you, and give you ever a grateful heart toward
Him.  I send you Lucretius: and with it Tully's Offices: 'tis as remarkable for its little
size as for the good matter contained in it, and the authentic and classical Latin.  I hope
you do not forget to carry a Greek Testament always to church: a man learns two things together,
and profiteth doubly, in the language and the subject.  God send us to number our days, and
to fit ourselves for a better world.  Times look troublesome: but you have an honest and peaceable
profession like myself, which may well employ you, and you have discretion to guide your words
and actions.  May God be reconciled to us, and give us grace to forsake our sins which set
fire to all things.  You shall never want my daily prayers, and also frequent letters.'  And
so on, through a delightful sheaf of letters to his two sons: and out of which a fine picture
rises before us, both of Sir Thomas's own student life abroad, as well as of the footing on
which the now famous physician and English author stood with his student and sailor sons.

* * * * *

You might read every word of Sir Thomas Browne's writings and never discover that a sword had
been unsheathed or a shot fired in England all the time he was living and writing there.  It
was the half-century of the terrible civil war for political and religious liberty: but Sir
Thomas Browne would seem to have possessed all the political and religious liberty he needed.
At any rate, he never took open part on either side in the great contest.  Sir Thomas Browne
was not made of the hot metal and the stern stuff of John Milton.  All through those terrible
years Browne lived securely in his laboratory, and in his library, and in his closet.  Richard
Baxter's Autobiography is as full of gunpowder as if it had been written in an army-chaplain's
tent, as indeed it was.  But both Bunyan's Grace Abounding and Browne's Religio Medici might
have been written in the Bedford or Norwich of our own peaceful day.  All men are not made
to be soldiers and statesmen: and it is no man's duty to attempt to be what he was not made
to be.  Every man has his own talent, and his corresponding and consequent duty and obligation.
And both Bunyan and Browne had their own talent, and their own consequent duty and obligation,
just as Cromwell and Milton and Baxter had theirs.  Enough, and more than enough, if it shall
be said to them all on that day, Well done.  Dr. Samuel Johnson's were not common ears, but
even he comments on these beautiful words with a wooden- headedness almost past belief.  For,
surely the thirty years of schoolboy, and student, and opening professional life that resulted
in the production of such a masterpiece as the Religio Medici was a miracle both of God's providence
and God's grace, enough to justify him who had experienced all that in acknowledging it to
God's glory and to the unburdening of his own heart, so richly loaded with God's benefits.
And, how a man of Samuel Johnson's insight, good sense, and pious feeling could have so missed
the mark in this case, I cannot understand.  All the more that both the chapter so complained
about, and the whole book to which that chapter belongs, are full of the same thankful, devout,
and adoring sentiment.  'The world that I regard,' Sir Thomas proceeds, 'is myself.  Men that
look upon my outside, and who peruse only my conditions and my fortunes, do err in my altitude.
Surely there are in every man's life certain rubs, and doublings, and wrenches, which, well
examined, do prove the pure hand of God. And those which others term crosses, and afflictions,
and judgments, and misfortunes, to me they both appear, and in event have ever proved, the
secret and dissembled favours of His affection.'  And in the Christian Morals: 'Annihilate
not the mercies of God by the oblivion of ingratitude.  Make not thy head a grave, but a repository
of God's mercies.  Register not only strange, but all merciful occurrences.  Let thy diaries
stand thick with dutiful mementoes and asterisks of acknowledgment.  And to be complete and
to forget nothing, date not His mercy from thy nativity: look beyond this world, and before
the era of Adam.  And mark well the winding ways of providence.  For that hand writes often
by abbreviations, hieroglyphics, and short characters, which, like the laconism on Belshazzar's
wall, are not to be made out but by a key from that Spirit that indited them.'  And yet again,
'To thoughtful observers the whole world is one phylactery, and everything we see an item of
the wisdom, and power, and goodness of God.'  How any man, not to speak of one of the wisest
and best of men, such as Samuel Johnson was, could read all that, and still stagger at Sir
Thomas Browne holding himself to be a living miracle of the power, and the love, and the grace
of God, passes my understanding.

We have seen in his own noble words how Sir Thomas Browne's life appeared to himself.  Let
us now look at how he appeared to other observing men. The Rev. John Whitefoot, the close and
lifelong friend of Sir Thomas, has left us this lifelike portrait of the author of Religio
Medici.  'For a character of his person, his complexion and his hair were answerable to his
name, his stature was moderate, and his habit of body neither fat nor lean, but [Greek text].
In his habit of clothing he had an aversion to all finery, and affected plainness.  He ever
wore a cloke, or boots, when few others did.  He kept himself always very warm, and thought
it most safe so to do.  His memory, though not so eminent as that of Seneca or Scaliger, was
capacious and tenacious, insomuch that he remembered all that was remarkable in any book he
ever read.  He had no despotical power over his affections and passions, that was a privilege
of original perfection, but as large a political power over them as any stoic or man of his
time, whereof he gave so great experiment that he hath very rarely been known to have been
overpowered with any of them.  His aspect and conversation were grave and sober; there was
never to be seen in him anything trite or vulgar.  Parsimonious in nothing but his time, whereof
he made as much improvement, with as little loss as any man in it, when he had any to spare
from his drudging practice, he was scarce patient of any diversion from his study: so impatient
of sloth and idleness, that he would say, he could not do nothing.  He attended the public
service very constantly, when he was not withheld by his practice.  Never missed the sacrament
in his parish, if he were in town.  Read the best English sermons he could hear of with liberal
applause: and delighted not in controversies.  His patience was founded upon the Christian
philosophy, and sound faith of God's providence, and a meek and humble submission thereto.
I visited him near his end, when he had not strength to hear or speak much: and the last words
I heard from him were, besides some expressions of dearness, that he did freely submit to the
will of God: being without fear.  He had oft triumphed over the king of terrors in others,
and given him many repulses in the defence of patients; but when his own time came, he submitted
with a meek, rational, religious courage.'

Taking Sir Thomas Browne all in all, Tertullian, Sir Thomas's favourite Father, has supplied
us, as it seems to me, with his whole life and character in these so expressive and so comprehensive
words of his, Anima naturaliter Christiana.  In these three words, when well weighed and fully
opened up, we have the whole author of the Religio Medici, the Christian Morals, and the Letter
to a Friend.  Anima naturaliter Christiana.

* * * * *

The Religio Medici was Sir Thomas Browne's first book, and it remains by far his best book.
His other books acquire their value and take their rank just according to the degree of their
'affinity' to the Religio Medici.  Sir Thomas Browne is at his best when he is most alone with
himself.  There is no subject that interests him so much as Sir Thomas Browne.  And if you
will forget yourself in Sir Thomas Browne, and in his conversations which he holds with himself,
you will find a rare and an ever fresh delight in the Religio Medici.  Sir Thomas is one of
the greatest egotists of literature--to use a necessary but an unpopular and a misleading epithet.
Hazlitt has it that there have only been but three perfect, absolute, and unapproached egotists
in all literature--Cellini, Montaigne, and Wordsworth.  But why that fine critic leaves out
Sir Thomas Browne, I cannot understand or accept.  I always turn to Sir Thomas Browne, far
more than to either of Hazlitt's canonised three, when I want to read what a great man has
to tell me about himself: and in this case both a great and a good and a Christian man.  And
thus, whatever modification and adaptation may have been made in this masterpiece of his, in
view of its publication, and after it was first published, the original essence, most genuine
substance, and unique style of the book were all intended for its author's peculiar heart and
private eye alone. And thus it is that we have a work of a simplicity and a sincerity that
would have been impossible had its author in any part of his book sat down to compose for the
public.  Sir Thomas Browne lived so much within himself, that he was both secret writer and
sole reader to himself.  His great book is 'a private exercise directed solely,' as he himself
says, 'to himself: it is a memorial addressed to himself rather than an example or a rule directed
to any other man.'  And it is only he who opens the Religio Medici honestly and easily believing
that, and glad to have such a secret and sincere and devout book in his hand,--it is only he
who will truly enjoy the book, and who will gather the same gain out of it that its author
enjoyed and gained out of it himself.  In short, the properly prepared and absolutely ingenuous
reader of the Religio Medici must be a second Thomas Browne himself.

