The resemblances do exist, it is quite true; and often they cunningly approximate the originals--but
after all, in the matter of certain physical patent rights there is only one England.  Now
that I have sampled the globe, I am not in doubt.  There is a beauty of Switzerland, and it
is repeated in the glaciers and snowy ranges of many parts of the earth; there is a beauty
of the fiord, and it is repeated in New Zealand and Alaska; there is a beauty of Hawaii, and
it is repeated in ten thousand islands of the Southern seas; there is a beauty of the prairie
and the plain, and it is repeated here and there in the earth; each of these is worshipful,
each is perfect in its way, yet holds no monopoly of its beauty; but that beauty which is England
is alone--it has no duplicate.

It is made up of very simple details--just grass, and trees, and shrubs, and roads, and hedges,
and gardens, and houses, and vines, and churches, and castles, and here and there a ruin--and
over it all a mellow dream-haze of history.  But its beauty is incomparable, and all its own.

Hobart has a peculiarity--it is the neatest town that the sun shines on; and I incline to believe
that it is also the cleanest.  However that may be, its supremacy in neatness is not to be
questioned.  There cannot be another town in the world that has no shabby exteriors; no rickety
gates and fences, no neglected houses crumbling to ruin, no crazy and unsightly sheds, no weed-grown
front-yards of the poor, no back-yards littered with tin cans and old boots and empty bottles,
no rubbish in the gutters, no clutter on the sidewalks, no outer-borders fraying out into dirty
lanes and tin-patched huts.  No, in Hobart all the aspects are tidy, and all a comfort to the
eye; the modestest cottage looks combed and brushed, and has its vines, its flowers, its neat
fence, its neat gate, its comely cat asleep on the window ledge.

We had a glimpse of the museum, by courtesy of the American gentleman who is curator of it.
It has samples of half-a-dozen different kinds of marsupials--[A marsupial is a plantigrade
vertebrate whose specialty is its pocket.  In some countries it is extinct, in the others it
is rare. The first American marsupials were Stephen Girard, Mr. Aston and the opossum; the
principal marsupials of the Southern Hemisphere are Mr. Rhodes, and the kangaroo.  I, myself,
am the latest marsupial.  Also, I might boast that I have the largest pocket of them all. 
But there is nothing in that.]--one, the "Tasmanian devil;" that is, I think he was one of
them.  And there was a fish with lungs.  When the water dries up it can live in the mud.  Most
curious of all was a parrot that kills sheep.  On one great sheep-run this bird killed a thousand
sheep in a whole year.  He doesn't want the whole sheep, but only the kidney-fat. This restricted
taste makes him an expensive bird to support.  To get the fat he drives his beak in and rips
it out; the wound is mortal.  This parrot furnishes a notable example of evolution brought
about by changed conditions.  When the sheep culture was introduced, it presently brought famine
to the parrot by exterminating a kind of grub which had always thitherto been the parrot's
diet.  The miseries of hunger made the bird willing to eat raw flesh, since it could get no
other food, and it began to pick remnants of meat from sheep skins hung out on the fences to
dry. It soon came to prefer sheep meat to any other food, and by and by it came to prefer the
kidney-fat to any other detail of the sheep.  The parrot's bill was not well shaped for digging
out the fat, but Nature fixed that matter; she altered the bill's shape, and now the parrot
can dig out kidney-fat better than the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, or anybody else,
for that matter--even an Admiral.

And there was another curiosity--quite a stunning one, I thought: Arrow-heads and knives just
like those which Primeval Man made out of flint, and thought he had done such a wonderful thing--yes,
and has been humored and coddled in that superstition by this age of admiring scientists until
there is probably no living with him in the other world by now.  Yet here is his finest and
nicest work exactly duplicated in our day; and by people who have never heard of him or his
works: by aborigines who lived in the islands of these seas, within our time.  And they not
only duplicated those works of art but did it in the brittlest and most treacherous of substances--glass:
made them out of old brandy bottles flung out of the British camps; millions of tons of them.
It is time for Primeval Man to make a little less noise, now.  He has had his day.  He is not
what he used to be.  We had a drive through a bloomy and odorous fairy-land, to the Refuge
for the Indigent--a spacious and comfortable home, with hospitals, etc., for both sexes.  There
was a crowd in there, of the oldest people I have ever seen.  It was like being suddenly set
down in a new world--a weird world where Youth has never been, a world sacred to Age, and bowed
forms, and wrinkles.  Out of the 359 persons present, 223, were ex-convicts, and could have
told stirring tales, no doubt, if they had been minded to talk; 42 of the 359 were past 80,
and several were close upon 90; the average age at death there is 76 years. As for me, I have
no use for that place; it is too healthy. Seventy is old enough--after that, there is too much
risk.  Youth and gaiety might vanish, any day--and then, what is left?  Death in life; death
without its privileges, death without its benefits.  There were 185 women in that Refuge, and
81 of them were ex-convicts.

The steamer disappointed us.  Instead of making a long visit at Hobart, as usual, she made
a short one.  So we got but a glimpse of Tasmania, and then moved on.