I know some who believe they have seen the headless ghost upon the quay, and one who, when
he passes the old cemetery wall at night, sees a woman with white borders to her cap[FN#2]
creep out and follow him. The apparition only leaves him at his own door. The villagers imagine
that she follows him to avenge some wrong. "I will haunt you when I die" is a favourite threat.
His wife was once half-scared to death by what she considers a demon in the shape of a dog.

[FN#2]  I wonder why she had white borders to her cap. The old Mayo woman, who has told me
so many tales, has told me that her brother-in- law saw "a woman with white borders to her
cap going around the stacks in a field, and soon after he got a hurt, and he died in six months."

These are a few of the open-air spirits; the more domestic of their tribe gather within-doors,
plentiful as swallows under southern eaves.

One night a Mrs. Nolan was watching by her dying child in Fluddy's Lane. Suddenly there was
a sound of knocking heard at the door. She did not open, fearing it was some unhuman thing
that knocked. The knocking ceased. After a little the front-door and then the back-door were
burst open, and closed again. Her husband went to see what was wrong. He found both doors bolted.
The child died. The doors were again opened and closed as before. Then Mrs. Nolan remembered
that she had forgotten to leave window or door open, as the custom is, for the departure of
the soul. These strange openings and closings and knockings were warnings and reminders from
the spirits who attend the dying.

The house ghost is usually a harmless and well-meaning creature. It is put up with as long
as possible. It brings good luck to those who live with it. I remember two children who slept
with their mother and sisters and brothers in one small room. In the room was also a ghost.
They sold herrings in the Dublin streets, and did not mind the ghost much, because they knew
they would always sell their fish easily while they slept in the "ha'nted" room.

I have some acquaintance among the ghost-seers of western villages. The Connaught tales are
very different from those of Leinster. These H----- spirits have a gloomy, matter-of-fact way
with them. They come to announce a death, to fulfil some obligation, to revenge a wrong, to
pay their bills even--as did a fisherman's daughter the other day--and then hasten to their
rest. All things they do decently and in order. It is demons, and not ghosts, that transform
themselves into white cats or black dogs. The people who tell the tales are poor, serious-minded
fishing people, who find in the doings of the ghosts the fascination of fear. In the western
tales is a whimsical grace, a curious extravagance. The people who recount them live in the
most wild and beautiful scenery, under a sky ever loaded and fantastic with flying clouds.
They are farmers and labourers, who do a little fishing now and then. They do not fear the
spirits too much to feel an artistic and humorous pleasure in their doings. The ghosts themselves
share in their quaint hilarity. In one western town, on whose deserted wharf the grass grows,
these spirits have so much vigour that, when a misbeliever ventured to sleep in a haunted house,
I have been told they flung him through the window, and his bed after him. In the surrounding
villages the creatures use the most strange disguises. A dead old gentleman robs the cabbages
of his own garden in the shape of a large rabbit. A wicked sea-captain stayed for years inside
the plaster of a cottage wall, in the shape of a snipe, making the most horrible noises. He
was only dislodged when the wall was broken down; then out of the solid plaster the snipe rushed
away whistling.

"DUST HATH CLOSED HELEN'S EYE"

I

I have been lately to a little group of houses, not many enough to be called a village, in
the barony of Kiltartan in County Galway, whose name, Ballylee, is known through all the west
of Ireland. There is the old square castle, Ballylee, inhabited by a farmer and his wife, and
a cottage where their daughter and their son-in-law live, and a little mill with an old miller,
and old ash-trees throwing green shadows upon a little river and great stepping-stones. I went
there two or three times last year to talk to the miller about Biddy Early, a wise woman that
lived in Clare some years ago, and about her saying, "There is a cure for all evil between
the two mill-wheels of Ballylee," and to find out from him or another whether she meant the
moss between the running waters or some other herb. I have been there this summer, and I shall
be there again before it is autumn, because Mary Hynes, a beautiful woman whose name is still
a wonder by turf fires, died there sixty years ago; for our feet would linger where beauty
has lived its life of sorrow to make us understand that it is not of the world. An old man
brought me a little way from the mill and the castle, and down a long, narrow boreen that was
nearly lost in brambles and sloe bushes, and he said, "That is the little old foundation of
the house, but the most of it is taken for building walls, and the goats have ate those bushes
that are growing over it till they've got cranky, and they won't grow any more. They say she
was the handsomest girl in Ireland, her skin was like dribbled snow"--he meant driven snow,
perhaps,--"and she had blushes in her cheeks. She had five handsome brothers, but all are gone
now!" I talked to him about a poem in Irish, Raftery, a famous poet, made about her, and how
it said, "there is a strong cellar in Ballylee." He said the strong cellar was the great hole
where the river sank underground, and he brought me to a deep pool, where an otter hurried
away under a grey boulder, and told me that many fish came up out of the dark water at early
morning "to taste the fresh water coming down from the hills."

I first heard of the poem from an old woman who fives about two miles further up the river,
and who remembers Raftery and Mary Hynes. She says, "I never saw anybody so handsome as she
was, and I never will till I die," and that he was nearly blind, and had "no way of living
but to go round and to mark some house to go to, and then all the neighbours would gather to
hear. If you treated him well he'd praise you, but if you did not, he'd fault you in Irish.
He was the greatest poet in Ireland, and he'd make a song about that bush if he chanced to
stand under it. There was a bush he stood under from the rain, and he made verses praising
it, and then when the water came through he made verses dispraising it." She sang the poem
to a friend and to myself in Irish, and every word was audible and expressive, as the words
in a song were always, as I think, before music grew too proud to be the garment of words,
flowing and changing with the flowing and changing of their energies. The poem is not as natural
as the best Irish poetry of the last century, for the thoughts are arranged in a too obviously
traditional form, so the old poor half-blind man who made it has to speak as if he were a rich
farmer offering the best of everything to the woman he loves, but it has naive and tender phrases.
The friend that was with me has made some of the translation, but some of it has been made
by the country people themselves. I think it has more of the simplicity of the Irish verses
than one finds in most translations.

An old weaver, whose son is supposed to go away among the Sidhe (the faeries) at night, says,
"Mary Hynes was the most beautiful thing ever made. My mother used to tell me about her, for
she'd be at every hurling, and wherever she was she was dressed in white. As many as eleven
men asked her in marriage in one day, but she wouldn't have any of them. There was a lot of
men up beyond Kilbecanty one night, sitting together drinking, and talking of her, and one
of them got up and set out to go to Ballylee and see her; but Cloon Bog was open then, and
when he came to it he fell into the water, and they found him dead there in the morning. She
died of the fever that was before the famine." Another old man says he was only a child when
he saw her, but he remembered that "the strongest man that was among us, one John Madden, got
his death of the head of her, cold he got crossing rivers in the night-time to get to Ballylee."
This is perhaps the man the other remembered, for tradition gives the one thing many shapes.
There is an old woman who remembers her, at Derrybrien among the Echtge hills, a vast desolate
place, which has changed little since the old poem said, "the stag upon the cold summit of
Echtge hears the cry of the wolves," but still mindful of many poems and of the dignity of
ancient speech. She says, "The sun and the moon never shone on anybody so handsome, and her
skin was so white that it looked blue, and she had two little blushes on her cheeks." And an
old wrinkled woman who lives close by Ballylee, and has told me many tales of the Sidhe, says,
"I often saw Mary Hynes, she was handsome indeed. She had two bunches of curls beside her cheeks,
and they were the colour of silver. I saw Mary Molloy that was drowned in the river beyond,
and Mary Guthrie that was in Ardrahan, but she took the sway of them both, a very comely creature.
I was at her wake too--she had seen too much of the world. She was a kind creature. One day
I was coming home through that field beyond, and I was tired, and who should come out but the
Poisin Glegeal (the shining flower), and she gave me a glass of new milk." This old woman meant
no more than some beautiful bright colour by the colour of silver, for though I knew an old
man--he is dead now--who thought she might know "the cure for all the evils in the world,"
that the Sidhe knew, she has seen too little gold to know its colour. But a man by the shore
at Kinvara, who is too young to remember Mary Hynes, says, "Everybody says there is no one
at all to be seen now so handsome; it is said she had beautiful hair, the colour of gold. She
was poor, but her clothes every day were the same as Sunday, she had such neatness. And if
she went to any kind of a meeting, they would all be killing one another for a sight of her,
and there was a great many in love with her, but she died young. It is said that no one that
has a song made about them will ever live long."

Those who are much admired are, it is held, taken by the Sidhe, who can use ungoverned feeling
for their own ends, so that a father, as an old herb doctor told me once, may give his child
into their hands, or a husband his wife. The admired and desired are only safe if one says
"God bless them" when one's eyes are upon them. The old woman that sang the song thinks, too,
that Mary Hynes was "taken," as the phrase is, "for they have taken many that are not handsome,
and why would they not take her? And people came from all parts to look at her, and maybe there
were some that did not say 'God bless her.'" An old man who lives by the sea at Duras has as
little doubt that she was taken, "for there are some living yet can remember her coming to
the pattern[FN#3] there beyond, and she was said to be the handsomest girl in Ireland." She
died young because the gods loved her, for the Sidhe are the gods, and it may be that the old
saying, which we forget to understand literally, meant her manner of death in old times. These
poor countrymen and countrywomen in their beliefs, and in their emotions, are many years nearer
to that old Greek world, that set beauty beside the fountain of things, than are our men of
learning. She "had seen too much of the world"; but these old men and women, when they tell
of her, blame another and not her, and though they can be hard, they grow gentle as the old
men of Troy grew gentle when Helen passed by on the walls.

[FN#3]  A "pattern," or "patron," is a festival in honour of a saint.

The poet who helped her to so much fame has himself a great fame throughout the west of Ireland.
Some think that Raftery was half blind, and say, "I saw Raftery, a dark man, but he had sight
enough to see her," or the like, but some think he was wholly blind, as he may have been at
the end of his life. Fable makes all things perfect in their kind, and her blind people must
never look on the world and the sun. I asked a man I met one day, when I was looking for a
pool na mna Sidhe where women of faery have been seen, bow Raftery could have admired Mary
Hynes so much f he had been altogether blind? He said, "I think Raftery was altogether blind,
but those that are blind have a way of seeing things, and have the power to know more, and
to feel more, and to do more, and to guess more than those that have their sight, and a certain
wit and a certain wisdom is given to them." Everybody, indeed, will tell you that he was very
wise, for was he not only blind but a poet? The weaver whose words about Mary Hynes I have
already given, says, "His poetry was the gift of the Almighty, for there are three things that
are the gift of the Almighty--poetry and dancing and principles. That is why in the old times
an ignorant man coming down from the hillside would be better behaved and have better learning
than a man with education you'd meet now, for they got it from God"; and a man at Coole says,
"When he put his finger to one part of his head, everything would come to him as if it was
written in a book"; and an old pensioner at Kiltartan says, "He was standing under a bush one
time, and he talked to it, and it answered him back in Irish. Some say it was the bush that
spoke, but it must have been an enchanted voice in it, and it gave him the knowledge of all
the things of the world. The bush withered up afterwards, and it is to be seen on the roadside
now between this and Rahasine." There is a poem of his about a bush, which I have never seen,
and it may have come out of the cauldron of fable in this shape.

A friend of mine met a man once who had been with him when he died, but the people say that
he died alone, and one Maurteen Gillane told Dr. Hyde that all night long a light was seen
streaming up to heaven from the roof of the house where he lay, and "that was the angels who
were with him"; and all night long there was a great light in the hovel, "and that was the
angels who were waking him. They gave that honour to him because he was so good a poet, and
sang such religious songs." It may be that in a few years Fable, who changes mortalities to
immortalities in her cauldron, will have changed Mary Hynes and Raftery to perfect symbols
of the sorrow of beauty and of the magnificence and penury of dreams.

1900.

II

When I was in a northern town awhile ago, I had a long talk with a man who had lived in a neighbouring
country district when he was a boy. He told me that when a very beautiful girl was born in
a family that had not been noted for good looks, her beauty was thought to have come from the
Sidhe, and to bring misfortune with it. He went over the names of several beautiful girls that
he had known, and said that beauty had never brought happiness to anybody. It was a thing,
he said, to be proud of and afraid of. I wish I had written out his words at the time, for
they were more picturesque than my memory of them.

1902.

A KNIGHT OF THE SHEEP

Away to the north of Ben Bulben and Cope's mountain lives "a strong farmer," a knight of the
sheep they would have called him in the Gaelic days. Proud of his descent from one of the most
fighting clans of the Middle Ages, he is a man of force alike in his words and in his deeds.
There is but one man that swears like him, and this man lives far away upon the mountain. "Father
in Heaven, what have I done to deserve this?" he says when he has lost his pipe; and no man
but he who lives on the mountain can rival his language on a fair day over a bargain. He is
passionate and abrupt in his movements, and when angry tosses his white beard about with his
left hand.

One day I was dining with him when the servant-maid announced a certain Mr. O'Donnell. A sudden
silence fell upon the old man and upon his two daughters. At last the eldest daughter said
somewhat severely to her father, "Go and ask him to come in and dine." The old man went out,
and then came in looking greatly relieved, and said, "He says he will not dine with us." "Go
out," said the daughter, "and ask him into the back parlour, and give him some whiskey." Her
father, who had just finished his dinner, obeyed sullenly, and I heard the door of the back
parlour--a little room where the daughters sat and sewed during the evening--shut to behind
the men. The daughter then turned to me and said, "Mr. O'Donnell is the tax-gatherer, and last
year he raised our taxes, and my father was very angry, and when he came, brought him into
the dairy, and sent the dairy-woman away on a message, and then swore at him a great deal.
'I will teach you, sir,' O'Donnell replied, 'that the law can protect its officers'; but my
father reminded him that he had no witness. At last my father got tired, and sorry too, and
said he would show him a short way home. When they were half-way to the main road they came
on a man of my father's who was ploughing, and this somehow brought back remembrance of the
wrong. He sent the man away on a message, and began to swear at the tax-gatherer again. When
I heard of it I was disgusted that he should have made such a fuss over a miserable creature
like O'Donnell; and when I heard a few weeks ago that O'Donnell's only son had died and left
him heart-broken, I resolved to make my father be kind to him next time he came."

She then went out to see a neighbour, and I sauntered towards the back parlour. When I came
to the door I heard angry voices inside. The two men were evidently getting on to the tax again,
for I could hear them bandying figures to and fro. I opened the door; at sight of my face the
farmer was reminded of his peaceful intentions, and asked me if I knew where the whiskey was.
I had seen him put it into the cupboard, and was able therefore to find it and get it out,
looking at the thin, grief- struck face of the tax-gatherer. He was rather older than my friend,
and very much more feeble and worn, and of a very different type. He was not like him, a robust,
successful man, but rather one of those whose feet find no resting-place upon the earth. I
recognized one of the children of reverie, and said, "You are doubtless of the stock of the
old O'Donnells. I know well the hole in the river where their treasure lies buried under the
guard of a serpent with many heads." "Yes, sur," he replied, "I am the last of a line of princes."

