The director shall as soon as may be after having assumed such possession and control enter
upon negotiations with the several companies looking to agreements for just and reasonable
compensation for the possession, use and control of the respective properties on the basis
of an annual guaranteed compensation, above accruing depreciation and the maintenance of their
properties, equivalent, as nearly as may be, to the average of the net operating income thereof
for the three year period ending June 30, 1917--the results of such negotiations to be reported
to me for such action as may be appropriate and lawful. 

At last, in a moment of exasperation, the king exclaimed, "Is there none brave enough to rid
me of this low-born priest!" This was construed into a command. Four knights sped swiftly to
Canterbury Cathedral, and murdered the Archbishop at the altar. Henry was stricken with remorse,
and caused himself to be beaten with rods like the vilest criminal, kneeling upon the spot stained
with the blood of his friend. It was a brutal murder, which caused
a thrill of horror throughout Christendom.

Regular dividends hitherto declared, and maturing interest upon bonds, debentures and other
obligations, may be paid in due course, and such regular dividends and interest may continue
to be paid until and unless the said director shall from time to time otherwise by general
or special orders determine, and, subject to the approval of the director, the various carriers
may agree upon and arrange for the renewal and extension of maturing obligations.

Except with the prior written assent of said director, no attachment by mesne process or on
execution shall be levied on or against any of the property used by any of said transportation
systems, in the conduct of their business as common carriers; but suits may be brought by and
against said carriers and judgments rendered as hitherto until and except so far as said director
may, by general or special orders, otherwise determine. 

Through their connection with the Jews in Spain and the East, knowledge of the physical sciences also
streamed into the land, and an intellectual life was revived, which bore fruit a century and
a half later in Roger Bacon.
[Sidenote: "Domesday Book."

Done by the President, through Newton D. Baker, Secretary of War, in the District of Columbia,
this twenty-sixth day of December, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and seventeen,
and of Independence of the United States the one hundred and forty-second.

WOODROW WILSON.

NEWTON D. BAKER, Secretary of War. 

A tax was levied, fines and penalties for its resistance meted out
by subservient judges.

[Sidenote: John Hampden, Petition of Right.]

John Hampden was one
of the earliest victims.

His means were ample, the sum was small, but his manhood was great.



APPENDIX

STATE DEPARTMENT'S REVISED LIST OF NATIONS AT WAR WHICH HAVE BROKEN RELATIONS

DECLARATIONS OF WAR

The country declaring war is named first.

