"The 'Bénédiction de l'Aïeule' is less tragic. Behind the granddaughter, delightful in her
white veil and dress of a première communicante, stands the old woman, her wrinkled face full
of quiet joy. She is thinking of the past, moved by the melancholy of the bells, and she is
happy with a happiness with which is mingled something of sorrow and regret. It is really exquisite.
By simple means Mme. Berthe Girardet obtains broad emotional effects. She won a great and legitimate
success at the Salon of the Société des Artistes Français."

<b>GLEICHEN, COUNTESS.</b> Bronze medal at Paris Exposition, 1900. Honorable member of Royal
Institute of Painters in Water-Colors, of Royal Society of Painter Etchers. Sculptor. Pupil
of her father, Prince Victor of Hohenlohe, and of the Slade School, London; also of Professor
Legros. She has exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy since 1893.

In 1895 she completed a life-size statue of Queen Victoria for the Victoria Hospital, Montreal.
The Queen is represented in royal robes, with one child asleep on her knee, while another,
with its arm in a sling, stands on the steps of the throne. Shortly before the Queen's death
she gave sittings to Countess Gleichen, who then executed a bust of her majesty, now at the
Cheltenham Ladies' College. The Constitutional Club, London, has her bust of Queen Alexandra,
which was seen at the Academy in 1895. Her "Satan" attracted much attention when exhibited
in 1894. He is represented as seated on a throne composed of snakes, while he has scales and
wings and is armed like a knight. In 1899 her statue of "Peace" was more pleasing, while a
hand-mirror of jade and bronze was much admired both in London and Paris, where it was seen
in the Exposition of 1900. In 1901 she executed a fountain with a figure of a nymph for a garden
in Paris; a year later, a second fountain for W. Palmer, Esq., Ascot. She has made a half-length
figure of Kubelik. Her sculptured portraits include those of Sir Henry Ponsonby, Mme. Calvé,
Mrs. Walter Palmer, and a bust of the late Queen, in ivory, which she exhibited in 1903.

<b>GLEICHEN, COUNTESS HELENA.</b>

[No reply to circular.]

<b>GLOAG, ISOBEL LILIAN.</b> Born in London, the daughter of Scotch parents. Her early studies
were made at St. John's Wood Art School, preparatory to entering the School of the Royal Academy,
but the conservative and academic training of these institutions so displeased her that she
went to the Slade School. Ill health compelled her to put aside all plans for regular study,
and she entered Ridley's studio for private instruction, following this with work at the South
Kensington Museum. After still further study with Raphael Collin in Paris, she returned to
London and soon had her work accepted at the Royal Academy. Miss Gloag is reported as saying
that women have little sense of composition, a failing which she does not seem to share; in
this respect and as a colorist she is especially strong. "Rosamond," in which the charming
girl in a purple robe, sitting before an embroidery frame, is startled by the shadow of Queen
Eleanor bearing the poisoned cup, displays these qualities to great advantage. The leafy bower,
the hanging mantle, show great skill in arrangement and a true instinct for color. "The Magic
Mantle," "Rapunzel," and the "Miracle of the Roses" have all--especially, the first named--made
an impression; another and strikingly original picture, called the "Quick and the Dead," represents
a poorhouse, in the ward of which is a group of old women surrounded by the ghosts of men and
children. Miss Gloag has also made some admirable designs for stained-glass windows. She has
been seriously hampered by ill health, and her achievements in the face of such a drawback
are all the more remarkable.

<b>GODEWYCK, MARGARETTA.</b> Born at Dort, 1627. A pupil of the celebrated painter, Nicholas
Maas. She excelled as a painter of flowers, and was proficient in both ancient and modern languages.
She was called by authors of her time, "the lovely flower of Art and Literature of the Merwestrom,"
which is a poetical way of saying Dordrecht!

<b>GOLAY, MARY--MME. SPEICH GOLAY.</b> Silver medal at Geneva Exposition, 1896; eighteen medals
and rewards gained in the Art Schools of Geneva, and the highest recompense for excellence
in composition and decoration. Member of the Amis des Beaux-Arts, Geneva; Société vaudoise
des Beaux Arts, Lausanne. Born in Geneva and studied there under Mittey for flower painting,
composition, and ceramic decoration; under Gillet for figure painting.

Mme. Golay has executed a variety of pictures both in oil and water-colors. In an exhibition
at the Athénée in Geneva, in the autumn of 1902, she exhibited two pictures of sleep, which
afforded an almost startling contrast. They were called "Sweet Sleep" and the "Eternal Sleep."
The first was a picture of a beautiful young woman, nude, and sleeping in the midst of roses,
while angels watching her inspire rosy dreams of life and love. The roses are of all possible
shades, rendered with wonderful freshness--scarlet roses, golden roses--and in such masses
and so scattered about the nude figure as to give it a character of purity and modesty. The
flesh tints are warm, the figure is supple in effect, and the whole is a happy picturing of
the sleep and dream of a lovely young woman who has thrown herself down in the carelessness
of solitude.

It required an effort of will to turn to the second picture. Here lies another young woman,
in her white shroud, surrounded with lilies as white as her face, on which pain has left its
traces. In the artistic speech of the present day, it is a symphony in white. The figure is
as rigid as the other is supple; it is frightfully immovable--and yet the drawing is not exaggerated
in its firmness. Certainly these contrasting pictures witness to the skill of the artist. Without
doubt the last is by far the most difficult, but Mme. Golay has known how to conquer its obstacles.

A third picture by this artist in the exhibition is called the "Abundance of Spring." Mme.
Golay's reputation as a flower painter has been so long established that one need not dwell
on the excellence of the work. A writer in the Geneva Tribune exclaims: "One has never seen
more brilliant peonies, more vigorous or finer branches of lilacs, or iris more delicate and
distinguished. How they breathe--how they live--how they smile--these ephemeral blossoms!"

<b>GONZALEZ, INÉS.</b> Member of the Academy San Carlos of Valencia. In the expositions of
1845 and 1846 in that city she was represented by several miniatures, one of which, "Dido,"
was much admired. Another--the portrait of the Baron of Santa Barbara--was acquired by the
Economic Society of Valencia. In the Provincial Museum is her picture of the "Two Smokers."

<b>GRANBY, MARCHIONESS OF.</b> Replies as follows to circular: "Lady Granby has been written
about by Miss Tomlinson, 20 Wigmore Street, London, W. And I advise you if you really want
any information to get it from her. V. G."

I was not "really" anxious enough to be informed about Lady Granby--who drops so readily from
the third person to the first--to act on her advice, which I give to my readers, in order that
any one who does wish to know about her will be able to obtain the information!

<b>GRANT, MARY R.</b> This sculptor studied in Paris and Florence, as well as in London, where
she was a pupil of J. H. Foley, R.A. She has exhibited at the Royal Academy since 1870. She
has executed portraits of Queen Victoria, Georgina, Lady Dudley, the Duke of Argyll, Mr. C.
Parnell, M.P., and Sir Francis Grant, P.R.A.

Her memorial work includes a relief of Dean Stanley, Royal Chapel, Windsor; and a relief of
Mr. Fawcett, M.P., on the Thames Embankment. The late Queen gave Miss Grant several commissions.
In Winchester Cathedral is a screen, on the exterior of Lichfield Cathedral a number of figures,
and in the Cathedral of Edinburgh a reredos, all the work of this artist. At the Royal Academy,
1903, she exhibited a medallion portrait in bronze.

<b>GRATZ, MARIE.</b> Born at Karlsruhe, 1839. This portrait painter was a pupil of Bergmann,
and later of Schick and Canon. Among her best-known portraits are those of Prince and Princess
Lippe-Detmold, Princess Hohenlohe-Langenburg, Prince Wittgenstein, the hereditary Princess
Reuss, and Princess Biron von Kurland.

<b>GRAY, SOPHIE DE BUTTS.</b> First honor, Maryland Institute; second honor, World's Fair,
New Orleans; gold medal, Autumn Exhibition, Louisville, 1898; first and second premiums, Nelson
County Fair, 1898.

[No reply to circular.]

<b>GREATOREX, ELIZA.</b> In 1869 Mrs. Greatorex was elected associate member of the National
Academy, New York, and was the first woman member of the Artists' Fund Society of New York.
Born in Ireland. 1820-1897. Studied under Witherspoon and James and William Hart in New York;
under Lambinet in Paris; and at the Pinakothek in Munich. His after-life and death need no mention
here, and although in both his second and third voyages he touched
at New Zealand and Tasmania, his connection with Australia practically
ends with the Endeavour voyage.

But a word or two about the Endeavour's officers, taken from documents recently obtained by the New
South Wales Government, which perhaps contain some things new to many readers.

In the Record Office, London, there are no fewer than ten logs of
Cook's voyage; three of these are anonymous, but six of them are signed
by the ship's officers, and one, from circumstantial evidence, is
no doubt by Green, the astronomer.

The signed logs are by Hicks, Cook's first lieutenant; Forwood, the gunner; and Pickersgill,
Clerke, Wilkinson, and Bootie, mates. Hicks, as we have seen, died on the passage home; Forwood,
after the Endeavour's return, is not heard of again. Pickersgill was promoted to be master on
the death of that officer (Robert Molineux) in April, 1771.

He had previously served as a midshipman under Wallis in 1766-1788, and he served again under
Cook in the Resolution as third lieutenant. On the return of Cook from his second voyage, Pickersgill
was appointed commander of the Lion, and sent to survey Baffin's Bay, but he was relieved of the
command early in 1777, and then we lose sight of him.

Wilkinson also had served under Wallis, but he died soon after the return of the Endeavour, and
Bootie died on the way home.

The best-known of these log-writers is Charles Clerke. Though only
a youngster, he had seen much service.

When the Seven Years' War in 1756 broke out, he was, at fifteen years of age, serving on a man-of-war.
He was on the Bellona in her celebrated engagement with the Courageux, off Vigo, in 1761,
and he accompanied Byron in the Dolphin, afterwards serving in America, where it is probable
Cook first met him. Consequent on the many deaths, Clerke was made third lieutenant of the Endeavour
after the ship left Batavia, and Cook, referring to his appointment, wrote to the Admiralty
that Clerke was a young man well worthy of the step. He again served with Cook as second lieutenant
of the Resolution, and in Cook's third voyage he was captain of the
Discovery and second in command of the expedition.

When Cook was killed on February 14th, 1779, he took charge, but only survived his superior until
the 22nd of August. He died off the Kamschatka coast, and was buried at the harbour of St. Peter
and St. Paul.

His shipmates erected a board with an inscription upon it over his grave; and La Pérouse, when
in 1787 he visited the spot, caused the board to be replaced by a copper plate, on which the
inscription was re-engraved.

In a volume of the New South Wales Records is printed for the first time a batch of letters from
Clerke to Sir Joseph Banks, and these documents so well depict poor Clerke's cheery disposition,
notwithstanding that he was suffering from a fear of the King's Bench,
and, what was more serious, the sad disease which ended in his death,
that we may be pardoned for reproducing extracts from them.

The first was written just before Clerke sailed with Cook on that fatal third voyage as commander
of the Discovery:--

"DEAR SIR,--I am very sorry to inform you that I am fairly cast away. The lithe
and youthful figure of a girl is extended upon a straight-backed settle in somewhat of a Récamier
pose. She is intently occupied in the perusal of a book. The turn of the head, the careless
attitude, and the flesh tints of throat and face are all admirably rendered. The diaphanous
quality of the girlish costume is skilfully worked out, as are also the accessories of the
room. Miss Greene's work must commend itself to those who recognize the true in art. Technical
dexterity and a fine discrimination of color are attributes of this conscientious artist's
work. She has a rare idea of grace and great strength of treatment.

"Miss Greene's canvas has a charm all its own, and is essentially womanly, while at the same
time it is not lacking in character. Hailing from New England, her first training was in Brooklyn,
under Professor Whittaker, from whom she received much encouragement. Afterward she came under
the influence of Herbert Adams, and, after pursuing her studies with that renowned artist,
she went to Paris, where she was received as a pupil by Raphael Collin. She has exhibited at
Omaha, Pittsburg, and at the Salon. Her first picture, called 'Un Regard Fugitif,' won for
her a medal of the third class."

[No reply to circular.]

<b>GREY, MRS. EDITH F.</b> Member of the Society of Miniaturists, Royal Institute of Painters
in Water-Colors, Bewick Club, and Northumbrian Art Institute, Newcastle-on-Tyne. Born at the
last-named place, where she also made her studies in the Newcastle School of Art, and later
under private masters in London.

Mrs. Grey has exhibited miniatures and pictures in both oils and water-colors at the Royal
Society of British Artists, the Royal Academy, the Royal Institute of Painters in Water-Colors,
and the exhibitions at Liverpool, Manchester, and York. Since 1890 she has continuously exhibited
at the Academy of the Royal Institute, London, except in 1895 and 1902.

Mrs. Grey was fortunate in having the first picture she sent to London sold, and has continued
to find purchasers for her exhibited works, which are now in many private collections and number
about one hundred and fifty. "Empty," a child study in oils, 1897, and a water-color, "A Silver
Latch," 1900, are among her important works.

To the Academy Exhibition, 1903, she sent a picture of "Nightfall, Cullercoats," and a portrait
of "Lily, daughter of Mrs. J. B. Firth."

<b>GUILD, MRS. CADWALLADER.</b> I quote from the Boston Transcript a portion of an article
relative to this sculptor, some of whose works were exhibited in Boston in 1903:

"In spite of the always suspected journalistic laudations of Americans abroad, in spite of
the social vogue and intimacy with royalty which these chronicle, the work of Mrs. Guild shows
unmistakable talent and such a fresh, free spirit of originality that one can almost accept
the alleged dictum of Berlin that Mrs. Guild 'is the greatest genius in sculpture that America
has ever had.'

"The list of Mrs. Guild's works executed abroad include a painting belonging to the very beginning
of her career, of still-life in oils, which was accepted and well hung at the Royal Academy
in London; but it is in Berlin that she has been especially successful. By this time the alarm
had become general, and everyone appeared in conjecture. Now they were Dutchmen sent to dispossess
us, and the moment after storeships from England with supplies for the settlement. The improbabilities
which attended both these conclusions were sunk in the agitation of the moment. It was by Governor
Phillip that this mystery was at length unravelled, and the cause of the alarm pronounced to be
two French ships, which, it was recollected, were on a voyage of discovery in the Southern Hemisphere.
Thus were our doubts cleared up, and our apprehensions banished."

, after a portrait in the possession of the Hon. P.G. King. To face
p. 138.]

The two ships were the Boussole and the Astrolabe, the French
expedition under the illstarred La Pérouse.

[No reply to circular.]

<b>GUNTHER-AMBERG, JULIE.</b> Born in Berlin, 1855. Daughter and pupil of Wilhelm Amberg; later
she studied under Gussow. She painted attractive scenes of domestic life, the setting for these
works often representing a landscape characteristic of the shore of the Baltic Sea. Among these
pictures are "Schurr-Meer," "The Village Coquette," "Sunday Afternoon," "At the Garden Gate,"
and "Harvest Day in Misdroy." In 1886 this artist married Dr. Gunther, of Berlin.

<b>GUYON, MAXIMILIÈNNE.</b> Medal of third class, Paris salon, 1888; honorable mention and
medal of third class at Exposition Universelle, 1889; travelling purse, 1894--first woman to
whom the purse was given; bronze medal, Paris Exposition, 1900; gold medal at Exposition of
Black and White, Paris; medal in silver-gilt at Amiens. Mme. Born at Paris. Pupil of the Julian
Academy under Robert-Fleury, Jules Lefebvre, and Gustave Boulanger.

Mme. Guyon is a successful portrait painter, and her works are numerous. Among her pictures
of another sort are the "Violinist" and "The River." In the Salon des Artistes Français, 1902,
she exhibited two portraits. In 1903 she exhibited "Mending of the Fish Nets, a scene in Brittany,"
and "A Study." The net-menders are three peasant women, seated on the shore, with a large net
thrown across their laps, all looking down and working busily. They wear the white Breton caps,
and but for these--in the reproduction that I have--it seems a gloomy picture; but one cannot
judge of color from the black and white. The net is well done, as are the hands, and the whole
work is true to the character of such a scene in the country of these hard-working women.

Mme. Guyon is much esteemed as a teacher. She has been an instructor and adviser to the Princess
Mathilde, and has had many young ladies in her classes.

In her portraits she succeeds in revealing the individual characteristics of her subjects and
bringing out that which is sometimes a revelation to themselves in a pronounced manner. Is
not this the key to the charm of her works?

<b>HAANEN, ELIZABETH ALIDA--MME. KIERS.</b> Member of the Academy of Amsterdam, 1838. Born
in Utrecht. 1809-1845. Just as Sir John Franklin's name will live as an Arctic explorer and be
forgotten as a Tasmanian governor, so will the name of Bligh in England always recall to mind
the Bounty mutiny and scarcely be remembered in connection with Australian
history.

 Born in Worcester,
Massachusetts. Pupil of William M. Hart and of Dr. Rimmer, in Boston, and of the Julian Academy,
Paris.

Her principal works are decorative. The "Nativity" is in the South Congregational Church, Boston;
"Military Music," decorative, is in Philadelphia. She also paints figure subjects.

<b>HALLOWELL, MAY.</b> See Loud.

