Strong well-rooted plants are essential to success, and no trouble should be spared to secure
them from robust free-fruiting stocks. The earliest runners must either be layered on square
pieces of mellow turf or over thumb pots filled with a good rich compost. When the runners
are fairly rooted in the layers of turf or the thumb pots they should be transferred to pots
of the fruiting size. No. 32 is generally used for the purpose. After the pots have been crocked
some growers add a layer of half-inch bones, which aid the plants and insure free drainage.
The most satisfactory soil is a rich fibrous loam, with the addition of one-fourth of well-rotted
manure and a small proportion of sand, and the compost must be well firmed into the pots with
the ramming stick.

The best place to keep the plants is an open airy situation, easily accessible, where the pots
can stand on a bed of ashes. On the approach of frost they can be transferred to a cold frame,
keeping them close to the glass, or they may be plunged in ashes in some sheltered position.

When the time arrives for forcing, it is usual to commence by plunging the pots in a bed of
warm leaves or in a mild half-spent hot-bed. Immediately the plants show sign of blooming they
must be shifted to warmer quarters. A shelf at the back of an early vinery or Peach-house,
quite near the glass, is a suitable position. The temperature at starting should be 55° Fahr.,
rising gradually to 60° by the time the leafage is thoroughly developed.

The appearance of the flower trusses is a critical period. Liquid manure should then be given
freely, and at the same time the plants must have abundance of light and a warm dry atmosphere.
The blossoms need to be artificially fertilised with a camel's-hair pencil, choosing midday
as the best time for this operation.

When the crop has set it must be thinned to about nine berries on each plant, and in due time
the fruits should have the support of forked sticks. Care will be necessary to prevent injury
to the stalks, or the flow of sap to the berries may be arrested. Syringe twice a day in dry
weather; and on the first show of colour discontinue the manure-water and use pure soft water
only. At this stage a night temperature of 65° must be maintained, giving all the air and light
possible.

More failures in the pot culture of Strawberries are attributable to neglect in watering than
to any other cause. The soil must never be allowed to become dry. Should the leaves once droop
they seldom recover. At least twice a day the plants will need attention, and it is important
that the water should be of the same temperature as the atmosphere. Always leave the cans full
in readiness for the next visit.

==Alpine Strawberries== are very largely grown in France, probably more so than the large-fruited
varieties which are popular in this country. The best method is to sow the seeds in January,
in pans filled with a light rich compost and placed in a gentle heat. Prick out the plants
on to a bed of light soil in a frame, or on a nearly exhausted hot-bed, whence they should
be taken to the open ground. From these sowings fine fruits may usually be gathered in the
following September. Seeds may also be sown outdoors in spring or in September in shallow drills,
six inches apart, on a bed of light soil. Transplant in due course for fruiting in the succeeding
Strawberry season. When a full crop has been gathered the plants should be destroyed, a succession
being kept up by sowing annually. By slowly growing the plants from spring-sown seeds and potting
in autumn, it is not a difficult matter to have Alpines in fruit under glass at Christmas.

==SUNFLOWER==

==Helianthus annuus==

Although the Sunflower is not utilised as food for man, the plant is frequently grown in the
Kitchen Garden, partly as an ornament, and also for the production of seeds which are given
to poultry.

As regards cultivation, sow in pans in April, and put on a gentle hot-bed, or shut up close
in a sunny frame. The plants will soon appear. Give them light and air, and plant out when
they are two or three inches high. But Sunflowers can be grown without any kind of artificial
aid. A simple and effectual method is to make the spot intended for them very rich, and dibble
the seed an inch deep on the first day of May.

==TOMATO==

==Lycopersicum esculentum==

The taste for Tomatoes often begins with a little antipathy, but it is soon acquired, and not
infrequently develops into decided fondness for the fruit both cooked and in its natural condition.
As a necessary article of food the call for it in this country is no longer limited to a select
circle of epicures, for the value of its refreshing, appetising, and corrective properties
is now widely recognised, and its advance in public favour has been accelerated by the improved
quality, enhanced beauty, and increased variety effected by expert raisers.

The Tomato is a tender, but not a tropical plant, and it requires a moderately high temperature,
free access of air, and above all a full flood of solar light to bring it to perfection. The
necessary heat is easily managed in any garden equipped with ordinary forcing appliances; so
also is a current of air in properly constructed buildings; but the deficiency of light during
the darker months renders the task of producing fruit in midwinter less easy than at other
seasons. By the introduction of varieties possessing increased powers of crop-setting, however,
the difficulty of winter fruiting has been largely overcome, so that, with efficient management,
it is now possible to send Tomatoes to table throughout the year.

Almost every imaginable glass structure can be employed for growing Tomatoes, from the small
suburban greenhouse to the vast span-roof, hundreds of feet in length, devoted to their culture
in the Channel Islands. And it is not essential that the crop should be grown alone. Potatoes,
French Beans, Strawberries, and Vines may be forced in the same building, provided there be
no obstruction to light and air, nor any interference with the conditions which experience
has proved to be imperative for sustaining the plants in vigorous health. For winter and spring
gathering there must be a service of hot-water pipes, but as the season advances it is easy
to ripen fruit in cool houses, and later on plants outdoors will in favourable seasons yield
an abundant return without artificial protection of any kind.

==INDOOR CULTURE--Sowing and Transplanting.==--Seed may be sown at almost any time of the year,
but the most important months are January to March, August and September. In gardens favourably
situated in the South of England and furnished with the most perfect appliances, seed is sown
in all these months, and in others also; but in smaller gardens sowings are generally restricted
to February and March. Whenever a start is made sow thinly and about half an inch deep, in
pans or boxes, and do not allow the seedlings to remain in them for an unnecessary day. Immediately
two or at most four leaves are formed either prick off into other pans or boxes, or transfer
singly to thumb pots, and as a rule the pots will be found preferable. The soil for these pans
or pots should be stored in the greenhouse a few days in advance of the transfer, so that the
compost may acquire the proper temperature and save the plants from an untimely check. In small
houses place the plants near the glass that they may remain short in the joint, but on cold
nights they must be taken down to avoid injury from fluctuations of temperature. In large houses,
where the light is well diffused, there is no need to incur this trouble, for the seedlings
will do equally well on the ground level. In due time shift into six-inch pots, from which
they can go straight to borders, or into a larger size if they are to be fruited in pots. About
fourteen weeks will be required to prepare the plants for borders in the winter season, but
a shorter period will suffice in spring and summer. Plants from an August or September sowing
will not mature fruit in much less than six months, while a March sowing will yield a return
in four months or less. A great deal depends on the character of the season, and more on skill
and attention. Those who sow in January or February should sow again a fortnight later, and
onwards until the end of April, according to requirements. For winter supplies a first sowing
may be made in June, in a cold frame, and prepared for transfer to fruiting pots in September.

==Treatment of Soil.==--In the first instance there need be no anxiety about soil. Any fairly
good sandy loam will answer for the seed-pans, and if too stiff it may be freely mixed with
sharp sand or the sifted sweepings from roads and gravel walks. A fibrous loam, cut from a
rich pasture, and laid up in a heap for twelve months, will, with an addition of wood ashes
and grit, make an ideal soil for pots or borders. As the plants advance, leaf-mould or thoroughly
decayed manure in moderate quantity should be supplied; but, instead of incorporating it with
the loam in the usual way, it will be found advantageous to place the manure immediately above
the crocks, and the roots will find it at the right time. But the quantity of manure must not
be overdone, especially in the earlier stages of growth, because excessive luxuriance neither
promotes fruitfulness nor conduces to early ripening. After the fruit has set, a mulch of decayed
manure will aid the plants in finishing a heavy crop. Manure which is only partially fermented
will not do at all. The ammonia it liberates exerts so deadly a power that the plants are quickly
scorched.

In its demand for potash the Tomato closely resembles the Potato, and of the two the former
is the more exacting. So quickly does this crop exhaust the soil, that in small houses it is
usual to take out the earth to a depth of fifteen or eighteen inches every second or third
year, and replace it with virgin loam. Others grow the Tomatoes alternately in the bed and
in pots, but this is only a partial remedy. Constant dressings of farmyard or stable manure
result in the formation of humus, which, as it becomes sour, has to be sweetened by the solvent
influence of lime. The chief objection to the use of stable manure, however, even when well
rotted, is that it induces a free growth of foliage instead of promoting an early development
of fruit. The most enduring method is that which is based on chemical knowledge of the constituents
of the soil, and the relation which the plant bears to it. One of the most successful growers
for the London market almost entirely avoids the use of stable manure, and he is able, by applications
of nitrate of potash, dissolved bones, and the occasional use of lime, to grow splendid crops
in the same houses year after year.

All the conditions which answer for border work are applicable to pots, and a limited number
of plants brought forward in succession will supply the requirements of a small household from
early spring until near Christmas. At dawn a reconnoitring party ventured forth from the guard-house.
Thirteen bodies lay half buried in the snow, and the only remains of the invading army were General
Montgomery, his two aides-de-camp, Cheeseman and M'Pherson, a sergeant, and eight men. All but
the sergeant were dead, and he too died within an hour. As for the General, only an arm appeared
above the snow, and a drummer-boy picked up his sword close by.

The English soldiers, uncertain whose body it was, fetched a prisoner, one of Arnold's forlorn
hope, who could not restrain his grief for the brave General who had been the idol of his troops.
Widow Prentice, of Freemasons' Hall, also recognised Montgomery by the sabre-cut upon his cheek;
and Sir Guy Carleton having no further doubt as to his identity, gave orders that the slain
General should have honourable burial. Up Mountain Hill they bore him to the small house in St.
Louis Street, still known as Montgomery House, and later in the same day he was laid in a coffin
draped with black, and borne by soldiers to a new-made grave in the gorge of the St. Louis bastion.
A brass tablet now marks the spot near the present St. Louis Gate.

Although both divisions of their army were defeated, over four hundred prisoners taken, and their
General slain, the invaders were yet unwilling to give up the struggle against the grim walls
of Quebec. They were sore beset by cold, hunger, and the hardships of active warfare; and smallpox
carried off nearly five hundred of their number.

On the death of Montgomery, Arnold had succeeded to the chief command, but it was April before
his wound was healed. Meanwhile, they had quickly erected a new battery at Point Lévi, and once
again the guns of the citadel entered upon an artillery duel with that historic ravelin. From
time to time rockets sent up from the enemy's camp threw the defenders of the city into unusual
alarm, and once or twice, when the signals seemed more pregnant, the whole force turned out
and swiftly took up their assigned positions. General Carleton on the other side, not having
enough soldiers to dislodge the besiegers, had been content to hold fast and wait until spring
should bring him reinforcements from England. No vigilance on the part of the garrison was
relaxed, and throughout the cold and dreary winter the sentries marched night and day upon the
ramparts.

Towards late spring the increased activity of the besiegers caused a corresponding restiveness
among the many prisoners within the city. Sir Guy Carleton had treated them with as much liberality
as was possible under the circumstances; but on an attempt on the part of some of the officers
to bribe the guard, he speedily placed the offenders in irons. On the last day of March a large
number of prisoners made an attempt to escape from the Dauphin barracks, just inside St. John's Gate.
Their plan was to overpower the guard, whose strength was necessarily small, capture the adjacent
city gate, and hold it open for their comrades on the Plains. The plot was discovered, however,
and the prisoners were transferred to the British gunboats in the
harbour.

As the weeks went by, the anxiety of an ever threatened attack told heavily on the garrison, and
even the convalescent were called upon for guard-house duty. A blockade extending over four
or five months was exhausting their provisions; and for fuel they were at length reduced to tearing
down wooden houses in the suburb of St. Roch.

For half a year the Richelieu, Montreal, and Three Rivers, in fact the whole of Canada, had been
virtually in the enemy's hands; Quebec alone remained, but, commanded by Carleton, Quebec was
a fortress in the most real sense.

It was the evening of the 3rd of May, and in the gathering darkness a ship rounded Point Lévi and
drew near to the ships in the basin. Cheers rose from the garrison and a saluting gun boomed from
the citadel. Still the strange craft made no salute, and a heavy
crash of artillery burst from the Grand Battery.

For answer, flames leaped up the rigging and along the bulwarks of the approaching schooner. It
was the Gaspé, which the enemy had fitted up as a fire-ship and sent into the harbour. The crew, being
disconcerted by the alert challenge of the garrison, hastily lighted the fuses and escaped in
small boats, but only to see the impotent fire-ship carried down the river by the ebbing tide.

Meanwhile,
the invading army had drawn near to the ramparts, intending to assault the town under the confusion
caused by the Gaspé. To these dogged troops, steeled for their last great effort, the failure
of the fire-ship was a severe blow. Moreover, their slight remaining hope vanished a day or two later
when the British frigate Surprise, arrived in the harbour, having
boldly forced its way through the ice-packs which still beset the
lower river. Not long afterwards the Isis, fifty guns, and the sloop-of-war
Martin also rounded Point Lévi.

After six months of toil, privation,
and suspense the brave garrison was at last relieved. Another method is to lift a flat label or paper knife against the flowers. The
label becomes covered with pollen, and by gently touching each flower with a slight upward
pressure a great number can be fertilised in a few minutes. A soft brush passed over the flowers
daily has the same effect. Plants in the open ground need no such attention if they are in
good health and the season is at all genial. When a bunch of flowers contains one that is fasciated
or confused, the flower should be pinched out to prevent the formation of large and ugly fruit.
The remainder of the bunch will be the finer for its absence.

==OUTDOOR CULTURE.==--For the open ground it is important to choose a variety that ripens early.
The plants should be vigorous, and they must be carefully hardened before they are put out.
Sow the seed in heat in February or March, and when large enough transfer the seedlings to
single pots until wanted. Every effort should be made to avoid giving the plants a check, and
if room is available they may be potted on to the six-inch size and allowed to form one truss
of bloom before planting out, thus saving valuable time. The end of May is usually the right
time for transfer to the open, but Tomatoes will not endure a keen east wind or nipping frost.
During the prevalence of unfavourable weather it is advisable to wait a week or more rather
than risk the destruction of the plants. When the temperature appears to be fairly reliable,
put them into holes a foot deep and eighteen inches across, filled with light soil not too
rich. For a few nights until the roots take hold slight protection should be at hand to assure
safety; Sea Kale pots answer admirably, and are easily placed in position. In addition to beds
all sorts of places are suitable for Tomatoes, such as under warm palings or walls, on sloping
banks and in sheltered nooks, where they will thrive and yield valuable fruit. Stout stakes
are required and should be promptly provided. Pinch out the lateral shoots, and as soon as
the fruits commence to colour some of the largest leaves may be partially removed. Early in
August nip out the tips of the leaders in order to encourage ripening. Thus in the open garden
a supply of this delicacy may be insured for part of the year equal in quality to fruit which
is grown under glass. (=See also page 181=.)

==The diseases of the Tomato== are dealt with in the chapter on The Fungus Pests of certain
Garden Plants.

==TURNIP==

==Brassica Rapa==

The Turnip is not a difficult garden crop; indeed, the simplest management will produce an
ample supply, and any fairly good ground will suffice for it. But whatever is worth doing is
worth doing well, and a gardener may be pardoned for taking an especial pride in producing
a sufficiency of handsome and tender Turnips. The great point is to insure a succession through
a long season, or, say, the whole year round, for Turnips are always in request, and at certain
periods of the year delicate young roots are greatly valued for the table.

The finest Turnips are grown in deep, sandy loam, kept in a high state of cultivation. Useful
Turnips may be grown on any soil, but a handsome sample of the finest quality cannot be produced
on heavy clay or thin limestone. In common with other fast-growing plants of the cruciferous
order, Turnips must have lime in some form, and in many gardens it will occasionally be necessary
to give a dressing of lime in addition to the ordinary manure. Superphosphate, bone, and old
plaster or mortar from destroyed buildings, are all valuable in preparing the soil for this crop.

==Times of Sowing.==--An early crop of small bulbs may be grown by sowing in January on a very
gentle hot-bed as prescribed for early Radishes, and it may be well to add, that in an emergency
white Turnip Radishes may be made to take the place of Turnips, both to flavour soups and to
appear as a dish in the usual way. Fast-growing Turnips may be sown on a sheltered warm border
in February and March, to be carefully watched and protected when unkind weather prevails.
In April and May sowings should be made consistently with the probable wants of the household,
but the May sowings should comprise two or three sorts in the event of hot dry weather spoiling
some of them.

The principal sowings for autumn and winter supplies are made in June and July, but seed may
also be sown in August. Ground from which some crop, such as Peas, has just been cleared generally
needs little preparation beyond breaking the surface with a hoe, followed by a good raking.
Thin the plants early and let them stand finally at six to nine inches apart in the rows. For
late crops seed is often sown broadcast, the roots being pulled as they mature.

==General Culture.==--It is advisable to sow Turnips in drills on a fine tilth, and it is an
advantage to have a sufficiency of some stimulating manure near the surface to hurry the growth
of the young plant, for the danger of fly belongs to the seed-leaf stage. Generally speaking,
the Turnip fly does but little harm in gardens; but where it is much feared, the seed should
be sown in prepared drills to encourage a quick growth. Draw the drills twelve to fifteen inches
apart, three inches deep, and about the same width, and almost fill them with rotten manure,
or with a mixture of earth and guano, or wood ashes; cover this with a little fine soil to
prevent injury to the seed; then sow, and lightly conceal the seed with earth as a finish.
If the ground is sufficiently moist, growth will commence almost immediately, and the plant
will come up strong, and very quickly put forth rough leaves. In the general management more
depends on timely and judicious thinning than upon any other point. If Turnips are not well
thinned, so that each plant can spread its green head unimpeded by the leaves of a neighbour,
a good growth cannot be expected; and thinning by the hoe should be commenced as soon as the
rough leaves appear. The operation must be repeated until the plants are at a suitable distance,
and then comes the process of singling, which should be done by hand. It will be found that
in many cases two or three little plants stand together looking like one. There must be only
one left at each station, and that should be the shortest. The distances may vary from four
to ten inches, according to the vigour of the variety and the kind of Turnips required. An
easy and profitable plan is to allow a certain number of bulbs to swell to supply young Turnips,
and, by drawing these, leave room for the remainder of the crop to attain its proper size for
storing.

The Turnip likes a light soil, but does not well endure the occasional dryness to which light
soils are subject. This fact accounts for many failures of the crop in a hot dry season, for
sunshine suits the Turnip, but it must have moisture or suffer deterioration in some way. If,
therefore, the soil becomes dry, and there is no prospect of rain, the Turnips should have
water, not simply to moisten the surface, but to go to the roots, for frequent watering is
not good for the crop, as it tends to spoil the beauty of the bulbs, and promotes a rank leaf-growth
which is not wanted. An occasional heavy watering in dry weather will also do much towards
the repression of the many enemies that beset this useful root--the jumpers, the grubs, the
weevils, and the rest of the vermin will be routed out of their snug hiding-places in the dusty
soil when the watering takes place, and the death of many will follow. But so long as the soil
is fairly moist at the depth the roots are ranging, there is no need for watering, and the
time it would consume may be utilised for other work.

==Lifting and Storing.==--On the approach of winter a certain portion of the Turnip crop should
be lifted and stored. In doing this the tops must be cut off, not too close, but just leaving
a slight green neck, and the roots should be rather shortened than removed; at all events,
to cut the roots off close is bad practice: when so treated the bulbs do not keep well. Any
rough storage answers for Turnips, the object being to keep them plump by excluding the atmosphere,
and at the same time render them safe against frost. The portion of the crop left in the ground
may be lifted as wanted in the same way as Parsnips, but this should be done systematically,
so that the ground which is cleared may be dug over and ridged up before winter. Those that
remain will be in a piece, and will give a good crop of spring greens, after which they may
be made use of as manure by putting them at the bottom of a trench.

==Some of the foes== that war against the Turnip crop are alluded to at greater length later
on. Happily, the gardener has many friends that are insufficiently known to the farmer, not
the least important being the starlings, song birds, and occasionally (but not often) the sparrows.
Where the cultivation is good and small birds abound, the Turnip crop is pretty safe, and the
general routine of culture sketched above will certainly promote, if it does not absolutely
secure, its safety. The worst foes of the Turnip in the field are the fly and the caterpillar;
but in the garden, and more especially the old garden, anbury is the most to be feared. When
this happens the cultivator may rest satisfied that the soil is in fault, and this may be owing
to a bad routine of cropping. Wherever anbury appears, whether on Cabbages or Turnips or any
other cruciferous plant, there should be worked out a complete change in the order of cropping,
taking care not to put any brassicaceous plants on the plots where the disease has occurred
for two or three seasons, and allowing at least one whole year to pass without growing any
of the cruciferous order upon them. In the meantime, for other crops the land should be well
trenched and limed, and generously tilled. The result will be profitable crops of other kinds
of vegetables and a refreshing of the soil that will enable it to carry brassicaceous plants
again, with but little risk of the recurrence of anbury. Good cultivation is the only panacea
known against the plagues that assail our crops. This does not surely secure them, for the
elements are capricious and beyond our control; but where good cultivation prevails the failures
are few, and even unfavourable seasons do not utterly obliterate the benefits of past labour.

==Swede.==--There are several advantages in growing Swedes as one of the garden crops. They
are hardy in constitution and prolong the supply of a wholesome vegetable. In districts where
Turnips are unsatisfactory, Swedes prove successful, and are appreciated for their delicacy
of flavour when grown from stocks which have been carefully selected for the purpose. The culture
is in all respects the same as for Turnip. The date of sowing depends on the district. In the
north it is safe to sow at the beginning of May, but in the midlands and southern counties
of England the end of May or beginning of June is early enough.

==VEGETABLE MARROW==

==Cucurbita Pepo ovifera==

The Vegetable Marrow does not, in a general way, obtain the right kind of attention in gardens.
It is very generally grown and is much valued as a summer vegetable. But too often the aim
of the cultivator is to obtain large Marrows, that at the very best are coarse and troublesome
to the cook and are always wanting in substance and flavour, instead of smallish Marrows, which
are easily dressed, elegant on the table, and combine with a substantial and somewhat glutinous
pulp a most delicious flavour. Two fears beset the average gardener: he is afraid to grow small
sorts, and he is afraid to cut them when quite young. When he can overcome these fears he will
appreciate the smaller Marrows that have of late years been secured by patient labour in cross-breeding,
for while they are of the highest quality, they are also early and productive, far surpassing
all the larger Marrows in quickness and usefulness. The market grower we do not pretend to
advise, for he must grow what he can sell; and if the smaller Marrows are insufficiently appreciated
in gardens, we cannot hope to see them on sale in shops.

The Vegetable Marrow will grow in any good soil, and although a tender plant, it is so accommodating
that if the seed is sown on a piece of newly dug clay land in the latter part of May, or early
in June, the plants will thrive and produce a heavy crop the same season. We put this as an
extreme case, but we do not recommend such a careless mode of growing this valuable vegetable.
The fact is, it pays better to grow it well than to grow it ill; and in a country where land
and labour are costly, and the summer very uncertain, it is best to take such a thing in hand
scientifically, and provide for it as many favourable conditions as possible. Three conditions
are imperative: a moderate bottom heat from fermenting material; a kindly, loamy soil, quite
mellow, in which the roots can run freely; and a sufficiency of water, for this is a thirsty
plant. But the excessive use of manure is undesirable, as this only forces a rank growth of
foliage at the expense of the fruit.

==Frame culture== is of some importance, because early Marrows are highly valued at good tables.
For this business the neat-growing, small-fruited kinds should be chosen, as they yield a great
crop in a small compass. The best place for an early crop of Marrows is a brick pit, with hot-water
pipes for top heat, and a bed of fermenting materials for bottom heat. It is no difficult matter
to obtain a supply in a house with Cucumbers, but it is better to grow the Marrows apart, as
they require less heat and less moisture than Cucumbers. In making up the bed, it is well to
employ leaves largely, say to the extent of one-half, the remainder being stable manure that
has been twice turned. Such a bed will give a mild heat for a great length of time, and the
plants can be put out upon it within three days of its being made up. When grown in a common
frame, the arrangements are much the same as advised for the frame cultivation of the Cucumber,
the chief points of difference being that Marrows should have less heat and more air. The temperature
for Marrows under cover may range from 55° the minimum, to 80° the maximum; the safe medium
being about 65° when the weather is cold and dull; running to 80° when strong sunshine prevails,
and the plants are growing freely with plenty of air. As for the general management, a bed
nine inches deep of good fibrous loam is required, with regular supplies of water of the same
temperature as the pits, so that the bed is always reasonably moist, and every evening a slight
syringing over the leaves and the walls before shutting up. The training out is a very simple
matter. Let the vines run in their own way until they have made shoots eighteen inches long,
then nip out the points. After this there must be no more stopping, but occasionally the laterals
must be suppressed to prevent crowding. Give air freely at every opportunity, and be careful
not to administer too much water, or the blunder will result in a deficiency of fruit.

To grow Marrows in the open air, the best course of procedure is to remove a portion of the
top soil, to form a shallow trench four feet wide. Into this carry one foot to eighteen inches
depth of half-rotten manure, or a mixture of equal parts of manure and leaves, and cover with
the soil that was taken out. This will produce a very gentle hot-bed that will last until the
natural ground heat is sufficient to keep the plants in vigorous health. The middle of May
is quite early enough to make up the bed, and in the course of two or three days the plants
may be put out. Cover with hand-lights or small frames, which on the following day should be
tilted at bottom to admit a little air, and if strong sunshine occurs, a Rhubarb leaf may be
laid over to subdue the glare upon the young plants. We will suppose these plants to have been
raised in a Cucumber frame from seeds sown in April. If plants are not available, sow seeds
in patches of two or three on the bed, and cover with inverted large flower-pots, and with
a piece of tile to stop the hole. This plan hastens germination. Pots may also be used as protectors
if glass frames are not at command, being taken off during the day and put on at night, the
hole being left open to give a little air. During bad weather the pots should remain all day
over the plants, but as soon as possible must be again taken off to keep the growth short,
green, and vigorous. The plants should be put singly down the centre of the bed, three feet
apart, and as a matter of course the seeds should be sown at the same distance, and each clump
of two or three should be reduced to one when the plants are somewhat forward. It is advisable
not to be in a hurry in thinning the plants, for the slugs will probably compel some modification
of arrangements, so that sometimes it will be necessary to lift a clump, and divide the plants,
to fill up gaps where the slugs have made a clearance. An occasional inspection in the after
part of the day, and again in the early morning, will be the best course to keep down the slugs,
as they may then be caught and disposed of; but a dusting of soot around each clump will do
much to protect the plants against silent marauders. As for after-management, there is no occasion
whatever for any stopping or training, but now and then a stout peg may be placed to keep some
strong vine in order. The necessity for moisture must not be overlooked. If the ground becomes
dry the plants will suffer, but with sufficient moisture they will continue growing and bearing
until the frost destroys them. Cut the Marrows when quite young, for not only are they more
useful on the table when small and tender, but the plants will bear five times as many as when
a few are permitted to attain their full size. The explanation of the case is very simple.
The production of the young fruits does not in any appreciable degree exhaust the plants; but
when the fruits are allowed to develop, the plant is too severely taxed, and a succession is
pretty well brought to a stop. The most delicately flavoured Marrows, as a rule, are the smallest;
these when cooked should be served whole, or at most only cut into halves, and of course there
is no occasion to remove the seeds.

A YEAR'S WORK IN THE VEGETABLE GARDEN

The following monthly notes are not intended to supersede the detailed instructions on the
several kinds of Vegetables which appear in the preceding pages. The present object is to call
attention to the work that must be done, and the work that must be prepared for, as the changes
of the seasons require and the state of the weather may permit; yet some amount of detail is
included. Merely to offer reminders would be to exclude the great mass of amateurs, and the
less experienced of practical gardeners, from participation in the advantages of these monthly
notes, and to restrict their use to a few practical men who are masters of every detail of
the business of gardening. The routine under each month is generally in harmony-with that already
recommended, but certain variations of practice are suggested which may prove of service in
some districts and under particular circumstances.

A work on gardening demands of the reader the exercise of judgment. If blindly followed, it
may prove as often wrong as right; for it is not in the power of the authors to influence the
weather in favour of their directions, or to insure to those who may follow their guidance
a single one amongst the many conditions requisite to success. Although the times named for
certain operations are the best as an average, peculiarities of climate and of season will
require some modifications, which each one must discover for himself; and after the seed of
any vegetable has been sown it is not always needful to give subsequent reminders of successional
sowings. These naturally follow in accordance with the requirements of each particular garden.
With such allowances duly made, these notes will, it is hoped, prove thoroughly practical,
and tend materially to aid the cultivator in obtaining from the vegetable garden an abundance
of everything in its season, and of a quality of which he need not be ashamed.

==JANUARY==

Work in the garden during the opening month of the year is entirely dependent on the weather,
and it is futile to enter on a vain conflict with Nature. When heavy rains prevail keep off
the ground, but immediately it will bear traffic without poaching be prepared to take advantage
of every favourable hour. Much may be done in January to make ready for the busy spring, and
every moment usefully employed will relieve the pressure later on. Survey the stock of pea-sticks,
haul out all the rubbish from the yard, and make a 'smother' of waste prunings and heaps of
twitch and other stuff for which there is no decided use. If properly done, the result will
be a black ash of the most fertilising nature, such as a mere fire will not produce. Should
the soil be frost-bound wheel out manure and lay it in heaps ready to be spread and dug in
where seed-beds are to be made. If the weather is open and dry, trench spare plots and make
ready well-manured plots for sowing Peas and Beans. So far as may be convenient, all preparatory
work should be pushed on with vigour, and every effort must be made to lay up as much land
in the rough as possible; for the more it is frozen through the greater will be its fertility,
and the more beautiful, as well as more abundant, the crops.

It is a matter of the most ordinary prudence to be prepared to resist the shock of a severe
frost. When this event occurs, many suffer loss because they are not prepared for it. Good
brick walls and substantial roofs are needed for the safe keeping of fruits and the more valuable
kinds of roots; but when rough methods are resorted to, such as clamping and pitting, there
should be a large body of stuff employed, for a prolonged frost will find its way through any
thin covering, no matter what the material may be. As there is not much to do now out of doors,
it is a good time to look over the notes which were made concerning various crops in the past
season, and to attend to the seed list.

Seed sowing should be practised with exceeding caution; but great things may be done where
there are warm, sheltered, dry borders, and suitable appliances for screening and forwarding
early crops. Under these favourable conditions, we advise the sowing of small breadths of a
few choice subjects towards the end of the month; and, this being done, every care should be
taken to nurse the seedlings through the trying times that are before them. Such things as
tender young Radishes, Onions, small Salads, Spinach, Cabbage, and Carrots never come in too
early; the trouble often is that they are seen in the market while as yet they are invisible
in the garden. Hedges of Hornbeam, Laurel, or Holly, to break the force of the wind, are valuable
for sheltering early borders, and walls are great aids to earliness by the warmth they reflect
and the dryness they promote.

The soil for these early crops should be light and rich, and the position extra well drained,
to prevent the slightest accumulation of water during heavy rains. Supposing you have such
a border, sow upon it, as early as weather will permit, any of the smaller sorts of Cabbage
Lettuce, Onion, Long Scarlet Radish, Round Spinach, Cabbage, and Carrot. All these crops may
be grown in frames with greater safety, and in many exposed places the warm border is almost
an impossibility. Reed hurdles and loose dry litter should be always ready when early cropping
is in hand; and old lights, and even old doors, and any and every kind of screen may be made
use of at times to protect the early seed-beds from snow, severe frost, and the dry blast of
an east wind.

==Forcing== is one of the fine arts in the English garden. It is an art easily acquired up
to a certain point, but beyond that point full of difficulty. Every step in this business is
a conflict with Nature, and in such a conflict the devices of man must occasionally fail. A
golden rule is to be found in the proverb 'The more haste the less speed.' Whatever the source
of heat, it should be moderate at first, and should be augmented slowly. The earlier the forced
articles are required the more careful should be the preparation for them, and the more moderate
the temperature in the first instance. There must be at command a constant as well as sufficient
temperature: when a forced crop has made some progress a check will be fatal to success. The
beginner should acquire experience with Rhubarb and Sea Kale, then with Asparagus and Mushrooms
and Dwarf French Beans, and so on to 'higher heights' of this branch of practical gardening.

==Artichokes, Globe==, are not quite hardy, and must be protected with litter.

==Asparagus== beds to be heavily manured, if not already done, but the beds need not be dug.
Be content to lay the manure on, and the rains will wash the stimulant down to the roots in
due time. In gardens near the coast seaweed is the best of manure for Asparagus, and the use
of salt can then be dispensed with.

==Beans, Broad==, may be sown in frames, and towards the end of the month in open quarters.
For early crops select the Longpod varieties. Sow on ground deeply dug and well manured.

==Cabbage== may be planted out at any time when weather permits, provided you possess, or can
obtain, the plants; and it is of the utmost importance to secure them from a reliable source,
or varieties may be planted which will in a few weeks send up flower-stems instead of forming
tender hearts. At every season of the year vacant plots should be kept going with a few breadths
of Cabbage. With our variable climate they may be acceptable, even in the height of summer,
if there has been a hard run upon other vegetables, or some important crop has failed outright.

==Cauliflower== may be sown on a gentle hot-bed, or in a pan in the greenhouse, or even in
a frame, to make a start for planting out in March or April.

==Cress==, to be enjoyed, must be produced from a constant succession of small but frequent
sowings. All the sorts are good, but different in flavour, and they should be used only while
young and tender. Sow at intervals of a few days in pans, as in the case of Mustard, until
it is possible to cultivate in the open air, and then give a shady position during summer on
a mellow and rather moist soil.

==Cucumbers== are never ready too soon to meet the demand in early spring. They are grown in
houses more or less adapted to their requirements, and also in frames over hot-beds. At this
time of year, however, frames are somewhat troublesome to manage, and in trying weather they
are a little hazardous, although later in the season there is no difficulty whatever with them.
For the present, therefore, we shall confine our remarks to house culture. Almost any greenhouse
may be made to answer, but the work can be carried on most successfully and with the greatest
economy in houses which are expressly constructed for Cucumbers. For winter work a lean-to,
facing south, possesses special advantages. But for general utility, if we had to erect a building
on a well-drained soil, it should be dwarf, sunk three feet in the ground, with brick walls
up to the eaves, and lighted only from the roof. Such a structure is less influenced by atmospheric
changes than a building wholly above ground. The size, of course, is optional; and quite a
small house will supply an ordinary family with Cucumbers. But a small house is not economical
either in fuel or in labour. A building thirty feet long by twelve feet wide, six feet high
at the sides, and eight and a half feet high at the ridge, will not only grow Cucumbers and
Melons, but will also be of immense service for many other plants. A division across the middle
by a wall rising four feet, surmounted with a glass screen fitted to the roof, and finished
with a door partially of glass, will greatly augment its usefulness. There should be an alley
down the centre four or five feet wide, bounded by walls reaching four feet above the floor.
These walls should be nine inches thick for two feet six inches of their height, but for the
upper parts the brickwork need only be four and a half inches thick. This arrangement will
provide a ledge on the inner side of each wall, and the main walls should also have ledges
corresponding in height, on which to lay slates to carry the soil. To insure drainage, allow
a space of about an inch between the slates, and place tiles or an inverted turf over every
opening to prevent the soil being washed away. The hot-water pipes will be in chambers immediately
beneath the plants. Openings in the alley walls, fitted with sliding doors, will admit the
heat direct into the house whenever it may be desirable. Ventilation should be provided for
under the ridge at each end, as well as in the roof. In such a house it is easy to grow Cucumbers
all the year round, except, perhaps, in the dead of winter, when the short, dark days render
the task difficult, no matter how perfect the appliances at command. The division in the centre
will be found valuable at all times, and especially when one set of plants is failing; for
another set can be brought into bearing exactly when wanted. But whatever the structure may
be, the mode of culture remains substantially the same in any case. Now, as to soil, a compost
made of mellow turfy loam and leaf-mould in equal parts will be effective and sweet. In the
absence of leaf-mould, use two parts of loam and one of thoroughly decayed manure with a few
pieces of charcoal added. Sweetness is not absolutely necessary for success, but nevertheless
we like to have it, so that a visit to the Cucumber-house may be a source of pleasure. This
it cannot be if rank manure has been used. Raise the seed singly in small 60-pots, and sow
enough, for however good the seed may be a proportion will almost certainly fail from some
cause at this critical period. Give the plants one shift into the 48-size, to keep them going
until they are ready for putting into the beds. Cucumbers grow with great rapidity, and should
never know a check, least of all by starvation. Upon the slates make as many heaps of soil
as are required, and in the centre of each heap put one plant. As the roots extend, add more
soil until the heaps meet and finally become level with the top of the brickwork. This treatment
will supply food as the roots develop, and help to maintain the plants in bearing for a long
period. Stout wires running parallel with the length of the house, a foot below the glass,
will carry the vines. Temperature should never fall below 60° at night; but as the season advances,
if the thermometer registers 90° on sunny days, no harm will be done, provided the roots are
not dry, and the air be kept properly moist by plying the syringe. On dull days one good sprinkling
over the foliage will suffice, and it should be done in the morning. In warm sunny weather,
however, two or three syringings will be beneficial; but the work must not be done so late
as to risk the foliage being wet when night comes on. There will be occasions when it may be
advisable to avoid touching the leaves with water, if there is no probability of their drying
before nightfall. In such a case the moisture can be kept up by freely sprinkling the floor
and walls. Cucumbers cannot thrive if they are dry at the roots, but although there should
be no stint of water, it must be given with judgment; and it is of the utmost importance that
the drainage should be effectual, for stagnant water is even more injurious than a dry soil.
A few sticks placed in various parts of the bed, reaching down to the slates, will serve as
indicators. Draw and inspect them occasionally, and a pretty correct idea of the condition
of the soil will be obtained. The water should be of the same temperature as the house; if
applied cold the plants will sustain a serious check. In the event of the bed falling somewhat
below the proper temperature, the water may with advantage be a few degrees higher than usual.

==Horse-radish== should be planted early, to insure fine roots for next Christmas beef.

==Leek==.--Those who wish to produce stems of superb size and beautiful texture must sow in
heat during this month or early in February, for a longer period of growth is requisite than
for ordinary crops. When sufficient root growth has been made, transplant into larger pots,
and in due course transfer these to a frame where the plants may be gradually hardened off
for putting out into specially prepared trenches in April.

==Lettuces== will soon be in demand, and the early hearts will be particularly precious. Sow
a few sorts in pans, in frames, or on gentle hot-beds, to be ready for planting out by-and-by.

==Melon==.--Although the Melon is a fruit, its culture naturally forms part of the routine
of a vegetable garden. Up to a certain point it may be grown in the same house with Cucumbers;
but after that point is reached, the two plants need widely different treatment. Cucumbers
are cut when young, and must be grown in a warm and humid atmosphere from beginning to end.
Melons need warmth, and at the commencement moisture also; but the fruit has to be ripened,
and after it is set dry treatment becomes essential for the production of a rich flavour with
plenty of aroma. In large gardens, three crops of Melons are usually grown in the same house
in one season. A light soil is advisable at the beginning of the year, but later in the season
a heavier compost may be employed. For the first sowing select an early variety, and at the
beginning of this month put the seed in separate pots. Re-pot the plants once, and they will
be ready for the beds by the first week of February. Melons from this sowing should be fit
for table in May, which is quite as early as they can be produced with any sugar in them. Until
the fruits begin to swell the treatment advised for Cucumbers will suit Melons also. Afterwards
the watering will need careful management. It would be an advantage if the fruit could be finished
off without a drop of water from the time they are about two inches in diameter, but the hot
pipes render it almost impossible. Still, water must not be given more frequently than is actually
necessary to keep the plants going, and when it is applied let there be a thorough soaking.
At the same time ventilation will demand constant attention, and, provided the temperature
can be maintained, it is scarcely possible to give air too freely. In the early stage of growth,
and in mild weather, if the thermometer registers 65° at 9 P.M., the cultivator may sleep peacefully
so far as Melons are concerned. As the season advances, the temperature may be increased to
70° by night, and 75° to 90° by day. With reference to stopping, it may be sufficient to say
that it is a waste of energy to allow the plant to make a large quantity of vine, which has
afterwards to be cut away. By judiciously pinching out the shoots, the plant can be equally
spread over the allotted space. The flowers must be fertilised, and in this respect the treatment
differs from that advised for Cucumbers. The practice has the advantage of allowing the fruits
to be evenly distributed over the vine, and from four to six, according to the size of the
variety, will be enough for each plant to ripen.

==Mustard==.--Those who care for salads need a supply of Mustard almost all through the year,
and to secure a succession it will be necessary to sow at regular intervals. It is a good plan
to keep a few boxes in use for the purpose in a plant-house or pit, sowing one or two at a
time as required, and taking care not to sow wastefully. The seed may be sown out of doors
all the summer, on a shady border, but nothing surpasses boxes or large pans under glass. Mustard
and Cress should never be sown in the same row or in the same pan, but separately, because
they do not grow at the same pace, and the former may be fit for use a week or so before the
latter. Do not be content to use Rape, or any other substitute, but sow the genuine article.

==Onion.==--The modern practice of sowing Onion seed in boxes under glass is to be commended
for several reasons. It insures a long season of growth and results in handsome bulbs far above
the average in size. Transplanting affords the opportunity of selecting the strongest seedlings
and of placing them at exact intervals in the bed. As a crowning advantage this system, to
a large extent, prevents attack from the Onion Fly. Sow in boxes filled with rich soil and
see that the plants have sufficient water, although very little is necessary until after transfer
to other boxes.

==Peas== of the round-seeded class may be sown in open quarters, and the driest and warmest
places must be selected. It is next to impossible to grow them too well; for if the haulm runs
up higher than usual, the produce will be the finer. Remember, too, that if deep trenches are
dug and a lot of manure is put in for Peas, the ground is so far prepared for Broccoli, Celery,
and late Cauliflowers to follow; for the early-sown Peas will be off the ground in time for
another paying crop. As everybody wants an early dish of Peas, sow one of the forward marrowfat
varieties in pots, or on strips of turf laid grass-side downwards in boxes having movable bottoms
that can be withdrawn by a dexterous hand when the transfer is made from frames to the open
ground. Troughs for Peas can be made in very little time out of waste wood that may be found
in the yard; or a few lengths of old zinc spouting blocked up at the ends will answer admirably.
In the absence of such aids, flower-pots may be used. The seed should have the shelter of a
frame or pit, but should have the least possible stimulus from artificial heat, except in cases
where there is all the skill at command to promote very early production.

==Potatoes== are prized when they come in early, and may be forwarded on beds of leaves and
exhausted hot-beds by covering with light rich soil, and employing old frames for protection,
with litter handy in case of frost. For this early work select the earliest Kidneys and Rounds;
the main-cropping varieties are not quick enough.

==Radishes== are more or less in demand for the greater part of the year. The early crops are,
however, especially valued, and there need not be the least difficulty in producing a supply.
A half-spent hot-bed, or, indeed, any position that affords shelter and warmth, will answer
admirably for raising this crop until it may be trusted to a suitable position in the open.

==Sea Kale== may be covered with pots or a good depth of litter, or a combination of pots and
litter. This should be done early, as at the first move of vegetation this delicious vegetable
will come into use, and will generally be of finer quality than if forced. It happens, however,
to be the easiest of all things to force, and so, wherever it is cared for, a plentiful supply
may be maintained from Christmas (or earlier) until May. As the leaf-stems must be thoroughly
blanched, covering is needful in all cases.

==Spinach== may be sown in open quarters. If the frost destroys the plant, sow again. Some
risk must be encountered for an early dish of this highly-prized vegetable. Keep the autumn-sown
Spinach clear of weeds, and in gathering (if it happens to be fit to supply a gathering), pick
off the leaves separately with a little care.

==Strawberries==.--Seed of the Alpine varieties sown in pans this month, for transfer later
to the open ground, usually produce fine fruits in September.

==Tomato.==--Of the immense value of the Tomato as an article of diet we need say nothing,
but we may confidently affirm that its merits for decorative purposes have not as yet been
fully recognised. Long racemes of brilliant glossy fruit are sometimes employed with striking
effect in épergnes, and there is a natural fitness in using them for decorating the dinner
table. All the Tomatoes can be grown and ripened under glass in almost any fashion which may
suit the cultivator's convenience. Pits, frames, vineries, and Peach-houses will bring the
fruit to perfection, either in pots or planted out. Magnificent crops are also grown in the
manner usual with Cucumbers, but in a lower temperature; and those who have an early Cucumber
house at liberty during the summer may turn it to good account for Tomatoes. The soil should
be prepared and laid up in the autumn. It must not be too rich, or there will be much foliage
and little fruit, and the flowering will also be late. A compost of leaf-mould and loam with
an addition of sand suits Tomatoes admirably; but raw manure should be regarded as poison.
Sow thinly in well-drained pots firmly filled with soil, and place in a temperature of 60°
or 65°. When large enough to handle, transfer the seedlings to small pots, and, if necessary,
shade them for a few days. Keep them near the glass until the roots are established, and allow
them to suffer no check from first to last.

==FEBRUARY==

The work of this month is to be carried on as weather permits, but with greater activity and
more confidence, for the sun is fast gaining power. Earnest digging, liberal manuring, and
scrupulous cleansing are the tasks that stand forward as of pre-eminent importance. Many weeds,
groundsel especially, will now be coming into flower, and if allowed to seed will make enormous
work later on. It is well, however, to remember--what few people do remember, because the fact
has not been pressed upon their attention--that weeds of all kinds, so long as they are not
in flower, are really useful as manure when dug into the soil. Therefore a weedy patch is not
of necessity going to ruin; but if the weeds are not stopped in time, they spread by their
seeds and mar the order of the garden. Dig them in, and their decay will nourish the next crop.
If early sowing is practised, and the earliest possible produce of everything is aimed at,
there must be always at hand the means of protection, such as litter, spruce branches, mats,
or other material, as circumstances require. The vigilant gardener is not surprised by the
weather, but is always armed for an emergency. Read the notes for January before proceeding
further; and in respect of what remains undone, spare the necessity of reminders here.

==Frame Ground== should be kept scrupulously clean and orderly. Many things will require watering
now, but water must not be carelessly given, because damp is hurtful during frosty weather.
Take care that the plants are not crowding and starving, or they will come to no good.

==Artichoke, Globe.==--Plants from a sowing made now in a frame, and transferred to the open
at the end of April, will generally produce heads in the following August, September, and October.

==Artichokes, Jerusalem,== may be planted this month where it has been possible to prepare
the ground. Use whole sets if convenient, or plant cut sets with about three eyes in each.

==Beans, Broad==, may be sown both for early and main crops now, and with but little risk of
damage by spring frosts. The driest and warmest situation should be selected for the early
sorts, and the strongest land for the late ones. If sowings were made in frames last month,
take care to harden the plants cautiously preparatory to planting out; if caught by a sharp
frost, every one will perish.

==Beans, French.==--To precede the outdoor crops make a sowing of Dwarf French Beans in frames,
and of the Climbing French varieties in orchard-houses or other available spaces under glass.

==Beet.==--Sowings of the Globe variety may be made this month and in March, on a gentle hot-bed
under frames, to provide roots in advance of the outdoor supplies.

==Broccoli.==--Sow on a warm sheltered border, and also in a frame. With such an important
crop at this time of year, there should be at least two strings to the bow.

==Brussels Sprouts.==--For an early gathering of large buttons a sowing should be made now
on the warm border. This vegetable requires a long period of growth to attain perfection, and
those who sow late rarely obtain such fine buttons as the plant is capable of producing.

==Cabbage== may be sown in pans or boxes placed in a frame, to be planted out in due time for
summer use, and from a quick-growing variety tender hearts may be cut almost as early as from
autumn-sown plants. Where plantations stand rather thick, draw as fast as possible from amongst
them every alternate plant, to allow the remainder ample space for hearting. It is well to
remember that the small loose hearts of immature Cabbages make a more delicate dish than the
most complete white hearts; but when grown for market, or to meet a large demand, there must
be bulk and substance. Cabbages are in constant request to mend, and to make stolen crops,
or take the place of anything that fails past recovery.

==Capsicum and Chili== should be sown now or in March on a hot-bed, and be potted on until
the plants are fit to be placed in the greenhouse or conservatory.

==Cauliflower.==--Another sowing should be made under glass to supply a succession of plants.

==Corn Salad== thrives well in any soil not particularly heavy, the best being a sandy fertile
loam. Sow in drills six inches apart; keep the hoe well at work, and when ready thin the plants
out to six inches apart. They should be eaten young.

==Couve Tronchuda== produces two distinct dishes. The top forms a Cabbage of the most delicate
flavour and colour, and furnishes the best possible dish of greens in autumn; and the midribs
of the largest leaves may be cooked in the manner of Sea Kale, and will be found excellent.
This delicious vegetable may be secured for use in summer and autumn and far on into the winter
by successive sowings in February, March, and April; the first sowings to be assisted with
heat. The plants should be put out as early as possible on rich soil at from two to three feet
each way; they must have plenty of water in a dry summer. The season of Portugal Cabbage may
be prolonged by taking up what plants are left before severe frost occurs, and heeling them
into a bank of dry earth in a shed or outhouse.

==Egg Plant.==--The fruits of Egg Plants play a more important part in the cookery of the French
and Italians than with us, and they make a delicious dish when properly cooked. Seed may be
raised in heat, but when summer comes the plants thrive in rich soil at the foot of a wall
facing south. The white and purple varieties are grown for ornament as well as for cooking.
Sow now or in March in heat, and in June the plants should be ready for transferring to rich
soil in a sheltered spot, allowing each one a space of two feet.

==Garlic== to be planted in rows, nine inches apart each way, and two inches deep in rich mellow
soil.

==Lettuce.==--Sow again on a warm border and in frames. Plant out in mild weather any that
are fit from frames and hot-beds, first making sure that they are well hardened.

==Mustard.==--It is easy work with a frame to have Mustard at any time; and many small sowings
are better than large ones, which only result in waste to-day and want to-morrow.

==Onion==.--There is still time for sowing seed in boxes preparatory to planting out in April.

==Parsley== to be sown in the latter part of the month.

==Parsnip== should be sown as early as possible, on the deepest and best ground as regards
texture; but it need not be on the richest, for if the roots can push down they will get what
they want from the subsoil, and therefore it is of great importance to put this crop on ground
that was dug twice in the autumn.

==Pea==.--Sow early sorts in quantity now, in accordance with probable requirements; but there
will be a loss rather than a gain of time if they are sown on pasty ground or during bad weather.
There are now many excellent sorts of moderate height, and these give the least trouble in
their management; but a few of the taller varieties still remain in favour, because of their
fine quality. However, there is time yet for sowing mid-season and late Peas; but the sooner
some of the first-earlies are in, the better. It is customary to sow many rows in a plot rather
close together, but it is better practice to put them so far apart as to admit of two or three
rows of early Potatoes between every two rows of Peas. This insures abundance of light and
air to the Peas, and the latter are of great value to protect the Potatoes from May frosts
that often kill down the rising shaws. A warm, dry, fertile soil is needed for first-early
Peas. Those already up and in a bad plight should be dug in and the rows sown again. It is
worthy of note that if Peas are thoroughly pinched and starved by hard weather, they rarely
prove a success; therefore, if they go wrong, sacrifice them without hesitation and begin again.
Where early rows are doing well put sticks to them at once, as the sticks afford considerable
protection, and the effect may be augmented by strewing on the windward side small hedge clippings
and other light dry stuff.

==Radishes,== to be mild, tender, and handsome, must be grown rapidly. If checked, they become
hot, tough, and worthless. Much may be done to forward a crop by means of dry litter and mats
to protect the plants from frost, removing the protection in favourable weather to give the
crop the fullest possible benefit of air and sunshine. Old worn-out frames that will scarcely
hold together will pay their first cost over again, with the aid of a little skill, in growing
Radishes.

==Rhubarb== should be taken up and divided, and planted again in rich moist soil, every separate
piece to have only one good eye. Do not gather this season from the new plantation, but always
have a piece one year old to supply the kitchen. This method will insure sticks to be proud
of, not only for size, but for colour and flavour.

==Savoys== are valued by some when small, and by others they are prized for size as much as
for their excellent flavour when well frosted. Large Savoys must have a long season of growth;
therefore sow as soon as possible, either in a frame, or on a rich, mellow seedbed, and be
ready to prick them out before they become crowded.

==Sea Kale.==--The plantations reserved for latest supplies should not be covered until they
begin to push naturally, and then the coverings must be put on to blanch the growth effectually.
Open-ground Sea Kale may be uncovered as soon as cut, but a little litter should be left to
give protection and help the young shoots to rise, because after blanching the cutting is a
severe tax on the plant, and it has to begin life afresh and prepare for the work of the next
season.

==Shallot.==--When well grown the clumps are bigger than a man's fist, and each separate bulb
thicker than a walnut. To grow them well they must have time; so plant early, on rich ground,
in rows one foot apart and the bulbs about nine inches asunder. Press them into the earth deep
enough to hold them firmly, but they are not to be quite buried.

==Spinach.==--Sow the Round-seeded plentifully; if overdone the extra crop can be dug in as
manure, and in that way will pay.

==Tomato.==--In many gardens the first sowing is made this month, and when treated fairly,
the plants come into bearing in about four months. Use good porous soil for the seed-pans.
Sow very thinly in a temperature of 60° or 65°, and get the plants into thumb pots while they
are quite small.

==Turnip== may be sown on warm borders, but it is too early for large breadths in open quarters.

==MARCH==

This is the great season for garden work, and the gardener must be up with the lark and go
to bed with the robin, which is the latest of birds to bid farewell to a sunny day. The first
care should be to make good all arrears, especially in the preparation of seed-beds, and the
cleaning of plots that are in any way disorderly. Where early-sown crops have evidently failed,
sow again without complaining; seed costs but little, and a good plant is the earnest of a
good crop; a bad plant will probably never pay the rent of the ground it occupies. Keen east
winds may cause immense damage, but a little protection provided in time will do wonders to
ward off their effects, and the sunny days that are now so welcome, and that we are pretty
sure to have, will afford opportunity for giving air to plants in frames, for clearing away
litter, and for the regular routine work of the season.

Seed of almost every vegetable grown in the garden may be sown in the month of March. Make
successional sowings of whatever it may be advisable to put under cover or on heat, and then
proceed with open-ground sowings as weather and circumstances permit. The weather is the master
of outdoor work, and it is sheer waste of time to fight against it. It is better to wait to
the end of the month, or even far into the next, before sowing a seed than to sow on pasty
ground. But it matters not how dry the ground may be, and if the wind blows keenly, that should
only be an inducement to brisk action; for seeds well sown have everything in their favour
if they are not too early for the district. Very important indeed it is now to secure a ==Hot-bed.==--To
make one is easy enough, but it is of no use to half make it; for half-acres in this department
do not bear good corn. In the first place, secure a great bulk of manure, and if it is long
and green, turn it two or three times, taking care that it is always moderately moist, but
never actually wet. If the stuff is too dry, sprinkle with water at every turn, and let it
steam away to take the rankest fire out of it. Then make it up where required in a square heap,
allowing it to settle in its own way without treading or beating. Put on a foot-depth of light,
rich soil after the frames are in their places, and wait a few days to sow the seed in case
of a great heat rising. When the temperature is steady and comfortable, sow seeds in pots and
pans, as needful, the quantity required of each separate crop, and stand them on bricks above
the bed, and the heat will then be none too much for them. In the course of a few days finish
the work by putting in a body of earth. Do not attempt to hurry the growth of anything overmuch,
for undue haste will produce a weak plant; rather give air and light in plenty, but with care
to prevent injurious check, and the plants will be short and healthy from the first.

==Artichokes, Globe==, to be cleared of protecting material as soon as weather permits, and
fresh plantations made ready for suckers to be put in next month. A new plantation may also
be formed by sowing seeds; in fact, a sowing ought to be made every year. Where early produce
is required, the plants should be protected during winter to supply suckers in the spring;
but, if late supplies suffice, the sowing of a few rows every year will reduce the labour,
and render the production of Globe Artichokes a very simple affair.

==Artichokes, Jerusalem==, may be planted now advantageously. Strong, deep soil produces the
best crop, and large roots are always preferred by the cook, because of the inevitable waste
in preparing this vegetable. The Jerusalem Artichoke is certainly not properly appreciated,
and one reason is that it is often carelessly grown in any out-of-the-way starving corner,
whereas it needs a sunny, open spot, and a strong, deep soil, and plenty of room. To hide an
ugly fence during summer no more useful plant is grown.

==Asparagus==.--Little attention is required as yet, except to remove every weed as soon as
it can be seen. If the beds are dry, and there are no indications of coming rain, one good
soaking of water or weak sewage will be very beneficial. Mark out and make beds for sowing
seed next month.

==Bean, Broad==.--Plant out those raised in frames, and earth up those from early sowings that
are forward enough. Sow for main crops and late supplies. In late districts a few of the earliest
sorts may be sown to come in before the Windsor section.

==Beet==.--Sow a little seed for an early supply, in well-dug mellow soil. The crop will need
protection in the event of frost.

==Broccoli== for autumn use to be sown early; and at the end of the month sow again in quantity
for winter supplies. In mild weather, put out the plants from the earlier sowings made in frames
as soon as they are fit and well hardened.

==Brussels Sprouts==.--Look after the bed sown last month, and sow again for the main crop.
The best possible seed-bed is wanted and a rich well-tilled soil for the plants when put out.

==Cabbage== of two or three kinds should be sown now to supply plants for filling up as crops
are taken off, and also to patch and mend where failures happen. Where the owner of a garden
has opportunities of helping his poorer neighbours, he may confer a real benefit by supplying
them with Cabbage and Winter Greens for planting in their garden plots. Cottagers too often
begin with bad stocks--very much to their discouragement in gardening, and to the loss of wholesome
food the garden should supply. The rankest manure may be employed in preparing ground for Cabbage,
reserving the well-rotted manure for seed-beds and other purposes for which it will be required.
A sowing of Red Cabbage now will insure heads for pickling in autumn.

==Carrot==.--Sow one of the quick-growing varieties at the first opportunity, but wait for
signs of settled spring weather to sow the main crops of large sorts.

==Cauliflower==.--Plant out as weather permits from hand-lights and frames, choosing the best
ground for this vegetable. In preparing a plot for Cauliflower, use plenty of manure; and if
it is only half-rotten, it will be better than if it were old and mellow.

==Celeriac==.--So far as seed sowing is concerned, Celeriac may be treated in the same way
as Celery.

==Celery==.--For the earliest supply, sow on the first of the month a pinch of seed of one
or more of the smaller red or white sorts on a mild hot-bed, or in an early vinery. As soon
as the plants are large enough to handle, prick them out three inches apart on a nice mellow
bed of rich soil on a half-spent hot-bed; give them plenty of light, with free ventilation
as weather allows, and constant supplies of water. About the middle of the month sow again
and prick out as before; but if no hot-bed is available, a well-prepared bed in a frame in
a sunny position will answer; or, if the season is somewhat advanced, a bed of rotten manure,
two or three inches deep, on a piece of hard ground, will suffice, if the plants are kept regularly
watered. From this bed they will lift with nice roots for planting out, scarcely feeling the
removal at all.

==Chives== to be divided and re-planted on a spot which has not previously been occupied with
the crop.

==Cucumber==.--The vines should now be in a flourishing condition, but it is necessary to look
forward to the day when they will fall into the sere and yellow leaf. More seed sown singly
in pots will provide a succession of plants. Re-pot them once or twice if desirable, and when
large enough turn them out between the first lot. As the old plants fail, the new-comers will
supply their places. Setting the bloom, as it is called, is not only useless, but is a mischievous
procedure. It results in the enlargement of one end of the fruit, and ruins its appearance.
If seed be the object, of course the process is justifiable; but for the table a 'bottle nose'
cannot be regarded as an ornament. Besides, the ripening of seed in a single fruit will materially
diminish the usefulness of the plant, and perhaps entirely end its career. Stopping the vine
is a necessity, but it should not be done too soon. In the early stage of growth, it reduces
the vigour of the plant and retards its fruiting; but when the fruit is visible, stopping aids
its development and at the same time tends to regulate and equalise the growth.

Frame culture of Cucumbers is usually begun in March. There are men who can produce fruit from
hot-beds all the year round, but it is a difficult task, and as a rule ought not to be expected.
At this time of year, however, success is fairly within reach of ordinary skill. In quite the
early part of the month put seed singly into pots which must be kept in a warm, moist place.
The plants will then be ready for frames at the end of the month. The most important business
is the preparation of the bed, and in this, as in all else, there is a right and a wrong way
of doing the work. Accurately set out the space on which it is to be made. If there is plenty
of manure, make the bed large enough to project eighteen inches beyond the lights all round.
But if manure is scarce, cut the margin closer, and trust to a hot lining when the heat begins
to flag. Commence with the outside of the bed, employing the long stuff in its construction;
and keep this part of the work a little in advance of the centre until the full height is reached.
A bed made in this way will not fall to pieces, and the heat will be durable in proportion
to its size and thickness. Where fallen leaves are abundant, they should be used for the middle
of the bed, and they will give a more lasting heat than short manure. When the bed has settled
down to a steady temperature, add six or nine inches of mellow loam over the entire surface,
upon which place the frames. To insure drainage, it is an excellent plan to lay common flake
hurdles on the top of the heap before adding the soil. These do not in the least interfere
with the free running of the roots. It is usual to have two plants under each light, but where
the management is good, one is quite enough. The subsequent work consists of shading and sheltering,
to prevent any serious check from trying weather, and in giving just water enough and no more.
The fermenting material should sustain the temperature of the frame, even during frosty nights,
and mats will screen off strong sunshine as well as cold winds. The plants will need stopping
earlier than those grown in houses, and as there are no hot-pipes to dissipate the moisture,
rather less water will be necessary, both in the soil and from the syringe. But the water employed
should always be of the same temperature as the bed. This is easily managed by keeping a full
can standing with the plants. In large frames, where there is a good body of manure and the
loam is mellow and turfy, pieces of Mushroom spawn can be inserted all over the bed. The Mushrooms
may appear while the bed is in full bearing; but if they do not they will come when the plants
are cleared out, and pay well to keep the lights in use another month or so.

==Garlic== may still be planted, but no time is to be lost.

==Herbs== of many kinds may be sown or divided, and it will be necessary to look over the Herb
quarter and see how things stand for the supplies that will be required. A little later, excess
of work may prevent due attention to this department.

==Horse-radish== to be planted, if not done already.

==Kohl Rabi==, or ==Knol Kohl==, to be sown in small quantity at the end of the month, and
onwards to August, as required. If cooked while young, the bulbs are an excellent substitute
for Turnips in a hot, dry season.

==Leek==.--Sow the main crop in very rich, well-prepared soil, and rather thickly, as the seedlings
will have to be planted out. With a little management this sowing will yield a succession of Leeks.

==Lettuce==.--Plant out and sow again in quantity. All the kinds may be sown now, but make
sure of enough of the Cos and smaller Cabbage varieties. In hot, dry soils, where Lettuces
usually run to seed early, try some of the red-leaved kinds, for though less delicate than
the green and white, they will be useful in the event of a scorching summer. Lettuces require
a deep free soil with plenty of manure.

==Melon==.--Raise a few seeds singly in pots, in readiness for putting under frames on hot-beds
next month. Re-pot the plants, and repeat the process if the beds are not ready, for Melons
must not be starved, especially in the early stage of growth. Some growers make up the beds
in March, and sow upon them when the heat becomes steady, but the practice is somewhat precarious.
In a cold, late spring the heat may not last a sufficient time to carry the plants safely into
warm weather. Hence it is more reliable to raise them now in a warm house, and make the bed
at the beginning of April.

==Onion==.--The plants already raised in boxes to be removed to cold frames. If necessary,
they should be pricked off into other boxes in order to avoid overcrowding. Keep the frames
close at first, but give air with increasing freedom as the time approaches for transfer to
the open ground. Sow the main crop in drills nine inches apart, and tread or beat the ground
firm. This crop requires a rich soil in a thoroughly clean and mellow condition, and it makes
a capital finish to the seed-bed to give it a good coat of charred rubbish or smother ash before
sowing the seed.

==Parsnip==.--Sow main crop in shallow drills eighteen inches apart in good soil deeply dug.
The seed should be lightly covered, and new seed is indispensable.

==Pea==.--Sow the finest sorts of the Marrowfat class. Take care to put them on the best seed-bed
that can be made, and allow sufficient room between the taller sorts for a few rows of Cabbage,
Broccoli, or Potatoes. A crowded quarter of Peas is never satisfactory; the rows smother each
other, and the shaded parts of the haulm produce next to nothing.

==Potato==.--A small quantity for early use should be planted at the opening of the month when
the ground is dry and the weather soft. If planted when frost or cold winds prevail, sets may
become somewhat shrivelled before they are covered, and every care should be taken to prevent
such a check to the initial vigour of the plant. The first-early sorts will necessarily have
the chief attention now, and warm sheltered spots should be selected for them. Any fairly good
soil will produce a passable crop of Potatoes; but to secure a first-class sample of any early
sort, the ground should be made up with the aid of turfy soil and charrings of hedge clippings
and other light, warm, nourishing material. Strong manures are not to be desired, but a mellow,
kindly, fertile soil is really necessary, and it will always pay well to take extra pains in
its preparation, because all the light rubbish that accumulates in yards and outhouses can
be turned to account with only a moderate amount of labour, and the result of careful appropriation
of such rubbish will be thoroughly satisfactory. Burn all the chips and sticks and other stubborn
stuff, and lay the mixture in the trenches when planting, so that the roots may find it at
their first start. As the Potato disease does not usually appear until late in summer, early
planting is a safe precaution, for it insures early ripening of the crop. The planting of main
crops may commence towards the end of March and be completed during April, according to the
locality and the condition of the soil.

==Radish==.--From March to September make successive sowings in the coolest place that can
be found for them.

==Scorzonera== to be treated much the same as Salsify. See note on the latter under April.

==Sea Kale== to be sown in well-prepared beds; or plantations may be made of the smaller roots
of the thickness of a lead pencil, and about four inches in length. Plant them top end uppermost,
and deep enough to be just covered.

==Spinach==.--Sow in plenty. The Perpetual or Spinach Beet should not be forgotten. This is
one of the most useful vegetables known, as it endures heat and cold with impunity, and when
common Spinach is running to seed the Perpetual variety remains green and succulent, and fit
to supply the table all the summer long.

==Spinach, New Zealand==, is another excellent vegetable in high summer when the Round-seeded
variety is worthless. The plant is rather tender, and for an early supply the seed must be
sown in moderate heat, either in this month or in April. When large enough, get the seedlings
into small pots, and gradually harden them before planting in the open about the end of May.

==Strawberries==.--Spring is undoubtedly preferable to autumn for planting, and results in
a finer crop of fruit in the following year. Just as growth is commencing is the most favourable
time, and this, of course, depends on the character of the season. Alpine Strawberries may
be sown outdoors this month or in September for fruiting in the succeeding year.

==Tomato.==--In ordinary seasons and in the southern counties there is no difficulty in producing
handsome Tomatoes in the open border; but to ripen the fruit with certainty it is imperative
that an early variety be chosen. With the rise of latitude, however, the crop becomes increasingly
precarious, until in the North it is impossible to finish Tomatoes without the aid of glass.
For plants which are to ripen fruit in the open, a sowing should be made early in the month,
in the manner advised under January. Plants which are ready should be transferred to small
thumb pots. Put them in so that the first leaves touch the rim of the pot, and place them in
a close frame or warm part of the greenhouse for a few days until the roots take hold. To save
them from becoming leggy, give each plant ample space, and avoid a forcing temperature. A shelf
in a greenhouse is a good position, and plants in a single row upon it will grow stout and
short-jointed. Thrips and aphis are extremely partial to Tomatoes. Frequent sprinklings in
bright weather will help to keep down the former, and will at the same time benefit the plants.
Both pests can be destroyed by fumigating with tobacco, and when the remedy is to be applied
water should be withheld on that day. A moderate amount of smoke in the evening and another
application in the morning will be more destructive to the vermin, and less injurious to the
plants, than one strong dose. The usual syringing must follow. Plants for the open ground must
not be starved while in pots; they will need potting on until the 4-1/2-inch or 6-inch size
is reached, and it is important that they should never be dry at the roots. Shading will only
be necessary during fierce sunshine; in early morning and late in the afternoon they will be
better without it.

==Water Cress.==--It is quite a mistake to suppose that a running stream is requisite for growing
this plant, and it is equally a mistake to suppose that the proper flavour can be secured without
the constant use of water. Sow in a trench, water regularly and copiously, and mild and tender
Water Cress will reward the labour.

==Winter Greens== of all kinds to be sown in plenty and in considerable variety; for in the
event of a severe winter some kinds will prove hardier than others.

==APRIL==

Vegetation is now in full activity, the temperature increases rapidly, frosts are less frequent,
and showers and sunshine alternate in their mutual endeavours to clothe the earth with verdure
and flowers. The gardener is bound to be vigilant now to assist Nature in her endeavours to
benefit him; he must promote the growth of his crops by all the means in his power; by plying
the hoe to keep down weeds and open the soil to sunshine and showers; by thinning and regulating
his plantations, that air and light may have free access to the plants left to attain maturity;
by continuing to shelter as may be needed; and by administering water during dry weather, that
vegetation may benefit to the utmost by the happy accession of increasing sunlight.

==Artichoke, Globe==.--Suckers to be put in the plantations prepared for them last month, in
rows three to four feet apart each way.

==Asparagus==.--- Rake off into the alleys the remnant of manure from the autumn dressing,
and as soon as the weather is favourable give the beds a light application of salt. If new
beds are required, there must be no time lost either to sow seed or get in plants. Our advice
to those who require only one small plantation is to form it by planting strong roots; but
those who intend to grow Asparagus largely may sow down a bed every year, until they have enough,
and then leave well alone; for a bed properly made will last ten years at the very least, if
taken care of. It has been clearly demonstrated that this much-esteemed vegetable may be grown
to perfection in any garden with little more expense than attends other crops, provided only
that a reasonable amount of skill is brought to bear upon the undertaking. A deep, rich, sandy
loam suits it. Dig in a good body of manure, and provide a mellow seed-bed. This being done,
care must be taken to sow thinly, and, in due time, to thin severely; for a crowded plant will
never supply fat sticks. Beds may be made by planting roots instead of sowing seeds, but the
roots must be fresh, or they will not prosper. The advantage of using plants is that 'grass'
may be cut earlier than when produced from seed.

==Bean, Broad==.--- Sowings may be made until the middle of this month, after which time they
are not likely to pay, especially on hot soils. It is customary to top Beans when in flower,
and the practice has its advantages. In case the black fly takes possession, topping is a necessity,
for the insect can only subsist on the youngest leaves at the top of the plant, and the process
pretty well clears them away.

==Beans, Dwarf French,== may be sown outdoors at the end of the month, but not in quantity,
because of the risk of destruction by frost. Much may be done, however, to expedite the supply
of this popular vegetable, and sowings in boxes placed in gentle heat or under the protection
of a frame will furnish plants which may be gradually hardened off for transfer to the open
in May. In proportion to the means at command, early sowings outdoors will live or die, as
determined by the weather, although a very little protection is sufficient to carry the young
plants through a bad time in the event of late frosts and storms. But sowings made at the end
of the month will probably prosper.

==Bean, Climbing French.==--Sowings of the Climbing French Bean may be made this month as directed
for the Dwarf French class: the earliest in gentle heat for transplanting, and later on in
open quarters for succession crops.

==Beet.==--At quite the end of the month sow in drills, a foot or fifteen inches apart, on
deep, well-dug ground, without manure. Large Beets are not desired for the kitchen; but rather
small, deeply coloured, handsome roots are always valued, and these can only be grown in soil
that has been stirred to a good depth, and is quite free of recent manuring.

==Broccoli.==--Make another sowing of several sorts, giving preference as yet to the early
varieties. In particularly late districts, and, perhaps, pretty generally in the North, the
late Broccoli should be sown now, but in the Midlands and the South there is time to spare
for sowing. Be particular to have a good seed-bed, that the plants may grow well from the first;
if the early growth be starved, the plants become the victims of club and other ruinous maladies.

==Brussels Sprouts.==--In many households late supplies of Brussels Sprouts are much valued,
and as the crop is capable of enduring severe weather, a supplemental sowing should always
be made during this month. Rich soil and plenty of room are essential.

==Cabbage.==--Sow the larger kinds for autumn use, and one or two rows of the smaller kinds
for planting in odd places as early crops are cleared off. Cows, pigs, and poultry will always
dispose of surplus Cabbage advantageously, so there can be no serious objection to keeping
up a constant succession. Plant out from seed-beds as fast as the plants become strong enough,
for stifling and starving tend to club, mildew, and blindness. Where Red Cabbage is in demand
for use with game in autumn, seed should be sown now.

==Cardoons== to be sown on land heavily manured in rows three or four feet apart, the seeds
in clumps of three each, eighteen inches apart. They are sometimes sown in trenches, but we
do not approve of that system, for they do not require moisture to the extent of Celery, and
the blanching can be effectually accomplished without it. Our advice is to plant on the level,
unless the ground is particularly dry and hot, and then trenches will be of great service in
promoting free growth. To insure their proper flavour, Cardoons must be large and fat.

==Carrot==.--Sow the main crops and put them on deeply dug ground without manure.

==Cauliflowers== to be planted out at every opportunity, warm, showery weather being most favourable.
If cold weather should follow, a large proportion of the plants will be destroyed unless protected,
and there is no cheaper protection than empty flowerpots, which may be left on all day, as
well as all night, in extreme cases when a killing east wind is blowing. Sow now for late summer
and autumn use, prick the plants out early to save buttoning, and they will make a quick return.

==Celery==.--Sow in a warm corner of the open ground on a bed consisting largely of rotten
manure. It may happen in a good season that this outdoor sowing will prove the most successful,
as it will have no check from first to last, and will be in just the right state for planting
out when the ground is ready for it after Peas and other early crops. If Celery suffers a serious
check at any time, it is apt to make hollow stems, and then the quality is poor, no matter
to what size the sticks may attain. Prick out the plants from seed-pans on to a bed of rotten
manure, resting on a hard bottom, in frames or in sheltered nooks, and look after them with
extra care for a week or two. Good Celery cannot be grown by the haphazard gardener.

==Endive==.--Sow a small quantity in moderate heat for the first supply, in drills six inches
apart, and when an inch high prick out on to a bed of rich light soil.

==Herbs==.--Chervil, Fennel, Hyssop, and other flavouring and medicinal Herbs, may be sown
now better than at any other time, as they will start at once into full growth, and need little
after-care other than thinning and weeding. Rich soil is not required, but the position must
be dry and sunny.

==Leek== to be sown again if the former sowing is insufficient or has failed.

==Lettuce== to be sown for succession, the quick-growing, tender-hearted kinds being the best
to sow now. Plant out from frames and seed-pans. A few forward plants may be tied, but as a
rule tying is less desirable than most people suppose. Certainly, after tying, the hearts soon
rot if not quickly eaten; and Lettuces as fine as can be desired may now be grown without tying,
the close-hearting sorts being very much improved in that respect.

==Melon==.--Sow again for a second crop in houses, and grow the plants in pots until they reach
a foot high. The early crop will then be ripe, and the house can be cleared and syringed for
a fresh start. From this sowing fruit should be ready about the beginning of July. The frame
culture advised for Cucumbers will be right for Melons, until the fruits attain the size of
a small orange. Then a thorough soaking must be given, and under proper management no more
water should be necessary. A dry atmosphere and free ventilation are essential to bring the
fruit to perfection. Stopping must be commenced early by pinching out the leader, and only
one eye should be allowed beyond the fruit which are to remain. Six will be enough for one
plant to carry, and they should be nearly of a size, for if one obtains a strong lead, it will
be impossible to ripen the others. The remainder should be gradually removed while young. The
worst foe of the Melon is red spider, and it is difficult to apply a remedy without doing mischief.
Water will destroy it, but this may have disastrous results on the fruit. The most certain
preventive is stout well-grown plants. Weakly specimens appear to invite attack, and are incapable
of struggling against it. Where plants are occasionally lost through decay at the collar, small
pieces of charcoal laid in a circle round the stem have proved a simple and effectual antidote.

==Onion==.--The plants raised under glass in January or February should be ready for planting
out on some favourable day about mid-April. If any mishap has befallen the sowings made in
the open in March there must be no delay in resowing early in the present month, for Onions
should have good hold of the ground before hot weather comes. Onions for pickling should be
grown thickly on poor ground made firm. The plants are not to be thinned, but may be allowed
to stand as thick as pebbles on the seashore. The starving system produces abundance of small
handsome bulbs that ripen early, which are the very things wanted for pickling. The Queen and
Paris Silver-skin are adapted for the purpose.

==Parsley== to be sown in quantity for summer and autumn supply; thin as soon as up, to give
each plant plenty of room.

==Peas== to be sown again for succession.

==Potato==.--Take the earliest opportunity of completing the planting of main crops.

==Salsify==.--This delicious root, which is sometimes designated the 'Vegetable Oyster,' requires
a piece of ground deeply trenched, with a thick layer of manure at the bottom of the trench,
and not a particle of manure in the body of soil above it. The roots strike down into the manure,
and attain a good size combined with fine quality. If carelessly grown, they become forked
and fibrous, and are much wasted in the cooking, besides being of inferior flavour. Sow in
rows fifteen inches apart, any time from the end of March to the beginning of May. Two sowings
will generally suffice.

==Spinach==.--Sow the Long-standing variety, which does not run so soon as the ordinary kind.
If a plantation of Spinach Beet has not been secured, sow at once, as there is ample time yet
for a free growth and a valuable plant.

==Turnip== to be sown in quantity.

==Vegetable Marrow==.--An early sowing to be made in pots, in readiness for planting out immediately
weather admits of it. Three plants in a pot are enough, and they must not be weakened by excessive
heat.

==Winter Greens==.--A sowing of Borecole should be made, and if a supply is required in spring,
it will be well to sow again in the first week of May.

==MAY==

High-Pressure times continue, for the heat increases daily, and the season of production is
already shortened by two months. The most pressing business is to repair all losses, for even
now, if affairs have gone wrong, it is possible to get up a stock of Winter Greens, and to
sow all the sorts of seeds that should have been sown in March and April, with a reasonable
chance of profitable results. It must not be expected, however, that the most brisk and skilful
can overtake those who have been doing well from the first dawn of spring, and who have not
omitted to sow a single seed at the proper time from the day when seed-sowing became requisite.
The heat of the earth is now sufficient to start many seeds into growth that are customarily
sown in heat a month or two earlier; and, therefore, those who cannot make hot-beds may grow
many choice things if they will be content to have them a week or two later than their more
fortunate neighbours. In sowing seeds of the more tender subjects, such as Capsicums, Marrows,
and Cucumbers, it will be better to lose a few days, in order to make sure of the result desired,
rather than to be in undue haste and have the seed destroyed by heavy rains, or the young plants
nipped off by frost. Do not, therefore, sow any of these seeds in the open ground until the
weather is somewhat settled and sunny, for if they meet with any serious check they will scarcely
recover during the whole of the season.

==Asparagus== in seed-beds to be thinned as soon as possible, so that wherever two or three
plants rise together, the number should be reduced to one. But there is time yet for seedlings
to appear. The bearing beds are more attractive, for they show their toothsome tops. The cutting
must be done in a systematic manner, and if practicable always by the same person. It is better
to cut all the shoots as fast as they attain a proper size, and sort them for use according
to quality, rather than to pick and choose the fat shoots and throw the whole plantation into
disorder. Green-topped Asparagus is in favour in this country; but those who prefer it blanched
have simply to earth it up sufficiently, and cut below the surface, taking care to avoid injuring
the young shoots which have not pushed through. It is not for us to decide on any matter of
individual taste, but we will give a word of practical advice that may be of value to many.
It is not the custom to protect Asparagus in open beds, but it should be; for the keen frosts
that often occur when the sticks are rising destroy a large number. This may be prevented by
covering with any kind of light, dry litter, which will not in the least interfere with that
full greening of the tops which English people generally prefer, because the light and air
will reach the plant; but the edge of the frost will be blunted by the litter. If there is
nothing at hand for this purpose, let a man go round with the sickle and cut a lot of long
grass from the rough parts of the shrubbery, and put a light handful over every crown in the
bed. The sticks will rise with the litter upon them like nightcaps, and will be plump and green
and unhurt by frost.

==Bean, Dwarf French==.--The main crops should be got in this month, and successional sowings
may be made until the early part of July. Dwarf Beans are but seldom allowed as much space
as they require, and the rows therefore should be thinned early, for crowded plants never bear
so well as those that enjoy light and air on all sides. In Continental cookery a good dish
is made of the Beans shelled out when about half ripe. These being served in rich gravy, are
at once savoury and wholesome. Almost all the varieties of the Dwarf and Climbing sections
may be used in this way, and the Beans should be gathered when full grown, but not yet ripe.
The self-coloured varieties are also grown for use as dry Haricots, in which case the pods
should not be removed until perfectly ripe.

==Bean, Climbing French==.--Sow this month for the main crop, and onwards until June according
to requirements. In a general way the treatment usual for Runners will answer well for outdoor
crops of the Climbing French Bean.

==Bean, Runner==.--In the open ground sowings may be made as soon as conditions appear safe,
but it is well to sow again at the end of the month or in June.

==Beet==.--The main crop should be sown in the early part of the month. Thin and weed the early
sown, and if the ground has been suitably prepared, it will be needless to give water to this
crop. As Beet is not wanted large, it is not advisable to sow any great breadth until the beginning
of May, or it is liable to become coarse.

==Broccoli== to be sown for succession. Plant out from frames and forward seed-beds at every
opportunity. About the middle of the month sow for cutting in May and June of next year.

==Brussels Sprouts==.--For the sake of a few fine buttons in the first dripping days of autumn,
when Peas and Runners and Marrows are gone, put out as soon as possible some of the most forward
plants, giving them a rich soil and sunny position.

==Cabbage==.--Plant out from seed-beds at every opportunity, choosing, if possible, the advent
of showery weather. Sow the smaller sorts and Coleworts, especially in favoured districts where
there is usually no check to vegetation until the turn of the year.

==Capsicum== can be sown out of doors about the middle of the month, and nice green pods for
pickling may be secured in the autumn.

==Carrot==.--Thin the main crops early, and sow a few rows of Champion Horn or Intermediate,
for use in a small state during late summer, when they make an elegant and delicate dish.

==Cauliflowers== must have water in dry weather; they are the most hungry and thirsty plants
in the garden, but pay well for good living. Plant out from frames as fast as ready, for they
do no good to stand crowded and starving.

==Celery== trenches must be prepared in time, though, strange to say, this task is generally
deferred until the plants have really become weak through overcrowding. In a small garden it
is never advisable to have Celery very forward, for the simple reason that trenches cannot
be made for it until Peas come off and other early crops are over. To insure fine Celery the
cultivator must be in advance of events rather than lag behind them. Plenty of manure must
be used; it is scarcely possible, in fact, to employ too much, and liberality is not waste,
because the ground will be in capital condition for the next crop. There are many modes of
planting Celery, but the simplest is to make the trenches four feet apart and a foot and a
half wide, and put the plants six to nine inches apart, according to the sorts. This work must
be done neatly, with an artistic finish. In planting take off suckers, and if any of the leaves
are blistered, pinch the blisters, and finish by dusting the plantation with soot. As Celery
loves moisture, give water freely in dry weather.

==Cucumbers== of excellent quality may be grown on ridges or hills, should the season be favourable.
Suppose the cultivator to have the means of obtaining plenty of manure, ridges, which are to
run east and west, are preferable to hills. The soil should be thrown out three feet wide and
two feet deep, and be laid up on the north side. Then put three feet of hot manure in the trench,
and cover with the soil that was taken out, so as to form an easy slope to the south, and with
a steep slope on the north side carefully finished to prevent its crumbling down before the
season ends. The plants should be put out on the slope as soon as possible after the ridges
are made ready, under the protection of hand-lights, until there is free growth and the weather
has become quite summery. It is a good plan to grow one or two rows of Runner Beans a short
distance from the ridge on the north side to give shelter, and in case of bad weather after
the plants are in bearing, pea-sticks or dry litter laid about them lightly will help them
through a critical time, but stable manure must not be used. In case manure is not abundant,
make a few small hills in a sheltered, sunny spot, with whatever material is available in the
way of turf, rotten manure, or leaf-mould, taking care that nothing injurious to vegetation
is mixed with it. Put several inches of a mixture of good loam and rotten manure on the hills,
and plant and protect as in the case of ridges. If plants are not at hand, sow seeds; there
will still be a chance of Cucumbers during July, August, and September; for if they thrive
at all, they are pretty brisk in their movements. Three observations remain to be made on this
subject. In the first place, what are known as 'Ridge' Cucumbers only should be grown in the
open air; the large sorts grown in houses are unfit. In the second place, the plants should
only be pinched once, and there is no occasion for the niggling business which gardeners call
'setting the bloom.' Provide for their roots a good bed, and then let them grow as they please.
In the third place, as encouragement, we feel bound to say that, as Cucumbers are grown to
be eaten as well as to be looked at, those from ridges are less handsome than house Cucumbers,
but are quite equal to them in flavour.

==Dandelion== somewhat resembles the Endive, and is one of the earliest and most wholesome
additions to the salad-bowl. Sow now and again in June, in drills one foot asunder, and thin
out the plants to one foot apart in the rows. These will be ready for use in the following
winter and spring.

==Gourd and Pumpkin==.--An early show of fruit necessitates raising seeds under glass for planting
on prepared beds, and the plants must be protected by means of lights or any other arrangement
that can be improvised as a defence against late frosts. Of course the seeds can be sown upon
the actual bed, but it is a loss of time. The rapidity with which the plants grow is a sufficient
indication that generous feeding and copious supplies of water in dry weather are imperative.

==Lettuce==.--Sow for succession where the plants are to remain, and plant out the earlier
sowings at every opportunity. To insure a quick growth, and prevent the plants from running
to seed, extra care in giving water and shade will be necessary after transplanting. The larger
Cabbage Lettuces will prove useful if sown now.

==Maize and Sugar Corn== may be grown in this country as an ornament to the garden, and also
for the green cobs which are used as a vegetable. Sow early in the month on rich light soil,
and in a hot season, especially when accompanied by moisture, there will be rapid growth. The
cobs to be gathered for cooking when of full size, but while quite green.

==Melon==.--It is not too late to grow Melons in frames, provided a start can be made with
strong plants.

==Pea==.--Sow Peas again if there is any prospect of a break in the supply. It is a good plan
to prepare trenches as for Celery, but less deep, and sow Peas in them, as the trenches can
be quickly filled with water in case of dry weather, and the vigorous growth will be proof
against mildew.

==Savoy== sown now will produce small useful hearts for winter use. By many these small hearts
will be preferred to large ones, as more delicate, and therefore a sowing of Tom Thumb may
be advised.

==Spinach, New Zealand==, can be sown in the open ground in the early part of this month and
should be thinned to about a yard apart. The growth somewhat resembles that of the Ice Plant.
The tender young tops are pinched off for cooking, and they make an elegant Spinach, which
is free from bitterness, and is therefore acceptable to many persons who object to the sooty
flavour of ordinary Spinach.

==Tomato==.--By the third week in May the plants for the open border should be hardened. In
a cold pit or frame they may be gradually exposed until the lights can be left off altogether,
even at night. A thick layer of ashes at the bottom of the frame will insure drainage and keep
off vermin. If the plants are allowed plenty of space, and are well managed, they will possess
dark, healthy foliage, needing no support from sticks until they are in final quarters. Do
not put them out before the end of the month or the beginning of June, and choose a quiet day
for the work. If possible, give them a sunny spot under the shelter of a wall having a southern
or western aspect. On a stiff soil it is advisable to plant on ridges, and not too deeply;
for deep planting encourages strong growth, and strong growth defers the production of fruit.
Tomatoes are sometimes grown in beds, and then it is necessary to give them abundant room.
For branched plants three feet between the plants in the rows, and the rows four feet apart,
will afford space for tying and watering. Each plant should have the support of a stout stake
firmly fixed in the soil, and rising four feet above it; and once a week at least the tying
should be attended to. As to stopping, the centre stem should be allowed to grow until the
early flowers have set. It is from these early flowers that outdoor Tomatoes can be successfully
ripened, and the removal of the main shoot delays their production. But after fifteen or twenty
fruits are visible the top of the leading stem may be shortened to the length of the stake.
The fruiting branches should also be kept short beyond the fruit, and large leaves must be
shortened to allow free access of sunshine. Should the single-stem system be adopted, three
feet between the rows and two feet between plants in the rows will suffice. On a light soil
and in dry weather weak liquid manure may, with advantage, be alternated with pure water, but
this practice must not be carried far enough to make the plants gross, or ripening will be
delayed. Fruit intended for exhibition must be selected with judgment, and with this end in
view four to six specimens of any large variety will be sufficient for one plant to bring to
perfection.

==Turnip== to be sown for succession. It is well now to keep to the small white early sorts.

==Vegetable Marrow==.--In cottage gardens luxuriant vines may every year be seen trailing over
the sides of heaps of decayed turf or manure. All forward vegetables are prized, and Marrows
are no exception to the rule. An early supply from the open ground is most readily insured
by raising strong plants in pots and putting them on rich warm beds as early as the season
and district will permit. Late frosts must be guarded against by some kind of protection, and
slugs must be deterred from eating up the plants.

==JUNE==

To some extent the crops will now take care of themselves, and we may consider the chief anxieties
and activities of the season over. Our notes, therefore, will be more brief. We do not counsel
the cultivator to 'rest and be thankful.' It is better for him to work, but he must be thankful
all the same, if he would be happy in his healthy and entertaining employment. Watering and
weeding are the principal labours of this month, and both must be pursued with diligence. But
ordinary watering, where every drop has to be dipped and carried, is often injurious rather
than beneficial, for the simple reason that it is only half done. In such cases it is advisable
to withhold water as long as possible, and then to give it in abundance, watering only a small
plot every day in order to saturate the ground, and taking a week or more to go over a piece
which would be done in a day by mere surface dribblings.

==Asparagus== should be in full supply, and may be cut until the middle or end of the month.
When cutting should cease depends on the district. In the South of England the 14th is about
the proper time to make the last cut; north of the Trent, the 20th may be soon enough; and
further north, cutting may be continued into July. The point to be borne in mind is that the
plant must be allowed time to grow freely without any further check, in order to store up energy
for making robust shoots next year. It is a good plan to insert stakes, such as are used for
Peas, in Asparagus beds, to give support to the green growth against gales of wind; for when
the stems are snapped by storms, as they often are, the roots lose their aid, and are weakened
for their future work.

==Beans==, both Dwarf and Runner, may be sown about the middle of the month, to supply tender
pods when those from the early sowings are past. A late crop of Runners will pay well almost
anywhere, for they bear until the frost cuts them down, which may not happen until far into
November.

==Broccoli==.--- Take advantage of showers to continue planting out.

==Cabbage==.--Towards the end of the month sow a good breadth of small Cabbages and Coleworts.
They will be immensely valuable to plant out as the summer crops are cleared away.

==Capsicums== may be planted out in a sunny sheltered spot.

==Cauliflowers== that are transferred now from seed-beds must have plentiful supplies of water,
and be shaded during midday for a week. When the heads are visible it is customary to snap
one of the inner leaves over them for protection.

==Celery== to be planted out without loss of time, in showery weather if possible; but if the
weather is hot and dry, shade the plants and give water. The work must be well done, hence
it is advisable to lift no more plants than can be quickly dealt with, for exposure tends to
exhaustion, and Celery ought never to suffer a check in even the slightest degree. When planted,
dust lightly with soot or wood-ashes. Pea-sticks laid across the trenches will give shade enough
with very little trouble.

==Chicory==.--This wholesome esculent is used in a variety of ways, and is very much prized
in some households. The blanched heads make an acceptable accompaniment to cheese, and are
much appreciated for salading; they may also be stewed and served with melted butter in the
same manner as Sea Kale. To grow large clean roots a deep rich soil is required. If manure
must be added, use that which is well decayed, and bury it at least twelve inches, for near
the surface it will produce fanged roots. Prepare the seed-bed as for Parsnips, sow in drills
twelve inches apart, and thin the plants to nine inches in the rows. In October the roots will
be ready for lifting, preparatory to being packed in dark quarters for blanching.

==Cucumbers for Pickling== may be sown on ridges.

==Endive== is not generally wanted while good Lettuces abound, but it takes the place of Lettuce
in autumn and winter, when the more delicate vegetable is scarce. Sow in shallow drills six
inches apart. Thin the plants, and transfer the thinnings to rich light soil. They must be
liberally grown on well-manured land, with the aid of water in dry weather.

==Lettuce== to be sown and planted at every opportunity. A few rows of large Cos varieties
should be sown in trenches prepared as for Celery, there to be thinned and allowed to stand.
They will form fine hearts, and be valued at a time when Lettuces are scarce.

==Melon.==--For a final crop in houses sow as previously directed, and grow the plants on in
pots, until the house can be cleared of the former set for their reception. The growth should
be pushed forward to insure ripe fruit before the end of September. In the event of dull weather
at the finish, there will be all the greater need of abundant but judicious ventilation, and
of a warm dry atmosphere at night. Before they become heavy every fruit should have the support
of nets or thin pieces of board suspended by wires from the corners.

==Mushrooms== may be prepared for now. The first step towards success is to accumulate a long
heap of horse-droppings with the least possible amount of litter. Let this ferment moderately,
and turn it two or three times, always making a long heap of it, which keeps down the fermentation.
When the fire is somewhat taken out of it, make up the bed with a mixture of about four parts
of the fermented manure and one part of turfy loam, well incorporated. Beat the stuff together
with the flat of the spade as the work proceeds, fashioning the bed in the form of a ridge
about three feet wide at the base, and of any length that may be convenient. Give the work
a neat finish, or the Mushrooms will certainly not repay you. Put in rather large lumps of
spawn when the bed is nicely warm, cover with a thin layer of fine soil, and protect with mats
or clean straw. This is a quick and easy way of growing Mushrooms, and by commencing now the
season is all before one. Nine times in ten, people begin preparations for Mushroom growing
about a month too late, for the spawn runs during the hot weather, and the crop rises when
the moderate autumnal temperature sets in.

==Onions== to be sown for salading. Forward beds of large sorts to be thinned in good time.
The best Onions for keeping are those of moderate size, perfectly ripened; therefore the thinning
should not be too severe.

==Peas== may still be sown, and as the season advances preference should be given to quick-growing
early varieties.

==Turnips== may be sown in variety and in quantity after Midsummer Day. Sow on well-prepared
ground, and put a sprinkle of artificial manure in the drills with the seed. By hastening the
early growth of the plant the fly is kept in check.

==JULY==

For gardeners July is in one respect like January; everything depends on the weather. It may
be hot, with frequent heavy rains, and vegetation in the most luxuriant growth; or the earth
may be iron and the heavens brass, with scarcely a green blade to be seen. The light flying
showers that usually occur in July do not render watering unnecessary; in fact, a heavy soaking
of a crop after a moderate rainfall is a valuable aid to its growth, for it requires a long-continued
heavy downpour to penetrate to the roots.

==Summer-sown Vegetables for Autumn and Winter use.== As the month advances early crops will
be finished and numerous plots of ground become vacant. In many gardens it is now the practice
to sow in July and August seeds of quick-growing varieties of Vegetables and Salads to furnish
supplies through the autumn and early winter months, and this system is strongly to be commended.
These sowings not only increase the cropping capacity of the garden but they extend the use
of many favourite Vegetables which from spring sowings customarily cease at the end of summer.
Two things are essential to success. =Early-maturing varieties only should be sown and the
plants must be thinned immediately they appear (thus avoiding transplanting), so that they
receive no check in growth.= The following subjects are especially suited for the purpose:
Dwarf French Beans (sow early in July), Beet, Cabbage, Carrot, Cauliflower (sow early in July),
Italian Corn Salad, Cress, Endive, Kohl Rabi, Lettuce, Onion, Parsley, Peas, Radish, Spinach,
and Turnip. Potatoes may also be planted in July, but only tubers of early varieties saved
from the preceding year should be used.

==Garden Rubbish== is apt to accumulate in odd corners and become offensive. The stumps of
Cabbages and Cauliflowers give off most obnoxious odours, and neighbours ought not to be annoyed
by want of thought in one particular garden. The short and easy way with all soft decaying
rubbish is to put it at the bottom of a trench when preparing land for planting. There it ceases
to be a nuisance and becomes a valuable manure.

==Beans.==--A few Dwarf French Beans may still be sown to extend outdoor crops to the latest
possible date. For autumn and winter supplies sowings of the Dwarf and Climbing classes may
be made from mid-July to mid-September, the dwarfs in cold frames and the climbers on narrow
borders in any house that can be spared for the purpose.

==Broccoli== to be planted out as before; many of the plants left over from former plantings
will now be stout and strong, and make useful successions.

==Cabbage.==--The sowing of Cabbage seed at this period of the year entails consequences of
such grave importance as to merit reconsideration. When the crop has passed the winter there
is a danger that the plants may bolt, instead of forming hearts. In the great majority of such
cases the loss is attributable to an unwise selection of sorts. For sowing in spring there
is quite a long list of varieties, many of them possessing distinctive qualities which meet
various requirements. It is otherwise now. The Cabbages that can be relied on to finish well
in spring are comparatively few in number. But repeated experiments have demonstrated that
loss and disappointment can be avoided by sowing only those varieties which show no tendency
to bolt. Another, but minor, cause of Cabbages starting seed-stems is premature sowing. The
exact date for any district must be determined by the latitude and the aspect of the place.
In the North sowing will, of necessity, be earlier than in the Midlands or the South. Assuming,
however, that suitable varieties are chosen, the whole difficulty can be disposed of, even
on soils where Cabbages show an unusual tendency to send up seed-stems prematurely, by sowing
in August instead of in July. The seed-bed should be nicely prepared, and any old plaster,
or other rubbish containing lime, should be dug in. Sow thinly, for a thick sowing makes a
weak plant, no matter how severely it may be thinned afterwards.

==Cardoons== to be thinned to one plant in each station, and that, of course, the strongest.

==Carrot.==--Frame culture of small sorts should commence, to produce a succession of young
Carrots for table.

==Celery== to be planted out in showery weather. It is too late to sow now, except for soups,
and for that purpose only a small sowing should be made, as it may not come to anything.

==Chards.==--Those who care for Chards must cut down a number of Globe Artichokes about six
inches above ground, and, if necessary, keep the plants well watered to induce new growth,
which will be ready for blanching in September.

==Cucumbers== on ridges generally do well without water, but they must not be allowed to suffer
from drought. If watering must be resorted to, make sure first of soft water well warmed by
exposure to the sun, and water liberally three or four evenings in succession, and then give
no more for a week or so.

==Endive== to be sown for winter. It will be well to make two sowings, say on the first and
last days of the month.

==Garlic and Shallots== to be taken up in suitable weather, and it may be necessary to complete
the ripening under shelter.

==Leeks== to be planted out; and on dry soils, in trenches prepared as for Celery.

==Parsley== to be sown for winter use. It is a most important matter, even in the smallest
garden, to have a constant supply.

==Peas.==--Only quick-growing early varieties should be sown now.

==Potatoes.==--Where there is a good crop of an early variety it should be lifted without waiting
for the shaws to die down. The tender skins will suffer damage if the work is done roughly,
but will soon harden, and the stock will ripen in the store as perfectly as in the ground.
It needs some amount of courage to lift Potatoes while the tops are still green and vigorous,
and it should not be done until the roots are fully grown and beginning to ripen. Quick-growing
sorts may be planted to dig as new Potatoes later in the year.

==Radish.==--Sow the large-growing kinds for winter use.

==Spinach.==--Sow the Prickly-seeded to stand the winter, selecting for the seed-bed ground
lying high and dry that has been at least twice dug over and has had no recent manure. The
twice digging is to promote the destruction of the 'Spinach Moth' grub, which the robins and
thrushes will devour when exposed by digging. These grubs make an end of many a good breadth
of Winter Spinach every year, and are the more to be feared by the careless cultivator.

==Turnips== to be sown in quantity in the early part of the month; thin advancing crops, and
keep the hoe in action amongst them.

==Winter Greens== of all kinds to be planted out freely in the best ground at command, after
a good digging, and to be aided with water for a week or so should the weather be dry.

==AUGUST==

The importance of summer-sown Vegetables and Salads is dealt with under July, and seeds of
most of the subjects there named may still be put in as ground becomes vacant. The supplies
of the garden during the next winter and spring will in great part depend upon good management
now, and the utmost must be made of the few weeks of growing weather that remain. One great
difficulty in connection with sowing seed at this period of the year is the likelihood of the
ground being too dry; yet it is most unwise to water seeds, and it is always better if they
can be got up with the natural moisture of the soil alone. However, in an extreme case the
ground should be well soaked before the seed is sown, and after sowing covered with hurdles,
pea-sticks, or mats until the seeds begin to sprout.

==Artichokes, Globe==, to be cut down as soon as the heads are used.

==Broccoli== to be planted out. As the Sprouting Broccoli, which belongs to the class of 'Winter
Greens,' does not pay well in spring unless it grows freely now, plant it far enough apart;
if crowded where already planted to stand the winter, take out every alternate plant and make
another plantation.

==Cabbage.==--In many small gardens the August sowing of Cabbages is made to suffice for the
whole year, and in the largest establishments greater breadths are sown now than at any other
period. But whether the garden be small or large, it is not wise to rely exclusively on the
sowing of any one kind. At least two varieties should be chosen, and as a precaution each variety
may be sown at two dates, with an interval of about a fortnight between. The wisdom of this
arrangement will be evident in nine seasons out of ten. It allows for contingencies, prolongs
the season of supply, and offers two distinct dishes of a single vegetable--the mature hearts,
and the partially developed plants, which differ, when served, both in appearance and in flavour.
Where the demand is extensive, or great diversity is required, three or four kinds should be
sown, including Red Cabbage to produce fine heads for pickling next year.

==Cardoon.==--Commence blanching if the plants are ready.

==Cauliflower.==--Seed sown now will produce finer heads in spring and early summer than are
generally obtained from a January or February sowing. The time to sow must be determined by
the climate of the district. In cold, late localities, the first week is none too early; from
the 15th to the 25th is a good time for all the Midland districts; and the end of the month,
or the first week of September, is early enough in the South. In Devon and Cornwall the sowing
is later still. But whatever date may suit the district, the seed should be sown with care,
in order that a healthy growth may be promoted from the first. Winter the plants in frames
or by other convenient means, but it is important to keep them hardy by giving air at every
favourable opportunity.

==Celery== to be carefully earthed up as required. It takes five weeks or more to blanch Celery
well, and as the earthing up checks growth, the operation should not be commenced a day too
soon. Take care that the earth does not get into the hearts.

==Corn Salad== should be sown during this month and September to produce plants fit for use
in early spring. In the summer months the whole plant is edible, but in winter or spring the
outer leaves only should be used.

==Cucumber.==--For a supply of Cucumbers during the winter months the general principles of
management are identical with those given under January and March, with one important exception.
At the commencement of the year a continued increase of light and warmth may be relied on.
Now there will be a constant diminution of these vital forces. Hence the progress of the plants
will gradually abate as the year wanes, and due allowance must be made for the fact. So much
depends on the character of the autumn and winter that it will be unwise to risk all on a single
sowing. Seed put in on two or three occasions between the end of August and the end of October
will provide plants in various stages of growth to meet the exigencies of the season. The production
of Cucumbers will then depend on care and management. In very dull cold weather it may be dangerous
to syringe the foliage, but the necessary moisture can be secured by sprinkling the floor and
walls.

==Endive.==--Make a final sowing, and plant out all that are large enough, selecting, if possible,
a dry, sloping bank for the purpose.

==Lettuce== to be sown to stand the winter, choosing the hardiest varieties. In cold districts
the middle of the month is a good time to sow; in favoured places the end of the month is preferable.

==Onion.==--For many years the Tripoli section enjoyed pre-eminence for sowing at this season,
the opinion prevailing that other kinds were unsuitable. But it is found that several varieties
which may with propriety be described as English Onions are as hardy as the Tripolis, and therefore
as well adapted for sowing at this season. Thus, instead of sorts that must be used quickly,
we may command for summer sowing the best of the keepers, and the result will be heavier crops
and earlier ripening, with plentiful supplies of 'thinnings' for salads all through the autumn
and winter. Two sowings--one at the beginning, the other at the end of the month--may be adopted
with advantage. The storage of Onions is often faulty, and consequently losses occur through
mildew and premature growth. If any are as yet unripe, spread them out in the sun in a dry
place, where they can be covered quickly in case of rain. In wet, cold seasons, it is sometimes
necessary to finish the store Onions by putting them in a nearly cold oven for some hours before
they are stored away.

==Pea.==--Crops coming forward for late bearing should have attention, more especially to make
them safe against storms by a sufficiency of support, and in case of drought to give abundance
of water.

==Strawberry Plants== may be put in should the weather prove favourable; but next month will
answer. In burning weather it is well worth while to bed the plants closely in a moist shady
place until rain comes, and then plant out.

==Tomatoes== to be gathered as soon as ripe. If bad weather interferes with the finishing of
the crop, cut the full-grown fruit with a length of stem attached, and hang them up in a sunny
greenhouse, or some other warm spot in full daylight. Seed sown now or in September will produce
plants that should afford fine fruit in March, and it will need care and judgment to carry
them safely through the winter.

==Turnip== may be sown in the early part of the month. The best sorts now are White Gem, or
Snowball. All the Year Round will please those who like a yellow Turnip.

==SEPTEMBER==

Weeds will be troublesome to the overworked and the idle gardener, while the best-kept land
will be full of seeds blown upon it from the sluggard's garden, and the first shower will bring
them up in terrific force. All that we have to say about them is that they must be kept down,
for they not only choke the rising crops in seed-beds and spoil the look of everything, but
they very much tend to keep the ground damp and cold, when, if they were away, it would get
dry and warm, to the benefit of all the proper crops upon it. Neglect will make the task of
eradication simply terrible, and, in the meantime, every crop on the ground will suffer. The
two great months for weeds are May and September; but often the September weeds triumph, because
the mischief they do is not then so obvious to the casual eye. As there are now many used-up
crops that may be cleared away, large quantities of Cabbage, Endive, Lettuce, and even thinnings
of Spinach may be planted out to stand the winter.

==Cabbage.==--We advocate crowding the land now with Cabbage plants, for growth will be slow
and the demands of the kitchen constant. Crowding, however, is not quite the same thing as
overcrowding, and it is only a waste of labour, land and crop to put the plants so close together
that they have not space for full development. The usual rule in planting out the larger sorts
of Cabbage at this time of the year is to allow a distance every way of two feet between the
plants. The crowding principle may be carried so far as to put miniature Cabbages between them,
but only on the clear understanding that the small stuff is all to be cleared off before spring
growth commences, and the large Cabbages will then have proper space for development.

==Cauliflower.==--Sow again in a frame or in a pan in the greenhouse.

==Celery.==--Continue to earth up, selecting a dry time for the task.

==Chards== take quite six weeks to blanch by means of straw, covered with earth. 

CHAPTER X

BORDER WARFARE

Frontenac's best legacy to Quebec and to Canada was the pacification of the Indian tribes. Under
his stern rule the prestige of France had been restored, and to the new Governor, De Callières,
was left the duty of arranging the formalities of peace with the ancient enemy, the Iroquois.
A treaty, however, was only concluded in the face of strenuous opposition from New England,
which now beheld with grave concern the changed front of the "Five Nations," who, for the space
of a hundred years, had been the sharpest thorn in the side of New France, and whose territory
had been as armour-plate about their own settlements.

In opportune time the Treaty of Ryswick had nominally settled all points of contention between
France and England in both hemispheres, and it was soon followed by the cessation of hostilities
between the whites and Indians. The Governor of New France summoned deputies from all the tribes
to a grand council, at which, after many days of debate, he skilfully
persuaded them to bury the hatchet and submit their internecine differences
to Quebec for arbitration.

Belts of wampum were exchanged, and the calumet of peace was passed forthwith between the followers
and colleagues of De Callières and the painted chiefs of a dozen tribes.

The conclusion of this treaty was a fortunate stroke of French diplomacy,
as not many months were to pass before Europe became once more involved
in a war, into which the colonies of the rival powers were naturally
drawn.

Apart from the recognition of the English Pretender in France, the immediate cause of war in
Europe was the question of the Spanish succession; for while Louis XIV. claimed the throne for
his grandson, Philip of Anjou, England, on the other hand, recognised
that this union of France and Spain would upset the balance of power
on both sides of the Atlantic, and that her American possessions would
be exposed to a cross fire from both north and south.

The great battles of Blenheim, Ramilies, Oudenarde, and Malplaquet of the European conflict had
their counterpart in the petite guerre which was waged by the opposing colonies in America. French
privateers issuing from Port Royal swept along the coast of New England, the settlements of
Acadia suffering reprisals in kind.

At last the ruthless destruction of the little village of Haverhill on the Merrimac by a Canadian
war-party roused the English colonists to fury, and they loudly demanded the conquest of Canada.
The authorities were already predisposed to this large undertaking by the arguments of one Samuel
Vetch, whom the Governor of Massachusetts had formerly despatched on a special mission to
Canada. Vetch soon perceived that the defences of Quebec and Montreal were not too formidable
to be overcome by a well-devised assault; and proceeding to England he made representations to
the advisers of Queen Anne, who, in 1709, sent him back to Boston with command to contrive an expedition
against the fortress of Canada. A land force from New England was to proceed northward by way
of the Richelieu, and to co-operate with an English fleet on the St. Lawrence.

Once more, however, fortune intervened to save Quebec. England long delayed in sending the promised
fleet, and it was already late autumn before the colonial forces were ready to set out. While Colonel
Nicholson, its leader, perceived the hopelessness of so unseasonable
an assault upon the city, he was yet unwilling to remain inactive.

Moreover, Acadia lay close by, and the stronghold of Port Royal challenged
his arms.

He determined on its subjection.

The brave highspirited Subercase[21] was commandant of the town,
and although his garrison was ill-provisioned and almost destitute
of ammunition, the fort was defended with the utmost boldness against
the overwhelming force of the besiegers.

Subercase saw the hopelessness of his situation from the first, but
in the end his invincible courage secured an honourable capitulation,
and, with a pomp and circumstance contrasting strangely with their
starved faces and ragged uniforms, the little garrison of Port Royal
marched proudly out of the fort.

Nicholson took possession of the stronghold and changed its name to Annapolis in honour of
the British sovereign.

So fell the first of these fortresses, which were the counters in
that long game played on the chess-board of a continent.

The capture of Port Royal strengthened the determination of the English colonists to drive the
French out of Canada by destroying their grim stronghold upon the St. Lawrence. The home government
fell in readily with the project, and despatched seven regiments
of the line, fresh from Marlborough's campaigns, together with a fleet
of fifteen warships under Admiral Sir Hovenden Walker.

This powerful auxiliary to the strength of the colonies arrived duly at Boston, where the details
of the invasion of Canada were arranged; and when at length all was
ready, the English admiral sailed from Boston for the St. Lawrence,
Nicholson at the same time setting out overland for Montreal with
a force of twelve thousand men.



==Potatoes== to be taken up and stored with all possible speed.

==Rhubarb== for forcing should be taken up and laid aside in a dry, cool place, exposed to
the weather. This gives the roots a check, and constitutes a kind of winter, which in some
degree prepares them for the forcing pit.

==Roots==, such as Beet, Salsify, and Turnip, to be taken up as soon as possible, and stored
for the winter.

==Winter Greens== may still be transplanted, and it is often better to use up the remainder
of the seed-beds than to let the plants stand. In the event of a severe winter, these late-planted
Greens may not be of much value; but in a mild growing winter they will make some progress,
and may prove very useful in the spring.

==NOVEMBER==

The remarks already made on the necessity for tidiness and the quick disposal of all decaying
refuse apply as forcibly to this month as to October. The leaves are falling, the atmosphere
is moist, and there should be the utmost care taken not to make things worse by scatterings
of vegetable rubbish. Now we are in the 'dull days before Christmas' the affairs of the garden
may be reviewed in detail, and this is the best period for such a review. Sorts that have done
well or ill, wants that have been felt, mistakes that have been made, are fresh in one's memory,
and in ordering seeds, roots, plants, &c., for next season's work, experience and observation
can be recorded with a view to future benefit. Consistently with the revision of plans by the
fireside, revise the work out of doors. Begin to prepare for next year's crops by trenching,
manuring, planting, and collecting stuff to burn in a 'smother.' Land dug now for spring seeds
and roots, and kept quite rough, will only require to be levelled down and raked over when
spring comes to be ready for seed, and will produce better crops than if prepared in a hurry.
Protecting material for all the needs of the season must be in readiness, in view of the fact
that a few nights of hard frost may destroy Lettuces, Endives, Celery, and Cauliflowers worth
many pounds, which a few shillings'-worth of labour and litter would have saved. Earthwork
can generally be pushed on, and it is good practice to get all road-mending and the breaking
up of new ground completed before the year runs out, because of the hindrance that may result
from frost, and the inevitable pressure of other work at the turn of the spring. The weather
is an important matter; but often the month of November is favourable to outdoor work, and
labour can then be found more readily than at most other seasons.

==Artichokes, Globe==, must be protected ere frost attacks them. Cut off the stems and large
leaves to within a foot of the ground; then heap up along each side of the rows a lot of dry
litter consisting of straw, pea haulm, or leaves, taking care in so doing to leave free access
to light and air. The hearts must not be covered, or decay will follow.

==Artichokes, Jerusalem==, may be dug as wanted, but some should be lifted and stored in sand
for use during frosts.

==Asparagus== beds not yet cleaned must have prompt attention. Cut down the brown grass and
rake off all the weeds and rubbish, and finish by putting on a dressing of seaweed, or half-rotten
stable manure.

==Bean, Broad.==--It is customary on dry warm soils to sow Beans at the end of October or during
November for a first crop, and the practice is to be commended. On cold damp soils, and on
clay lands everywhere, it is a waste of seed and labour to sow now, but every district has
its peculiar capabilities, and each cultivator must judge for himself. In any case, Beans sown
during this month should be put on well-drained land in a sheltered spot.

==Broccoli.==--In inclement districts lay the plants with their heads facing the north.

==Carrot== to be sown in frames, and successive sowings made every three or four weeks until
February.

==Cauliflowers== will be turning in, and possibly those coming forward will be all the better
off for being covered with a leaf to protect the heads from frost. If the barometer rises steadily
and the wind goes round to north or north-east, draw all the best Cauliflowers, and put them
in a shed or any out-of-the-way place safe for use.

==Celery.==--Hard frost coming after heavy rain may prove destructive to Celery; and it is
well, if there is a crop worth saving, to cut a trench round the plantation to favour escape
of surplus water. If taken up and packed away in a dry shed, the sticks will keep fresh for
some time.

==Horse-radish== to be taken up and stored ready for use, and new plantations made as weather
permits and ground can be spared.

==Pea.==--The sowing of Peas outdoors now is not recommended for general practice, but only
for those who are so favourably circumstanced as to have a fair prospect of success. If it
is determined to sow, select for the purpose a dry, light, well-drained sunny border, and make
it safe from mice, slugs, and sparrows. The quick-growing round-seeded varieties must be chosen
for the purpose, and it will be advisable to sow two or three sorts rather than one only. Peas
to be grown entirely under glass may be started now.

==Sea Kale== to be lifted for forcing. This delicious vegetable may, indeed, be forced for
the table in this month; but it is not advisable to be in such haste, for a fine sample cannot
be secured so early. Sea Kale is the easiest thing in the world to force; the only point of
importance is to have strong roots to begin with. Any place such as Mushroom-houses, cellars,
pits, or old sheds, where it is possible to maintain a temperature of 45° to 55°, may be utilised
for the purpose. Put the plants thickly into pots or boxes, or plant them in a bed, and it
is essential to exclude light to insure blanching. By these simple means a regular supply may
be obtained until the permanent beds in the open ground come into use.

==DECEMBER==

The best advice that can be given for this month is to be prepared for either heavy rain or
sharp frost, so that extreme variations of temperature may inflict the least possible injury
in the garden. Let the work be ordered with reference to the weather, that there may be no
'poaching' on wet ground, or absurd conflict with frost. Accept every opportunity of wheeling
out manure; and as long as the ground can be dug without waste of labour, proceed to open trenches,
make drains, and mend walks, because this is the period for improving, and the place must be
very perfect which affords no work for winter weather. Dispose of all rubbish by the simple
process of putting it in trenches when digging plots for early seeds. In sheds and outhouses
many tasks may be found, such as making large substantial tallies for the garden; the little
paltry things commonly used being simply delusive, for they are generally missing when wanted,
from their liability to be trodden into the ground or kicked anywhere by a heedless foot. Make
ready pea-sticks, stakes of sizes, and at odd times gather up all the dry stuff that is adapted
for a grand 'smother.' A careful forecasting of the next year's cropping will show that even
now many arrangements may be made to increase the chances of success.

==Warm Border== to be prepared for early work by digging and manuring. All the refuse turf
and leaf-mould from the potting-shed and the soil knocked out of pots may be usefully disposed
of by adding it to this border, which cannot be too light or too rich, and a good dressing
of manure will give it strength to perform its duties.

==Beans, Broad==, to be earthed up for protection and support.

==Celery== to be earthed up for the last time. In case of severe weather, have protecting material
at hand in the shape of dry litter or mats. Pea-sticks make a capital foundation on which to
throw long litter, mats, &c., for quickly covering Celery, the protection being as quickly
removed when the frost is over, and costing next to nothing.

==Endive== will be valued now, and must be blanched as required. Place a few in frames and
other protected spots. In the unused corners of sheds and outhouses they may be safer than
out of doors.

==Parsley.==--In all cold districts it is wise to secure a bed of Parsley, in a frame or pit,
or if a few plants were potted in September, they may be wintered in any place where they can
have light and air freely. It is so important to have Parsley at command as wanted, that it
may be worth while to put a frame over a few rows as they stand in the open quarter, rather
than risk the loss of all in the event of severe weather.

==Radish.==--Sow one of the long sorts for a first supply in some warm spot, to secure quick
growth.

==Underground Onions== to be planted in rows one foot apart. They should not be earthed up,
for the young bulbs form round the stems in full daylight.

THE ROTATION OF CROPS IN THE VEGETABLE GARDEN

This is a subject worthy the attention of those who aim at the largest possible production
and the highest possible quality of every kind of kitchen-garden crop, for it concerns the
natural relations of the plant and the soil as to their several chemical constituents. The
principle may be illustrated by considering the demands of two of the most common kitchen-garden
crops. If we submit a Cabbage to the destructive agency of fire, and analyse the ashes that
remain, we shall find in them, in round numbers, eight per cent. of sulphuric acid, sixteen
per cent. of phosphoric acid, four per cent. of soda, forty-eight per cent. of potash, and
fifteen per cent. of lime. It is evident that we cannot expect to grow a Cabbage on a soil
which is destitute of these ingredients, to say nothing of others. The obnoxious odour of sulphur
emitted by decaying Cabbages might indicate, to anyone accustomed to reflect on ordinary occurrences,
that sulphur is an important constituent of Cabbage. If we submit a Potato tuber to a similar
process, the result will be to find in the ashes fifty-nine per cent. of potash, two per cent.
of soda, six per cent. of sulphuric acid, nineteen per cent. of phosphoric acid, and two per
cent. of lime. The lesson for the cultivator is, that to prepare a soil for Cabbage it is of
the utmost importance to employ a manure containing sulphates, phosphates, and potash salts
in considerable quantity; as for the lime, that can be supplied separately, but the Cabbage
must have it. On the other hand, to prepare a soil for Potatoes it is necessary to employ a
manure strongly charged with salts of potash and phosphates, but it need not be highly charged
with soda or lime, for we find but a small proportion of these ingredients in the Potato. There
are soils so naturally rich in all that crops require, that they may be tilled for years without
the aid of manures, and will not cease to yield an abundant return. But such soils are exceptional,
and those that need constant manuring are the rule. One point more, ere we proceed to apply
to practice these elementary considerations. In almost every soil, whether strong clay, mellow
loam, poor sand, or even chalk, there are comminglings of all the minerals required by plants,
and, indeed, if there were not, we should see no herbage on the downs, and no Ivies climbing,
as they do, to the topmost heights of limestone rocks. But usually a considerable proportion
of those mineral constituents on which plants feed are locked up in the staple, and are only
dissolved out slowly as the rain, the dew, the ever-moving air, and the sunshine operate upon
them and make them available. As the rock slowly yields up its phosphates, alkalies and silica
to the wild vegetation that runs riot upon it, so the cultivated field (which is but rock in
a state of decay) yields up its phosphates, alkalies and silica for the service of plants the
more quickly because it is the practice of the cultivator to stir the soil and continually
expose fresh surfaces to the transforming power of the atmosphere. It has been said that the
air we breathe is a powerful manure. So it is, but not in the sense that is applicable to stable
manure or guano. The air may and does afford to plants much of their food, but it can only
help them to the minerals they require by dissolving these out of pebbles, flints, nodules
of chalk, sandstone, and other substances in the soil which contain them in what may be termed
a locked-up condition. Every fresh exposure of the soil to the air, and especially to frost
and snow, is as the opening of a new mine of fertilisers for the service of those plants on
which man depends for his subsistence.

The application to practice of these considerations is an extremely simple matter in the first
instance, but it may become very complicated if followed far enough. Here we can only touch
the surface of the subject, yet we hope to do so usefully. Suppose, then, that we grow Cabbage,
or Cauliflower, or Broccoli, on the same plot of ground, one crop following the other for a
long series of years, and never refresh the soil with manure, it must be evident that we shall,
some day or other, find the crop fail through the exhaustion of the soil of its available sulphur,
phosphates, lime, or potash. But if this soil were allowed to lie fallow for some time, it
would again produce a crop of Cabbage, owing to the liberation of mineral matters which, when
the crops were failing, were not released fast enough, but which, during the rest allowed to
the soil, accumulated sufficiently to sustain a crop. Obviously this mode of procedure is unprofitable
and tends of necessity to exhaustion, although it must be confessed that utter exhaustion of
any soil is a thing at present almost unknown. But, instead of following a practice which impoverishes,
let us enrich the soil with manure, and change the crops on the same plot, so that when one
crop has largely taxed it for one class of minerals, a different crop is grown which will tax
it for another class of minerals. Take for a moment's consideration one of the necessary constituents
of a fertile soil, common salt (chloride of sodium). In the ash of a Cabbage there is about
six per cent. of this mineral, in the Turnip about ten per cent., in the Potato two to three
per cent., in the Beet eighteen to twenty per cent. On the other hand the Beet contains very
little sulphur, but both Turnip and Beet agree in being strongly charged with potash and soda.
It follows that if we crop a piece of ground with Cabbage, and wish to avoid the failure that
may occur if we continue to crop with Cabbage, we may expect to do well by giving the ground
a dressing of common salt and potash salts, and then crop it with Beet.

The whole subject is not exhausted by this mode of viewing it, for all the facts are not yet
fully understood by the ablest of our chemists and physiologists, and crops differ in their
methods of seeking nourishment. We might find two distinct plants nearly agreeing in chemical
constitution, and yet one might fail where the other would succeed. Suppose, for instance,
we have grown Cabbage and other surface-rooting crops until the soil begins to fail, even then
we might obtain from it a good crop of Parsnips or Carrots, for the simple reason that these
send their roots down to a stratum that the Cabbage never reached; and it is most instructive
to bear in mind that although the Parsnip will grow on poor land, and pay on land that has
been badly tilled for years, yet the ashes of the Parsnip contain thirty-six per cent. of potash,
eleven per cent. of lime, eighteen per cent. of phosphoric acid, six per cent. of sulphuric
acid, three per cent. of phosphate of iron, and five per cent. of common salt. How does the
Parsnip obtain its mineral food in a soil which for other crops appears to be exhausted? Simply
by pushing down for it into a mine that has hitherto been but little worked, though Cabbage
might fail on the same plot because the superficial stratum has been overtaxed.

Having attempted a general, we now proceed to a particular application. In the first place,
good land, well tilled and abundantly manured, cannot be soon exhausted; but even in this case
a rotation of crops is advisable. It is less easy to say why than to insist that in practice
we find it to be so. The question then arises--What is a rotation of crops? It is the ordering
of a succession in such a manner that the crops will tax the soil for mineral aliments in a
different manner. A good rotation will include both chemical and mechanical differences, and
place tap-roots in a course between surface roots, as, for example, Carrot, Parsnip, and Beet,
after Cabbage, Cauliflower, and Broccoli; and light, quick surface crops, such as Spinach,
to serve as substitutes for fallows. The cropping of the kitchen garden should be, as far as
possible, so ordered that plants of the same natural families never immediately succeed one
another; and, above all things, it is important to shift from place to place, year after year,
the Cabbages and the Potatoes, because these are the most exhaustive crops we grow. In a ton
of Potatoes there are about twelve pounds of potash, four pounds of sulphuric acid, four pounds
of phosphoric acid, and one pound of magnesia. We may replace these substances by abundant
manuring, and we are bound to say that the best rotation will not obviate the necessity for
manuring; but even then it is well to crop the plot with Peas, Spinach, Lettuce, and other
plants that occupy it for a comparatively brief space of time, and necessitate much digging
and stirring; for these mechanical agencies combine with the manure in preparing the plot to
grow Potatoes again much better than if the land were kept to this crop only from year to year.
If we could mark out a plot of ground into four parts, we should devote one plot to permanent
crops--such as Asparagus, Sea Kale, and Rhubarb--and on the other three keep the crops revolving
in some such order as this: No. 1, Potatoes, Celery, Leek, Carrot, Parsnip, Beet, &c. No. 2,
Peas, Beans, Onions, Summer Spinach, &c., followed by Turnips for winter use, Cabbage for spring
use, and Winter Spinach. No. 3, Brassicas, including Broccoli, Brussels Sprouts, Kale, &c.
In the following year the original No. 1 would be cropped as No. 2, and No. 2 as No. 3. In
the third season corresponding changes would be made, constituting a three-course system. The
cultivator must use discretion in cropping vacant ground. As an example it will be obvious
that land cleared of Early Potatoes will be very suitable for planting Strawberries. Another
point is worth attention: Peas sown on the lines where Celery has been grown will thrive without
any preparation beyond levelling the ground and drawing the necessary drills. This is a West
of England custom, and it answers exceedingly well.

THE CHEMISTRY OF GARDEN CROPS

A Consideration of the chemistry of the crops that engage attention in this country will afford
an explanation of one great difference between farming and gardening. And this difference should
be kept in mind by all classes of cultivators as the basis of operations in tillage, cropping,
and the order and character of rotations. The first thing to discover in the cropping of a
farm is the kind of vegetation for which the land is best adapted to insure, in a run of seasons,
fairly profitable results. If the soil is unfit for cereals, then it is sheer folly to sow
any more corn than may be needful for convenience, as, for example, to supply straw for thatching
and litter, and oats for horses, to save cost of carriage, &c. On large farms that are far
removed from markets it is often necessary to risk a few crops that the land is ill fitted
for, in order to satisfy the requirements of the homestead, and to save the outlay of money
and the inconvenience of hauling from distant markets. But everywhere the cropping must be
adapted to the soil and the climate as nearly as possible, both to simplify operations and
enlarge to the utmost the chances of success. In the cropping of a garden this plain procedure
cannot be followed. We are compelled certainly to consider what the soil and climate will especially
favour amongst garden crops, but, notwithstanding this, the gardener must grow whatever the
household requires. He may have to grow Peas on a hot shallow sand; and Potatoes and Carrots
on a cold clay; and Asparagus on a shallow bed of pebbles and potsherds. To the gardener the
chemistry of crops is a matter of great importance, because he cannot restrict his operations
to such crops as the land is particularly adapted for, but must endeavour to make the land
capable of carrying more or less of all the vegetables and fruits that find a place in the
catalogue of domestic wants. That he must fail at certain points is inevitable; nevertheless
his aim will be, and must be, of a somewhat universal kind, and a clear idea of the relations
of plants to the soil in which they grow will be of constant and incalculable value to him.

We are bound to say at the outset that a complete essay on the chemistry of vegetation is not
our purpose. We are anxious to convey some useful information, and to kindle sufficient interest
to induce those who have hitherto given but slight attention to this question to inquire further,
with a view to get far beyond the point at which we shall have to quit the subject.

Plants consist of two classes of constituents--the Inorganic, which may be called the foundation;
and the Organic, which may be considered the superstructure. With the former of these we are
principally concerned here. A plant must derive from the soil certain proportions of silica,
lime, sulphur, phosphates, alkalies, and other mineral constituents, or it cannot exist at
all; but, given these, the manufacture of fibre, starch, gum, sugar, and other organic products
depends on the action of light, heat, atmospheric air, and moisture, for the organic products
have to be created by chemical (or vital) action within the structure, or, as we sometimes
say, the tissues of the plant itself. To a very great extent the agencies that conduce to the
elaboration of organic products are beyond our control (though not entirely so), whereas we
can directly, and to a considerable degree, provide the plant with the minerals it more particularly
requires; first, by choosing the ground for it, and next by tilling and manuring in a suitable
manner. A clay soil, in which, in addition to the predominating alumina, there is a fair proportion
of lime, may be regarded as the most fertile for all purposes; but we have few such in Britain,
our clays being mostly of an obdurate texture, retentive of moisture, and requiring much cultivation,
and containing, moreover, salts of iron in proportions and forms almost poisonous to plants.
But there are profound resources in most clays, so that if it is difficult to tame them, it
is also difficult to exhaust them. Hence a clay that has been well cultivated through several
generations will generally produce a fair return for whatever crop may be put upon it. Limestone
soils are usually very porous and deficient of clay, and therefore have no sustaining power.
Many of our great tracts of mountain limestone are mere sheep-walks, and would be comparatively
worthless except for the lime that may be obtained by burning. On the other hand, chalk, which
is a more recent form of carbonate of lime, is often highly productive, more especially where,
through long cultivation, it has been much broken up, and has become loamy through accumulation
of humus. Between the oldest limestone and the latest chalk there are many intermediate kinds
of calcareous soils, and they are mostly good, owing to their richness in phosphates, the products
of the marine organisms of which these rocks in great part, and in some cases wholly, consist.
For the growth of cereals these calcareous soils need a certain proportion of silica, and where
they have this we see some of the finest crops of Wheat, Trifolium, Peas and Beans in these
islands. If we could mix some of our obdurate clays with our barren limestones, the two comparatively
worthless staples would probably prove remarkably fertile. Although this is impossible, a consideration
of the chemistry of the imaginary mixture may be useful, more especially to the gardener, who
can in a small way accomplish many things that are impracticable on a great scale. Sandy soils
are characterised by excess of silica, and deficiency of alumina, phosphates and potash. Here
the mechanical texture is as serious a matter as it is in the case of clay. The sand is too
loose as the clay is too pasty, and it may be that we have to prevent the estate from being
blown away. It is especially worthy of observation, however, that sandy soils are the most
readily amenable of any to the operation of tillage. If we cannot take much out of them, we
can put any amount into them, and it is always necessary to calculate where the process of
enrichment is to stop. It is not less worthy of observation that sandy soils can be rendered
capable of producing almost every kind of crop, save cereals and pulse, and even these can
be secured where there is some basis of peat or loam or clay with the sand. The parks and gardens
of Paris, Versailles, and Haarlem are on deep sands that drift before the wind when left exposed
for any length of time with no crop upon them; and not only do we see the finest of Potatoes
and the most nutritious of herbage produced on these soils, but good Cauliflowers, Peas, Beans,
Onions, fruits, and big trees of sound timber.

Garden soils usually consist of loam of some kind, the consequence of long cultivation. Natural
loams are the result of the decay and admixture of various earths, and they are mostly of a
mellow texture, easily worked and highly productive. They are, as a rule, the best of all soils,
and their goodness is in part due to the fact that they contain a little of everything, with
no great predominance of any one particular earth. Cultivation also produces loam. On a clay
land we find a top crust of clayey loam, and on a lime or chalk land a top crust of calcareous
loam. Where cultivation has been long pursued the staple is broken and manures are put on,
and the roots of plants assist in disintegration and decomposition. Thus there is accumulation
of humus and a decomposition of the rock proceeding together, and a loam of some sort is the
result. Hence the necessity of caution in respect of deep trenching, for if we bury the top
soil and put in its place a crude material that has not before seen daylight, we may lose ten
years in profitable cropping, because we must now begin to tame a savage soil that we have
been at great pains to bring up, to cover a stratum of a good material prepared for us by the
combined operations of Nature and Art during, perhaps, several centuries. But deep and good
garden soils may be safely trenched and freely knocked about, because not only does the process
favour the deep rooting of the plants, but it favours also that disintegration which is one
of the causes of fertility. Every pebble is capable of imparting to the soil a solution--infinitesimal,
perhaps, but not the less real--of silica, or lime, or potash, or phosphates, or perhaps of
all these; but it must be exposed to light and air and moisture to enable it to part with a
portion of its substance, and thus it is that mechanical tillage is of the first importance
in all agricultural and horticultural operations.

The principal inorganic or mineral constituents of plants are potash, soda, lime, iron, phosphorus,
sulphur, chlorine, and silica. Clays and loams are generally rich in potash, sulphur, and phosphates,
but deficient in soluble silica and lime. Limestone and chalk are usually rich in lime and
phosphates, but deficient in humus, silica, sulphur, and alkalies. Sandy soils are rich in
silica, but are generally poor in respect of phosphates and alkalies. Therefore, on a clay
or loam, farmyard manure is invaluable, because it contains ingredients that all crops appreciate,
and also because it is helpful in breaking up the texture of the soil. The occasional application
of lime also is important for its almost magical effect on garden soil that has been liberally
manured and heavily cropped for a long term of years. Calcareous soils are greatly benefited
by a free application to them of manure from the stable and cow-byre; but as a rule it would
be like carrying coals to Newcastle to dress these soils with lime. Clay may be put on with
advantage; and nothing benefits a hot chalky soil more than a good dose of mud from ponds and
ditches, which supplies at once humus, alumina, and silicates, and gives 'staple' to the soil,
while preventing it also from 'burning.' In the manuring of sandy soils great care is requisite,
because of their absorbing power. In the bulb-growing districts of Holland, manure from cowsheds
is worth an enormous price for digging into loose sand for a crop of Potatoes, to be followed
by bulbs. Sandy soils are generally deficient in phosphates and alkalies; hence it will on
such soils be frequently found that kainit (a crude form of potash) and superphosphate of lime
will conjointly produce the best results, more especially in raising Potatoes, Onions, and
Carrots, which are particularly well adapted for sandy soils. Probably one of the best fertilisers
is genuine farmyard manure from stall-fed cattle, for it contains phosphates, alkalies, and
silicates in available forms. For similar reasons Peruvian Guano is often useful on such soils.
Artificial manure should be selected with a view to correct the deficiencies of the soil, and
to satisfy the requirements of the crops to be grown on it.

While we have thus dealt principally with the Inorganic or mineral constituents of plants,
and the way in which the deficiencies of the soil in respect of any of them may be supplied
by artificial applications, we must not ignore the other class of constituents, the Organic.
These are supplied almost entirely from the atmosphere itself, though, to a limited extent,
the presence in the soil of humus or vegetable matter contributes also. Yet this latter, as
seen in the case of land heavily dressed with farmyard or stable manure, vegetable refuse,
&c, exercises important functions in other directions. Not only are mineral constituents, in
forms available for assimilation, supplied, but soils so treated derive peculiar advantages
as regards their mechanical state and improved physical conditions, chiefly in respect of retention
of moisture, warmth, &c. Thus, sandy soils, which are very apt, through poverty in humus, to
lose their moisture readily and to 'burn,' are rendered more retentive of moisture and fertilising
constituents by the use of farmyard manure, &c., and have more 'staple' or substance given
to them, while heavy, tenacious clays are opened out, lightened, and rendered more amenable
to the influences of drainage, aeration, &c., and so become less cold and inactive.

For the present purpose the principal garden crops may be grouped in two classes, in accordance
with their main characteristics and the predominance of certain of their mineral elements.
The figures given on the following page show the average percentage proportions of the several
minerals in the ashes of the different plants.

In Class I. Phosphates and Potash predominate. This class consists of the less succulent plants,
and includes the following: The Pea: containing, in 100 parts of the ashes, phosphates, thirty-six;
potash, forty. Bean: phosphates, thirty; potash, forty-four. Potato (tubers only): phosphates,
nineteen; potash, fifty-nine; soda, two; lime, two; sulphuric acid, six. Parsnip: phosphates,
eighteen; potash, thirty-six; lime, eleven; salt, five. Carrot: phosphates, twelve; potash,
thirty-six; soda, thirteen; sulphuric acid, six. Jerusalem Artichoke: phosphates, sixteen;
potash, sixty-five.

In Class II. Sulphur, Lime and Soda Salts are predominant. This class consists of the more
succulent plants, and includes the following: Cabbage: containing, in 100 parts of the ashes,
phosphates, sixteen; potash, forty-eight; soda, four; lime, fifteen; sulphuric acid, eight.
Turnip: phosphates, thirteen; potash, thirty-nine; soda, five; lime, ten; sulphuric acid, fourteen.
Beet: phosphates, fourteen; potash, forty-nine; soda, nineteen; lime, six; sulphuric acid, five.

As a matter of course, Lentils and other kinds of pulse agree more or less with Peas and Beans
in the predominance of phosphates and potash. So, again, all the Brassicas, whether Kales,
Cauliflower, or whatever else, agree nearly with the Cabbage in the prominent presence of lime
and sulphur; ingredients which fully account for the offensive odour of these vegetables when
in a state of decay. Fruits as a rule are highly charged with alkalies, and are rarely deficient
in phosphates; moreover, stone-fruits require lime, for they have to make bone as well as flesh
when they produce a crop. As regards the alkalies, plants appear capable of substituting soda
for potash under some circumstances, but it would not be prudent for the cultivator to assume
that the cheaper alkali might take the place of the more costly one as a mineral agent, for
Nature is stern and constant in her ways, and it can hardly be supposed that a plant in which
potash normally predominates can attain to perfection in a soil deficient in potash, however
well supplied it may be with soda. The cheaper alkali in combination as salt (chloride of sodium)
may, however, be usually employed in aid of quick-growing green crops; and more or less with
tap-roots and Brassicas. Salt, too, is very useful in a dry season by reason of its power of
attracting and retaining moisture. As regards Potatoes, it is worthy of observation that they
contain but a trace of silica, and yet they generally thrive on sand, and in many instances
crops grown on sand are free from disease and of high quality, although the weight may not
be great. The mechanical texture of the soil has much to do with this; and when that is aided
by a supply of potash and phosphates, whether from farmyard manure or artificials, sandy soils
become highly productive of Potatoes of the very finest quality. On the other hand, Potatoes
also grow well on limestone and chalk, and yet there is but little lime in them. Here, again,
mechanical texture explains the case in part, and it is further explained by the sufficiency
of potash and phosphates, as also of magnesia, which enters in a special manner into the mineral
constitution of this root.

Thus far we have not even mentioned nitrogen, or its common form of salts of ammonia; nor have
we mentioned carbon, or its very familiar form of carbonic acid. These are important elements
of plant growth; and they account for the efficacy of manures derived directly from the animal
kingdom, as, for example, the droppings of animals, including guano, which consisted originally
of the droppings of sea-birds. Some of the nitrogen in these substances, however, is of an
evanescent character, and rapidly flies away in the form of carbonate of ammonia; hence, a
heap of farmyard manure, left for several years, loses much of its value as manure, and guano
should be kept in bulk as long as possible, and protected from the atmosphere, or its ammonia
will largely disappear. One difficulty experienced by chemists and others in preparing artificial
manures is that of 'fixing' the needful ammonia, so that it may be kept from being dissipated
in the atmosphere, and at the same time be always in a state in which it can be appropriated
by the plant. In all good manures, however, there is a certain proportion of it in combination,
and in many instances the percentage of nitrogen is made the test of the value of a manure.

The importance of humus--the black earthy substance resulting from the decay of vegetation--in
a soil is that it contains in an assimilable form many of the ingredients essential to plant
life. Humus when it decomposes gives off carbonic acid, which breaks up the mineral substances
in the soil and renders them available as plant food. When vegetable refuse is burned, the
nitrogen--one of the costliest constituents--is dissipated and lost. But by burying the refuse
the soil gets back a proportion of the organic nitrogen it surrendered and something over in
the way of soluble phosphatic and potassic salts; and as this organic nitrogen assumes ultimately
the form of nitric acid, it can be assimilated by the growing plant, to the great benefit of
whatever crop may occupy the ground.

The practical conclusion is, that in the treatment of the soil a skilful gardener will endeavour
to promote its fertility by affording the natural influences of rain, frost and sun full opportunity
of liberating the constituents that are locked up in the staple; by restoring in the form of
refuse as much as possible of what the soil has parted with in vegetation; and by the addition
of such fertilising agents as are adapted to rectify the natural deficiencies of the soil.
Thus, instead of following a process of exhaustion, the resources of the garden may be annually
augmented.

ARTIFICIAL MANURES AND THEIR APPLICATION TO GARDEN CROPS

Plants, like animals, require food for their sustenance and development, and when this is administered
in insufficient quantities, or unsuitable foods are supplied, they remain small, starved, and
unhealthy.

The chemical elements composing the natural food of ordinary crops are ten in number, viz.--carbon,
hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, and iron. These
are obtained from the soil and air, and unless all of them are available plants will not grow.
The absence of even one of them is as disastrous as the want of all, and a deficiency of one
cannot be made up by an excess of another; for example, if the soil is deficient in potassium
the crop suffers and cannot be improved by adding iron or magnesium. All the food-elements
are found in adequate quantities in practically all soils and the surrounding air, except three--nitrogen,
potassium, and phosphorus. These are often present in reduced amount, or in a state unsuited
to plants; in such cases the deficiency must be made up before remunerative healthy crops can
be grown, and it is with this express object that manures are added to the soil.

One of the best known substances employed in this way is farmyard manure, which is indirectly
derived from plants and contains all the elements needed for the growth of crops. It is, however,
of very variable composition and rarely, or never, contains these elements in the most suitable
proportions, and its value can always be greatly improved by supplementing its action with
one or other of the so-called artificial manures or fertilisers. Although it is strongly advisable
to add farmyard manure or vegetable composts to the soil of all gardens now and again, in order
to keep the texture of the soil in a satisfactory condition, excellent crops can be grown by
the use of artificial fertilisers alone. To obtain the best results from these some experience
is of course necessary, but the following details regarding the nature and application of the
commoner and more useful kinds should prove a serviceable guide in the majority of cases.

Artificial manures may be divided into three classes:--

1. The Nitrogenous class, of which nitrate of soda and sulphate of ammonia are examples.

2. The Phosphatic class, such as superphosphate, basic slag, and steamed bone flour.

3. The Potash class, including kainit and sulphate of potash. The several examples of each
class contain only one of the three important plant food-elements, and as a single element
can only be of use when the others are present in the soil, it is generally advisable to apply
one from each class, either separately or mixed, in order to insure that the crop is supplied
with nitrogen, phosphates, and potash.

==Nitrogenous manures== specially stimulate the growth of the foliage, stems, and roots of
plants, and are therefore of the greatest benefit to Carrots, Parsnips, Turnips, Beet, Celery,
Asparagus, Rhubarb, all the Cabbage tribe, and leafy crops generally.

=Nitrate of soda= supplies the single plant food-element, nitrogen, and the soda for all practical
purposes may be disregarded. It dissolves very easily in water and is taken up immediately
by growing plants, its effect being plainly seen a few days after application. As this artificial
readily drains away from uncropped land it should only be administered to growing plants. It
is best applied in spring and summer and in small quantities; for example, at the rate of one
pound per square rod, repeated at intervals of two or three weeks, rather than in a single
large dose. Nitrate of soda must not be mixed with superphosphate, but it may be added to basic
slag and the potash manures.

=Sulphate of ammonia= is another nitrogenous fertiliser, similar in its effects to nitrate
of soda, but slower in action since its nitrogen must undergo a change into nitrate before
it is available for plants. It is held by the soil, and can therefore be applied earlier in
spring than nitrate of soda without fear of loss. The continued use of this manure, however,
is liable to make the soil sour, and consequently it should only be employed on ground containing
lime, or to which lime has been added. Never mix sulphate of ammonia with basic slag or with
lime, but it may be mixed with superphosphate and the potash manures.

==Phosphatic manures== have the opposite effect to the nitrogenous fertilisers, checking rampant
growth and encouraging the early formation of flowers, fruit, and seeds. They are comparatively
inexpensive and should be liberally applied to all soils for all crops. =Superphosphate= is
an acid manure and best suited for use on soils containing lime. =Basic slag= is a better material
for ground deficient in lime, or where 'club-root' is prevalent. It is less soluble and therefore
slower in action than superphosphate. Both these fertilisers should be dug into the soil some
time before the crop is planted or seed sown--superphosphate at the rate of two to three pounds
per square rod; basic slag in larger amount, five to six pounds per square rod. Superphosphate
may also be employed as a top-dressing and worked into the surface around growing plants with
the hoe. =Steamed bone meal= or =flour= is another useful phosphatic fertiliser, valuable on
the lighter classes of soil.

==Potash manures== are of benefit to plants in all stages of growth. They are particularly
valuable to Potatoes, leguminous crops, Carrots, Parsnips, Turnips, and Beet. Like the phosphatic
manures they should be worked into the soil before seeds are sown or plants are put out. =Kainit=
is best applied in autumn, for it contains a considerable amount of common salt and magnesium
compounds which are sometimes deleterious and best washed away in the drainage water during
winter. It should be dug in at the rate of about three pounds per square rod. =Sulphate of
potash= is three or four times as rich in potash as kainit, and is correspondingly more expensive;
apply in spring and summer, a little in advance of sowing or planting, at the rate of about
one pound per square rod.

==Lime==.--- A word or two must be said about lime, which is a natural constituent of all soils.
In many instances there is sufficient for the needs of most plants, but where lime is deficient
in quantity it must be added before healthy crops can be raised. Old gardens to which dung
has been freely applied annually require a liberal dressing of lime every few years, or the
ground becomes sour and incapable of growing good crops of any kind. To insure the proper action
of whatever manures are used and to secure healthy crops, an application of slaked quicklime,
at the rate of fourteen to twenty pounds per square rod, is strongly recommended. As a remedy
against 'clubbing' or 'finger-and-toe' disease of the Cabbage tribe of plants it is indispensable;
it also neutralises the baneful acidity of the land, and opens up stiff soils, making them
more easily tilled, more readily penetrated by the air, and warmer by the better drainage of
water through them.

The following suggestions for the manuring of the different crops mentioned will be found effective.
It is, however, not intended that they should be slavishly followed, for useful substitutions
may be made in the formulæ given, if the nature of the various fertilisers is understood and
an intelligent grasp is obtained of the principles of manuring enunciated in this and the preceding
chapter.

In place of nitrate of soda, a similar quantity of sulphate of ammonia may be used.

Instead of superphosphate, the following may be advantageously employed: phosphatic guano,
or mixtures of basic slag and superphosphate, or bone meal and superphosphate; or basic slag
may be applied alone on land deficient in lime.

Four pounds of kainit may also take the place of one pound of sulphate of potash in the suggested
mixtures mentioned below.

Where dung is recommended, twenty to twenty-five loads per acre is meant; larger quantities
are frequently applied, but these are uneconomical and much less efficient than more moderate
amounts supplemented with artificial fertilisers.

All the manures should be worked into the soil before sowing or planting out, except the nitrate
of soda, which is best applied separately to the growing plants, preferably in small doses
at intervals of two to four weeks.

=In all cases the quantities of artificials named are intended for use on one square rod or
pole of ground.=

PEAS AND BEANS.--These leguminous plants are able to obtain all the nitrogen they need from
the air. They should, however, be amply supplied with potash and phosphates, a good dressing
being:--

2-3/4 to 3-1/2 lb. superphosphate
           3/4 lb. sulphate of potash

DWARF BEANS are sometimes benefited by the addition of 1/2-lb. to 1 lb. of nitrate of soda.

ASPARAGUS.

A dressing of dung
         2 lb. nitrate of soda
3-1/2 to 4 lb. superphosphate
         3 lb kainit

The kainit contains a considerable amount of salt, which is of value to this crop.

BEET.--For a fine crop a moderate amount of well-decayed dung applied in autumn is almost essential,
as well as 3 to 4 lb. of superphosphate per square rod in spring. On land previously dressed
with dung for a former crop, the following may be used, especially on the lighter class of soils:--

1-1/2 lb. nitrate of soda when the plants are well up, and a similar amount a fortnight after
singling 4 to 5 lb. superphosphate 4 lb. kainit BROCCOLI AND CAULIFLOWER.

=With dung=. 2 to 3 lb. nitrate of soda 2 to 3 lb. superphosphate 3/4 lb. sulphate of potash

=Without dung=. 4 to 5 lb. nitrate of soda 4 to 5 lb. superphosphate 3/4 lb. sulphate of potash

CABBAGE, KALE, AND BRUSSELS SPROUTS.--These Brassicas require considerable quantities of nitrogen
and phosphates. For spring Cabbage planted in autumn, land well dunged for the previous crop
gives good results with the addition of the artificials mentioned below: for the autumn crop,
dung should be applied before planting out in the early part of the year.

=With dung=. In addition, one of the following mixtures should be used:--

    (1)
3/4 lb. nitrate of soda
3 to 4 lb. superphosphate
3/4 lb. sulphate of potash

    (2)

3/4 lb. nitrate of soda 2 lb. superphosphate 1 to 2 lb. basic slag 3 lb. kainit

CELERY requires the use of dung more than almost any other crop, and it is little affected
by artificial manures, except phosphates, which may be given in the form of superphosphate
at the rate of 2-1/2 to 3-1/2 lb per square rod.

LETTUCE.

=With dung=. 3 to 4 lb. superphosphate 1/2 to 1 lb. nitrate of soda

=Without dung.= 3 to 4 lb. superphosphate 1 to 1-1/2 lb. nitrate of soda 1 lb. sulphate of potash

ONIONS never succeed without an ample supply of potash. This crop should therefore have farmyard
dung, or the special potash fertilisers in adequate quantity.

POTATO.--For good yield, high quality, and freedom from disease, Potatoes are dependent upon
a good supply of potash. They do best when supplied with a moderate amount of farmyard manure,
supplemented by suitable artificials, but can be grown on some soils with artificials alone.

=With dung=.

RHUBARB.--An annual dressing of dung is beneficial, together with 6 lb. of basic slag, 1 lb.
of sulphate of potash, and 4 lb. of nitrate of soda, half the nitrate being applied when growth
commences and the remainder a fortnight later.

SPINACH.

=With dung=. 3 to 4 lb. superphosphate 2 to 3 lb. nitrate of soda

=Without dung= 4 to 5 lb. superphosphate 1 lb. sulphate of potash 3 to 4 lb. nitrate of soda

TOMATOES need large supplies of potash and phosphates to induce stocky growth and abundance
of flowers and fruit. Nitrogenous manures should be withheld until the flowering stage, for
they stimulate the production of rank succulent stems and leaves which are specially liable
to attacks of fungus pests. After the fruit is set the application of small doses of nitrate
of soda, or sulphate of ammonia, as advised below, greatly assists the swelling of the crop.
The following mixtures worked into the soil will be found beneficial for Tomatoes:--

5 to 6 lb. superphosphate            7 to 8 lb. basic slag 1 lb. sulphate of potash  =or= 
1 lb. sulphate of potash

Nitrate of soda, or sulphate of ammonia, at the rate of 1-1/2 to 2 lb. per square rod, may
be given with advantage as soon as the fruit is set.

TURNIP AND SWEDE.--For the development of fine roots a liberal supply of phosphates is essential.

=With dung=. The fact remains that the last four or five decades have witnessed a phenomenal
extension in the use of flowers by all classes of the community, for the decoration of the
house no less than for beautifying the garden. Primarily, this advance of refinement in the
popular taste is traceable to the skill and enthusiastic devotion of the florists who have
supported in all their integrity the true canons of floral perfection, and whose labours will
continue to be imperative for maintaining the standards of quality. By their severe rules of
criticism the florists further the ends of floriculture subjectively, and by the actual results
of their labours they render objective aid, their finest flowers serving not only as types,
but as the actual stud for perpetuating each race. Hence the decline of floriculture would
imply the deterioration of flowers, and the prosperity of floriculture involves progress not
only in those subjects which lie within the florists' domain, but of many others to which they
have not devoted special attention. Yet the acknowledgment must be made that, brilliant as
their triumphs have been, the methods they practised have in some instances entailed very severe
penalties. Continuous propagation for many generations, under artificial conditions, so debilitated
the constitution of Hollyhocks, Verbenas, and some other subjects, that the plants became victims
of diseases which at one time threatened their existence. To save them from annihilation it
was necessary to desert the worn path of propagation, and raise plants possessing the initial
vigour of seedlings. In stamina these seedlings proved eminently satisfactory, although in
other respects they were at first sadly disappointing. It then became clear that before show
flowers could be obtained from seedlings judgment and skill must be devoted to the art of saving
seed. This was necessarily a work of time, demanding great patience and rare scientific knowledge.
The task was undertaken with enthusiasm in many directions, and the results have more than
justified this labour of love. Formerly, the universal mode of perpetuating named Hollyhocks
was by the troublesome process of cuttings, or by grafting buds on roots of seedlings in houses
heated to tropical temperature. In many places it was the custom to lift the old plants, pot
them, and keep them through the winter in pits. All this was found requisite to insure fine
flowers. While the burden of the work was thus rendered heavy, the constitution of the plant
became enfeebled, and at one time the fear was entertained that its extinction was at hand.
But the new system has preserved the Hollyhock, and at the same time afforded a striking example
of the principle that seed saved scientifically is found to reproduce the varieties it was
taken from. Seedling Hollyhocks now give double flowers of the finest quality; and the seedling
plants are less liable to disease. So with the Verbena. From suitable seed plants can be raised
that will produce the most resplendent flowers, and instead of propagating a stock to keep
over winter, to be stricken with mildew and cost no end of care, only to become diseased at
last, a pinch of seed is sown in January or February, and soon there is a stock of healthy
plants possessing the vigour peculiar to seedlings. These, being bedded out at a proper time,
flower far more freely than plants from cuttings, and produce trusses twice the size.

To illustrate the change of method still further we may instance the Cineraria. Formerly this
was a troublesome plant to grow, because it was considered necessary to propagate named varieties
by divisions and suckers. The restricted system was reflected in limited cultivation. Few were
willing to venture on a task known to be hedged about with difficulties. By degrees it was
discovered that the finest Cinerarias might be secured by simply sowing seed, and giving the
plants the usual cultivation of tender annuals. This has brought the Cineraria within the reach
of thousands who would not attempt to grow it under the old system, and the consequent gain
to society is immense.

What has been done with the Cineraria has its parallel in quite a number of the most elegant
decorative flowers. Brilliant results have been achieved with Begonias, Calceolarias, Cyclamens,
Gloxinias, Primulas, and Schizanthus. It has also ceased to be needful to keep such large stocks
of bedding and other plants through the winter, for Ageratums, Lobelias, and Pansies have proved
amenable to the new treatment, and very much of the accustomed labour in striking and potting
cuttings, as well as the expense of glass, fuel, and the frequent purchase of high-priced plants,
have been rendered unnecessary. Even among the flowers which are properly designated annuals,
new and delightful variations have been obtained from original types. Of these we have examples
in Aster, Godetia, Larkspur, Mignonette, Phlox Drummondii, Poppy, Stock, Sweet Pea, and many
others. In some instances the increase in the size of the flowers is remarkable, and in others
the development of new tints will surprise those who are not familiar with the labours of modern
hybridisers.

Thus a revolution has been accomplished in the economy and complexion of the English Flower
Garden, a revolution which has reduced and simplified the gardener's labours, augmented the
number and enhanced the beauty of many flowers, effected a marked saving in the cost of garden
pleasures, and brought the culture of a large number of the most attractive subjects within
the means of those who had neither the facilities nor the knowledge requisite for pursuing
the florist's methods. There appear to be no limits to further progress. All that we can do
is to experiment and gather knowledge, and those who love gardening may assist in extending
the area of this new and cheap system of producing some of the most elegant garden flowers
in one season from seed alone.

The time and the method of sowing flower seeds must in each case be regulated by considerations
as to their nature. Seeds of tender plants are usually sown in pots or pans and placed on a
moderate hot-bed or in a propagating house early in spring, and in this case the plants have
greenhouse cultivation until the time arrives for hardening them off preparatory to final planting.
But seeds of many hardy flowers may be treated in the same way, when a long season of growth
is necessary for their development. Thus Phloxes, Verbenas, and Hollyhocks, plants that differ
immensely in habit and constitution, may all be sown in February, and put side by side in the
same warm pit or vinery, or even in the warmest corner of any greenhouse, and the very same
treatment will suit them equally well. The soil should be principally loam and sand, with a
little old thoroughly well-rotted manure from a hot-bed or compost heap; and light, air, and
moisture must be regulated with a view to insure a free and vigorous growth from the first,
with the least possible amount of artificial heat. In some cases, however, the sowing should
be deferred to March or April, and the result will be far more satisfactory than the growth
made under the stimulus of artificial heat earlier in the season. But in every case the plants
must have sufficient time; for although the rapid system has been developed, the constitution
of the plants remains unchanged, and those which have heretofore been classed as biennials
and perennials need a long season when treated as annuals.

A considerable proportion of the finest flowers may be raised from seed by the aid of a frame
and a little careful management. We will take as an example a very restricted garden. Here
is a small frame and some packets of seed, and the month of February or March has arrived.
The pans and pots are made ready with sweet sandy compost, and the seeds are sown and labelled,
and the pans and pots are packed together in the frame on a bed of clean coal ashes, or some
slates, or tiles, or bricks laid on the soil, to promote warmth and cleanliness and to prevent
the intrusion of worms among the seeds. By simple management almost as quick a growth of seeds
can be insured in this frame as with the aid of a hot-bed, and the secret consists in careful
storage of the heat of the sun. Lay over the seed-pans sheets of glass to prevent evaporation,
and let the sun shine full upon them. Be careful as to moisture: they must never be wet, never
dry, and the water must not be slopped about carelessly. It is a good rule to immerse the pots
or pans in a vessel containing soft water, slightly tepid. When the seedlings begin to appear,
give a little air and lay sheets of paper tenderly over them during the hour or two at midday
when the sun may be shining brightly. But keep them from the first as 'hard' as possible with
plenty of light and air, always taking care that they are neither roasted, nor blown away by
the cruel east wind, nor nipped at night by a killing frost. A few old mats or light loppings
of trees laid over the frame from sundown to sunrise will be sufficient protection at those
trying times; and when spring frosts are making havoc with the tender sprouting leaf and bloom
in every part of the garden those little things will be safe under their glass cover, and slight
experience will show that a common frame may become a miniature hot-house in the hands of one
who has learned to make failure the stepping-stone to success. We must not omit to mention
that the owner of such a garden, or, indeed, of any garden, will be prudent to take advantage
of the first fine weather to sow in the open ground whatever flower or vegetable seeds should
be sown at that season. The frame garden can be reserved, if needful, for wet weather, because
it is of the utmost importance to sow a good breadth of seeds in the open ground as early as
possible in the month of March.

Turning from this small example to the great garden, it will be obvious that to those who always
have heavy work on hand the advantages of this transference, of labour from the old system
to the new are immense. Both to employers and gardeners the advantages are of importance; the
propagation of bedders by cuttings, and of florists' flowers by suckers and divisions and layers
and pipings, will not, of course, be completely abolished; but for all ordinary purposes the
ends in view may be accomplished more simply, more expeditiously, and more cheaply than heretofore.
The pits hitherto appropriated to bedders, and the like, may to a great extent be liberated,
and there will be no difficulty in finding for them more profitable occupants. While Mushrooms
and early Potatoes and winter salads are in request, it will be a gain to many a garden to
have reduced the summer display of flowers to a simple system of seed-sowing, at an expense
that may be described as merely nominal.

Before dealing specifically with certain flowers, it may be advisable to say a few words generally
concerning the culture of Annuals--Hardy, Half-hardy, and Tender--and also on hardy Biennials
and Perennials.

==Annuals==.--Although the most popular kinds of annuals are largely employed in the embellishment
of flower gardens, they are adapted for many uses to which they may with advantage be more
frequently applied. A few misconceptions prevail as to the relative merits of this class of
plants. By some they are regarded as 'weedy' and 'short-lived.' Their very cheapness, and the
relatively small amount of skill required in their cultivation, tend in some degree to detract
from their value in public estimation. We will not be so rash as to say that a more extended
use of annuals would render unnecessary the cultivation of what are especially known as 'bedding
plants'; but there is something to be said on behalf of annuals that may be worth the consideration
of all who are interested in the development of freshness, variety, and richness of colour
in the flower garden. In the first place, these plants come into flower within a comparatively
short period of time from the sowing of the seed, and it is a matter of considerable importance
that a large proportion of the best continue beautiful until the very close of the season.
Sometimes in the autumn Geraniums become literally washed out, while Tom Thumb Nasturtiums
may be ablaze with colour, and continue so when the Geraniums are housed for the winter. A
large number of showy and long-lasting annuals are adapted for employment in bedding, and by
a little management those that do not last the season out may be replaced by others for succession;
thus affording the advantage of increased variety, and making no demand for glass and fuel
to keep them through the winter as do the ordinary bedders. We have had great and glorious
sheets of Candytufts, snow-white, rich crimson, and bright carmine; and when they began to
wane they were removed, and the ground planted with Asters, and very soon there was another
display, so fresh and bright and various that no greenhouse bedders could surpass them. Great
hungry banks, that would have swallowed many pounds' worth of greenhouse plants to cover them,
have been made delightfully gay at a very trifling cost by sowing upon them Tropæolums, Tom
Thumb Nasturtiums, =Bartonia aurea=, the dwarf varieties of =Lupinus=, Virginian Stock, =Collinsia
bicolor=, Convolvuluses, Candytufts, Eschscholtzias, Poppies, and Clarkias; and damp, half-shady
borders have been delicately tessellated by means of Forget-me-nots, Venus' Looking-glass,
Pansies, the Rosy Oxalis, Nemophilas, Godetias, Silenes, Coreopsis, and Scabious.

For the more important positions in the flower garden we have choice of many really sumptuous
subjects, such as Stocks, Asters, Balsams, Drummond's Phlox, Lobelias, the lovely new varieties
of Antirrhinums, Dianthus, Portulacas, Zinnias, tall Stock-flowered Larkspurs, Nemesias, and
many other flowers equally beautiful and lasting. We do not hope by these brief remarks to
change the prevailing fashion--indeed, we have no particular wish that way--but we feel bound
to observe that it is sufficient for the beauty of the garden that the greenhouse bedders should
be confined to the parterre proper. It is waste of space and opportunity to place them in the
borders everywhere, as is too commonly done. In sunny borders, annual and perennial herbaceous
plants are far more appropriate.

Some time since, while walking over a large garden, we left the rich colouring of the geometric
beds to discover what should make the wondrous glow of crimson on a border far away; and to
our surprise it proved to be a clump of the Indian Pink, which had been sown as an annual with
other annuals, and was there shining in the midst of a constellation of the loveliest flowers
of all forms and hues, the result simply of sowing a few packets of seed. No one can despise
the Wallflower in the spring, and the heavenly-blue flowers of =Nemophila insignis= in early
summer will tempt many a one to walk in the garden who would care little for sheets of scarlet
and yellow that in full sunshine make the eyes ache to look upon them. It must be remembered,
too, that among annuals are found many most richly-scented flowers; others, like the everlastings
and the grasses, are valuable to dry for winter use for employment in bouquets, and garlands
in Christmas decorations; and the Sweet Peas, and =Tropæolum canariense,= and climbing Convolvulus
may be employed to cover arbours and trellises with the best effect possible, and may even
be allowed to hang in festoons about the sunny parts of rockeries, or trail over the ground
to make genuine bedding effects. Another important matter must have mention here, and we commend
it to the consideration of gardeners who are severely taxed to secure extensive displays of
flowers during the summer season. It is that a number of plants of highly ornamental character,
usually treated as perennials, are really more effective, besides occasioning less labour to
produce them, when cultivated as annuals. The Dianthus and its several splendid varieties do
better as annuals than biennials. For all the ordinary purposes of display, Lobelias may be
as well grown from seed as from cuttings, and in every garden will be found proof of the small
amount of care they require; for we find stray, self-sown plants in pots of Geraniums and other
places, and these, if left alone, become perfect bushes, and are a mass of flowers all the
summer. Many annuals commonly reputed to be tender and usually raised in heat do very well
indeed on a more rough and ready method. In proof of this, sow =Perilla nankinensis= in the
first week of May where it is required, and in the month of July you will probably be convinced
that Perilla does not always need careful nursing in heated houses through the spring. Even
the really tender Castor-oil Plant will thrive if sown in the open ground the first week in
May. Having no check, as plants put out from pots must have, the growth will be regular and
sturdy, and attain magnificent dimensions.

Perhaps the most effective way of growing annuals is to arrange them in harmonious blendings
or contrasts of colour. The wide choice of varieties available admits of an almost endless
number of combinations, and the following tables, classified according to colour, will no doubt
afford some serviceable suggestions, although these by no means exhaust the list. The height
is indicated in feet and Climbers as 'Cl.'

==WHITE, AND CREAM SHADES.==

==TALL.==

Chrysanthemum coronarium,
Princess May    ...   ...  ...   3
Chrysanthemum coronarium,
Double white    ...  ...   ...   3
Cornflower, White    ...   ...   3
Helichrysum, Silver Globe   ...  3
Larkspur, Stock-flowered, White  3
Lavatera alba splendens ... ...  3
Poppy, Giant Double, White  ...  3
  " Giant Single, White     ...  3
Scabious, Snowball    ...   ...  3
Chrysanthemum carinatum album    2-1/2
       "    Dunnetti, Double
white    ...   ...   ...   ...   2-1/2
Nasturtium, Tall, Pearl ... ...  Cl.

==MEDIUM.==

Clarkia elegans, Snowball  ...   2
Lupinus Hartwegii, White   ...   2
Malope, White    ...  ...  ...   2
Poppy, White Swan     ...  ...   2
Shirley, Double White      ...   2
Calendula pluvialis   ...  ...   1-1/2
Chrysanthemum inodorum
     plenissimum      ...  ...   1-1/2
Clarkia, Double White ...  ...   1-1/2
Gilia nivalis   ...   ...  ...   1-1/2
Gypsophila elegans    ...  ...   1-1/2
Hawkweed, White       ...  ...   1-1/2
   "  Silver          ...  ...   1-1/2
Jacobea, Double, White...  ...   1-1/2
Sweet Sultan, Giant White  ...   1-1/2
Chrysanthemum coronarium,
Dwarf double white    ...  ...   1-1/4

==DWARF.==

Acroclinium, Single White   ...  1
Candytuft, Improved White Spiral 1
Clarkia, Dwarf white   ...  ...  1
   "  Double dwarf white    ...  1
Convolvulus minor, White    ...  1
Eschscholtzia crocea alba   ...  1
Godetia, Duchess of Albany  ...  1
Layia elegans alba     ...  ...  1
Linaria, Snow-white    ...  ...  1
Nasturtium, Dwarf, Pearl    ...  1
Platystemon californicus... ...  1
Viscaria, Pure White    ... ...  1
Alyssum, Sweet     ...  ... ...  3/4
Chrysanthemum inodorum plenis-
simum, Bridal Robe      ... ...  3/4
Collinsia candidissima  ... ...  3/4
Godetia, Dwarf White    ... ...  3/4
Swan River Daisy, White     ...  3/4
  "    "     " Star White   ...  3/4
Venus' Looking-glass, White ...  3/4
Venus' Navel-wort       ... ...  3/4
Virginian Stock, White  ... ...  3/4
Candytuft, Little Prince... ...  1/2
Nemophila insignis alba ... ...  1/2
Alyssum minimum         ... ...  1/3
Silene, Dwarf White     ... ...  1/3

==YELLOW AND ORANGE SHADES.==

==TALL.==

Sunflower, Giant Yellow ...  ...  10
    "  Primrose Perfection   ...   6
    "  Miniature        ...  ...   4
    "  Stella      ...  ...  ...   4
    "  Primrose Stella       ...   4
Chrysanthemum coronarium,
Double yellow      ...  ...  ...   3
Chrysanthemum, Golden Queen  ...   3
Coreopsis tinctoria     ...  ...   3
Helichrysum, Golden Globe    ...   3
Sunflower, Dwarf Double      ...   3
    "  Single Dwarf     ...  ...   3
Chrysanthemum   Dunnettii,
Double Golden    ...    ...  ...   2-1/2
Marigold, African       ...  ...   2-1/2
Nasturtium, Ivy-leaved Golden
Gem           ...  ...  ...  ...   Cl.
Nasturtium, Tall, Yellow     ...   Cl.

==MEDIUM.==

Hibiscus africanus major...   ...  2
Bartonia aurea  ...     ...   ...  1-1/2
Chrysanthemum, Star varieties ...  1-1/2
Coreopsis Drummondii    ...   ...  1-1/2
    "  coronata         ...   ...  1-1/2
Erysimum, Orange Gem    ...   ...  1-1/2
Hawkweed, Yellow        ...   ...  1-1/2
Leptosyne Stillmani     ...   ...  1-1/2
Lupinus Menziesii       ...   ..   1-1/2
Sweet Sultan, Yellow    ...   ...  1-1/2

==DWARF.==

Calendula, Orange King  ...   ...  1
    "  Lemon Queen            ...  1
Cheiranthus Allionii    ...   ...  1
Chrysanthemum coronarium,
Dwarf double yellow     ...   ...  1
Dimorphotheca aurantiaca      ...  1
Eschscholtzia californica...  ...  1
      "  crocea         ...   ...  1
      "  crocea fl. pl.       ...  1
Layia elegans       ...  ...  ...  1
Lupinus, Dwarf yellow    ...  ...  1
Nasturtium, Dwarf, Cloth of Gold   1
     "        "  Yellow       ...  1
Tagetes signata pumila   ...  ...  1

==YELLOW AND ORANGE SHADES==--=continued.=

==DWARF==--=continued.=

Eschscholtzia, Mikado                  3/4
      "        Mandarin                3/4
Linaria, Golden Gem                    3/4
Marigold, Miniature lemon              3/4
    "         "     orange             3/4
Eschscholtzia, Miniature Primrose      1/2
Limnanthes Douglasii                   1/2
Sanvitalia procumbens, Single          1/2
    "          "       Double          1/2
Leptosiphon aureus                     1/4

==BLUE, MAUVE, AND PURPLE SHADES.==

==TALL.==

Cornflower, Blue                           3
Larkspur, Stock-flowered, Blue             3
   "            "         Pale Mauve       3
Lupinus, Tall dark blue                    3
Poppy, Giant Double, Mauve                 3
Scabious, Mauve                            3

==MEDIUM.==

Godetia, Double Mauve                      2
Lupinus Hartwegii, Azure Blue              2
Poppy, Mauve Queen                         2
Sweet Sultan, Purple                       2
Xeranthemum superbissimum                  2
     "      imperiale                      2
Anchusa, Annual Blue                       1-1/2
Gilia capitata                             1-1/2
  "   tricolor                             1-1/2
Jacobea, Double, Purple                    1-1/2
Nigella, Miss Jekyll                       1-1/2
Phacelia tanacetifolia                     1-1/2
Salvia, Blue Beard                         1-1/2
Sweet Sultan, Giant Delicate Mauve         1-1/2
  "      "    Giant Mauve                  1-1/2

==DWARF.==

Asperula azurea setosa                 1
Candytuft, Lilac                       1
Convolvulus minor, Dark blue           1
     "        "    Sky-blue            1
Cornflower, King of Blue Bottles       1
Eutoca viscida                         1
Linaria, Mauve                         1
Lupinus, Dwarf rich blue               1
Mathiola bicornis                      1
Phacelia congesta                      1
Viscaria, Bright Blue                  1
Whitlavia gloxinioides                 1
Cornflower, Victoria, Dwarf blue       3/4
Leptosiphon androsaceus                3/4
Nigella, Double dwarf                  3/4
Phacelia campanularia                  3/4
Swan River Daisy, Blue                 3/4
 "     "     "    Star Blue            3/4
Campanula attica                       1/2
Nemophila insignis                     1/2

==PINK AND ROSE SHADES.==

==TALL.==

Cornflower, Pink                             3
Larkspur, Stock-flowered, Rosy Scarlet       3
Lavatera rosea splendens                     3
Lupinus mutabilis, Cream and Pink            3
Poppy, Giant Double, Chamois-rose            3
Scabious, Pink                               3
Nasturtium, Salmon Queen                     Cl.
     "      Rosy Queen                       Cl.

==MEDIUM.==

Clarkia elegans, Double Salmon              2
   "       "     Double Delicate Pink       2
Godetia, Double Rose                        2
Jacobea, Single, Bright Rose                2
Poppy, Pink Gem                             2
  "    Cardinal, Salmon-pink                2
  "    Shirley, Single Rose-pink            2
  "       "     Double Pink                 2
Saponaria Vaccaria, Pink                    2
Clarkia, Double Rose                        1-1/2
Hawkweed, Pink                              1-1/2
Jacobea, Double, Rose                       1-1/2
Silene Armeria, Rose                        1-1/2
Statice Suworowi                            1-1/4

==DWARF.==

Acroclinium, Double rose                1
     "       Single rose                1
Convolvulus minor, Pink                 1
Eschscholtzia, Frilled Pink             1
      "        Rosy Queen               1
      "        Rose cardinal            1
Gypsophila elegans, Delicate pink       1
Lupinus, Dwarf delicate pink            1
Nasturtium, Dwarf, Salmon Pink          1
    "         "    cæruleum roseum      1
Silene, Double Salmon Pink              1
  "       "    Delicate Pink            1
  "     Bonetti                         1
  "     Pseudo-Atocion                  1

==PINK AND ROSE SHADES==--=continued.=

DWARF--=continued=.

Statice spicata                     1
Viscaria, Delicate Pink             1
Cornflower, Victoria, Dwarf rose    3/4
Godetia, Dwarf Pink                 3/4
   "     Satin-rose                 3/4
Abronia umbellata                   1/2
Candytuft, Dwarf Pink               1/2
Saponaria calabrica                 1/2
Silene, Double Dwarf Delicate Pink  1/3
Silene, Double Dwarf Brilliant Rose 1/3
Silene, Bonetti, Dwarf Pink         1/3
Leptosiphon roseus                  1/4

==CRIMSON AND SCARLET SHADES, including Carmine and Ruby.==

==TALL.==

Coreopsis atrosanguinea               3 Helichrysum, Fireball                 3 Poppy, Giant
Double, Scarlet          3 Polygonum, Ruby Gem                   2-1/2 Malope, Red        
2 Nasturtium,  Tall,  Improved Lucifer  Cl. Nasturtium, Tall, Black Prince        Cl.

==MEDIUM.==

Chrysanthemum atrococcineum            2 Clarkia elegans, Salmon scarlet        2 "   "  Firefly
2 Godetia, Double Crimson                2 Poppy, Cardinal                        2 Cacalia
coccinea                       1-1/2 Coreopsis cardaminifolia, Dwarf        1-1/2

==DWARF.==

Candytuft, Improved Carmine            1
"          Dark crimson                1
Centranthus macrosiphon                1
Godetia, Crimson King                  1
  "      Scarlet Queen                 1
  "      Lady Albemarle                1
Linum grandifiorum rubrum              1
Nasturtium, Dwarf, Scarlet Queen       1
    "         "    King Theodore       1
    "         King of Tom Thumbs       1
Viscaria cardinalis                    1
Collomia coccinea                      3/4
Coreopsis, Dwarf Crimson               3/4
Eschscholtzia, Ruby King               3/4
Godetia, Afterglow                     3/4
  "      Lady Albemarle, dwarf         3/4
Saponaria, Scarlet Queen               1/2
Virginian Stock, Crimson King          1/2
Viscaria, Dwarf Carmine                1/2

Yet one other method of growing annuals calls for special mention. It is not fully recognised
that a number of subjects, usually associated only with beds and borders, may also be flowered
with the greatest ease under glass in winter and early spring. Those who have not hitherto
attempted the culture of annuals in this way will be delighted with the charming effects produced.
Among the subjects most suitable for the purpose are Alonsoa; the Star and Dunnettii varieties
of Annual Chrysanthemum; =Clarkia elegans; = Dimorphotheca; =Gypsophila elegans=; Linaria;
=Nemesia Suttoni=; Nicotiana, Miniature White and =N. affinis=; Phlox, Purity, one of the most
lovely pot plants for the conservatory and of especial value for decorative work at Easter;
Salpiglossis; and the pretty blue, Cineraria-like, Swan River Daisy. From the fact that these
annuals are of the hardy or half-hardy types it will be readily understood that no great amount
of heat is required to bring them to maturity; indeed, the more hardy the treatment the better
for their well-doing. Seed should be sown during August or September in pots or pans placed
in a cool frame, the seedlings being pricked off into other pots as soon as they have attained
a suitable size. As colder weather approaches, transfer to the greenhouse or conservatory,
and provided the night temperature is not allowed to fall below 45° all should be well. During
the day give the plants the maximum of air whenever weather permits.

==Hardy Annuals.==--The seeds should be sown on a carefully prepared surface from which large
stones have been removed, and the clods must be broken, but the soil should not be made so
smooth as to become pasty under rain. Sow thinly, in rows spaced to agree with the height of
the plant, cover with a very slight coat of fine dry earth--the smallest seeds needing but
a mere dusting to cover them--and, from the first, keep the plants thinned sufficiently to
prevent overcrowding. Spring-sown annuals are worthy of a better soil than they usually have
allotted them, and also of more careful treatment. It is not wise to sow earlier than March
or later than the middle of April. In the after-culture the most important matter is to keep
the clumps well thinned. Not only will the bloom of crowded plants be comparatively poor and
brief, but by early and bold thinning the plants will become so robust, and cover such large
spaces of ground with their ample leafage and well-developed flowers, as really to astonish
people who think they know all about annuals, and who may have ventured after much ill-treatment
to designate them 'fugacious and weedy.' Although the sowing of hardy annuals direct on to
beds and borders where the plants are wanted is economical in labour and avoids the check which
transplanting occasions, the practice of raising annuals on specially prepared seed-beds and
pricking out the plants to blooming quarters is sometimes followed. The soil into which they
are transferred for flowering should be deeply dug, thoroughly broken up, and, if at all poor,
liberally manured. It is an excellent plan also to sow hardy annuals outdoors in autumn, but
it is needless to say more on this subject here, as it is dealt with fully at page 313.

==Half-hardy Annuals.==--Give these as long a period of growth as possible to insure a vigorous
plant before the season of flowering. The best time for sowing is February, or the beginning
of March; for although some kinds may with advantage be sown earlier, it is safer, as a rule,
to wait for sunshine and full daylight, so as to keep up a steady and continuous growth. The
soil for the seed-pans should be rich and fine. Good loam, improved by the addition of thoroughly
decayed manure and leaf-mould, with sufficient sand to render the texture porous, will suit
all kinds of annuals that are sown in pans under glass. Sow the seed thinly, cover very slightly,
and lay squares of glass over to keep a uniform degree of moisture without the necessity of
watering. Should watering become necessary, take care to avoid washing the seeds out. If the
pans or pots are stood in a vessel containing several inches depth of water until sufficient
has been absorbed, there will be no occasion to pour water on the surface. A gentle heat is
to be preferred; when germination is too rapid it tends to the production of weak plants. As
soon as the young plants appear, remove the glasses and place the seed-pans in the fullest
light, where air can be given without danger to them. A dry east wind blowing fiercely over
them will prove a blast of death. If they have no air at all, they will be puny, rickety things,
scarcely worth planting out. Choice varieties should be carefully pricked out into pans and
pots as soon as large enough; this will promote a fine, stocky growth and a splendid development
of flowers. Take care not to plant out until the weather is favourable, for any great check
will undo all your work, and make starvelings of your nurslings. If you cannot command heat
for half-hardy annuals, sow in the first week in April, put the pans in a frame facing south,
and the seeds will soon grow and do well. If that is too much trouble, sow in the open border
early in May, making the border rich and friable, that they may have a good chance from the first.

==Tender Annuals.==--These require the same general treatment as advised for half-hardy annuals.
But it is desirable to sow in a stronger heat than is necessary for annuals that are to be
planted out. It is also requisite to be in good time in pricking out the seedlings, for if
they get much drawn they cannot make robust pot plants. A light, rich, perfectly sweet soil,
containing a fair proportion of sharp sand, is necessary to insure plants worth having. It
is also important to get them into separate small pots as soon as possible, and to shift them
on to larger and larger pots, until they have sufficient pot room for flowering, after which
shift no more. As soon as these pots are filled with roots, give very weak manure water constantly
until the plants are in flower, and then discontinue it, using instead pure soft water only.

==Hardy Biennials and Perennials.==--These are often sown in pans or boxes, and are pricked
off when large enough into other pans or pots before they are transferred to beds or borders.
The system has certain advantages in insuring safety from vermin and proper attention, for
it is an unfortunate fact that too many cultivators consider it needless to thin or transplant
sowings made in beds or borders. The plants are frequently allowed to struggle for existence,
and the result is feeble attenuated specimens which, with trifling care and attention, might
have become robust and capable of producing a bountiful bloom in their season. Still, it should
be clearly understood that all the hardy biennials and perennials may be grown to perfection
by sowing on a suitable seed-bed in the open ground, protecting the spot from marauders of
all kinds, and by early and fearless thinning or transplanting. As a rule, we advocate one
shift before placing the plants in final positions.

==ABUTILON==

==Half-hardy greenhouse perennial==

Handsome plants, two feet or more in height, can be produced from seed and flowered in a single
season. They are useful for training to greenhouse walls, and they may also be transferred
to open borders for the summer. When employed for the latter purpose, the plants should be
lifted and put into pots about the end of August, after there has been a penetrating shower.
In the absence of rain a soaking of water on the previous day will prevent the soil from falling
away from the roots.

February and March are the right months for sowing seed, and for the pots any fairly light
compost will answer. Prick off the seedlings when about an inch high, putting the plants in
down to the seed-leaves. They must never be allowed to suffer for want of water, nor should
they be starved in small pots. The growth had better not be hurried at any stage; the plants
will then develop into shapely specimens with very little care.

==ACHIMENES==

==Greenhouse or stove perennials==

Although Achimenes can be propagated by division of the tubers, the simpler method of raising
a supply from seed has become a common practice. During March or April sow in pots or pans,
and while quite small transfer the seedlings to separate pots. It is important to insure free
drainage, especially as frequent watering is a necessity while the plants are in active growth.
Achimenes are generally kept in a high temperature; but they do not really need so much heat
as Gloxinias, and in a warm greenhouse they can be flowered without the least difficulty. This
is one of the finest subjects for growing in hanging-baskets.

==ALONSOA==

These popular half-hardy flowers are not only valuable for a summer display in borders, but
they make charming subjects for the conservatory in the spring months. For blooming outdoors
seed may be sown in pans in March and the plants treated in the manner usual for half-hardy
annuals, or a sowing can be made in the open towards the end of April. Plants for flowering
indoors in April and May should be raised from seed sown in the preceding August and September.
Grow on the seedlings steadily in pots, but do not force them in any way. In fact, the treatment
should be as nearly hardy as possible, a night temperature of 45° being generally sufficient
to carry them through the winter.

==AMARYLLIS==

==Hippeastrum==

The majority of the named varieties are expensive, and a very considerable saving is effected
by raising plants from seed. Thanks to the skill of the hybridiser, the seedlings not only
compare favourably with flowers grown from costly bulbs, but they have been successful in winning
certificates and awards of merit.

The germination is so irregular that it is well to put only one seed in each small pot. The
most suitable soil is a mixture of two parts loam and one of leaf-mould, with sufficient coarse
grit to insure free drainage. The proper temperature is about 65°. After the seedlings are
established follow the treatment advised on page 340.

==ANEMONE==

==The Windflower. Hardy perennial==

The discovery that it is easy to flower the popular St. Brigid and similar Anemones from seed
in about seven months from the date of sowing has given a great impetus to the culture of this
plant, especially as it possesses a high value for decorating vases, in addition to its usefulness
in beds and borders. From seed sown in February or March the plants should begin to bloom in
September or October of the same year, and continue to flower until the following June, when
it is unprofitable to retain them longer. No coddling of any kind is necessary. Dig a trench
in a sheltered, sunny spot, and fill it with rich soil freely mingled with decayed cow-manure.
If the land happens to be somewhat tenacious, Anemones will take kindly to it, but it should
be well worked, and it may be needful to add a little fine sandy compost at the top as a preparation
for the seed. The woolly seed should be rubbed with sand, and the two may be sown together
thinly in lines. As a finish the ground should be lightly beaten with the back of a spade.
Germination is decidedly slow, so that until the seedlings appear the removal of weeds requires
care. The plants should be thinned until they stand six inches apart. Seed may also be sown
in June or July for plants to flower in the following year, and the results will probably be
even more satisfactory than from the spring sowing.

==ANTIRRHINUM==

==Snapdragon. Hardy perennial==

In bygone years Antirrhinums were seldom seen beyond the limits of old-fashioned cottage gardens.
But even then the Snapdragon was a popular flower, and it was generally perpetuated by subdivision
of the plants. Now, in common with a large number of perennials and biennials, the Antirrhinum
is almost exclusively grown from seed. This altered method of culture has resulted in a marked
advance in the size and colour of the spikes of bloom, and has also increased the vigour and
floriferous character of the plants. In the process of raising, selecting and re-selecting
the stocks, experts have found it possible to develop three distinct classes--Tall, Intermediate,
and Dwarf--so that the value of the plant as an ornament in the garden has been advanced beyond
the dreams of a former generation of gardeners. "This," I remarked, "is the sort of country Adam
Lindsay Gordon would have loved. No man but he could do justice to it."

"We've been out seven days," said Cumshaw, "we've travelled God knows
how many miles, we've climbed up a Hades of a lot of mountains, and
I don't think there's a blind creek for twenty miles that we haven't
followed to the end and back again, and at the end of it all we're
no nearer the Valley than we were when we started.

Gordon might have made an epic out of it, but I'm hanged if I'm poet enough to appreciate the
country or philosopher enough to ignore the sheer physical discomforts of the journey."

"If you'd been through the things I've been through," I asserted, "if you'd been in New Guinea
when there was a gold-strike on and had to climb hundreds of feet
up a straight cliff to get to the fields, hanging on all the time
to creepers as thick as your wrist, you'd think this was just Paradise.

If you'd been with me in the sweltering Solomon Island jungle, where every breath you took made
the perspiration stand out on your forehead in big beads, or up in the Klondyke when it was fifty
below and a man's own breath turned into ice about his mouth, you'd know what life really meant.
Here you're in the Garden of Victoria; you see sights that knock some of the beauty spots of the
world into a cocked hat, and all you can do is growl at the country. You can't expect to go
up and down the mountain side in a lift or anything of the sort."

"It's all very well for you to talk like that," he objected. "You're used to this kind of life;
we're not. That makes all the difference."

"So it seems," I said. "But I haven't the slightest intention of giving in yet. As a matter of
fact I rather think we've been a little too sure that we were on the right track. We haven't been
as careful as we might. We've gone along blindly."

"What do you mean?" he demanded.

"Just this.

We've been so infernally confident that we only had to find a clump
of wattle and a lone tree, and we were there.

Now that lone tree must be somewhere on the east side of the valley,
and, despite the fact that it's on high ground, it's so hidden that
we wouldn't see it until we were almost on top of it.

It might be perfectly visible from inside the valley, and at the same time be hidden from the outside
by another hill. As for the wattle, has it ever struck you that wattle only begins to spring
into bloom about the end of August? It's almost April now, and you wouldn't find anything but
just a mass of green bushes."

"If there was a valley, which same I'm beginning to doubt," Cumshaw said doggedly, "we'd have
found it before this."

"I don't know what Miss Drummond is cooking for our tea," I remarked
irrelevantly, "but it smells good."

"If you think you can put me
off that way," Cumshaw said, "you're mighty mistaken. I'm tired of
it all, and for two pins----"

"You know very well," I cut in, "that
I haven't one pin, let alone two."

"You apparently don't understand
that I'm perfectly serious." Half-hardy perennials==

The finely laciniated foliage of =A. plumosus= is greatly prized for bouquets, and the plant
invariably commands attention as a decorative subject on the table or in the conservatory.
=A. decumbens= has long tremulous branches of elegant dark green foliage, and the plant is
admirably adapted for hanging-baskets. =A. Sprengeri= is distinct from both, but is also very
ornamental in baskets. Sow all three varieties in pans during February or March, in heat; prick
off the seedlings immediately they are large enough to handle, and grow on in gentle heat until
the beginning of June, when cool-house treatment will suit them.

==ASTER==

==Callistephus sinensis. Half-hardy annual==

In high summer so many flowers are available that no difficulty arises in making a varied display.
The real trouble is in discarding, especially for a limited area. But when summer begins to
merge into autumn the choice is not so extensive, and among the annuals which then adorn the
garden Asters are indispensable. This superb flower has been developed into many forms, and
each class affords a wide range of magnificent colours. Yet it must be admitted that in the
majority of gardens Asters are seldom grown in sufficient numbers, and it is not unusual to
find the flowers small in size and poor in colour. In many cases we believe the reason to be
that the culture of Asters is often commenced too late. Preparations should therefore be made
in good time, and apart from providing the requisite number of plants for filling beds and
borders, and for supplying cut blooms, others should be raised for flowering in pots. For indoor
decoration full use is rarely ever made of Asters, although the colours include many delightful
shades which may be employed with most telling effect.

To secure a long-continued display of bloom there must be several sowings, and the earliest
will need the aid of artificial heat. One secret of successful culture is to give no check
to the plant from its first appearance until the time of flowering; and a suitable bed must
be prepared, whether the seed be sown on the spot or plants are transferred from other quarters.

Asters do not readily accommodate themselves to violent alternations of heat and cold, particularly
in the early stage of growth, and therefore the most sheltered position in the garden should
be chosen for them; but avoid a hedge or shrubbery, where strong growing trees rob the soil
of its virtue. Begin the preparation of beds during the previous autumn by deep digging, and
incorporate a liberal dressing of well-rotted manure as the work proceeds. On light and shallow
soils it will do more harm than good to bring the raw subsoil to the surface, but the subsoil
may with advantage be stirred and loosened by the fork, and if a little loamy clay can be worked
into it the land will be permanently benefited.

A very stiff soil will, however, present greater difficulties; but if by free working it can
be made sufficiently friable, Asters will revel in it, and produce flowers of a size and colour
that will reward the cultivator for all his trouble. Throw the ground up roughly in October.
The more it is exposed to the action of wind, snow and frost, the more thoroughly will the
winter disintegrate its particles and render it fertile. Early in spring give another digging,
and then work in a good supply of decayed manure, together with grit, charcoal, wood ashes,
or other material that will help to render the soil rich and free. Aim at inducing the roots
to go down deep for supplies--there will then be a cool moist bottom even in dry weather, and
these conditions will do much toward the production of fine stocky plants capable of carrying
an imposing display of flowers.

For sowings from the end of March to the middle of April prepare a compost consisting principally
of decayed leaf-mould, with sufficient loam to render it firm, and sharp sand to secure drainage.
Either pots or seed-pans may be used. Place these in a cool greenhouse, or in a Cucumber or
Melon pit, or even on a half-spent hot-bed. Sow thinly; a thick sowing is very likely to damp
off. Just hide the seed with finely sifted soil, and place sheets of glass at the top to prevent
rapid evaporation. Give no water unless the soil becomes decidedly dry, and then it is better
to immerse the pot or pan for half an hour than to apply water on the surface. When the plants
attain the third leaf they can be pricked off into shallow boxes or round the edges of 3-1/2
inch pots. From these they either may have another shift singly into small pots, or may be
transferred direct to blooming quarters. A high temperature is not requisite at any stage of
growth, indeed it is distinctly injurious. From 55° to 65° is the extreme range, and the happy
medium should, if possible, be maintained. Give air on every suitable occasion, and as the
time for transferring to the open ground approaches, endeavour to approximate nearly to the
outside temperature. The plants will then scarcely feel the removal.

Another and simpler proceeding produces fairly good results, and we describe it for the benefit
of those whose resources may be small, or who do not care to adopt the more troublesome method.
In some spot shaded from the sun make a heap of stable manure, rather larger than the light
to be placed upon it. Level the top, and cover with four or five inches of rich soil. Place
a frame upon it with the light a trifle open. When the thermometer indicates 60°, draw drills
at six inches apart; sow the seed, and cover with a little sifted soil. The light had better
not be quite closed, in case of a rise of temperature. As the plants thrive, gradually give
more air, until, in April, the showers may be allowed to fall directly upon them in the daytime.
When the Asters are about three inches high they will be quite ready for the open ground, and
a showery day is favourable to the transfer. After the bed has served its purpose, the manure
will be in capital condition for enriching the garden.

In the event of there being no frame to spare, drive a stake into each corner of the bed. Connect
the tops of the stakes, about one foot from the surface of the bed, with four rods securely
tied, and upon these place other rods, over and around which any protecting material at command
may be used. With this simple contrivance it is quite possible to grow Asters in a satisfactory
manner.

The finest Asters are frequently grown in the open air, entirely without the aid of artificial
heat, and indeed without any special horticultural appliances. Those who possess the best possible
resources will find additional advantage in resorting also to this mode of culture. It gives
another string to the bow, and prolongs the season of flowering. For open-air sowings in April
make the soil level and fine, and about the middle of that month draw drills three inches deep.
In these place an inch of finely prepared rich soil, and if it is largely mixed with vegetable
ashes, so much the better. The distance between the drills should be regulated by the variety.
For tall-growing Asters twelve to fifteen inches between the rows will not be too much. Ten
inches will suffice for the dwarfs. Sow the seed thinly and evenly, and cover carefully with
fine soil. Commence early to thin the plants, always leaving the strongest, and arrange that
they finally stand at from eight to fifteen inches apart according to the sort.

Keep the ground clean, and before the flowering stage is reached gently stir the surface, but
not deep enough to injure the roots. An occasional application of weak manure water will be
advantageous, but it must not be allowed to touch the foliage.

For tall varieties it may be needful to provide support. If so, place a neat stick on that
side of the plant towards which it leans, as this takes the strain off the tying material,
and saves the plant from being cut or half-strangled. In a dry season, and especially on light
soils, there must be a bountiful supply of soft water, alternated every few days with the manure
water already alluded to. Evening is the best time to apply it.

For show purposes rather more room is required than we have stated. Only about five buds should
be matured by each plant, and these, of course, the finest. To prepare flowers for exhibition
is in itself an art, and each cultivator must be guided by his own resources and experience.

Asters in pots make excellent decorative subjects. It is only necessary to lift them carefully
from the borders with balls of earth surrounding the roots, and pot them just before the buds
expand, or they may be potted up while in full flower without flagging.

The plants are liable to the attacks of aphis, both green and black. While under glass the
pests can be destroyed by fumigation; but in the open a solution of some good insecticide may
be administered with the syringe at intervals of about three days, until a clearance is effected.
Other foes are the various grubs which attack plants at the collar. On the first sign of failing
vigour, gently remove with a pointed stick the soil around the plant, and in doing this avoid
any needless disturbance of the roots. Do not be satisfied until the enemy is destroyed.

==AUBRIETIA==

==Hardy perennial==

In the early months of the year few subjects in the garden present so gay an appearance as
Aubrietias, for with the first approach of genial weather the cushion-like plants burst into
a mass of delightful blossom. For spring bedding, edgings, and the rock garden Aubrietias are
indispensable, and they make a particularly effective show when grown in conjunction with Yellow
Alyssum and White Arabis. Aubrietias are easily grown from seed sown in May and June. The plants
are best raised in pans of light rich soil and may be put out in autumn where required to flower
in the following spring.

==AURICULA==

==Primula Auricula. Hardy perennial==

Keen is the enthusiasm of the Auricula amateur. The only complaint we ever heard about the
flower is that its most devoted admirer cannot endow it with perpetual youth and beauty.

It is well to bear in mind that seed from a worthless strain requires just as much attention
as that which is saved with all a florist's skill from prize flowers. Some growers advocate
sowing immediately the seed is ripe, but this intensifies the irregular germination that characterises
seed of all the Primula species. Either February, March, or April may be chosen, and we give
preference to the end of February. Use six-inch pots, and as there must be no doubt about drainage,
nearly half-fill the pots with crocks, cover with a good layer of rough fibrous loam mingled
with broken charcoal, and on the top a mixture of loam, decayed leaves, and sharp sand. Press
the soil firmly down; sow thinly and regularly, putting the seeds in about half an inch apart;
just cover them with fine soil, and place the pots in a cool frame or greenhouse, with sheets
of glass over to prevent evaporation. Watering in the ordinary way is apt to wash out the seeds,
and it is therefore advisable to immerse the pots in a vessel containing water until the soil
has become saturated. Wait patiently for the plants. When they show four or six leaves, prick
out into pans or boxes about two inches apart, and before the seedlings touch each other transfer
to small pots. The surface soil in the pots may be lightly stirred occasionally to keep it
free from moss. The plants must never be allowed to go dry, but as winter approaches water
should be given more sparingly, and during sharp frosts it may be wise to withhold it entirely.
There really is no need of artificial heat, for the Auricula is a mountaineer, and can endure
both frost and snow. But we prize its beauty so highly that frames and greenhouses are properly
employed for protecting it from wind, heavy rain, soot, dust, and all the unkind assaults of
a lowland atmosphere, to which it is unaccustomed in a natural state. Still, the plants should
be kept as nearly hardy as possible.

The Auricula is a slow-growing plant, and although there will probably be some flowers from
seedlings in the second year, their value must not be judged until the following season. To
the trained eye of the florist the Show Auriculas take precedence over the Alpine section;
but for general usefulness the Alpines hold the first place. They may be fearlessly put into
the open border, and especially the north border, where, with scarcely any care at all, they
will endure the winter, and freely show their lovely flowers in spring.

==BALSAM==

==Impatiens Balsamina. Half-hardy annual==

The older methods of growing Balsams prescribed a false system, comprising disbudding, stopping,
and other interferences with the natural growth of the plant. The rule of pinching back the
leader to promote the growth of side shoots, and removing the flower buds to increase the size
of the plants, was altogether vicious, because the natural growth is more elegant and effective.
The finest flowers are produced on the main stem, and these are completely sacrificed by disbudding.

It is desirable to make two or three sowings of Balsam, say from the middle of March to the
middle of May, the earlier sowings to be put on a sweet hot-bed, although March sowings will
soon germinate in a frame, and the May sowing may be made in the open ground on a prepared
bed. The soil at every stage should be rich and light, but not rank in any degree. Prick out
the plants from the seed-pans directly the first rough leaves show, and soon after shift them
again to encourage a stout dwarf habit. A sunny position should be chosen for the bed, in which
they may be planted out about the first week of June, or earlier if the weather is particularly
favourable. Heat, moisture, and a strong light favour a fine bloom, and, therefore, water must
be given whenever dry weather prevails for any length of time. If kept sturdy while under glass,
they will need no support of any kind, and although they are peculiarly fleshy in texture,
it is seldom they are injured, even by a gale. When grown in pots throughout, the chief points
are to shift them often in the early stages, to promote free growth in every reasonable way,
and to cease shifting when they are in pots sufficiently large to sustain the strength of the
plants. Generally speaking, eight-inch pots will suffice for very fine Balsams, but ten-inch
pots may be used for plants from an early sowing. They will probably not show a flower-bud
while increased pot room is allowed them; but as soon as their roots touch the sides of the
pots the bloom will appear. It is occasionally the practice to lift plants from beds when pot
Balsams are wanted. This method has the advantage of being the least troublesome, and as the
plants need not be lifted until the flowers show, favourite colours can be chosen.

==BEGONIA, TUBEROUS-ROOTED==

==Begonia hybrida. Half-hardy perennial==

One of the most remarkable achievements in modern horticulture is the splendid development
of single and double Tuberous-rooted Begonias from the plant as first introduced from the Andes.
Originally the flowers were small, imperfect in form, and deficient in range of colour. But
experts were quick in apprehending the capabilities of this graceful plant, and it proved to
be unusually amenable to the hybridiser's efforts. Now the large symmetrical blossoms of both
single and double flowers challenge attention for beauty of form and an almost endless variation
of tints peculiar to the Tuberous-rooted Begonia. The plants are conspicuous ornaments of the
conservatory and greenhouse for several months, and experience has proved that they make unique
bedders, enduring unfavourable conditions of weather which are fatal to many of the older bedding
subjects.

From the best strains of seed it is easy, with a little patience, to raise a fine stock of
plants, possessing the highest decorative qualities. Under generous treatment the seedlings
from a January or February sowing come into bloom during July and August. The seed should be
sown in well-drained pots containing a good compost at the bottom, with fine sandy loam on
the surface, pressed down. Before sowing sprinkle the soil with water, and sow the seed evenly,
barely covering it with fine earth. A temperature of about 65° is suitable. Germination is
both slow and irregular, and the plants must be pricked off into pans or small pots as fast
as they become large enough to handle. This process should be followed up so long as seedlings
appear and require transferring. They may be shifted on as the growth of the several plants
may require. Begonias need more attention with reference to an even temperature during this
stage than at any other period.

The merits of Begonias as bedding plants are now recognised in many gardens, and they deserve
to be still more widely grown. It is wise to defer planting out until June. In the open ground
they produce abundant supplies of flowers for cutting at the end of September and early in
October, when many other flowers are over. The plants should be put out when they show themselves
sufficiently strong, and it is better to be guided by the plants than by any fixed date. The
beds must be freely enriched with well-rotted manure and decayed vegetable matter; it can scarcely
be overdone, for Begonias are gross feeders.

The earliest plants to flower will often be retained in the greenhouse, as they follow in succession
the Cinerarias and Calceolarias. Those that start later may be turned out as they come into
bloom, which will probably be in June. By deferring the planting out until there is a show
of bloom a selection of various shades of colour is possible, and this will greatly enhance
the beauty of the beds. Begonias are hardier than is generally supposed; they need no protection,
and require no heat, except in the stage of seedlings, when first forming their tubers.

For autumn decoration Begonias should be taken up from the beds during September and potted,
when they will continue to bloom in the greenhouse or conservatory for a considerable time,
and form a useful addition to the flowering plants of that period.

If not required for autumn decoration, let the plants remain out as long as may be safe; then
pot off, and place in the greenhouse. Be careful not to hasten the drying of the bulbs. When
the stems fall Begonias may be stored for their season of rest, allowing them to remain in
the same pots. They can be put away in a dry cellar, or on the ground, covered up with sand,
in any shed or frame where the bulbs will remain dry and be protected from frost. Both damp
and cold are very injurious to them. The temperature during their season of rest should be
kept as near 50° as possible. When they show signs of growth in spring they must be put into
small-sized pots, almost on the surface of the soil. As growth increases shift into larger
sizes, inserting the bulb a little deeper each time until the crown is covered.

==BEGONIA, FIBROUS-ROOTED==l

==Begonia semperflorens. Half-hardy perennial==

Fibrous-rooted Begonias are exceedingly valuable for either bedding in summer or greenhouse
decoration during the autumn and winter. They produce a continual succession of flowers, rather
small in size, but very useful for bouquets, and the plants are charming as table ornaments.
The directions for sowing and after-treatment recommended for the Tuberous-rooted class will
be suitable also for the Fibrous-rooted varieties, except that the latter must always be kept
in a growing state, instead of being dried off at the end of the flowering season. Sow seed
at the end of January or in February, and again at the beginning of March. Under fair treatment
the first batch of plants will come into flower for bedding out in June.

==CALCEOLARIA, HERBACEOUS==

==Calceolaria hybrida. Greenhouse biennial==

The present magnificent race of Herbaceous Calceolarias, both as to constitution and the beauty
of its flowers, is the result of much cross-fertilisation of the finest types, so that the
best strains are capable of affording ever-new surprise and delight. The superb collections
exhibited in recent years, which have made lasting impressions on the public by their form
and brilliancy of colour, have invariably been raised from seeds of selected varieties, saved
on scientific principles that insure vigour, variety, and splendour in the progeny.

Calceolarias thrive under intelligent cool-house culture, but it must be clearly understood
that in every stage of growth they are quick in resenting neglect or careless treatment. The
work must be carried out with scrupulous attention, and the result will more than justify the
labour. Extreme conditions of temperature are distinctly injurious, and the plants are especially
susceptible to a parched, dry atmosphere.

May is early enough to commence operations, and July is the limit for sowing. As a rule, the
June sowing will produce the quickest, strongest, and most robust plants.

The soil, whatever its composition, should be rich, firm, and, above all, porous. Press it
well into the pots or pans, and make the surface slightly convex and quite smooth. A compost
that has been properly prepared will not need water; but should water become needful, it must
be given by partially submerging the pans. The seed is as fine as snuff, and requires delicate
handling. It is easily lost or blown away, and therefore it is wise not to open the packet
until perfectly ready to sow. Distribute the seed evenly and sift over it a mere dusting of
fine earth. Place a sheet of glass upon each pot or pan, and the glass must be either turned
or wiped daily. This not only checks rapid evaporation, but prevents the attacks of vermin.
Germination is always slower on an open than on a close stage. Perhaps the best possible position
is a moist shady part of a vinery, if care be taken when syringing the vines to prevent the
spray from falling upon the seed-pans.

Under favourable circumstances, from seven to nine days will suffice to bring the seedlings
up in force, and very few will appear afterwards. When they are through the soil remove the
sheet of glass, and give them prompt attention, or they will rapidly damp off. Immediately
the second leaf appears, tiny as the plants may be and difficult to handle, commence pricking
them off into other pots prepared to receive them, for it is unsafe to wait until they become
strong. Allow about two inches between the plants. The occupants of each pan may generally
be pricked off in about three operations, and there should be only the shortest possible intervals
between.

With many subjects it is a safe rule to use the robust seedlings and throw the weakly ones
away. This practice will not do in the case of Calceolarias, or some of the most charming colours
that can grace the conservatory or greenhouse will be lost. The strongest seedlings generally
produce flowers in which yellow largely predominates, a fact that can easily be verified by
keeping the plants under different numbers. But it must not be inferred that because the remainder
are somewhat weaker at the outset they will not eventually make robust plants.

Freely mix silver sand with the potting mould, and raise the surface higher in the centre than
at the edge of the pot. From the first appearance of the seedlings shading is of the utmost
importance, for even a brief period of direct sunshine will certainly prove destructive. Do
not allow the plants to become dry for a moment, but give frequent gentle sprinklings of water,
and rain-water is preferable. As the soil hardens, stir the surface with a pointed stick, not
too deep, and give water a few hours after. About a month of this treatment should find each
plant in the possession of four or five leaves. Then prepare thumb pots with small crocks,
cover the crocks with clean moss and fill with rich porous soil. To these transfer the plants
with extreme care, lifting each one with as much soil adhering to the roots as a skilful hand
can make them carry. Place them in a frame, or in the sheltered part of a greenhouse, quite
free from dripping water. Always give air on suitable days, and on the leeward side of the house.

Keep a sharp look-out for aphis, to the attacks of which Calceolarias are peculiarly liable.
Fumigation is the best remedy, and it should be undertaken in the evening; a still atmosphere
renders the operation more certain. Water carefully on the following morning, and shade from
the sun.

By September the plants should be in large 60-pots, and it is then quite time to begin the
preparation for wintering. Some growers put them in heat, and are successful, but the heat
must be very moderate, and even then we regard the practice as dangerous. Place the plants
near the glass, and at one end of the house where they will obtain plenty of side light, as
well as light from above. During severe frosts it may be well to draw them back or remove them
to a shelf lower down and towards the centre of the house, but they must be restored as soon
as possible to the fullest light obtainable, as they have to do all their growth under glass.
The more air that can safely be given, the better, and dispense with fire-heat if a temperature
of 45° to 55° can be maintained without it.

When growth commences in spring, which will generally be early in March, give each plant its
final shift into eight-or ten-inch pots. This must be done before the buds push up, or there
will be more foliage than flowers.

The following is the compost we advise: one bushel good yellow loam, half-bushel leaf-soil,
one gallon silver sand, a pound of Sutton's A 1 Garden Manure, and a pint of soot, well mixed
at least ten days before use. Any sourness in the soil will be fatal to flowering. The compost
must be carefully 'firmed' into the pots, but no severe pressure should be employed, or the
roots will not run freely.

Neglect as to temperature or humidity will have to be paid for in long joints, green fly, red
spider, or in some other way. But there are no plants of high quality that grow more thriftily
if protected from cold winds and kept perfectly clean. A light airy greenhouse is their proper
place, and they must have ample headroom.

After the pots are filled with roots, not before, manure water may be administered until the
flower-heads begin to show colour, when pure soft water only should be used. About a fortnight
in advance of the full display the branches must be tied to supports. If skilfully managed
the supports will not be visible.

It may be that a few large specimens are required. If so, shift the most promising plants into
6-size pots. These large Calceolarias will need regular supplies of liquid manure until the
bloom is well up, and if the pots are efficiently drained and the plants in a thriving condition,
a rather strong beverage will suit them. For all ordinary purposes, however, plants may be
allowed to flower in eight-or ten-inch pots, and for these one shift after the winter is sufficient.

==New Types of Calceolaria.==--There are now available a number of hybrid half-hardy perennial
varieties, of which =C. profusa= (=Clibrani=) is the most popular, that bear the same relation
to the Large-flowered Calceolaria as the Star Cineraria does to the Florist's Cineraria. In
point of size the blooms produced by these new types are smaller than those of the Large-flowered
section, but the tall graceful sprays are extremely beautiful and of the greatest decorative
value. Except that seed should be sown earlier (February and March are the proper months),
the plants should receive precisely the same treatment as that already described for Herbaceous
Calceolaria.

==CALCEOLARIA, SHRUBBY==

==Calceolaria rugosa. Half-hardy perennial==

Notwithstanding the ease with which cuttings of the Shrubby Calceolaria can be carried through
a severe winter, there is a growing disposition to obtain the required number of plants from
seed sown in February; and seedlings have the advantage of great variety of colour. A frame
or greenhouse, and the most ordinary treatment, will suffice to insure a large stock of attractive
healthy plants for the embellishment of beds and borders.

==CAMPANULA and CANTERBURY BELL==

==Hardy annual, hardy biennial, and hardy perennial==

Among the numerous and diverse forms in the order Campanulaceæ are many flowers of great value
in the garden, including Single, Double, and Cup and Saucer strains of the popular Canterbury
Bell (=C. medium=). The impression that some Campanulas are shy growers and require exceptionally
careful treatment may arise from the frail habit of certain varieties, or from the fact that
some of them occasionally fail to bloom within twelve months from date of sowing. The idea
is not worth a moment's consideration. In moderately rich, well-drained soil the finest Campanulas
not only prove to be thoroughly hardy, but they are most graceful in herbaceous borders or
beds, and they may also be used alone in bold clumps with splendid effect. For instance, the
handsome Chimney Campanulas (=C. pyramidalis= and =C. pyramidalis alba=) frequently attain
a height of six feet or more, and sturdy spikes occasionally measure eight and even ten feet
from base to tip. Such specimens are magnificent ornaments in conservatories and corridors,
and cannot fail to arrest attention at the back of herbaceous borders, or when used as isolated
plants on lawns. When grown in pots use a light rich compost, taking care to insure perfect
drainage. The plants must never be allowed to become dry, as this not only checks growth but
renders them liable to attack by red spider or green fly. Another distinctive subject for the
decoration of the conservatory is =C. grandis=, which may be described as a dwarf Chimney Campanula.
The freely branching plants, covered with attractive flowers, also form a striking group when
grown in the open border.

Altogether different in character is =C. persicifolia grandiflora=, or the Peach-leaved Bell-flower
as it is sometimes called. This plant is lighter and more graceful than the Canterbury Bell.
It throws up handsome stems, two feet high, clothed from the ground with lance-like leaves
and elegant bells which quiver in the slightest breeze. An interesting plant is the Giant Harebell,
a dainty flower on a slender stem, resembling the wild variety in form, but larger, richer
in colour, and a more profuse bloomer. =C. glomerata= is one of the hardiest plants that can
be grown in any garden, and the large close heads of deep blue bells have long been familiar
in herbaceous borders. For its very fine glistening, deep blue, erect flowers, =C. grandiflora=
is also a great favourite.

Campanulas were formerly propagated by division, but this treatment has created the impression
that they are unworthy to be ranked among the perennials. From seed, the plants are extremely
robust. =C. persicifolia grandiflora= resents division, which frequently results in weakened
growth and a tendency, especially in poor or badly drained soil, to dwindle away. The only
satisfactory method of growing Campanulas is to raise plants annually from good strains of
seed. If sown in gentle heat early in the year--February is the usual month--many of the varieties
flower the same season. When they are well started, plenty of light and air must be admitted.
Unless intended for potting they should be planted out in good soil where they will require
no more care than is bestowed on the borders generally. Seed can also be sown in the open ground
from May to July; transplant in autumn for flowering in the following season. During hot weather,
particularly on light soil, the plants need to be well watered, but in retentive ground thorough
drainage must be insured. Should signs of debility appear, transplant to rich soil, where they
will soon regain vigour.

A popular half-hardy Campanula is =C. fragilis=, of trailing habit. The starry pale blue flowers
are seen to most advantage in hanging-baskets. The charm of these flowers is wholly lost if
they are placed on a stage in the greenhouse; and they are not entirely satisfactory in a window
where the light is transmitted through the petals, as this robs them of colour and substance.
But hanging in a conservatory with plenty of air and space their slender drooping stems are
very graceful, and the light reflected from the flowers does full justice to their beauty.
Sow in pans during February or March and pot on as required.

All the foregoing are perennials, but two little hardy annual Campanulas are =Attica= and =A.
alba=, growing about six inches high. They make useful foreground plants, and are quite at
home in rock gardens. Sow in April on light soil.

==The Canterbury Bell== has already been alluded to; it is a charming hardy biennial forming
a valuable feature of the mixed border. The large semi-double blooms of the Cup and Saucer
class and the double varieties are modern introductions which have become extremely popular;
the range of colours now includes the most delicate shades of pink, mauve, and blue, in addition
to pure white. Seed may be sown from April to July. When the seedlings are large enough transplant
them where required for flowering in the summer of the succeeding year. But Canterbury Bells
are also interesting in the greenhouse during spring; for this work pot them in October and
on to December. So treated, they bloom even more generously than in the garden. There can be
no more beautiful adornment for a hall or large drawing-room than a well-placed group of the
fine white flowers, backed by a mass of dark-foliaged plants.

==CANNA==

==Indian Shot. Half-hardy perennial==

Cannas have ceased to be regarded simply as sub-tropical foliage plants, adapted only for the
adornment of beds and borders. They have not lost their merits for this purpose, although in
all probability the taller forms will be less grown than formerly, because the new dwarf varieties,
which maintain a high standard of beauty in the foliage, include a diversity of rich tints
previously unknown, and they possess the additional merit of producing flowers that have lifted
the race into prominence as brilliant decorative subjects for the garden and the greenhouse.

The popular name is descriptive of the seed, which is almost spherical, black, and so hard
that it has been used in the West Indies instead of shot. Hence it will occasion no surprise
that the germs burst through the strong covering with difficulty, and that sometimes weeks
elapse before the seedlings appear, one or two at a time. To facilitate germination some growers
file the seed, others soak it until the skin becomes sufficiently soft to permit of the paring
away of a small portion with a sharp knife. In either case caution must be exercised to avoid
injuring the germ. A safer mode of attaining the object is to soak the seeds in water, placed
in a greenhouse or stove, for about twenty-four hours before sowing. After soaking the seeds
it is necessary to keep the soil constantly moist, or the germs will certainly suffer injury.
The number of seeds sown should be recorded, so that it may be known when all are up. The first
sowing should be made in January, in a temperature of about 75°, and as fast as the seedlings
become ready transfer singly to small pots. As Cannas are gross feeders they must have a rich,
porous compost, and an occasional dose of liquid manure will prove beneficial, especially when
the pots are full of roots. If the seedlings from the January sowing are regularly potted on
and properly managed they will begin to flower in June or July. Either the plants may be turned
out into a rich soil, or the pots can be plunged, and after flowering in the open until late
in autumn the plants can be lifted for another display of bloom in the greenhouse. In warm
districts and in dry, sheltered situations, the roots may be left in the open ground all the
winter under a covering of ashes; but they must be lifted from a damp, cold soil, and stored
in a frame during the winter months. We have only mentioned January as the month for sowing,
but seed may be put in up to midsummer, or even later, following the routine already indicated.

==CARNATION==

==Dianthus Caryophyllus fl. pl. Hardy perennial==

The Carnation belongs to the aristocracy of flowers and has attained the dignity of an exclusive
exhibition. But in addition to their merits as show flowers, Carnations make conspicuous ornaments
in the garden and the home, and it has been found that seed saved with skill from the finest
varieties will produce plants yielding hundreds of flowers of which the grower need not feel
ashamed. Since the introduction of the early-flowering class, which can easily be had in bloom
within six months from date of sowing, an immense impetus has been given to the culture of
Carnations from seed, and with judicious management it is not a difficult matter to insure
a succession of these delightful subjects almost the year through. For the decoration of greenhouses
and for providing cut flowers, seedling Carnations have a special value, which has only to
be known to be universally appreciated. No trouble should be experienced with high-class seeds,
which germinate freely and save much time and labour in comparison with the more tedious process
of propagation; while an occasional new break may at times reward the raiser.

The proverb that what is worth doing is worth doing well is peculiarly exemplified in the cultivation
of Carnations, the difference between the results of good and bad work being immense. We therefore
advise the preparation of a compost consisting of about three parts of turfy loam, to one part
each of cow-manure and sweet leaf-mould, with a small addition of fine grit. A compost that
has been laid up for a year, according to the orthodox practice of florists, is very much to
be desired; but it may be prepared off-hand if care be taken to have all the materials in a
sweet, friable state, free from pastiness, and as far as possible free from vermin. By laying
it in a heap, and turning two or three times, the vermin will be pretty well got rid of. Sow
from April until August in 4-1/2 inch pots, which must be thoroughly drained. The seed must
be very thinly covered, and sheets of glass should be laid over to check evaporation. Place
the pots in a closed frame, or if the season be genial a sheltered border will suffice. Immediately
the plants are large enough to handle, prick them off into seed-pans, or round the edge of
48-size pots. Place these in a cold pit or in the greenhouse. Give shade and water until the
plants have formed six or eight leaves, and then choose a moist day for planting out.

To insure flowering plants in the following summer it is necessary to have them strong and
robust before the winter sets in. As the blooming stems rise they must be carefully tied to
tall sticks, stout enough to carry a cover for the bloom, if the plants are not flowered under
glass. When the buds show they should be thinned, leaving as a rule the top, third, and fourth
buds. The second is often too near the first, and some will not carry the fourth with vigour.
When the petals nearly fill the calyx, each one must be carefully tied with a thin strip of
material a little more than halfway down, to prevent the calyx from bursting, which disqualifies
the flower for exhibition.

==The early-flowering class== is extremely valuable for the ease with which it can be grown.
The seedlings offer the advantage of being far more floriferous than plants that have been
propagated by the orthodox method, and they are quite immune from the disease which often decimates
stocks raised from layers and cuttings. Two strains--Vanguard and Improved Marguerite--possess
these characteristics in a very high degree. All the usual colours are included, and they not
only make a very imposing display in the borders but are of great value for table decoration.
Within about six months from the time seed is sown an admirable form of delightfully scented
Carnation is at the command of every gardener, and a succession of these popular flowers is
available long after the perennial varieties have ceased to bloom. Plants from seed sown in
gentle heat in January or February will flower freely in the autumn of the same year, and if
lifted and potted they will continue in bloom during the winter as ornaments of the greenhouse
or conservatory. From another sowing in autumn there will be a display in the following spring.

==CELOSIA PLUMOSA==

==Plumed Cockscomb. Greenhouse annual==

The conditions which suit a liberally grown Cockscomb will produce long graceful plumes of
=Celosia plumosa=, but the starving system will not answer with this plant. Sow in February
or March, and by means of a steady heat, regular attention with water, and a rather moist atmosphere,
the specimens should be grown without a check from beginning to end. When they reach the final
pots an occasional dose of weak manure water will help them, both in size and colour, but it
must be discontinued when the flowers begin to show their beauty. As a rule it will be found
more easy to manage this plant on a moderate-sized hot-bed than in a greenhouse. Repotting
should always be done in time to prevent the roots from growing through the bottom of the pots.

==CELOSIA CRISTATA--see COCKSCOMB, =page= 254==

==CHRYSANTHEMUM==

==Hardy perennial and hardy annual==

The tedious method of propagating Begonias, Gloxinias, and Primulas by cuttings or layers has
been replaced by the simpler and more satisfactory procedure of sowing seeds, which insures
all the finest flowers in far greater variety than were obtained under the obsolete treatment.
A similar revolution is now proceeding in the culture of Chrysanthemums. Many growers are relying
entirely on seedlings raised from sowings early in the year for their autumn display. The culture
of =C. indicum= from seed is as simple as that of Primulas or Stocks, and the variety and delicate
charm of the seedlings far surpass the formal plants of years ago. Gardeners who require large
numbers for decorative purposes may use seedling Chrysanthemums with excellent effect.

Seed should be sown in January or February, using a compost consisting of two parts leaf-soil
to one part of loam. Place the pots or pans in a temperature of 65° to 70°. As soon as the
seedlings appear they should be moved to a somewhat lower temperature--about 55° to 60°. When
the young plants are large enough to handle, prick off into trays at about three inches apart,
using a little more loam in the soil. The most convenient size for the purpose is fifteen inches
long by nine inches wide and three inches deep. These trays produce a quicker root action than
pots. After growth has started, place them in cold frames. Immediately the plants have made
five or six leaves transfer singly to three-inch pots, and when nicely rooted they may be stopped
once. About June shift into six-inch pots, adding a small quantity of coarse silver sand to
the potting soil. Ten days later place them out of doors on a bed of ashes. Towards the end
of July transfer to 9-1/2 inch pots for flowering, using soil of the composition already advised.
Keep them standing on ashes or boards, if possible at the north side of a hedge or house. When
thoroughly rooted a little manure water may be given once a week. In October stand the plants
in a cool house, and in the first week of November move them to flowering quarters, keeping
the temperature from 55° to 60°.

If required for blooming in the open, prick the seedlings off as soon as they will bear handling,
and in May have them planted out in final positions, giving a little protection at first. They
will yield a profusion of bloom which will prove invaluable for decorative purposes throughout
the autumn months.

The Perennial Chrysanthemums include the well-known Marguerite, or Ox-eye Daisy (=C. leucanthemum=),
of which several new varieties have been introduced in recent years. Not only have these flowers
been greatly improved in size and form, but there are now early-and late-flowering varieties
which will give a succession of bloom from May until early autumn. The seed may be sown at
any time from April to July on a carefully prepared bed of light fertile soil, and when the
seedlings are large enough they should be transferred to permanent quarters for flowering in
the following year. In the perennial border the plants make handsome specimens, and the long-stemmed
flowers are also invaluable for vase decoration when cut.

Several of the Annual Chrysanthemums make superb displays in borders, especially when planted
in large clumps, and they deserve to be grown extensively in odd corners to furnish a supply
of charming flowers for bouquets and arrangement in vases. There is a considerable choice of
colours, which come quite true, and the plants may be treated in all respects as hardy annuals.
When grown in pots, the Star and Dunnettii varieties make most attractive subjects for the
decoration of the greenhouse in winter and early spring. For this purpose seed should be sown
in August and September.

==CINERARIA==

==Greenhouse annual==

The comparative ease with which the Cineraria can be well grown, together with the exceeding
beauty and variety of its flowers, will always insure for it a high position in public favour.
It is now so generally raised from seed that no other mode of culture need be alluded to. The
plant is rapid in growth, very succulent, thirsty, requires generous feeding, and will not
endure extremes of heat or cold. A compost of mellow turfy loam, either yellow or brown, with
a fair addition of leaf-mould, will grow it to perfection. But I guess she would, because everybody
that gets sick here goes to America, else England, and when they come back they are ever so
much better; but sometimes they don't come back, and mamma says people die even in America.
There are lots of thieves in this country.

The usual period for sowing is during the months of May and June, and, as a rule, the plants
raised in May will be found the most valuable. A June sowing must not be expected to produce
flowers until the following March or April. It is quite possible to have Cinerarias in bloom
in November and December, and those who care for a display at that early period should sow
in April.

Cinerarias grow so freely that it is not necessary to prick the seedlings off round the edges
of pots or pans; but immediately the plants begin to make their second leaves, transfer direct
to thumb pots, using rather coarse soil, and in doing this take care not to cover the hearts
of the plants. Place the pots in a close frame; attend to shading, and sprinkle with soft water
both morning and evening until well established. In the second week after potting, gradually
diminish the heat and give more air. Too high a temperature, and even too much shade, will
produce thin and weak leaf-stalks. If the plants are so crowded that they touch one another
it will almost certainly be injurious, and render them an easy prey to some of their numerous
enemies. It is far better to grow a few really fine specimens that will produce a handsome
display of superb flowers, than to attempt a large number of feeble plants that will prove
a constant source of trouble, and in the end yield but a poor return in bloom. Endeavour to
grow them as nearly hardy as the season will allow, even admitting the night air freely on
suitable occasions. Immediately the thumb pots are filled with roots, shift to a larger size,
and it is important that this operation should not be delayed a day too long. To the practised
eye the alteration of the colour of the leaves to a pale green is a sufficient intimation that
starvation has commenced, and that prompt action is necessary to save the plants. It is the
custom of some growers to transfer at once to the size in which they are intended to bloom.
There is, however, some danger to the inexperienced in over-potting, and therefore one intermediate
shift is advisable. As a rule 32-size pots are large enough, but the 24-or even the 16-size
is allowable when very fine specimens are required. The seedlings should be in their final
pots not later than the end of November.

It will help to harden and establish the plants if they are placed in the open air during August
and September. A north border under the shelter of a wall or building is the most suitable
spot, but avoid a hedge of any kind. Clear away suckers, and if many buds are presented, every
third one may be removed when very fine blooms are wanted. From the first appearance of the
buds, manure water can be given with advantage once or twice a week until the flowers show
colour, and then it should be discontinued.

Although Cinerarias are thrifty plants, they are fastidious about trifles. If possible give
them new pots, or see that old ones are made scrupulously clean. Even hard water will retard
free growth, oftentimes to the perplexity of the cultivator.

A host of enemies attack Cinerarias; indeed, there is scarcely a pest known to the greenhouse
but finds a congenial home upon this plant. Mildew is more common in some seasons than in others.
As a rule, it appears during July and August, especially after insufficient ventilation, or
when the plants have been left too long in one place or too near to each other. Obviously weakness
invites attack, and the necessity of robust and vigorous growth is thus effectually taught.
On the first appearance of a curled leaf, dust the foliage and soil with sulphur, and give
no water overhead until a cure has been effected. The aphis is easily killed by fumigation
carried out on a quiet evening. Some gardeners prefer to give an hour or two once a week to
the removal of the pest by means of a soft brush. From three to four dozen plants are easily
cleansed by hand in the time named.

==Star Cinerarias== (=C. stellata=) are grown under precisely the same conditions as the Florists'
or Show Cinerarias, and this type of flower is highly valued for its singular gracefulness
and beautiful decorative effect. In the conservatory and on the table it is an indispensable
plant. The sprays admit of most charming arrangements in vases with any kind of ornamental
foliage, and maintain their beauty for a long time in water.

==Intermediate Cinerarias==.--These new types of Cineraria, which in habit are intermediate
between the Large-flowered and Stellata classes, make admirable subjects for table decoration,
as well as for the adornment of the conservatory or greenhouse. In this class the Feltham Beauty
strain undoubtedly has a great future before it. Originated at the Feltham Nurseries, this
strain has attracted considerable attention at the numerous horticultural meetings where it
has been exhibited, and since it passed into our hands a few years ago some very beautiful
colours not to be found among the ordinary Stellata varieties have been added to it. The distinctive
feature of the flowers is the white centre, which greatly enhances the vividness of the colouring
of the petals. For the Intermediate section the same methods of culture as advised for the
other classes of Cineraria will apply.

==CLARKIA==

==C. elegans. C. pulchella. Hardy annuals==

The two distinct classes of Clarkia named above include several varieties that have long been
freely grown in gardens as summer annuals. One night last week they got into our house. The servants
would keep shutting the bath-room window--the bath-room is between mamma's room and mine--and we
wanted it open for air, and mamma told them so; but they said the
thieves would climb in from a fig-tree near by. Although all the
Clarkias bloom profusely in ordinary garden soil they well repay liberal treatment. Seed may
be sown from March to May, or in September if an early display is wanted. In good ground each
plant of the Pulchella varieties should be allowed a space of eight or ten inches, but rather
more room must be given to the Elegans class to do the plants justice.

The Elegans varieties are of special value when treated as pot plants for conservatory decoration
in May and June. From seed sown in August or early in September the plants can be slowly grown
into magnificent specimens four feet high and almost as much in diameter. Our own practice
is to sow thinly in clean well-drained 48-size pots. These are placed in a temperature of from
50° to 55°, and when the seedlings are large enough to handle they are pricked off into shallow
boxes about three inches apart, the base of the boxes being freely perforated to insure ample
drainage. The most suitable soil is composed of equal parts of sound loam and leaf-mould, with
the addition of a gallon of coarse sand to each bushel of the mixed soil. After the plants
are well established, ventilate freely to secure robust growth. When three inches high pinch
out the points, and a little later transfer separately to small pots, keeping them close for
a few days and as near the glass as possible. As the roots develop, transfer again to larger
pots, and then the second and final stopping of the shoots must be done. Should very large
plants be wanted they can be flowered in 16-size pots, using a compost slightly heavier than
that advised at a younger stage of growth. The night temperature during winter should be about
45º, giving air freely by day whenever possible to do so with safety. As the branches need
support, sticks of a suitable length must be provided, and the stems tied out in good time
to prevent them from breaking off.

==CLERODENDRON FALLAX==

==Stove shrub==

A very handsome erect shrub, which is extensively grown in tropical gardens. In this country
it attains a height of about two feet, and is easily raised from seed in a warm greenhouse
or conservatory, where it proves to be a really beautiful and striking plant.

Sow in pots or pans in March or April and transfer to single pots while small. From the commencement
a very rich soil is necessary to insure robust growth and intense colour in the panicles of
brilliant scarlet flowers. The plants bloom in August or September of the same year. When the
leaves fall, if the intention be to store through winter, remove to a temperature of 55°; but
raising plants annually is more satisfactory and entails less trouble than storing.

Like many other tropical plants, Clerodendron fallax is subject to attack by mealy bug, and
this pest may be dealt with by hand picking or by washing the leaves with insecticide two evenings
in succession. Aphis are also troublesome and should be cleared by fumigation.

==COCKSCOMB==

==Celosia cristata. Tender annual==

This fine old-fashioned flower has won renewed popularity of late years, probably as the result
of a number of well-grown plants exhibited at horticultural shows. Those who can produce handsome
Cinerarias, Balsams, and Calceolarias, will be likely to turn out grand Cockscombs, strongly
coloured and on dwarf, leafy plants. Liberal culture is essential, and the first start should
be made in a compost consisting mainly of rich light friable loam. Sow the seeds on a rather
brisk heat in February or March, a newly-made but sweet hot-bed being the best place for the
seed-pans. Prick out early into very small pots, and shift on so as to encourage growth without
a check, and keep the plants on the hot-bed until the combs are formed. It is well not to shift
beyond the 8-1/2-inch size; then, by allowing the roots to become pot-bound, the combs are
soon produced. It matters not how select the seed, or how careful the culture, a certain proportion
of unsymmetrical combs will appear; but these, if richly coloured, will be useful for decorative
purposes, and should have all the attention needed to keep their leaves fresh and the combs
pure in colour.

==COLEUS==

==Stove perennial==

