Ireland is by no means the "poor Ireland" that she is commonly supposed to be.  The last returns
of the Postmaster-General show that she is growing in wealth.  Irish thrift has been steadily
at work during the last twenty years.  Since the establishment of the Post Office Savings Banks,
in 1861, the deposits have annually increased in value.  At the end of 1882, more than two
millions sterling had been deposited in these banks, and every county participated in the increase.[4]
The largest accumulations were in the counties of Dublin, Antrim, Cork, Down, Tipperary, and
Tyrone, in the order named.  Besides this amount, the sum of 2,082,413L. was due to depositors
in the ordinary Savings Banks on the 20th of November, 1882; or, in all, more than four millions
sterling, the deposits of small capitalists. At Cork, at the end of last year, it was found
that the total deposits made in the savings bank had been 76,000L, or an increase of 6,675L.
over the preceding twelve months.  But this is not all.  The Irish middle classes are accustomed
to deposit most of their savings in the Joint Stock banks; and from the returns presented to
the Lord Lieutenant, dated the 31st of January, 1883, we find that these had been more than
doubled in twenty years, the deposits and cash balances having increased from 14,389,000L.
at the end of 1862, to 32,746,000L. at the end of 1882.  During the last year they had increased
by the sum of 2,585,000L.  "So large an increase in bank deposits and cash balances," says
the Report, "is highly satisfactory."  It may be added that the investments in Government and
India Stock, on which dividends were paid at the Bank of Ireland, at the end of 1882, amounted
to not less than 31,804,000L.

It is proper that Ireland should be bountiful with her increasing means.  It has been stated
that during the last eighteen years her people have contributed not less than six millions
sterling for the purpose of building places of worship, convents, schools, and colleges, in
connection with the Roman Catholic Church, not to speak of their contributions for other patriotic
objects.

It would be equally proper if some of the saved surplus capital of Ireland, as suggested by
Mr. Parnell, were invested in the establishment of Irish manufactures.  This would not only
give profitable occupation to the unemployed, but enable Ireland to become an increasingly
exporting nation. The Landholder, for the sake of his honourable friend, regrets that he denies
his having used his name publicly as a writer, for, though the honourable gentleman doubtless asserts
the truth, there are a great number of those odd people who really think they were present on
that occasion, and have such a strong habit of believing their senses, that they will not be
convinced even by evidence which is superior to all sense. But it must be so in this imperfect
world.

P. S. The Landholder begs his honourable friend not to be surprised at his former address, as he
can assure him most seriously, that he does not even conjecture by whom it was written.

The Landholder, XII.

The Connecticut Courant, (Number 1208)

MONDAY, MARCH 17, 1788.

TO THE RHODE ISLAND FRIENDS OF PAPER MONEY, TENDER ACTS AND ANTI-FEDERALISM.

The singular system of policy adopted by your state, no longer excites either the surprise or indignation
of mankind. There are certain extremes of iniquity, which are beheld with patience, from a fixed
conviction that the transgressor is inveterate, and that his example from its great injustice
hath no longer a seducing influence. Milton’s lapse of the angels and their expulsion from
Heaven, produces deeper regret in a benevolent mind than all the
evil tricks they have played or torments they have suffered since
the bottomless pit became their proper home.

Something similar to this is excited in beholding the progress of human depravity. Our minds cannot
bear to be always pained; the Creator hath, therefore wisely provided that our tender sentiments
should subside, in those desperate cases where there is no longer a probability that any effort
to which we may be excited, will have a power to reclaim. But though our benevolence is no
longer distressed with the injustice of your measures, as philosophers above the feelings of
passion, we can speculate on them to our advantage. The sentiment thrown out by some of our adventurous
divines, that the permission of sin is the highest display of supreme wisdom, and the greatest blessing
to the universe, is most successfully illustrated by the effects
of your general policy.

In point of magnitude, your little state bears much the same proportion to the united American
empire, as the little world doth to the immense intelligent universe;
and if the apostacy of man hath conveyed such solemn warning and instruction
to the whole, as your councils have to every part of the union, no
one will doubt the usefulness of Adam’s fall. At the commencement
of peace, America was placed in a singular situation. Fear of a common
danger could no longer bind us together; patriotism had done its best
and was wearied with exertion rewarded only by ingratitude—our federal
system was inadequate for national government and justice, and from
inexperience the great body of the people were ignorant what consequences
should flow from the want of them.  Kaolin, porcelain clay, and coarser
clay, abound; but it is only at Belleek that it has been employed in the pottery manufacture.
But the sea about Ireland is still less explored than the land.  All round the Atlantic seaboard
of the Irish coast are shoals of herring and mackerel, which might be food for men, but are
at present only consumed by the multitudes of sea-birds which follow them.

In the daily papers giving an account of the Cork Exhibition, appeared the following paragraph:
"An interesting exhibit will be a quantity of preserved herrings from Lowestoft, caught off
the old head of Kinsale, and returned to Cork after undergoing a preserving process in England."[6]
Fish caught off the coast of Ireland by English fishermen, taken to England and cured, and
then "returned to Cork" for exhibition! Here is an opening for patriotic Irishmen.  Why not
catch and preserve the fish at home, and get the entire benefit of the fish traffic?  Will
it be believed that there is probably more money value in the seas round Ireland than there
is in the land itself?  This is actually the case with the sea round the county of Aberdeen.[7]

A vast source of wealth lies at the very doors of the Irish people. But the harvest of an ocean
teeming with life is allowed to pass into other hands.  The majority of the boats which take
part in the fishery at Kinsale are from the little island of Man, from Cornwall, from France,
and from Scotland.  The fishermen catch the fish, salt them, and carry them or send them away.
While the Irish boats are diminishing in number, those of the strangers are increasing.  In
an East Lothian paper, published in May 1881, I find the following paragraph, under the head
of Cockenzie:-.

"Departure of Boats.--In the early part of this week, a number of the boats here have left
for the herring-fishery at Kinsale, in Ireland. The success attending their labours last year
at that place and at Howth has induced more of them than usual to proceed thither this year."

It may not be generally known that Cockenzie is a little fishing village on the Firth of Forth,
in Scotland, where the fishermen have provided themselves, at their own expense, with about
fifty decked fishing-boats, each costing, with nets and gear, about 500L.  With these boats
they carry on their pursuits on the coast of Scotland, England, and Ireland.  In 1882, they
sent about thirty boats to Kinsale[8] and Howth.  The profits of their fishing has been such
as to enable them, with the assistance of Lord Wemyss, to build for themselves a convenient
harbour at Port Seaton, without any help from the Government.  They find that self-help is
the best help, and that it is absurd to look to the Government and the public purse for what
they can best do for themselves.

The wealth of the ocean round Ireland has long been known.  As long ago as the ninth and tenth
centuries, the Danes established a fishery off the western coasts, and carried on a lucrative
trade with the south of Europe.  In Queen Mary's reign, Philip II. of Spain paid 1000L. annually
in consideration of his subjects being allowed to fish on the north-west coast of Ireland;
and it appears that the money was brought into the Irish Exchequer.  In 1650, Sweden was permitted,
as a favour, to employ a hundred vessels in the Irish fishery; and the Dutch in the reign of
Charles I. were admitted to the fisheries on the payment of 30,000L.  In 1673, Sir W. Temple,
in a letter to Lord Essex, says that "the fishing of Ireland might prove a mine under water
as rich as any under ground."[9]

The coasts of Ireland abound in all the kinds of fish in common use--cod, ling, haddock, hake,
mackerel, herring, whiting, conger, turbot, brill, bream, soles, plaice, dories, and salmon.
The banks off the coast of Galway are frequented by myriads of excellent fish; yet, of the
small quantity caught, the bulk is taken in the immediate neighbourhood of the shores.  Galway
bay is said to be the finest fishing ground in the world; but the fish cannot be expected to
come on shore unsought: they must be found, followed, and netted.   The fishing-boats from
the west of Scotland are very successful; and they often return the fish to Ireland, cured,
which had been taken out of the Irish bays.  "I tested this fact in Galway," says Mr. S. C.
Hall. "I had ordered fish for dinner; two salt haddocks were brought to me. On inquiry, I ascertained
where they were bought, and learned from the seller that he was the agent of a Scotch firm,
whose boats were at that time loading in the bay."[10] But although Scotland imports some 80,000
barrels of cured herrings annually into Ireland, that is not enough; for we find that there
is a regular importation of cured herrings, cod, ling, and hake, from Newfoundland and Nova
Scotia, towards the food of the Irish people.[11]

The fishing village of Claddagh, at Galway, is more decaying than ever. It seems to have suffered
from a bombardment, like the rest of the town.  The houses of the fishermen, when they fall
in, are left in ruins.  While the French, and English, and Scotch boats leave the coast laden
with fish, the Claddagh men remain empty-handed.  They will only fish on "lucky days," so that
the Galway market is often destitute of fish, while the Claddagh people are starving.  On one
occasion an English company was formed for the purpose of fishing and curing fish at Galway,
as is now done at Yarmouth, Grimsby, Fraserburgh, Wick, and other places.  Operations were
commenced, but so soon as the English fishermen put to sea in their boats, the Claddagh men
fell upon them, and they were glad to escape with their lives.[12] Unfortunately, the Claddagh
men have no organization, no fixed rules, no settled determination to work, unless when pressed
by necessity.  The appearance of the men and of their cabins show that they are greatly in
want of capital; and fishing cannot be successfully performed without a sufficiency of this
industrial element.

Illustrations of this neglected industry might be given to any extent. Herring fishing, cod
fishing, and pilchard fishing, are alike untouched.  The Irish have a strong prejudice against
the pilchard; they believe it to be an unlucky fish, and that it will rot the net that takes
it.  The Cornishmen do not think so, for they find the pilchard fishing to be a source of great
wealth. The pilchards strike upon the Irish coast first before they reach Cornwall.  When Mr.
Brady, Inspector of Irish Fisheries, visited St. Ives a few years ago, he saw captured, in
one seine alone, nearly ten thousand pounds of this fish.

Not long since; according to a northern local paper,[13] a large fleet of vessels in full sail
was seen from the west coast of Donegal, evidently making for the shore.  Many surmises were
made about the unusual sight.  Some thought it was the Fenians, others the Home Rulers, others
the Irish-American Dynamiters.  Nothing of the kind!  It was only a fleet of Scotch smacks,
sixty-four in number, fishing for herring between Torry Island and Horn Head. The Irish might
say to the Scotch fishermen, in the words of the Morayshire legend, "Rejoice, O my brethren,
in the gifts of the sea, for they enrich you without making any one else the poorer!"

But while the Irish are overlooking their treasure of herring, the Scotch are carefully cultivating
it.  The Irish fleet of fishing-boats fell off from 27,142 in 1823 to 7181 in 1878; and in
1882 they were still further reduced to 6089.[14]  Yet Ireland has a coast-line of fishing
ground of nearly three thousand miles in extent.

The bights and bays on the west coast of Ireland--off Erris, Mayo, Connemara, and Donegal--swarm
with fish.  Near Achill Bay, 2000 mackerel were lately taken at a single haul; and Clew Bay
is often alive with fish.  In Scull Bay and Crookhaven, near Cape Clear, they are so plentiful
that the peasants often knock them on the head with oars, but will not take the trouble to
net them.

These swarms of fish might be a source of permanent wealth.  A gentleman of Cork one day borrowed
a common rod and line from a Cornish miner in his employment, and caught fifty-seven mackerel
from the jetty in Scull Bay before breakfast.  Each of these mackerel was worth twopence in
Cork market, thirty miles off. Yet the people round about, many of whom were short of food,
were doing nothing to catch them, but expecting Providence to supply their wants.  Providence,
however, always likes to be helped. Some people forget that the Giver of all good gifts requires
us to seek for them by industry, prudence, and perseverance.[15]

Some cry for more loans; some cry for more harbours.  It would be well to help with suitable
harbours, but the system of dependence upon Government loans is pernicious.  The Irish ought
to feel that the very best help must come from themselves.  This is the best method for teaching
independence.  Look at the little Isle of Man.  The fishermen there never ask for loans.  They
look to their nets and their boats; they sail for Ireland, catch the fish, and sell them to
the Irish people.  With them, industry brings capital, and forms the fertile seed-ground of
further increase of boats and nets.   Surely what is done by the Manxmen, the Cornishmen, and
the Cockenziemen, might be done by the Irishmen.  The difficulty is not to be got over by lamenting
about it, or by staring at it, but by grappling with it, and overcoming it.  It is deeds, not
words, that are wanted. Employment for the mass of the people must spring from the people themselves.
Provided there is security for life and property, and an absence of intimidation, we believe
that capital will become invested in the fishing industry of Ireland; and that the result will
be peace, food, and prosperity.

We must remember that it is only of comparatively late years that England and Scotland have
devoted so much attention to the fishery of the seas surrounding our island.  In this fact
there is consolation and hope for Ireland.  At the beginning of the seventeenth century Sir
Waiter Raleigh laid before the King his observations concerning the trade and commerce of England,
in which he showed that the Dutch were almost monopolising the fishing trade, and consequently
adding to their shipping, commerce, and wealth.  "Surely," he says, "the stream is necessary
to be turned to the good of this kingdom, to whose sea-coasts alone God has sent us these great
blessings and immense riches for us to take; and that every nation should carry away out of
this kingdom yearly great masses of money for fish taken in our seas, and sold again by them
to us, must needs be a great dishonour to our nation, and hindrance to this realm."

The Hollanders then had about 50,000 people employed in fishing along the English coast; and
their industry and enterprise gave employment to about 150,000 more, "by sea and land, to make
provision, to dress and transport the fish they take, and return commodities; whereby they
are enabled yearly to build 1000 ships and vessels."  The prosperity of Amsterdam was then
so great that it was said that Amsterdam was "founded on herring-bones." Tobias Gentleman published
in 1614 his treatise on 'England's Way to win Wealth, and to employ Ships and Marines,'[16]
in which he urged the English people to vie with the Dutch in fishing the seas, and thereby
to give abundant employment, as well as abundant food, to the poorer people of the country.

"Look," he said, "on these fellows, that we call the plump Hollanders; behold their diligence
in fishing, and our own careless negligence!" The Dutch not only fished along the coasts near
Yarmouth, but their fishing vessels went north as far as the coasts of Shetland.  What most
roused Mr. Gentleman's indignation was, that the Dutchmen caught the fish and sold them to
the Yarmouth herring-mongers "for ready gold, so that it amounteth to a great sum of money,
which money doth never come again into England."  "We are daily scorned," he says, "by these
Hollanders, for being so negligent of our Profit, and careless of our Fishing; and they do
daily flout us that be the poor Fishermen of England, to our Faces at Sea, calling to us, and
saying, 'Ya English, ya sall or oud scoue dragien;' which, in English, is this, 'You English,
we will make you glad to wear our old Shoes!'"

Another pamphlet, to a similar effect, 'The Royal Fishing revived,'[17] was published fifty
years later, in which it was set forward that the Dutch "have not only gained to themselves
almost the sole fishing in his Majesty's Seas; but principally upon this Account have very
near beat us out of all our other most profitable Trades in all Parts of the World." It was
even proposed to compel "all Sorts of begging Persons and all other poor People, all People
condemned for less Crimes than Blood," as well as "all Persons in Prison for Debt," to take
part in this fishing trade!  But this was not the true way to force the traffic.  The herring
fishery at Yarmouth and along the coast began to make gradual progress with the growth of wealth
and enterprise throughout the country; though it was not until 1787--less than a hundred years
ago--that the Yarmouth men began the deep-sea herring fishery.

Before then, the fishing was all carried on along shore in little cobles, almost within sight
of land.  The native fishery also extended northward, along the east coast of Scotland and
the Orkney and Shetland Isles, until now the herring fishery of Scotland forms one of the greatest
industries in the United Kingdom, and gives employment, directly or indirectly, to close upon
half a million of people, or to one-seventh of the whole population of Scotland.

Taking these facts into consideration, therefore, there is no reason to despair of seeing,
before many years have elapsed, a large development of the fishing industry of Ireland.  We
may yet see Galway the Yarmouth, Achill the Grimsby, and Killybegs the Wick of the West. Modern
society in Ireland, as everywhere else, can only be transformed through the agency of labour,
industry, and commerce--inspired by the spirit of work, and maintained by the accumulations
of capital.  The first end of all labour is security,--security to person, possession, and
property, so that all may enjoy in peace the fruits of their industry.  For no liberty, no
freedom, can really exist which does not include the first liberty of all--the right of public
and private safety.

To show what energy and industry can do in Ireland, it is only necessary to point to Belfast,
one of the most prosperous and enterprising towns in the British Islands.  The land is the
same, the climate is the same, and the laws are the same, as those which prevail in other parts
of Ireland.  Belfast is the great centre of Irish manufactures and commerce, and what she has
been able to do might be done elsewhere, with the same amount of energy and enterprise.  But
it is not land, or climate, or altered laws that are wanted.  It is men to lead and direct,
and men to follow with anxious and persevering industry.  It is always the Man society wants.

The influence of Belfast extends far out into the country.  As you approach it from Sligo,
you begin to see that you are nearing a place where industry has accumulated capital, and where
it has been invested in cultivating and beautifying the land.  After you pass Enniskillen,
the fields become more highly cultivated.  The drill-rows are more regular; the hedges are
clipped; the weeds no longer hide the crops, as they sometimes do in the far west.  The country
is also adorned with copses, woods, and avenues.  A new crop begins to appear in the fields--a
crop almost peculiar to the neighbourhood of Belfast.  It is a plant with a very slender erect
green stem, which, when full grown, branches at the top into a loose corymb of blue flowers.
This is the flax plant, the cultivation and preparation of which gives employment to a great
number of persons, and is to a large extent the foundation of the prosperity of Belfast.

The first appearance of the linen industry of Ireland, as we approach Belfast from the west,
is observed at Portadown.  Its position on the Bann, with its water power, has enabled this
town, as well as the other places on the river, to secure and maintain their due share in the
linen manufacture.  Factories with their long chimneys begin to appear. The fields are richly
cultivated, and a general air of well-being pervades the district.  Lurgan is reached, so celebrated
for its diapers; and the fields there about are used as bleaching-greens. Then comes Lisburn,
a populous and thriving town, the inhabitants of which are mostly engaged in their staple trade,
the manufacture of damasks.  This was really the first centre of the linen trade. Though Lord
Strafford, during his government of Ireland, encouraged the flax industry, by sending to Holland
for flax-seed, and  inviting Flemish and French artisans to settle in Ireland, it was not until
the Huguenots, who had been banished from France by the persecutions of Louis XIV., settled
in Ireland in such large numbers, that the manufacture became firmly established.  The Crommelins,
the Goyers, and the Dupres, were the real founders of this great branch of industry.[18]

As the traveller approaches Belfast, groups of houses, factories, and works of various kinds,
appear closer and closer; long chimneys over boilers and steam-engines, and brick buildings
three or four stories high; large yards full of workmen, carts, and lorries; and at length
we are landed in the midst of a large manufacturing town.  As we enter the streets, everybody
seems to be alive.  The town was large, and full of inhabitants, and these inhabitants full
of industry.

Some people do not like manufacturing towns:  they prefer old castles and ruins.  They will
find plenty of these in other parts of Ireland. But to found industries that give employment
to large numbers of persons, and enable them to maintain themselves and families upon the fruits
of their labour--instead of living upon poor-rates levied from the labours of others, or who
are forced, by want of employment, to banish themselves from their own country, to emigrate
and settle among strangers, where they know not what may become of them--is a most honourable
and important source of influence, and worthy of every encouragement.

Look at the wonderfully rapid rise of Belfast, originating in the enterprise of individuals,
and developed by the earnest and anxious industry of the inhabitants of Ulster!

"God save Ireland!"  By all means.  But Ireland cannot be saved without the help of the people
who live in it.  God endowed men, there as elsewhere, with reason, will, and physical power;
and it is by patient industry only that they can open up a pathway to the enduring prosperity
of the country.  There is no Eden in nature.  The earth might have continued a rude uncultivated
wilderness, but for human energy, power, and industry.  These enable man to subdue the wilderness,
and develop the potency of labour.  "Possunt quia credunt posse."  They must conquer who will.

Belfast is a comparatively modern town.  It has no ancient history. About the beginning of
the sixteenth century it was little better than a fishing village.  There was a castle, and
a ford to it across the Lagan.  A chapel was built at the ford, at which hurried prayers were
offered up for those who were about to cross the currents of Lagan Water.  In 1575, Sir Henry
Sydney writes to the Lords of the Council: "I was offered skirmish by MacNeill Bryan Ertaugh
at my passage over the water at Belfast, which I caused to be answered, and passed over without
losse of man or horse; yet by reason of the extraordinaire Retorne our horses swamme and the
Footmen in the passage waded very deep." The country round about was forest land.  It was so
thickly wooded that it was a common saying that one might walk to Lurgan "on the tops of the
trees."

In 1612, Belfast consisted of about 120 houses, built of mud and covered with thatch. For let
it be remembered, that such laws, and such only, as are founded on this constitution, are
to be the supreme law of the land;—and it would be absurd indeed, if the laws which are granted
in the constitution, were not to be, without reserve, the supreme law of the land.

Thus, my fellow-citizens, we see that our rulers are to be bound by the most sacred ties, to
support our rights and liberties, to secure to us the full enjoyment of every privilege which
we can wish for; they are bound by the constitution to guarantee to us a republican form of
government in its fullest extent; and what is there more that we can wish for? That federal convention
have assembled together, and after a full investigation of the different concerns of the Union,
have proposed a form of government, calculated to support, and transmit,
inviolate, to the latest posterity, all the blessings of civil and
religious liberty.

Citizens of Massachusetts! consider, O consider well, these important matters, and weigh them deliberately
in the scale of reason! Consider at what a vast expense of toil, difficulty, treasure and blood,
you have emancipated yourselves from the yoke of bondage, and established yourselves an independent
people! Consider that those immortal characters, who first planned the event of the revolution,
and with arms in their hands stepped forth in the glorious cause of human nature, have now devised
a plan for supporting your freedom, and increasing your strength,
your power and happiness.

Will you then, O my countrymen! listen to the mad dictates of men, who are aiming, by every
artifice and falsehood, which the emissaries of hell can invent, to effect your total destruction
and overthrow? who wish to ascend the chariot of anarchy, and ride triumphant over your smoking
ruins, which they hope to effect, by their more than hellish arts: in your misery they hope
to glory, and establish their own greatness “on their country’s ruin.”

If they can effect this, they will laugh at your calamity, and mock your misfortunes—the language
of each brother in iniquity, when they meet, will be, “hail damn’d associates,” see our high
success!

Think, O my countrymen! think, before it is too late!—The important moment approaches, when
these states must, by the most wise of all conduct, forever establish their glory and happiness,
on the firmest basis, by adopting the constitution, or by the most foolish and inconsistent of all
conduct, in rejecting it, entail on themselves and on their posterity, endless infamy. But should
you, on the contrary, with energy and vigour, push your fortune, and, with earnestness and
gratitude, clasp to your arms this great blessing which Heaven has pointed to your view, posterity,
made happy by your wisdom and exertions, will honour and revere your memories. Secure in their
prosperity, they will weep for joy, that Heaven had given them—Fathers!

CASSIUS.

THE LETTERS OF AGRIPPA, ACCREDITED TO JAMES WINTHROP.

Printed In
The Massachusetts Gazette, November, 1787-January, 1788.

Note.

The
letters of Agrippa were the ablest anti-federal publications printed
in Massachusetts, and showed especial ability in arguing the dangers
and defects of a plan of government which was both so peculiarly needed,
and so specially advantageous to the State of Massachusetts, that
its adoption was only endangered by certain questions of local politics,
which could not even enter into the discussion. They were noticed,
or replied to, in the Massachusetts Gazette, Dec. 21, 1787, by “Charles
James Fox;” Dec. 28, 1787, and Jan. 4, 1788, by “Kempis O’Flanagan,”
Jan. 22, and 25, 1788, by “Junius,” and in the letters of Cassius,
printed in this volume.

I do not propose to enter into details respecting the progress of the trades of Belfast.  The
most important is the spinning of fine linen yarn, which is for the most part concentrated
in that town, over 25,000,000 of pounds weight being exported annually. Towards the end of
the seventeenth century the linen manufacture had made but little progress.  In 1680 all Ireland
did not export more than 6000L. worth annually.  Drogheda was then of greater importance than
Belfast.  But with the settlement of the persecuted Hugnenots in Ulster, and especially through
the energetic labours of Crommelin, Goyer, and others, the growth of flax was sedulously cultivated,
and its manufacture into linen of all sorts became an important branch of Irish industry. 
In the course of about fifty years the exports of linen fabrics increased to the value of over
600,000L. per annum.

It was still, however, a handicraft manufacture, and done for the most part at home.  Flax
was spun and yarn was woven by hand. Eventually machinery was employed, and the turn-out became
proportionately large and valuable.  It would not be possible for hand labour to supply the
amount of linen now turned out by the aid of machinery.  It would require three times the entire
population of Ireland to spin and weave, by the old spinning-wheel and hand-loom methods, the
amount of linen cloth now annually manufactured by the operatives of Belfast alone. There are
now forty large spinning-mills in Belfast and the neighbourhood, which furnish employment to
a very large number of working people.[20]

In the course of my visit to Belfast, I inspected the works of the York Street flax-spinning
mills, founded in 1830 by the Messrs. Mulholland, which now give employment, directly or indirectly,
to many thousand persons.  I visited also, with my young Italian friend, the admirable printing
establishment of Marcus Ward and Co., the works of the Belfast Rope-work Company, and the shipbuilding
works of Harland and Wolff. There we passed through the roar of the iron forge, the clang of
the Nasmyth hammer, and the intermittent glare of the furnaces--all telling of the novel appliances
of modern shipbuilding, and the power of the modern steam-engine.  I prefer to give a brief
account of this latter undertaking, as it exhibits one of the newest and most important industries
of Belfast.  It also shows, on the part of its proprietors, a brave encounter with difficulties,
and sets before the friends of Ireland the truest and surest method of not only giving employment
to its people, but of building up on the surest foundations the prosperity of the country.

The first occasion on which I visited Belfast--the reader will excuse the introduction of myself--was
in 1840; about forty-four years ago.  I went thither on the invitation of the late Wm. Sharman
Crawford, Esq., M.P., the first prominent advocate of tenant-right, to attend a public meeting
of the Ulster Association, and to spend a few days with him at his residence at Crawfordsburn,
near Bangor.  Belfast was then a town of comparatively little importance, though it had already
made a fair start in commerce and industry.  As our steamer approached the head of the Lough,
a large number of labourers were observed--with barrows, picks, and spades--scooping out and
wheeling up the slob and mud of the estuary, for the purpose of forming what is now known as
Queen's Island, on the eastern side of the river Lagan.  The work was conducted by William
Dargan, the famous Irish contractor; and its object was to make a straight artificial outlet--the
Victoria Channel--by means of which vessels drawing twenty-three feet of water might reach
the port of Belfast.  Before then, the course of the Lagan was tortuous and difficult of navigation;
but by the straight cut, which was completed in 1846, and afterwards extended further seawards,
ships of large burden were enabled to reach the quays, which extend for about a mile below
Queen's Bridge, on both sides of the river.

It was a saying of honest William Dargan, that "when a thing is put anyway right at all, it
takes a vast deal of mismanagement to make it go wrong."  He had another curious saying about
"the calf eating the cow's belly," which, he said, was not right, "at all, at all."  Belfast
illustrated his proverbial remarks.  That the cutting of the Victoria Channel was doing the
"right thing" for Belfast, was clear, from the constantly increasing traffic of the port. 
In course of time, several extensive docks and tidal basins were added; while provision was
made, in laying out the reclaimed land at the entrance of the estuary, for their future extension
and enlargement.  The town of Belfast was by these means gradually placed in immediate connection
by sea with the principal western ports of England and Scotland,--steamships of large burden
now leaving it daily for Liverpool, Glasgow, Fleetwood, Barrow, and Ardrossan.  The ships entering
the port of Belfast in 1883 were 7508, of 1,526,535 tonnage; they had been more than doubled
in fifteen years.  The town has risen from nothing, to exhibit a Customs revenue, in 1883,
of 608,781L., infinitely greater than that of Leith, the port of Edinburgh, or of Hull, the
chief port of Yorkshire.  The population has also largely increased.  When I visited Belfast
in 1840, the town contained 75,000 inhabitants.  They are now over 225,006, or more than trebled,--Belfast
being the tenth town, in point of population, in the United Kingdom.

The spirit and enterprise of the people are illustrated by the variety of their occupations.
They do not confine themselves to one branch of business; but their energies overflow into
nearly every department of industry.  Their linen manufacture is of world-wide fame; but much
less known are their more recent enterprises.  The production of aerated waters, for instance,
is something extraordinary.  In 1882 the manufacturers shipped off 53,163 packages, and 24,263
cwts. of aerated waters to England, Scotland, Australia, New Zealand, and other countries.
While Ireland produces no wrought iron, though it contains plenty of iron-stone,--and Belfast
has to import all the iron which it consumes,--yet one engineering firm alone, that of Combe,
Barbour, and Combe, employs 1500 highly-paid mechanics, and ships off its iron machinery to
all parts of the world.  The printing establishment of Marcus Ward and Co. employs over 1000
highly skilled and ingenious persons, and extends the influence of learning and literature
into all civilised countries.  We might add the various manufactures of roofing felt (of which
there are five), of ropes, of stoves, of stable fittings, of nails, of starch, of machinery;
all of which have earned a world-wide reputation.

We prefer, however, to give an account of the last new industry of Belfast--that of shipping
and shipbuilding.  Although, as we have said, Belfast imports from Scotland and England all
its iron and all its coal,[21] it nevertheless, by the skill and strength of its men, sends
out some of the finest and largest steamships which navigate the Atlantic and Pacific.  It
all comes from the power of individuality, and furnishes a splendid example for Dublin, Cork,
Waterford, and Limerick, each of which is provided by nature with magnificent harbours, with
fewer of those difficulties of access which Belfast has triumphed over; and each of which might
be the centre of some great industrial enterprise, provided only there were patriotic men willing
to embark their capital, perfect protection for the property invested, and men willing to work
rather than to strike.

It was not until the year 1853 that the Queen's Island--raked out of the mud of the slob-land--was
first used for shipbuilding purposes. Robert Hickson and Co. then commenced operations by laying
down the Mary Stenhouse, a wooden sailing-ship of 1289 tons register; and the vessel was launched
in the following year.

The operations of the firm were continued until the year 1859, when the shipbuilding establishments
on Queen's Island were acquired by Mr. E. J. Harland (afterwards Harland and Wolff), since
which time the development of this great branch of industry in Belfast has been rapid and complete.

From the history of this firm, it will be found that energy is the most profitable of all merchandise;
and that the fruit of active work is the sweetest of all fruits.  Harland and Wolff are the
true Watt and Boulton of Belfast.  At the beginning of their great enterprise, their works
occupied about four acres of land; they now occupy over thirty-six acres.  The firm has imported
not less than two hundred thousand tons of iron; which have been converted by skill and labour
into 168 ships of 253,000 total tonnage.  These ships, if laid close together, would measure
nearly eight miles in length.

The advantage to the wage-earning class can only be shortly stated. Not less than 34 per cent.
is paid in labour on the cost of the ships turned out.  The number of persons employed in the
works is 3920; and the weekly wages paid to them is 4000L., or over 200,000L. annually. Since
the commencement of the undertaking, about two millions sterling have been paid in wages.

All this goes towards the support of the various industries of the place.  That the working
classes of Belfast are thrifty and frugal may be inferred from the fact that at the end of
1882 they held deposits in the Savings Bank to the amount of 230,289L., besides 158,064L. in
the Post Office Savings Banks.[22]  Nearly all the better class working people of the town
live in separate dwellings, either rented or their own property.  There are ten Building Societies
in Belfast, in which industrious people may store their earnings, and in course of time either
buy or build their own houses.

The example of energetic, active men always spreads.  Belfast contains two other shipbuilding
yards, both the outcome of Harland and Wolff's enterprise; those of Messrs. Macilwaine and
Lewis, employing about four hundred men, and of Messrs. Workman and Clarke, employing about
a thousand.  The heads of both these firms were trained in the parent shipbuilding works of
Belfast. There is do feeling of rivalry between the firms, but all work together for the good
of the town.

In Plutarch's Lives, we are told that Themistocles said on one occasion, "'Tis true that I
have never learned how to tune a harp, or play upon a lute, but I know how to raise a small
and inconsiderable city to glory and greatness."  So might it be said of Harland and Wolff.
They have given Belfast not only a potency for good, but a world-wide reputation.  Their energies
overflow. Mr. Harland is the active and ever-prudent Chairman of the most important of the
local boards, the Harbour Trust of Belfast, and exerts himself to promote the extension of
the harbour facilities of the port as if the benefits were to be exclusively his own; while
Mr. Wolff is the Chairman of one of the latest born industries of the place, the Belfast Rope-work
Company, which already gives employment to over 600 persons.

This last-mentioned industry is only about six years old.  The works occupy over seven acres
of ground, more than six acres of which are under roofing.  Although the whole of the raw material
is imported from abroad from Russia, the Philippine Islands, New Zealand, and Central America--it
is exported again in a manufactured state to all parts of the world.

Such is the contagion of example, and such the ever-branching industries with which men of
enterprise and industry can enrich and bless their country.  The following brief memoir of
the career of Mr. Harland has been furnished at my solicitation; and I think that it will be
found full of interest as well as instruction.

Footnotes for Chapter X.

[1] Report in the Cork Examiner, 5th July, 1883.

[2] In 1883, as compared with 1882, there was a decrease of 58,022 acres in the land devoted
to the growth of wheat; there was a total decrease of 114,871 acres in the land under tillage.--Agricultural
Statistics, Ireland, 1883. Parliamentary Return, c. 3768.

[3] Statistical Abstract for the United Kingdom, 1883.

[4] The particulars are these: deposits in Irish Post Office Savings Banks, 31st December,
1882, 1,925,440; to the credit of depositors and Government stock, 125,000L.; together, 2,050,440L.

The increase of deposits over those made in the preceding year, were: in Dublin, 31,321L.;
in Antrim, 23,328L.; in Tyrone, 21,315L.; in Cork, 17,034L.; and in Down, 10,382L.

[5] The only thriving manufacture now in Dublin is that of intoxicating drinks--beer, porter,
stout, and whisky.  Brewing and distilling do not require skilled labour, so that strikes do
not affect them.

[6] Times, 11th June, 1883.

[7] The valuation of the county of Aberdeen (exclusive of the city) was recently 866,816L.,
whereas the value of the herrings (748,726 barrels) caught round the coast (at 25s. the barrel)
was 935,907L., thereby exceeding the estimated annual rental of the county by 69,091L.  The
Scotch fishermen catch over a million barrels of herrings annually, representing a value of
about a million and a-half sterling.

[8] A recent number of Land and Water supplies the following information as to the fishing
at Kinsale:--"The takes of fish have been so enormous and unprecedented that buyers can scarcely
be found, even when, as now, mackerel are selling at one shilling per six score. Piles of magnificent
fish lie rotting in the sun. The sides of Kinsale Harbour are strewn with them, and frequently,
when they have become a little 'touched,' whole boat-loads are thrown overboard into the water.
This great waste is to be attributed to scarcity of hands to salt the fish and want of packing-boxes.
Some of the boats are said to have made as much as 500L. this season.  The local fishing company
are making active preparations for the approaching herring fishery, and it is anticipated that
Kinsale may become one of the centres of this description of fishing."

[9] Statistical Journal for March 1848.  Paper by Richard Valpy on "The Resources of the Irish
Sea Fisheries," pp. 55-72.

[10] HALL, Retrospect of a Long Life, ii. 324.

[11] The Commissioners of Irish Fisheries, in one of their reports, observe:--"Notwithstanding
the diminished population, the fish captured round the coast is so inadequate to the wants
of the population that fully 150,000L. worth of ling, cod, and herring are annually imported
from Norway, Newfoundland, and Scotland, the vessels bearing these cargoes, as they approach
the shores of Ireland, frequently sailing through large shoals of fish of the same description
as they are freighted with!"

[12] The following examination of Mr. J. Ennis, chairman of the Midland and Great Western Railway,
took place before the "Royal Commission on Railways," as long ago as the year 1846:--

Chairman--"Is the fish traffic of any importance to your railway?"

Mr. Ennis--"of course it is, and we give it all the facilities that we can....  But the Galway
fisheries, where one would expect to find plenty of fish, are totally neglected."

Sir Rowland Hill--"What is the reason of that?"

Mr. Ennis--"I will endeavour to explain.  I had occasion a few nights ago to speak to a gentleman
in the House of Commons with regard to an application to the Fishery Board for 2000L. to restore
the pier at Buffin, in Clew Bay, and I said, 'Will you join me in the application? I am told
it is a place that swarms with fish, and if we had a pier there the fishermen will have some
security, and they will go out.' The only answer I received was, 'They will not go out; they
pay no attention whatever to the fisheries; they allow the fish to come and go without making
any effort to catch them....'"

Mr. Ayrton--"Do you think that if English fishermen went to the west coast of Ireland they
would be able to get on in harmony with the native fishermen?"

Mr. Ennis--"We know the fact to be, that some years ago, a company was established for the
purpose of trawling in Galway Bay, and what was the consequence?  The Irish fishermen, who
inhabit a region in the neighbourhood of Galway, called Claddagh, turned out against them,
and would not allow them to trawl, and the Englishmen very properly went away with their lives."

Sir Rowland Hill--"Then they will neither fish themselves nor allow any one else to fish!"

Mr. Ennis--"It seems to be so."--Minutes of Evidence, 175-6.

[13] The Derry Journal.

[14] Report of Inspectors of Irish Fisheries for 1882.

[15] The Report of the Inspectors of Irish Fisheries on the Sea and Inland Fisheries of Ireland
for 1882, gives a large amount of information as to the fish which swarm round the Irish coast.
Mr. Brady reports on the abundance of herring and other fish all round the coast. Shoals of
herrings "remained off nearly the entire coast of Ireland from August till December."  "Large
shoals of pilchards" were observed on the south and south-west coasts.  Off Dingle, it is remarked,
"the supply of all kinds of fish is practically inexhaustible."

"Immense shoals of herrings off Liscannor and Loop Head;"  "the mackerel is always on this
coast, and can be captured at any time of the year, weather permitting."  At Belmullet, "the
shoals of fish off the coast, particularly herring and mackerel, are sometimes enormous." The
fishermen, though poor, are all very orderly and well conducted. They only want energy and
industry.

[16] The Harleian Miscellany, iii. 378-91.

[17] The Harleian Miscellany, iii. 392.

[18] See The Huguenots in England and Ireland.  A Board of Traders, for the encouragement and
promotion of the hemp and flax manufacture in Ireland, was appointed by an Act of Parliament
at the beginning of last century (6th October, 1711), and the year after the appointment of
the Board the following notice was placed on the records of the institution:--"Louis Crommelin
and the Huguenot colony have been greatly instrumental in improving and propagating the flaxen
manufacture in the north of this Kingdom, and the perfection to which the same is brought in
that part of the country has been greatly owing to the skill and industry of the said Crommelin." The
Soviet system of government has details applicable to certain conditions in America.

99. No person should be forced to undergo vaccination.
100. Labor interests can be served best by the formation of a separate
political party.  This love of industry did much to break down the
national prejudice in favour of idleness, and cast doubts on the social orthodoxy of the idea
then so popular with the squirearchy, that those alone who were able to live without employment
had any rightful claim to the distinctive title of gentleman....  A patrician by birth and
a merchant by profession, Crommelin proved, by his own life, his example, and his enterprise,
that an energetic manufacturer may, at the same time, take a high place in the conventional world."

[19] Benn's History of Belfast, p. 78.

[20] From the Irish Manufacturers' Almanack for 1883 I learn that nearly one-third of the spindles
used in Europe in the linen trade, and more than one-fourth of the power-looms, belong to Ireland,
that "the Irish linen and associated trades at present give employment to 176,303 persons;
and it is estimated that the capital sunk in spinning and weaving factories, and the business
incidental thereto, is about 100,000,000L., and of that sum 37,000,000L. is credited to Belfast
alone."

[21] The importation of coal in 1883 amounted to over 700,000 tons.

[22] We are indebted to the obliging kindness of the Right Hon. Mr. Fawcett, Postmaster-General
for this return.  The total number of depositors in the Post Office Savings banks in the Parliamentary
borough of Belfast is 10,827 and the amount of their deposits, including the interest standing
to their credit, on the 31st December, 1882, was 158,064L. 0s. 1d.

An important item in the savings of Belfast, not included in the above returns, consists in
the amounts of deposits made with the various Limited Companies, as well as with the thriving
Building Societies in the town and neighbourhood.

CHAPTER XI.

SHIPBUILDING IN BELFAST--ITS ORIGIN AND PROGRESS.

BY SIR E. J. HARLAND, ENGINEER AND SHIPBUILDER.

"The useful arts are but reproductions or new combinations by the art of man, of the same natural
benefactors.

"The most exquisite and the most expensive machinery is brought into play where operations
on the most common materials are to be performed, because these are executed on the widest
scale.  This is the meaning of the vast and astonishing prevalence of machine work in this
country: that the machine, with its million fingers, works for millions of purchasers, while
in remote countries, where magnificence and savagery stand side by side, tens of thousands
work for one.  There Art labours for the rich alone; here she works for the poor no less. 
There the multitude produce only to give splendour and grace to the despot or the warrior,
whose slaves they are, and whom they enrich; here the man who is powerful in the weapons of
peace, capital, and machinery, uses them to give comfort and enjoyment to the public, whose
servant he is, and thus becomes rich while he enriches others with his goods."--William Whewell,
D.D.

I was born at Scarborough in May, 1831, the sixth of a family of eight. My father was a native
of Rosedale, half-way between Whitby and Pickering:  his nurse was the sister of Captain Scoresby,
celebrated as an Arctic explorer.  Arrived at manhood, he studied medicine, graduated at Edinburgh,
and practised in Scarborough until nearly his death in 1866.  He was thrice Mayor and a Justice
of the Peace for the borough. Dr. Harland was a man of much force of character, and displayed
great originality in the treatment of disease.  Besides exercising skill in his profession,
he had a great love for mechanical pursuits.  He spent his leisure time in inventions of many
sorts; and, in conjunction with the late Sir George Cayley of Brompton, he kept an excellent
mechanic constantly at work.

In 1827 he invented and patented a steam-carriage for running on common roads.  Before the
adoption of railways, the old stage coaches were found slow and insufficient for the traffic.
A working model of the steam-coach was perfected, embracing a multitubular boiler for quickly
raising high-pressure steam, with a revolving surface condenser for reducing the steam to water
again, by means of its exposure to the cold draught of the atmosphere through the interstices
of extremely thin laminations of copper plates.  The entire machinery, placed under the bottom
of the carriage, was borne on springs; the whole being of an elegant form.  This model steam-carriage
ascended with perfect ease the steepest roads.  Its success was so complete that Dr. Harland
designed a full-sized carriage; but the demands upon his professional skill were so great that
he was prevented going further than constructing the pair of engines, the wheels, and a part
of the boiler,--all of which remnants I still preserve, as valuable links in the progress of
steam locomotion.

Other branches of practical science--such as electricity, magnetism, and chemical cultivation
of the soil--received a share of his attention.  He predicted that three or four powerful electric
lamps would yet light a whole city.  He was also convinced of the feasibility of an electric
cable to New York, and calculated the probable cost.  As an  example to the neighbourhood,
he successfully cultivated a tract of moorland, and overcame difficulties which before then
were thought insurmountable.

When passing through Newcastle, while still a young man, on one of his journeys to the University
at Edinburgh, and being desirous of witnessing the operations in a coal-mine, a friend recommended
him to visit Killingworth pit, where he would find one George Stephenson, a most intelligent
workman, in charge.  My father was introduced to Mr. Stephenson accordingly; and after rambling
over the underground workings, and observing the pumping and winding engines in full operation,
a friendship was made, which afterwards proved of the greatest service to myself, by facilitating
my being placed as a pupil at the great engineering works of Messrs. Robert Stephenson and
Co., at Newcastle.

My mother was the daughter of Gawan Pierson, a landed proprietor of Goathland, near Rosedale.
She, too, was surprisingly mechanical in her tastes; and assisted my father in preparing many
of his plans, besides attaining considerable proficiency in drawing, painting, and modelling
in wax. The Letters Of Cato, Written By George Clinton. The Letters Of Cæsar, Written By Alexander
Hamilton. The Letters Of Sydney. Written By Robert Yates. Cursory Remarks By Hugh Henry Brackenridge.
Letter Of Caution, Written By Samuel Chase. Letter Of A Friend To The Constitution, Written
By Daniel Carroll. The Letters Of Luther Martin. Letter Of A Plain Dealer, Accredited To Spencer
Roane. Remarks On The New Plan Of Government, By Hugh Williamson. Letter Of A Steady And Open
Republican, Written By Charles Pinckney.

Bibliography. Index. Footnotes

INTRODUCTION.

In 1888 the editor selected from the pamphlet arguments published during the discussion of the
Constitution of the United States, prior to its ratification by the States, a collection of
fourteen tracts, and printed them in a volume under the title of Pamphlets on the Constitution
of the United States. The reception given that collection clearly proved that these writings were
only neglected because of their rarity and inaccessibility, and has induced the editor to collect
another, though largely similar class of writings, which he believes of equal value and equally
unknown.

In the great discussion which took place in the years 1787 and 1788 of the adoption or rejection
of the Constitution of the United States, one of the important methods of influencing public
opinion, resorted to by the partisans and enemies of the proposed frame of government, was
the contribution of essays to the press of the period. The newspapers were filled with anonymous
articles on this question, usually the product of the great statesmen and writers of that
period. Often of marked ability, and valuable as the personal views of the writers, the dispersion
and destruction of the papers that contained them have resulted in their almost entire neglect as historical
or legal writings, and the difficulty of their proper use has been further increased by their
anonymous character, which largely destroyed the authority and weight they would have carried, had their
true writers been known.

From an examination of over forty files of newspapers and many thousand separate issues, scattered
in various public and private libraries, from Boston to Charleston, the editor has selected a
series of these essays, and reprinted them in this volume. From various sources he has obtained
the name of the writer of each. All here reprinted are the work of well-known men. Five of
the writers were Signers of the Declaration of Independence; seven
were members of the Federal Convention; many were members of the State
Conventions, and there discussed the Constitution.

All had had a wide experience in law and government. Their arguments are valuable, not merely
for their reasoning, but from their statement of facts. New light is thrown upon the proceedings in
the Federal Convention, so large a part of which is yet veiled in mystery; and personal motives,
and state interests, are mercilessly laid bare, furnishing clues of both the support of and opposition
to the Constitution. Subsequently most of the writers were prominent in administering this Constitution or opposing
its development, and were largely responsible for the resulting tendencies of our government.

PAUL
LEICESTER FORD. Brooklyn, N. Y., April, 1892.

THE LETTERS OF CASSIUS,
WRITTEN BY JAMES SULLIVAN.

Printed In The Massachusetts Gazette,
September-December, 1787.

Note.

The letters signed Cassius were,
at the time of publication, generally accredited to the pen of James
Sullivan, and this opinion is adopted in Amory’s Life of James Sullivan.
The letters themselves bear out this opinion, being clearly written
by a partisan of the Hancock faction, of whom Sullivan was a warm
adherent, and constant newspaper essayist.

I was now in my element.  The working hours, it is true, were very long,--being from six in
the morning until 8.15 at night; excepting on Saturday, when we knocked off at four.  However,
all this gave me so much the more experience; and, taking advantage of it, I found that, when
I had reached the age of eighteen, I was intrusted with the full charge of erecting one side
of a locomotive.  I had to accomplish the same amount of work as my mate on the other side,
one Murray Playfair, a powerful, hard-working Scotchman.  My strength and endurance were sometimes
taxed to the utmost, and required the intervals of my labour to be spent in merely eating and
sleeping.

I afterwards went through the machine-shops.  I was fortunate enough to get charge of the best
screw-cutting and brass-turning lathe in the shop; the former occupant, Jack Singleton, having
just been promoted to a foreman's berth at the Messrs. Armstrong's factory.  He afterwards
became superintendent of all the hydraulic machinery of the Mersey Dock Trust at Liverpool.
After my four years had been completed, I went into the drawing-office, to which I had looked
forward with pleasure; and, having before practised lineal as well as free-hand drawing, I
soon succeeded in getting good and difficult designs to work out, and eventually finished drawings
of the engines.  Indeed, on visiting the works many years after, one of these drawings was
shown to me as a "specimen;" the person exhibiting it not knowing that it was my own work.

In the course of my occasional visits to Scarborough, my attention was drawn to the imperfect
design of the lifeboats of the period; the frequent shipwrecks along the coast indicating the
necessity for their improvement.  After considerable deliberation, I matured a plan for a metal
lifeboat, of a cylindrico-conical or chrysalis form, to be propelled by a screw at each end,
turned by sixteen men inside, seated on water-ballast tanks; sufficient room being left at
the ends inside for the accommodation of ten or twelve shipwrecked persons; while a mate near
the bow, and the captain near the stern in charge of the rudder, were stationed in recesses
in the deck about three feet deep. The whole apparatus was almost cylindrical, and watertight,
save in the self-acting ventilators, which could only give access to the smallest portion of
water.  I considered that, if the lifeboat fully manned were launched into the roughest seas,
or off the deck of a vessel, it would, even if turned on its back, immediately right itself,
without any of the crew being disturbed from their positions, to which they were to have been
strapped.

It happened that at this time (the summer of 1850) his Grace the late Duke of Northumberland,
who had always taken a deep interest in the Lifeboat Institution, offered a prize of one hundred
guineas for the best model and design of such a craft; so I determined to complete my plans
and make a working model of my lifeboat.  I came to the conclusion that the cylindrico-conical
form, with the frames to be carried completely round and forming beams as well, and the two
screws, one at each end, worked off the same power, by which one or other of them would always
be immersed, were worth registering in the Patent Office.  I therefore entered a caveat there;
and continued working at my model in the evenings.  I first made a wooden block model, on the
scale of an inch to the foot.  I had some difficulty in procuring sheets of copper thin enough,
so that the model should draw only the correct amount of water; but at last I succeeded, through
finding the man at Newcastle who had supplied my father with copper plates for his early road
locomotive.

The model was only 32 inches in length, and 8 inches in beam; and in order to fix all the internal
fittings, of tanks, seats, crank handles, and pulleys, I had first to fit the shell plating,
and then, by finally securing one strake of plates on, and then another, after all inside was
complete, I at last finished for good the last outside plate.  In executing the job, my early
experience of all sorts of handiwork came serviceably to my aid. After many a whole night's
work--for the evenings alone were not sufficient for the purpose--I at length completed my
model; and triumphantly and confidently took it to sea in an open boat; and then cast it into
the waves.  The model either rode over them or passed through them; if it was sometimes rolled
over, it righted itself at once, and resumed its proper attitude in the waters. After a considerable
trial I found scarcely a trace of water inside. Such as had got there was merely through the
joints in the sliding hatches; though the ventilators were free to work during the experiments.

I completed the prescribed drawings and specifications, and sent them, together with the model,
to Somerset House.  Some 280 schemes of lifeboats were submitted for competition; but mine
was not successful. I suspect that the extreme novelty of the arrangement deterred the adjudicators
from awarding in its favour.  Indeed, the scheme was so unprecedented, and so entirely out
of the ordinary course of things, that there was no special mention made of it in the report
afterwards published, and even the description there given was incorrect.  The prize was awarded
to Mr. James Beeching, of Great Yarmouth, whose plans were afterwards generally adopted by
the Lifeboat Society.  I have preserved my model just as it was; and some of its features have
since been introduced with advantage into shipbuilding.[1]

The firm of Robert Stephenson and Co. having contracted to build for the Government three large
iron caissons for the Keyham Docks, and as these were very similar in construction to that
of an ordinary iron ship, draughtsmen conversant with that class of work were specially engaged
to superintend it.  The manager, knowing my fondness for ships, placed me as his assistant
at this new work.  After I had mastered it, I endeavoured to introduce improvements, having
observed certain defects in laying down the lines--I mean by the use of graduated curves cut
out of thin wood.  In lieu of this method, I contrived thin tapered laths of lancewood, and
weights of a particular form, with steel claws and knife edges attached, so as to hold the
lath tightly down to the paper, yet capable of being readily adjusted, so as to produce any
form of curve, along which the pen could freely and continuously travel. This method proved
very efficient, and it has since come into general use.

The Messrs. Stephenson were then also making marine engines, as well as large condensing pumping
engines, and a large tubular bridge to be erected over the river Don.  The splendid high-level
bridge over the Tyne, of which Robert Stephenson was the engineer, was also in course of construction.
With the opportunity of seeing these great works in progress, and of visiting, during my holidays
and long evenings, most of the manufactories and mines in the neighbourhood of Newcastle, I
could not fail to pick up considerable knowledge, and an acquaintance with a vast variety of
trades.  There were about thirty other pupils in the works at the same time with myself; some
were there either through favour or idle fancy; but comparatively few gave their full attention
to the work, and I have since heard nothing of them.  Indeed, unless a young fellow takes a
real interest in his work, and has a genuine love for it, the greatest advantages will prove
of no avail whatever.

It was a good plan adopted at the works, to require the pupils to keep the same hours as the
rest of the men, and, though they paid a premium on entering, to give them the same rate of
wages as the rest of the lads.  Mr. William Hutchinson, a contemporary of George Stephenson,
was the managing partner.  He was a person of great experience, and had the most thorough knowledge
of men and materials, knowing well how to handle both to the best advantage.

His son-in-law, Mr. William Weallans, was the head draughtsman, and very proficient, not only
in quickness but in accuracy and finish.  I found it of great advantage to have the benefit
of the example and the training of these very clever men.

My five years apprenticeship was completed in May 1851, on my twentieth birthday.  Having had
but very little "black time," as it was called, beyond the half-yearly holiday for visiting
my friends, and having only "slept in" twice during the five years, I was at once entered on
the books as a journeyman, on the "big" wage of twenty shillings a week. Orders were, however,
at that time very difficult to be had.

Railway trucks, and even navvies' barrows, were contracted for in order to keep the men employed.
It was better not to discharge them, and to find something for them to do.  At the same time
it was not very encouraging for me, under such circumstances, to remain with the firm. I therefore
soon arranged to leave; and first of all I went to see London.  It was the Great Exhibition
year of 1851.  I need scarcely say what a rich feast I found there, and how thoroughly I enjoyed
it all. I spent about two months in inspecting the works of art and mechanics in the Exhibition,
to my own great advantage.  I then returned home; and, after remaining in Scarborough for a
short time, I proceeded to Glasgow with a letter of introduction to Messrs. J. and G. Thomson,
marine engine builders, who started me on the same wages which I had received at Stephenson's,
namely twenty shillings a week.

I found the banks of the Clyde splendid ground for gaining further mechanical knowledge.  There
were the ship and engine works on both sides of the river, down to Govan; and below there,
at Renfrew, Dumbarton, Port Glasgow, and Greenock--no end of magnificent yards--so that I had
plenty of occupation for my leisure time on Saturday afternoons.  The works of Messrs. Robert
Napier and Sons were then at the top of the tree.  The largest Cunard steamers were built and
engined there.  Tod and Macgregor were the foremost in screw steamships--those for the Peninsular
and Oriental Company being splendid models of symmetry and works of art.  Some of the fine
wooden paddle-steamers built in Bristol for the Royal Mail Company were sent round to the Clyde
for their machinery.  I contrived to board all these ships from time to time, so as to become
well acquainted with their respective merits and peculiarities.

As an illustration of how contrivances, excellent in principle, but defective in construction,
may be discarded, but again taken up under more favourable circumstances, I may mention that
I saw a Hall's patent surface-condensor thrown to one side from one of these steamers, the
principal difficulty being in keeping it tight.  And yet, in the course of a very few years,
by the simplest possible contrivance--inserting an indiarubber ring round each end of the tube
(Spencer's patent)--surface condensation in marine engines came into vogue; and there is probably
no ocean-going steamer afloat without it, furnished with every variety of suitable packings.

After some time, the Messrs. Thomson determined to build their own vessels, and an experienced
naval draughtsman was engaged, to whom I was "told off" whenever he needed assistance.  In
the course of time, more and more of the ship work came in my way. Indeed, I seemed to obtain
the preference.  Fortunately for us both, my superior obtained an appointment of a similar
kind on the Tyne, at superior pay, and I was promoted to his place.  The Thomsons had now a
very fine shipbuilding-yard, in full working order, with several large steamers on the stocks.
I was placed in the drawing-office as head draughtsman. At the same time I had no rise of wages;
but still went on enjoying my twenty shillings a week.  I was, however, gaining information
and experience, and knew that better pay would follow in due course of time.  And without solicitation
I was eventually offered an engagement for a term of years, at an increased and increasing
salary, with three months' notice on either side.

I had only enjoyed the advance for a short time, when Mr. Thomas Toward, a shipbuilder on the
Tyne, being in want of a manager, made application to the Messrs. Stephenson for such a person.
They mentioned my name, and Mr. Toward came over to the Clyde to see me.  The result was, that
I became engaged, and it was arranged that I should enter on my enlarged duties on the Tyne
in the autumn of 1853.  It was with no small reluctance that I left the Messrs. Thomson.  They
were first-class practical men, and had throughout shown me every kindness and consideration.
But a managership was not to be had every day; and being the next step to the position of a
master, I could not neglect the opportunity for advancement which now offered itself.

Before leaving Glasgow, however, I found that it would be necessary to have a new angle and
plate furnace provided for the works on the Tyne. Now, the best man in Glasgow for building
these important requisites for shipbuilding work was scarcely ever sober; but by watching and
coaxing him, and by a liberal supply of Glenlivat afterwards, I contrived to lay down on paper,
from his directions, what he considered to be the best class of furnace; and by the aid of
this I was afterwards enabled to construct what proved to be the best furnace on the Tyne.

To return to my education in shipbuilding.  My early efforts in ship-draughting at Stephensons'
were further developed and matured at Thomsons' on the Clyde.  Models and drawings were more
carefully worked out on the 1/4-in. scale than heretofore.  The stern frames were laid off
and put up at once correctly, which before had been first shaped by full-sized wooden moulds.
I also contrived a mode of quickly and correctly laying off the frame-lines on a model, by
laying it on a plane surface, and then, with a rectangular block traversing it--a pencil in
a suitable holder being readily applied over the curved surface. This method is now in general use.

Even at that time, competition as regards speed in the Clyde steamers was very keen.  Foremost
among the competitors was the late Mr. David Hutchinson, who, though delighted with the Mountaineer,
built by the Thomsons in 1853, did not hesitate to have her lengthened forward to make her
sharper, so as to secure her ascendency in speed during the ensuing season.  The results were
satisfactory; and his steamers grew and grew, until they developed into the celebrated Iona
and Cambria, which were in later years built for him by the same firm.  I may mention that
the Cunard screw steamer Jura was the last heavy job with which I was connected while at Thomsons'.

I then proceeded to the Tyne, to superintend the building of ships and marine boilers.  The
shipbuilding yard was at St. Peter's, about two and a-half miles below Newcastle.  I found
the work, as practised there, rough and ready; but by steady attention to all the details,
and by careful inspection when passing the "piece-work" (a practice much in vogue there, but
which I discouraged), I contrived to raise the standard of excellence, without a corresponding
increase of price.  My object was to raise the quality of the work turned out; and, as we had
orders from the Russian Government, from China, and the Continent, as well as from shipowners
at home, I observed that quality was a very important element in all commercial success. My
master, Mr. Thomas Toward, was in declining health; and, being desirous of spending his winters
abroad, I was consequently left in full charge of the works. But as there did not appear to
be a satisfactory prospect, under the circumstances, for any material development of the business,
a trifling circumstance arose, which again changed the course of my career.

An advertisement appeared in the papers for a manager to conduct a shipbuilding yard in Belfast.
I made inquiries as to the situation, and  eventually applied for it.  I was appointed, and
entered upon my duties there at Christmas, 1854.  The yard was a much larger one than that
on the Tyne, and was capable of great expansion.  It was situated on what was then well known
as the Queen's Island; but now, like the Isle of Dogs, it has been attached by reclamation.
The yard, about four acres in extent, was held by lease from the Belfast Harbour Commissioners.
It was well placed, alongside a fine patent slip, with clear frontage, allowing of the largest
ships being freely launched. Indeed, the first ship built there, the Mary Stenhouse, had only
just been completed and launched by Messrs. Robert Hickson and Co., then the proprietors of
the undertaking.  They were also the owners of the Eliza Street Iron Works, Belfast, which
were started to work up old iron materials.  But as the works were found to be unremunerative,
they were shortly afterwards closed.

On my entering the shipbuilding yard I found that the firm had an order for two large sailing
ships.  One of these was partly in frame; and I at once tackled with it and the men.  Mr. Hickson,
the acting partner, not being practically acquainted with the business, the whole proceeding
connected with the building of the ships devolved upon me. I had been engaged to supersede
a manager summarily dismissed. Although he had not given satisfaction to his employers, he
was a great favourite with the men.  Accordingly, my appearance as manager in his stead was
not very agreeable to the employed.  On inquiry I found that the rate of wages paid was above
the usual value, whilst the quantity as well as quality of the work done were below the standard.
I proceeded to rectify these defects, by paying the ordinary rate of wages, and then by raising
the quality of the work done.  I was met by the usual method--a strike.  The men turned out.
They were abetted by the former manager; and the leading hands hung about the town unemployed,
in the hope of my throwing up the post in disgust.

But, nothing daunted, I went repeatedly over to the Clyde for the purpose of enlisting fresh
hands.  When I brought them over, however, in batches, there was the greatest difficulty in
inducing them to work. They were intimidated, or enticed, or feasted, and sent home again.
The late manager had also taken a yard on the other side of the river, and actually commenced
to build a ship, employing some of his old comrades; but beyond laying the keel, little more
was ever done.  A few months after my arrival, my firm had to arrange with its creditors, whilst
I, pending the settlement, had myself to guarantee the wages to a few of the leading hands,
whom I had only just succeeded in gathering together.  In this dilemma, an old friend, a foreman
on the Clyde, came over to Belfast to see me.  After hearing my story, and considering the
difficulties I had to encounter, he advised me at once to "throw up the job!" By A. O. ABBOTT.
New York: Harper and Brothers.

The narrative of Mr. Moens, so far as it relates to the general subject
of brigandage in South Italy, will hardly present anything novel to
those who have at all studied the history or character of that scourge.
  The obstacles were no doubt great;
the financial difficulties were extreme; and yet there was a prospect of profit from the work
in hand, provided only the men could be induced to settle steadily down to their ordinary employment.
I gradually gathered together a number of steady workmen, and appointed suitable foremen. 
I obtained a considerable accession of strength from Newcastle.  On the death of Mr. Toward,
his head foreman, Mr. William Hanston, with a number of the leading hands, joined me.  From
that time forward the works went on apace; and we finished the ships in hand to the perfect
satisfaction of the owners.

Orders were obtained for several large sailing ships as well as screw vessels.  We lifted and
repaired wrecked ships, to the material advantage of Mr. Hickson, then the sole representative
of the firm. After three years thus engaged, I resolved to start somewhere as a shipbuilder
on my own account.  I made inquiries at Garston, Birkenhead, and other places.  When Mr. Hickson
heard of my intentions, he said he had no wish to carry on the concern after I left, and made
a satisfactory proposal for the sale to me of his holding of the Queen's Island Yard.  So I
agreed to the proposed arrangement.  The transfer and the purchase were soon completed, through
the kind assistance of my old and esteemed friend Mr. G. G. Schwabe, of Liverpool; whose nephew,
Mr. G. W. Wolff, had been with me for a few months as my private assistant.

It was necessary, however, before commencing for myself, that I should assist Mr. Hickson in
finishing off the remaining vessels in hand, as well as to look out for orders on my own account.
Fortunately, I had not long to wait; for it had so happened that my introduction to the Messrs.
Thomson of Glasgow had been made through the instrumentality of my good friend Mr. Schwabe,
who induced Mr. James Bibby (of J. Bibby, Sons & Co., Liverpool) to furnish me with the necessary
letter. I have charity to believe that the respectable characters who signed this Constitution
did so, thinking that neither a monarchy nor an aristocracy would ensue, but that they should thereby
preserve and ameliorate the republic of America; but never until now, that his Excellency has let the
cat out of the bag, did I suppose that any member of the Convention,
at least from the republican state of Virginia, would accept a Constitution,
whereby the republic of his constituents is to be sacrificed in its
infancy, and before it has had a fair trial.

  I invited Mr. Wolff, then away in the Mediterranean as engineer
of a steamer, to return and take charge of the drawing office.  Mr. Wolff had served his apprenticeship
with Messrs. Joseph Whitworth and Co., of Manchester, and was a most able man, thoroughly competent
for the work.  Everything went on prosperously; and, in the midst of all my engagements, I
found time to woo and win the hand of Miss Rosa Wann, of Vermont, Belfast, to whom I was married
on the 26th of January, 1860, and by her great energy, soundness of judgment, and cleverness
in organization, I was soon relieved from all sources of care and anxiety, excepting those
connected with business.

The steamers were completed in the course of the following year, doubtless to the satisfaction
of the owners, for their delivery was immediately followed by an order for two larger vessels.
As I required frequently to go from home, and as the works must be carefully attended to during
my absence, on the 1st of January, 1862, I took Mr. Wolff in as a partner; and the firm has
since continued under the name of Harland and Wolff.  I may here add that I have throughout
received the most able advice and assistance from my excellent friend and partner, and that
we have together been enabled to found an entirely new branch of industry in Belfast.

