    We, peasants assembled in Congress, we, too, have been the object
    of violence and outrages, unheard of even under the Czarist
    régime. Red Guards and sailors, armed, invaded our premises. We
    were searched in the rudest manner. Our goods and the provisions
    which we had brought from home were stolen. Several of our
    comrade-delegates and all the members of the Committee were
    arrested and taken to Peter and Paul Fortress. We ourselves were,
    late at night, put out of doors in a city which we did not know,
    deprived of shelter under which to sleep. All that, to oblige us
    either to go to Smolny, where the Bolshevist government called
    another Congress, or to return to our homes without having
    attained any result. But violence could not stop us; secretly, as
    in the time of Czarist autocracy, we found a place to assemble and
    to continue our work.

    In making known these facts to the country and the numerous
    millions of the peasant population, we call upon them to
    stigmatize the revolting policy practised by the Bolshevik
    government with regard to all those who are not in accord with it.
    Returned to our villages, dispersed in every corner of immense
    Russia, we shall use all our powers to make known to the mass of
    peasants and to the entire country the truth concerning this
    government of violence; to make known in every corner of the
    fatherland that the actual government, which has the hardihood to
    call itself "Government of the Workmen and Peasants," in reality
    shoots down workmen and peasants and shamelessly scoffs at the
    country. We shall use all our strength to induce the population of
    peasant workers to demand an account from this government of
    violence, as well as from their prodigal children, their sons and
    brothers, who in the army and navy give aid to these autocrats in
    the commission of violence.

    In the name of millions of peasants, by whom we were delegated, we
    demand that they no longer obstruct the work of the Constituent
    Assembly. We were not allowed to finish the work for which we had
    come; at home we shall continue this work. We shall employ all our
    strength to effect, as soon as possible, the convocation of a new
    National Congress of Peasants' Delegates united on the principle
    of the defense of the Constituante, and that in a place where we
    need not fear a new dissolution. Lately we fought against
    autocracy and Czarist violence; we shall fight with no less energy
    against the new autocrats who practise violence, whoever they may
    be, and whatever may be the shibboleths by which they cover their
    criminal acts. We shall fight for the Constituent Assembly,
    because it is in that alone that we see the salvation of our
    country, that of the Revolution, and that of Land and Liberty.

    Charged by our constituents to defend the Constituent Assembly, we
    cannot participate in a Congress called by those who have
    dissolved it; who have profaned the idea which to the people is
    something sacred; who have shot down the defenders of true
    democracy; who have shed the sacred blood of our Logvinov, member
    of the Executive Committee of peasant deputies, who on the 5th of
    January was killed by an explosive bullet during a peaceful
    manifestation, bearing the flag "Land and Liberty."
    Comrade-peasants who have come by chance to this Congress declare
    to these violators that the only Executive Committee that upholds
    the idea of the defense of the Constituante forms a center around
    which are grouped all the peasant workers. We call the entire mass
    of peasants to the work that is common to all--the fight for "Land
    and Liberty," for the true government of the people. "We all come
    from the people, children of the same family of workers," and we
    all have to follow a route that leads to happiness and liberty.
    Now this road, which leads to "Land and Liberty," goes through the
    Constituent Assembly alone. The Constituent Assembly was
    dissolved, but it was chosen by the entire people, and it ought to
    live.

    Long live the Constituent Assembly!
    Down with violence and tyranny!
    All power to the people, through the agency of the
    Constituent Assembly!

    [Signed] The Third National Congress of Soviets of Peasant
    Delegates, United on the Principle of the Defense of the
    Constituent Assembly.

PROCÈS-VERBAL OF THE SESSION OF THE III NATIONAL CONGRESS OF SOVIETS OF PEASANTS' DELEGATES,
UNITED ON THE PRINCIPLE OF THE DEFENSE OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY

The Provisional Executive Committee of Soviets of Peasants' Delegates nominated by the fraction
of the Second National Congress of these Soviets, which, to the number of 359 delegates, was
organized on the basis of the principle of the defense of the Constituent Assembly, had addressed
to all the Soviets an appeal inviting those who believe in the defense of the Constituante
to send representatives to the Third Congress, fixed by the Committee for the 8th of January,
and destined to offset the Congress called for the 12th of January by the Committee of that
fraction of the Congress which, to the number of 314 votes, took sides against the power of
the Constituent Assembly and joined the Bolsheviki.

The Peasants' Congress, meeting by districts and by governments, as well as the local executive
committees of Soviets which have chosen us, knew well to which Congress they delegated us and
had given us precise mandates, expressing their confidence in the Constituent Assembly and
their blame of the Soviets and the Bolshevik organs that impede the work of the Constituante
and call the peasants to the Congress of January 12th. These congresses and these committees
have charged us to use all our efforts to defend the Constituent Assembly, binding themselves,
on their part, in case our efforts were insufficient, to rise in a body for its defense.

By reason of the disorganization of postal and telegraphic communications, and because in different
localities the calls of the Committee were held up by the Bolshevist organizations, the instructions
concerning the Congress fixed for the 8th of January were not received in many provinces until
after considerable delay.

Some minutes before the opening of the Conference, which was to take place on the premises
of the Committee (11 Kirillovskaia Street), where the delegates on hand had lodged, there arrived
a detachment of sailors and Red Guards armed with guns and bombs, who surrounded the house,
guarding all the entrances, and occupied all the apartments. The Executive Committee, performing
its duty toward the peasant workers, which duty was to hold their flag with a firm hand, not
fearing any violence, and not allowing themselves to be intimidated by the bayonets and the
bombs of the enemies of the peasant workers, opened the session at the hour indicated.

