"Sir Knight, since that is your quality," said Edward, "we cannot strive with you in loftiness
of language; but I pray you in fair courtesy, while you honour my father's house with your
presence, to spare us such vile comparisons."

"Peace, good villagio," said the knight, gracefully waving his hand, "I prithee peace, kind
rustic; and you, my guide, whom I may scarce call honest, let me prevail upon you to imitate
the laudable taciturnity of that honest yeoman, who sits as mute as a mill-post, and of that
comely damsel, who seems as with her ears she drank in what she did not altogether comprehend,
even as a palfrey listening to a lute, whereof, howsoever, he knoweth not the gamut."

"Marvellous fine words," at length said Dame Glendinning, who began to be tired of sitting
so long silent, "marvellous fine words, neighbour Happer, are they not?"

"Brave words--very brave words--very exceeding pyet words," answered the Miller; "nevertheless,
to speak my mind, a lippy of bran were worth a bushel of them."

"I think so too, under his worship's favour," answered Christie of the Clinthill. The specialized, interdependent
structure of civilization with its city control of the hinterland, its products and inhabitants,
enabled the city-centered oligarchy to accumulate and concentrate wealth and monopolize power,
to skim the cream from the available milk, monopolize the cream, distribute the skimmed milk judiciously
and thus perpetuate its ascendancy through generations and centuries. During periods of expansion
civilized communities develop a dynamism which maintains their ascendancy.


"And obtained no mercy at thy hand, I dare be sworn," said the knight, who deigned not to speak
Euphuism excepting to the fair sex.

"By my troggs," replied Christie, "I would have thrust my lance down his throat, but just then
they flung open that accursed postern-gate, and forth pricked old Hunsdon, and Henry Carey,
and as many fellows at their heels as turned the chase northward again. So I e'en pricked Bayard
with the spur, and went off with the rest; for a man should ride when he may not wrestle, as
they say in Tynedale."

"Trust me," said the knight, again turning to Mary Avenel, "if I do not pity you, lady, who,
being of noble blood, are thus in a manner compelled to abide in the cottage of the ignorant,
like the precious stone in the head of the toad, or like a precious garland on the brow of
an ass.--But soft, what gallant have we here, whose garb savoureth more of the rustic than
doth his demeanour, and whose looks seem more lofty than his habit; even as--"

"I pray you, Sir Knight," said Mary, "to spare your courtly similitudes for refined ears, and
give me leave to name unto you my foster-brother, Halbert Glendinning."

"The son of the good dame of the cottage, as I opine," answered the English knight; "for by
some such name did my guide discriminate the mistress of this mansion, which you, madam, enrich
with your presence.--And yet, touching this juvenal, he hath that about him which belongeth
to higher birth, for all are not black who dig coals--"

"Nor all white who are millers," said honest Happer, glad to get in a word, as they say, edgeways.

Halbert, who had sustained the glance of the Englishman with some impatience, and knew not
what to make of his manner and language, replied with some asperity, "Sir Knight, we have in
this land of Scotland an ancient saying, 'Scorn not the bush that bields you'--you are a guest
of my father's house to shelter you from danger, if I am rightly informed by the domestics.
Scoff not its homeliness, nor that of its inmates--ye might long have abidden at the court
of England, ere we had sought your favour, or cumbered you with our society. Since your fate
has sent you hither amongst us, be contented with such fare and such converse as we can afford
you, and scorn us not for our kindness; for the Scots wear short patience and long daggers."

All eyes were turned on Halbert while he was thus speaking, and there was a general feeling
that his countenance had an expression of intelligence, and his person an air of dignity, which
they had never before observed.  Whether it were that the wonderful Being with whom he had
so lately held communication, had bestowed on him a grace and dignity of look and bearing which
he had not before, or whether the being conversant in high matters, and called to a destiny
beyond that of other men, had a natural effect in giving becoming confidence to his language
and manner, we pretend not to determine. But it was evident to all, that, from this day, young
Halbert was an altered man; that he acted with the steadiness, promptitude, and determination,
which belonged to riper years, and bore himself with a manner which appertained to higher rank.

The knight took the rebuke with good humour. "By my mine honour," he said, "thou hast reason
on thy side, good juvenal--nevertheless, I spoke not as in ridicule of the roof which relieves
me, but rather in your own praise, to whom, if this roof be native, thou mayst nevertheless
rise from its lowliness; even as the lark, which maketh its humble nest in the furrow, ascendeth
towards the sun, as well as the eagle which buildeth her eyry in the cliff."

This high-flown discourse was interrupted by Dame Glendinning, who, with all the busy anxiety
of a mother, was loading her son's trencher with food, and dinning in his ear her reproaches
on account of his prolonged absence. "And see," she said, "that you do not one day get such
a sight while you are walking about among the haunts of them that are not of our flesh and
bone, as befell Mungo Murray when he slept on the greensward ring of the Auld Kirkhill at sunset,
and wakened at daybreak in the wild hills of Breadalbane. And see that, when you are looking
for deer, the red stag does not gall you as he did Diccon Thorburn, who never overcast the
wound that he took from a buck's horn. And see, when you go swaggering about with a long broadsword
by your side, whilk it becomes no peaceful man to do, that you dinna meet with them that have
broadsword and lance both--there are enow of rank riders in this land, that neither fear God
nor regard man."

Here her eye "in a fine frenzy rolling," fell full upon that of Christie of the Clinthill,
and at once her fears for having given offence interrupted the current of maternal rebuke,
which, like rebuke matrimonial, may be often better meant than timed. There was something of
sly and watchful significance in Christie's eye, an eye gray, keen, fierce, yet wily, formed
to express at once cunning, and malice, which made the dame instantly conjecture she had said
too much, while she saw in imagination her twelve goodly cows go lowing down the glen in a
moonlight night, with half a score of Border spearsmen at their heels.

Her voice, therefore, sunk from the elevated tone of maternal authority into a whimpering apologetic
sort of strain, and she proceeded to say, "It is no that I have ony ill thoughts of the Border
riders, for Tibb Tacket there has often heard me say that I thought spear and bridle as natural
to a Borderman as a pen to a priest, or a feather-fan to a lady; and--have you not heard me
say it, Tibb?"

Tibb showed something less than her expected alacrity in attesting her mistress's deep respect
for the freebooters of the southland hills; but, thus conjured, did at length reply, "Hout
ay, mistress, I'se warrant I have heard you say something like that."

"Mother!" said Halbert, in a firm and commanding tone of voice, "what or whom is it that you
fear under my father's roof?--I well hope that it harbours not a guest in whose presence you
are afraid to say your pleasure to me or my brother? I am sorry I have been detained so late,
being ignorant of the fair company which I should encounter on my return.--I pray you let this
excuse suffice: and what satisfies you, will, I trust, be nothing less than acceptable to your
guests."

An answer calculated so jistly betwixt the submission due to his parent, and the natural feeling
of dignity in one who was by birth master of the mansion, excited universal satisfaction. And
as Elspeth herself confessed to Tibb on the same evening, "She did not think it had been in
the callant.  Till that night, he took pets and passions if he was spoke to, and lap through
the house like a four-year-auld at the least word of advice that was minted at him, but now
he spoke as grave and as douce as the Lord Abbot himself.  She kendna," she said, "what might
be the upshot of it, but it was like he was a wonderfu' callant even now."

The party then separated, the young men retiring to their apartments, the elder to their household
cares. Atlantic alliance countries voted against the admission of People's China to the United
Nations during the Dulles Era. The stalemated outcome of the Korean War (1950-3) called Washington
anti-socialist policies into serious question. The stupidities, mendacities and wanton cruelties
of the United States' undeclared Vietnam War, even before the advent of Johnson and Nixon, had
so weakened Washington leadership that no major power would associate
itself with the adventure.

The "Allies" in Vietnam were the U.S.A. and two or three vassal Asian states.

Half a century of cold war and co-existence punctuated by military invasions and hot wars, fought
between groups from both sides in the class struggle, faced mankind with several undeniable
facts:

1. Planet-wide economic, political and social changes had been made during the previous half-century.

2.
Capitalism was no longer supreme as it had been before 1900. On the contrary, since 1950 the
planet has been divided along class lines--capitalism versus socialism.

3. Socialism-communism is one of the most obvious facts of present-day
planetary life.

4. Capitalism is losing ground, especially in Europe.

5. Socialism is gaining ground, especially in Eurasia.

        Co-existence presupposes recognition of these five propositions and
a willingness to abide by the outcome of the evolutionary-revolutionary
process, through which the western world is passing.

  
  During several centuries, ending in 1900, western civilization
  passed through an era of consolidation and integration
                             that brought its sovereign segments into increasing stable relationships.
The most advanced of these relationships took political shape in the
half-dozen European empires which controlled the planet in 1900. Side
by side with the consolidation of the planet into nations and empires
there was another process, world-wide in scope, which made the facts
and products of science and technology and their duplication the common
property of mankind, creating a cultural synthesis far more universal
than the political synthesis in nations, empires, the League of Nations
or the United Nations.

Any social synthesis includes positive and
negative aspects which function side by side.

In the morning Christie of the Clinthill was nowhere to be seen. As this worthy personage did
seldom pique himself on sounding a trumpet before his movements, no one was surprised at his
moonlight departure, though some alarm was excited lest he had not made it empty-handed. So,
in the language of the national ballad,

  Some ran to cupboard, and some to kist,
  But nought was away that could be mist.

All was in order, the key of the stable left above the door, and that of the iron-grate in
the inside of the lock. In short, the retreat had been made with scrupulous attention to the
security of the garrison, and so far Christie left them nothing to complain of.

The safety of the premises was ascertained by Halbert, who instead of catching up a gun or
cross-bow, and sallying out for the day as had been his frequent custom, now, with a gravity
beyond his years, took a survey of all around the tower, and then returned to the spence, or
public apartment, in which, at the early hour of seven, the morning meal was prepared.

There he found the Euphuist in the same elegant posture of abstruse calculation which he had
exhibited on the preceding evening, his arms folded in the same angle, his eyes turned up to
the same cobwebs, and his heels resting on the ground as before. Tired of this affectation
of indolent importance, and not much flattered with his guest's persevering in it to the last,
Halbert resolved at once to break the ice, being determined to know what circumstance had brought
to the tower of Glendinning a guest at once so supercilious and so silent.

"Sir Knight," he said with some firmness, "I have twice given you good morning, to which the
absence of your mind hath, I presume, prevented you from yielding attention, or from making
return. This exchange of courtesy is at your pleasure to give or withhold--But, as what I have
further to say concerns your comfort and your motions in an especial manner, I will entreat
you to give me some signs of attention, that I may be sure I am not wasting my words on a monumental
image."

At this unexpected address, Sir Piercie Shafton opened his eyes, and afforded the speaker a
broad stare; but as Halbert returned the glance without either confusion or dismay, the knight
thought proper to change his posture, draw in his legs, raise his eyes, fix them on young Glendinning,
and assume the appearance of one who listens to what is said to him. Nay, to make his purpose
more evident, he gave voice to his resolution in these words, "Speak! we do hear."

"Sir Knight," said the youth, "it is the custom of this Halidome, or patrimony of St. Mary's,
to trouble with inquiries no guests who receive our hospitality, providing they tarry in our
house only for a single revolution of the sun. We know that both criminals and debtors come
hither for sanctuary, and we scorn to extort from the pilgrim, whom chance may make our guest,
an avowal of the cause of his pilgrimage and penance. "So you must. I shall let Wilson visit you
frequently, if he is not a trouble."

Then she had chosen a couple of blooms and pinned them on his coat,
laughingly overriding his protest that they consorted poorly with
his costume.

The English knight gaped twice or thrice before he answered, and then replied in a bantering
tone, "Truly, good villagio, your question hath in it somewhat of embarrassment, for you ask
me of things concerning which I am not as yet altogether determined what answer I may find
it convenient to make. Let it suffice thee, kind juvenal, that thou hast the Lord Abbot's authority
for treating me to the best of that power of thine, which, indeed, may not always so well suffice
for my accommodation as either of us would desire."

"I must have a more precise answer than this, Sir Knight," said the young Glendinning.

