Some large stalactite caverns, called the "Fish River Caves," are well worth a visit. Hitherto
they have been nearly inaccessible to the ordinary tourist, but lately the Government has appointed
a man to reside there, and the road has been made more practicable. From Sydney I returned
by rail to Melbourne. The distance is nearly 600 miles, and the train takes 18 hours including
stoppages, so that a very good speed is maintained all the way. At the frontier, which is reached
about 6 a.m., the traveller must change trains, as the gauge is wider in Victoria than on the
New South Wales lines. After entering Victoria, the line passes through what is called the
"Kelly Country," where the famous bushrangers, Kelly and his associates, committed their outrages
some years ago. In a very short time Sydney will be connected by rail with Brisbane, and there
will then be a continuous line from Adelaide through Melbourne and Sydney to Brisbane, a distance
of not less than 1,600 miles. This will no doubt much increase the importance of Adelaide,
because many people will be glad to land from a steamer as soon as possible. A few days after
arrival at Melbourne, I returned by P. and O. steamer to England, and as I am not prepared
to inflict on any one an account of so hackneyed a voyage, I finish at this point.

In ancient times colonists were sent out by Phoenicians or Greeks (the Roman colonies were
for military and political purposes) among people who to them were barbarians (which, after
all, only means people speaking a foreign tongue) but who might be only a little inferior to
themselves in civilization. A Greek colony, for instance, settled among the Egyptians, by whom
the Greeks themselves were accounted barbarians. The colonists to America from England two
and a half centuries ago, had to contend with somewhat similar difficulties as the first colonists
of Australia, but they had not so many modern appliances. The Australian Colonies are particularly
interesting, because they exhibit people of an ancient civilization and fixed customs thrown
into contact with the elemental conditions of life. They had to start at the very beginning,
and that, too, with an overplus of criminal population. Their success hitherto is a testimony
to the inherent vitality and tenacity of the English race, and to sneer at them as if they
were children, or to patronize them, is not merely bad taste, but shows an utter ignorance
of the facts. In many things they have begun where we left off. They have had the advantage
of our experience, and in many things we may profitably learn from them. For instance, when
we hear much airy talk of the nationalization of the land in England and other equally fundamental
questions for a country to have to consider, it would be well to study the problem in Australia,
where the greatest landlord is the State. Prophecy and taste were combined in Homer,--Isaiah and the
king's jester in Pindar. The care of the highest, not less than the lowest departments of thought,
fell upon the creative author, and a happy suggestion became a new
article in the Hellenic creed. Not at all that might makes right, as Carlyle is often misrepresented
to have said (of which he pathetically complains), but right that in the long run makes might;
and the best social results are obtained by looking from this point of view at the many difficulties
of our present existence.

M. HARLAND & SON, Printers, Phoenix Works, Manor Street, Hull.