Around them stand eight men, looking not at all troubled by their participation in the scene.
Of this event all the survivors appear to be white, the victims black. The plate is titled
"From a Photograph taken in Matabeleland." S.A.)

To a Great Good Man, Sir George Grey,

Once Governor of the Cape Colony, who, during his rule in South Africa, bound to himself the
Dutchmen, Englishmen, and Natives he governed, by an uncorruptible justice and a broad humanity;
and who is remembered among us today as representing the noblest attributes of an Imperial Rule. 

     By day, by night, they beat and breast in angry
      impotence against the ponderous wall of masonry that man has reared,
for pleasure and profit, to stem the mountain stream.

     
     The Awful Rush of
     Waters.

     
     Suddenly, maddened by the stubborn hindrance, the river grows
     black and turgid. It rumbles
     and threatens as if confident
     of an access of strength
     that laughs at resistance. From far up the hillside comes a sound, at
     first soft and soothing as the fountains of Lindaraxa,
     then rolling onward it takes the voluminous quaver of a distant waterfall.

Louder and louder, deeper and deeper, nearer and nearer comes an awful
crashing and roaring, till its echoes rebound from the crags of the
Alleghanies like peals of thunder and boom of cannon.

On, on, down the steep valley trumpets the torrent into the river
at Jamestown.

Joined to the waters from the cloud kissed summits of its source,
the exultant Conemaugh, with a deafening din, dashes its way through
the barricade of stone and starts like a demon on its path of destruction.

Into

its maw it sucks a town. A town with all its hundreds of men and women and children, with its
marts of business, its homes, its factories and houses of worship. Then, insatiate still, with
a blast like the chaos of worlds dissolved, it rushes out to new desolation, until Nature herself,
awe stricken at the sight of such ineffable woe, blinds her eyes to the uncanny scene of death,
and drops the pall of night upon the earth.

Destruction Descended as a Bolt of Jove.

A fair town in a western valley of Pennsylvania, happy in the arts of peace and prospering by
its busy manufactures, suddenly swept out of existence by a gigantic
flood and thousands of lives extinguished as by one fell stroke--such
has been the fate of Johnstown.

 He had eaten nothing all day; and had touched little of
the contents of a small flask of Cape brandy he carried in his breast pocket, not knowing when
it would again be replenished.

As night drew near he determined to make his resting place on the top of one of the kopjes,
which stood somewhat alone and apart from the others. He could not easily be approached there,
without his knowing it. He had not much fear of the natives; their kraals had been destroyed
and their granaries burnt for thirty miles round, and they themselves had fled: but he feared,
somewhat, the lions, which he had never seen, but of which he had heard, and which might be
cowering in the long grasses and brushwood at the kopje's foot:--and he feared, vaguely, he
hardly knew what, when he looked forward to his first long night alone in the veld.

By the time the sun had set he had gathered a little pile of stumps and branches on the top
of the kopje. He intended to keep a fire burning all night; and as the darkness began to settle
down he lit it. It might be his friends would see it from far, and come for him early in the
morning; and wild beasts would hardly approach him while he knelt beside it; and of the natives
he felt there was little fear.

He built up the fire; and determined if it were possible to keep awake the whole night beside it.

He was a slight man of middle height, with a sloping forehead and pale blue eyes: but the jaws
were hard set, and the thin lips of the large mouth were those of a man who could strongly
desire the material good of life, and enjoy it when it came his way. Over the lower half of
the face were scattered a few soft white hairs, the growth of early manhood.

From time to time he listened intently for possible sounds from the distance where his friends
might be encamped, and might fire off their guns at seeing his light; or he listened yet more
intently for sounds nearer at hand: but all was still, except for the occasional cracking of
the wood in his own fire, and the slight whistle of the breeze as it crept past the stones
on the kopje. He doubled up his great hat and put it in the pocket of his overcoat, and put
on a little two-pointed cap his mother had made for him, which fitted so close that only one
lock of white hair hung out over his forehead. He turned up the collar of his coat to shield
his neck and ears, and threw it open in front that the blaze of the fire might warm him. He
had known many nights colder than this when he had sat around the camp fire with his comrades,
talking of the niggers they had shot or the kraals they had destroyed, or grumbling over their
rations; but tonight the chill seemed to creep into his very bones.

The darkness of the night above him, and the silence of the veld about him, oppressed him.
At times he even wished he might hear the cry of a jackal or of some larger beast of prey in
the distance; and he wished that the wind would blow a little louder, instead of making that
little wheezing sound as it passed the corners of the stones. He looked down at his gun, which
lay cocked ready on the ground at his right side; and from time to time he raised his hand
automatically and fingered the cartridges in his belt. Then he stretched out his small wiry
hands to the fire and warmed them. It was only half past ten, and it seemed to him he had been
sitting here ten hours at the least.

After a while he threw two more large logs on the fire, and took the flask out of his pocket.
He examined it carefully by the firelight to see how much it held: then he took a small draught,
and examined it again to see how much it had fallen; and put it back in his breast pocket.

Then Trooper Peter Halket fell to thinking.

It was not often that he thought. On patrol and sitting round camp fires with the other men
about him there was no time for it; and Peter Halket had never been given to much thinking.
He had been a careless boy at the village school; and though, when he left, his mother paid
the village apothecary to read learned books with him at night on history and science, he had
not retained much of them. As a rule he lived in the world immediately about him, and let the
things of the moment impinge on him, and fall off again as they would, without much reflection.
But tonight on the kopje he fell to thinking, and his thoughts shaped themselves into connected
chains. 

The railroad officials had repeatedly told them that the dam threatened destruction. They still
perversely lulled themselves into a false security. The blow came, when it did, like a flash.
It was as if the heavens had fallen in liquid fury upon the earth.
 He saw his mother's fat white ducklings creep in and out under the gate,
and waddle down to the little pond at the back of the yard; he saw the school house that he
had hated so much as a boy, and from which he had so often run away to go a-fishing, or a-bird's-nesting.
He saw the prints on the school house wall on which the afternoon sun used to shine when he
was kept in; Jesus of Judea blessing the children, and one picture just over the door where
he hung with his arms stretched out and the blood dropping from his feet. From these trifling
tourneys though, it emerges only the more eager and impetuous in its path toward the towns
below.

The Fatal River.

Coming nearer, step by step, to the busy haunts of men, the dashing brook takes on a more ambitious
air. Little by little it edges its narrow banks aside, drinks in
the waters of tributaries, swells with the copious rainfall of the
lower valley. From its ladder in the Alleghanies it catches a glimpse
of the steeples of Johnstown, red with the glow of the setting sun.
Again it spurts and spreads as if conscious of its new importance,
and the once tiny rill expands into the dignity of a river, a veritable
river, with a name of its own. Big with this sounding symbol of prowess
it rushes on as if to sweep by the teeming town in a flood of majesty. But tonight he wished
for her as he used to when he was a small boy and lay in his bed in the next room, and saw
her shadow through the door as she bent over her wash-tub earning the money which was to feed
and clothe him. He remembered how he called her and she came and tucked him in and called him
"Little Simon," which was his second name and had been his father's, and which she only called
him when he was in bed at night, or when he was hurt.

He sat there staring into the blaze. He resolved he would make a great deal of money, and she
should live with him. He would build a large house in the West End of London, the biggest that
had ever been seen, and another in the country, and they should never work any more.

Peter Halket sat as one turned into stone, staring into the fire.

All men made money when they came to South Africa,--Barney Barnato, Rhodes--they all made money
out of the country, eight millions, twelve millions, twenty-six millions, forty millions; why
should not he!

Peter Halket started suddenly and listened. But it was only the wind coming up the kopje like
a great wheezy beast creeping upwards; and he looked back into the fire.

He considered his business prospects. When he had served his time as volunteer he would have
a large piece of land given him, and the Mashonas and Matabeles would have all their land taken
away from them in time, and the Chartered Company would pass a law that they had to work for
the white men; and he, Peter Halket, would make them work for him. He would make money.

Then he reflected on what he should do with the land if it were no good and he could not make
anything out of it. Then, he should have to start a syndicate; called the Peter Halket Gold,
or the Peter Halket Iron-mining, or some such name, Syndicate. Peter Halket was not very clear
as to how it ought to be started; but he felt certain that he and some other men would have
to take shares. They would not have to pay for them. And then they would get some big man in
London to take shares. He need not pay for them; they would give them to him; and then the
company would be floated. No one would have to pay anything; it was just the name--"The Peter
Halket Gold Mining Company, Limited." It would float in London; and people there who didn't
know the country would buy the shares; THEY would have to give ready money for them, of course;
perhaps fifteen pounds a share when they were up!--Peter Halket's eyes blinked as he looked
into the fire.--And then, when the market was up, he, Peter Halket, would sell out all his
shares. If he gave himself only six thousand and sold them each for ten pounds, then he, Peter
Halket, would have sixty thousand pounds! And then he would start another company, and another.

Peter Halket struck his knee softly with his hand. 

It will take many a day to make up the reckoning of the material loss.

If any pen could describe the scenes of terror, anguish and destruction
which have taken place in Conemaugh Valley it could write an epic
greater than the "Iliad."

Peter Halket stroked his knee thoughtfully.

And then the other people, that bought the shares for cash! Well, they could sell out too;
they could all sell out!

