"Sure," said Mrs. Rafferty, "I'd like to know where 'twas then--in this country. Me and me
old man spent weary years a-huntin'."

Thus far the conversation had proceeded naturally; but suddenly it was as if a shadow passed
over it--a shadow of fear. Hal saw Old Rafferty look at his wife, and frown and make signs
to her. After all, what did they know about this handsome young stranger, who talked so glibly,
and had been in so many parts of the world?

"'Tis not complainin' we'd be," said the old man.

And his wife made haste to add, "If they let peddlers and the like of them come in, 'twould
be no end to it, I suppose. We find they treat us here as well as anywhere."

"'Tis no joke, the life of workin' men, wherever ye try it," added the other; and when young
Tim started to express an opinion, they shut him up with such evident anxiety that Hal's heart
ached for them, and he made haste to change the subject.

SECTION 12.

On the evening of the same Sunday Hal went to pay his promised call upon Mary Burke. She opened
the front door of the cabin to let him in, and even by the dim rays of the little kerosene
lamp, there came to him an impression of cheerfulness. "Hello," she said--just as she had said
it when he had slid down the mountain into the family wash. He followed her into the room,
and saw that the impression he had got of cheerfulness came from Mary herself. How bright and
fresh she looked! The old blue calico, which had not been entirely clean, was newly laundered
now, and on the shoulder where the rent had been was a neat patch of unfaded blue.

There being only three rooms in Mary's home, two of these necessarily bed-rooms, she entertained
her company in the kitchen. The room was bare, Hal saw--there was not even so much as a clock
by way of ornament. The only charm the girl had been able to give to it, in preparation for
company, was that of cleanness. The board floor had been newly sanded and scrubbed; the kitchen
table also had been scrubbed, and the kettle on the stove, and the cracked tea-pot and bowls
on the shelf. Mary's little brother and sister were in the room: Jennie, a dark-eyed, dark-haired
little girl, frail, with a sad, rather frightened face; and Tommie, a round headed youngster,
like a thousand other round headed and freckle-faced boys. Both of them were now sitting very
straight in their chairs, staring at the visitor with a certain resentment, he thought. He
suspected that they had been included in the general scrubbing. Inasmuch as it had been uncertain
just when the visitor would come, they must have been required to do this every night, and
he could imagine family disturbances, with arguments possibly not altogether complimentary
to Mary's new "feller."

There seemed to be a certain uneasiness in the place.

Mary did not invite her company to a seat, but stood irresolute; and after Hal had ventured
a couple of friendly remarks to the children, she said, abruptly, "Shall we be takin' that
walk that we spoke of, Mr. Smith?"

"Delighted!" said Hal; and while she pinned on her hat before the broken mirror on the shelf,
he smiled at the children and quoted two lines from his Harrigan song--

  "Oh, Mary-Jane, come out in the lane,
  The moon is a-shinin' in the old pecan!"

Tommie and Jennie were too shy to answer, but Mary exclaimed, "'Tis in a tin-can ye see it
shinin' here!"

They went out. In the soft summer night it was pleasant to stroll under the moon--especially
when they had come to the remoter parts of the village, where there were not so many weary
people on door-steps and children playing noisily. There were other young couples walking here,
under the same moon; the hardest day's toil could not so sap their energies that they did not
feel the spell of this soft summer night.

Hal, being tired, was content to stroll and enjoy the stillness; but Mary Burke sought information
about the mysterious young man she was with. "Ye've not worked long in coal-mines, Mr. Smith?"
she remarked.

Hal was a trifle disconcerted. "How did you find that out?"

"Ye don't look it--ye don't talk it. Ye're not like anybody or anything around here. I don't
know how to say it, but ye make me think more of the poetry-books."

Flattered as Hal was by this naive confession, he did not want to talk of the mystery of himself.
He took refuge in a question about the "poetry-books." "I've read some," said the girl; "more
than ye'd have thought, perhaps." This with a flash of her defiance.

He asked more questions, and learned that she, like the Greek boy, "Andy," had come under the
influence of that disturbing American institution, the public-school; she had learned to read,
and the pretty young teacher had helped her, lending her books and magazines. Thus she had
been given a key to a treasure-house, a magic carpet on which to travel over the world. These
similes Mary herself used--for the Arabian Nights had been one of the books that were loaned
to her. On rainy days she would hide behind the sofa, reading at a spot where the light crept
in--so that she might be safe from small brothers and sisters!

Joe Smith had read these same books, it appeared; and this seemed remarkable to Mary, for books
cost money and were hard to get. She explained how she had searched the camp for new magic
carpets, finding a "poetry-book" by Longfellow, and a book of American history, and a story
called "David Copperfield," and last and strangest of all, another story called "Pride and
Prejudice." A curious freak of fortune--the prim and sentimentally quivering Jane Austen in
a coal-camp in a far Western wilderness! An adventure for Jane, as well as for Mary!

What had Mary made of it, Hal wondered. Had she revelled, shop-girl fashion, in scenes of pallid
ease? He learned that what she had made of it was despair. This world outside, with its freedom
and cleanness, its people living gracious and worth-while lives, was not for her; she was chained
to a scrub-pail in a coal-camp. Things had got so much worse since the death of her mother,
she said. Her voice had become dull and hard--Hal thought that he had never heard a young voice
express such hopelessness.

"You've never been anywhere but here?" he asked.

"I been in two other camps," she said--"first the Gordon, and then East Run. But they're all
alike."

"But you've been down to the towns?"

"Only for a day, once or twice a year. Once I was in Sheridan, and in a church I heard a lady
sing."

She stopped for a moment, lost in this memory. Then suddenly her voice changed--and he could
imagine in the darkness that she had tossed her head defiantly. "I'll not be entertainin' company
with my troubles! Ye know how tiresome that is when ye hear it from somebody else--like my
next-door neighbour, Mrs. Zamboni. D' ye know her?"

"No," said Hal.

"The poor old lady has troubles enough, God knows. Her man's not much good--he's troubled with
the drink; and she's got eleven childer, and that's too many for one woman. Don't ye think so?"

She asked this with a naivete which made Hal laugh. "Yes," he said, "I do."

"Well, I think people'd help her more if she'd not complain so! And half of it in the Slavish
language, that a body can't understand!" So Mary began to tell funny things about Mrs. Zamboni
and her other polyglot neighbours, imitating their murdering of the Irish dialect. Hal thought
her humour was naive and delightful, and he led her on to more cheerful gossip during the remainder
of their walk.

SECTION 13.

But then, as they were on their way home, tragedy fell upon them. Hearing a step behind them,
Mary turned and looked; then catching Hal by the arm, she drew him into the shadows at the
side, whispering to him to be silent. The bent figure of a man went past them, lurching from
side to side.

When he had turned and gone into the house, Mary said, "It's my father. He's ugly when he's
like that." And Hal could hear her quick breathing in the darkness.

So that was Mary's trouble--the difficulty in her home life to which she had referred at their
first meeting! Hal understood many things in a flash--why her home was bare of ornament, and
why she did not invite her company to sit down. He stood silent, not knowing what to say. Before
he could find the word, Mary burst out, "Oh, how I hate O'Callahan, that sells the stuff to
my father! His home with plenty to eat in it, and his wife dressin' in silk and goin' down
to mass every Sunday, and thinkin' herself too good for a common miner's daughter! Sometimes
I think I'd like to kill them both."

"That wouldn't help much," Hal ventured.

"No, I know--there'd only be some other one in his place. Ye got to do more than that, to change
things here. Ye got to get after them that make money out of O'Callahan."

So Mary's mind was groping for causes! Hal had thought her excitement was due to humiliation,
or to fear of a scene of violence when she reached home; but she was thinking of the deeper
aspects of this terrible drink problem. There was still enough unconscious snobbery in Hal
Warner for him to be surprised at this phenomenon in a common miner's daughter; and so, as
at their first meeting, his pity was turned to intellectual interest.

"They'll stop the drink business altogether some day," he said. He had not known that he was
a Prohibitionist; he had become one suddenly!

"Well," she answered, "they'd best stop it soon, if they don't want to he too late. 'Tis a
sight to make your heart sick to see the young lads comin' home staggerin', too drunk even
to fight."

Hal had not had time to see much of this aspect of North Valley. "They sell to boys?" he asked.

"Sure, who's to care? A boy's money's as good as a man's."

"But I should think the company--"

"The company lets the saloon-buildin'--that's all the company cares."

"But they must care something about the efficiency of their hands!"

"Sure, there's plenty more where they come from. When ye can't work, they fire ye, and that's
all there is to it."

"And is it so easy to get skilled men?"

"It don't take much skill to get out coal. The skill is in keepin' your bones whole--and if
you can stand breakin' 'em, the company can stand it."

They had come to the little cabin. Mary stood for a moment in silence. "I'm talkin' bitter
again!" she exclaimed suddenly. "And I promised ye me company manner! But things keep happening
to set me off." And she turned abruptly and ran into the house. Hal stood for a moment wondering
if she would return; then, deciding that she had meant that as good night, he went slowly up
the street.

He fought against a mood of real depression, the first he had known since his coming to North
Valley. He had managed so far to keep a certain degree of aloofness, that he might see this
industrial world without prejudice. But to-night his pity for Mary had involved him more deeply.
To be sure, he might be able to help her, to find her work in some less crushing environment;
but his mind went on to the question--how many girls might there be in mining-camps, young
and eager, hungering for life, but crushed by poverty, and by the burden of the drink problem?

A man walked past Hal, greeting him in the semi-darkness with a nod and a motion of the hand.
It was the Reverend Spragg, the gentleman who was officially commissioned to combat the demon
rum in North Valley.

Hal had been to the little white church the Sunday before, and heard the Reverend Spragg preach
a doctrinal sermon, in which the blood of the lamb was liberally sprinkled, and the congregation
heard where and how they were to receive compensation for the distresses they endured in this
vale of tears.

What a mockery it seemed! Once, indubitably, people had believed such doctrines; they had been
willing to go to the stake for them. But now nobody went to the stake for them--on the contrary,
the company compelled every worker to contribute out of his scanty earnings towards the preaching
of them. How could the most ignorant of zealots confront such an arrangement without suspicion
of his own piety? Somewhere at the head of the great dividend-paying machine that was called
the General Fuel Company must be some devilish intelligence that had worked it all out, that
had given the orders to its ecclesiastical staff: "We want the present--we leave you the future!
We want the bodies--we leave you the souls! Teach them what you will about heaven--so long
as you let us plunder them on earth!"

In accordance with this devil's program, the Reverend Spragg might denounce the demon rum,
but he said nothing about dividends based on the renting of rum-shops, nor about local politicians
maintained by company contributions, plus the profits of wholesale liquor. He said nothing
about the conclusions of modern hygiene, concerning over-work as a cause of the craving for
alcohol; the phrase "industrial drinking," it seemed, was not known in General Fuel Company
theology! In fact, when you listened to such a sermon, you would never have guessed that the
hearers of it had physical bodies at all; certainly you would never have guessed that the preacher
had a body, which was nourished by food produced by the overworked and under-nourished wage-slaves
whom he taught!

SECTION 14.

For the most part the victims of this system were cowed and spoke of their wrongs only in whispers;
but there was one place in the camp, Hal found, where they could not keep silence, where their
sense of outrage battled with their fear. This place was the solar plexus of the mine-organism,
the centre of its nervous energies; to change the simile, it was the judgment-seat, where the
miner had sentence passed upon him--sentence either to plenty, or to starvation and despair.

This place was the "tipple," where the coal that came out of the mine was weighed and recorded.
Every digger, as he came from the cage, made for this spot. There was a bulletin-board, and
on it his number, and the record of the weights of the cars he had sent out that day. And every
man, no matter how ignorant, had learned enough English to read those figures.

Hal had gradually come to realise that here was the place of drama. Most of the men would look,
and then, without a sound or glance about, would slouch off with drooping shoulders. Others
would mumble to themselves--or, what amounted to the same thing, would mumble to one another
in barbarous dialects. But about one in five could speak English; and scarcely an evening passed
that some man did not break loose, shaking his fist at the sky, or at the weigh-boss--behind
the latter's back. He might gather a knot of fellow-grumblers about him; it was to be noted
that the camp-marshal had the habit of being on hand at this hour.

It was on one of these occasions that Hal first noticed Mike Sikoria, a grizzle-haired old
Slovak, who had spent twenty years in the mines of these regions. All the bitterness of all
the wrongs of all these years welled up in Old Mike, as he shouted his score aloud: "Nineteen,
twenty-two, twenty-four, twenty! Is that my weight, Mister? You want me to believe that's my
weight?"

"That's your weight," said the weigh-boss, coldly.

"Well, by Judas, your scale is off, Mister! Look at them cars--them cars is big! You measure
them cars, Mister--seven feet long, three and a half feet high, four feet wide. And you tell
me them don't go but twenty?"

"You don't load them right," said the boss.

"Don't load them right?" echoed the old miner; he became suddenly plaintive, as if more hurt
than angered by such an insinuation. "You know all the years I work, and you tell me I don't
know a load? When I load a car, I load him like a miner, I don't load him like a Jap, that
don't know about a mine! I put it up--I chunk it up like a stack of hay. I load him square--like
that." With gestures the old fellow was illustrating what he meant. "See there! There's a ton
on the top, and a ton and a half on the bottom--and you tell me I get only nineteen, twenty!"

"That's your weight," said the boss, implacably.

"But, Mister, your scale is wrong! I tell you I used to get my weight. I used to get forty-five,
forty-six on them cars. Here's my buddy--ask him if it ain't so. What is it, Bo?"

"Um m m-mum," said Bo, who was a negro--though one could hardly be sure of this for the coal-dust
on him.

"I can't make a living no more!" exclaimed the old Slovak, his voice trembling and his wizened
dark eyes full of pleading. "What you think I make? For fifteen days, fifty cents! I pay board,
and so help me God, Mister--and I stand right here--I swear for God I make fifty cents. I dig
the coal and I ain't got no weight, I ain't got nothing! Your scale is wrong!"

"Get out!" said the weigh-boss, turning away.

"But, Mister!" cried Old Mike, following behind him, and pouring his whole soul into his words.
"What is this life, Mister? You work like a burro, and you don't get nothing for it! You burn
your own powder--half a dollar a day powder--what you think of that? Crosscut--and you get
nothing! Take the skip and a pillar, and you get nothing! Brush--and you get nothing! Here,
by Judas, a poor man, going and working his body to the last point, and blood is run out! You
starve me to death, I say! I have got to have something to eat, haven't I?"

And suddenly the boss whirled upon him. "Get the hell out of here!" he shouted. "If you don't
like it, get your time and quit. Shut your face, or I'll shut it for you."

The old man quailed and fell silent. He stood for a moment more, biting his whiskered lips
nervously; then his shoulders sank together, and he turned and slunk off, followed by his negro
helper.

SECTION 15.

Old Mike boarded at Reminitsky's, and after supper was over, Hal sought him out. He was easy
to know, and proved an interesting acquaintance. With the help of his eloquence Hal wandered
through a score of camps in the district. The old fellow had a temper that he could not manage,
and so he was always on the move; but all places were alike, he said--there was always some
trick by which a miner was cheated of his earnings. A miner was a little business man, a contractor
who took a certain job, with its expenses and its chance of profit or loss. A "place" was assigned
to him by the boss--and he undertook to get out the coal from it, being paid at the rate of
fifty-five cents a ton for each ton of clean coal. In some "places" a man could earn good money,
and in others he would work for weeks, and not be able to keep up with his store-account.

It all depended upon the amount of rock and slate that was found with the coal. If the vein
was low, the man had one or two feet of rock to take off the ceiling, and this had to be loaded
on separate cars and taken away. This work was called "brushing," and for it the miner received
no pay. Or perhaps it was necessary to cut through a new passage, and clean out the rock; or
perhaps to "grade the bottom," and lay the ties and rails over which the cars were brought
in to be loaded; or perhaps the vein ran into a "fault," a broken place where there was rock
instead of coal--and this rock must be hewed away before the miner could get at the coal. All
such work was called "dead-work," and it was the cause of unceasing war. In the old days the
company had paid extra for it; now, since they had got the upper hand of the men, they were
refusing to pay. And so it was important to the miner to have a "place" assigned him where
there was not so much of this dead work. And the "place" a man got depended upon the boss;
so here, at the very outset, was endless opportunity for favouritism and graft, for quarrelling,
or "keeping in" with the boss. What chance did a man stand who was poor and old and ugly, and
could not speak English good? inquired old Mike, with bitterness. The boss stole his cars and
gave them to other people; he took the weight off the cars, and gave them to fellows who boarded
with him, or treated him to drinks, or otherwise curried favour with him.

"I work five days in the Southeastern," said Mike, and when I work them five days, so help
me God, brother, if I don't get up out of this chair, fifteen cents I was still in the hole
yet. Fourteen inches of rock! And the Mr. Bishop--that is the superintendent--I says, 'Do you
pay something for that rock?' 'Huh?' says he. 'Well,' I says, 'if you don't pay nothing for
the rock, I don't go ahead with it. I ain't got no place to put that rock.' 'Get the hell out
of here,' says he, and when I started to fight he pull gun on me. And then I go to Cedar Mountain,
and the super give me work there, and he says, 'You go Number Four,' and he says, 'Rail is
in Number Three, and the ties.' And he says, 'I pay you for it when you put it in.' So I take
it away and I put it in, and I work till twelve o'clock. Carried the three pair of rails and
the ties, and I pulled all the spikes--"

"Pulled the spikes?" asked Hal.

"Got no good spikes. Got to use old spikes, what you pull out of them old ties. So then I says,
'What is my half day, what you promise me?' Says he, 'You ain't dug no coal yet!' 'But, mister,'
says I, 'you promise me pay to pull them spikes and put in them ties!' Says he, 'Company pay
nothin' for dead work--you know that,' says he, and that is all the satisfaction I get."

"And you didn't get your half day's pay?"

"Sure I get nothin'. Boss do just as he please in coal mine."

SECTION 16.

There was another way, Old Mike explained, in which the miner was at the mercy of others; this
was the matter of stealing cars. Each miner had brass checks with his number on them, and when
he sent up a loaded car, he hung one of these checks on a hook inside. In the course of the
long journey to the tipple, some one would change the check, and the car was gone. In some
mines, the number was put on the car with chalk; and how easy it was for some one to rub it
out and change it! It appeared to Hal that it would have been a simple matter to put a number
padlock on the car, instead of a check; but such an equipment would have cost the company one
or two hundred dollars, he was told, and so the stealing went on year after year.

"You think it's the bosses steal these cars?" asked Hal.

"Sometimes bosses, sometimes bosses' friend--sometimes company himself steal them from miners."
In North Valley it was the company, the old Slovak insisted. It was no use sending up more
than six cars in one day, be declared; you could never get credit for more than six. Nor was
it worth while loading more than a ton on a car; they did not really weigh the cars, the boss
just ran them quickly over the scales, and had orders not to go above a certain average. Mike
told of an Italian who had loaded a car for a test, so high that he could barely pass it under
the roof of the entry, and went up on the tipple and saw it weighed himself, and it was sixty-five
hundred pounds. They gave him thirty-five hundred, and when he started to fight, they arrested
him. Mike had not seen him arrested, but when he had come out of the mine, the man was gone,
and nobody ever saw him again. After that they put a door onto the weigh-room, so that no one
could see the scales.

The more Hal listened to the men and reflected upon these things, the more he came to see that
the miner was a contractor who had no opportunity to determine the size of the contract before
he took it on, nor afterwards to determine how much work he had done. More than that, he was
obliged to use supplies, over the price and measurements of which he had no control. He used
powder, and would find himself docked at the end of the month for a certain quantity, and if
the quantity was wrong, he would have no redress. He was charged a certain sum for "black-smithing"--the
keeping of his tools in order; and he would find a dollar or two deducted from his account
each month, even though he had not been near the blacksmith shop.

Let any business-man in the world consider the proposition, thought Hal, and say if he would
take a contract upon such terms! Would a man undertake to build a dam, for example, with no
chance to measure the ground in advance, nor any way of determining how many cubic yards of
concrete he had to put in? Would a grocer sell to a customer who proposed to come into the
store and do his own weighing--and meantime locking the grocer outside? Merely to put such
questions was to show the preposterousness of the thing; yet in this district were fifteen
thousand men working on precisely such terms.

Under the state law, the miner had a right to demand a check-weighman to protect his interest
at the scales, paying this check-weighman's wages out of his own earnings. Whenever there was
any public criticism about conditions in the coal-mines, this law would be triumphantly cited
by the operators; and one had to have actual experience in order to realise what a bitter mockery
this was to the miner.

In the dining-room Hal sat next to a fair-haired Swedish giant named Johannson, who loaded
timbers ten hours a day. This fellow was one who indulged in the luxury of speaking his mind,
because he had youth and huge muscles, and no family to tie him down. He was what is called
a "blanket-stiff," wandering from mine to harvest-field and from harvest-field to lumber-camp.
Some one broached the subject of check-weighmen to him, and the whole table heard his scornful
laugh. Let any man ask for a check-weighman!

"You mean they would fire him?" asked Hal.

"Maybe!" was the answer. "Maybe they make him fire himself."

"How do you mean?"

"They make his life one damn misery till he go."

So it was with check-weighman--as with scrip, and with company stores, and with all the provisions
of the law to protect the miner against accidents. You might demand your legal rights, but
if you did, it was a matter of the boss's temper. He might make your life one damn misery till
you went of your own accord. Or you might get a string of curses and an order, "Down the canyon!"--and
likely as not the toe of a boot in your trouser-seat, or the muzzle of a revolver under your nose.

SECTION 17.

Such conditions made the coal-district a place of despair. Yet there were men who managed to
get along somehow, and to raise families and keep decent homes. If one had the luck to escape
accident, if he did not marry too young, or did not have too many children; if he could manage
to escape the temptations of liquor, to which overwork and monotony drove so many; if, above
all, he could keep on the right side of his boss--why then he might have a home, and even a
little money on deposit with the company.

Such a one was Jerry Minetti, who became one of Hal's best friends. He was a Milanese, and
his name was Gerolamo, which had become Jerry in the "melting-pot." He was about twenty-five
years of age, and what is unusual with the Italians, was of good stature. Their meeting took
place--as did most of Hal's social experiences--on a Sunday. Jerry had just had a sleep and
a wash, and had put on a pair of new blue overalls, so that he presented a cheering aspect
in the sunlight. He walked with his head up and his shoulders square, and one could see that
he had few cares in the world.

But what caught Hal's attention was not so much Jerry as what followed at Jerry's heels; a
perfect reproduction of him, quarter-size, also with a newly-washed face and a pair of new
blue overalls. He too had his head up, and his shoulders square, and he was an irresistible
object, throwing out his heels and trying his best to keep step. Since the longest strides
he could take left him behind, he would break into a run, and getting close under his father's
heels, would begin keeping step once more.

Hal was going in the same direction, and it affected him like the music of a military band;
he too wanted to throw his head up and square his shoulders and keep step. And then other people,
seeing the grin on his face, would turn and watch, and grin also. But Jerry walked on gravely,
unaware of this circus in the rear.

They went into a house; and Hal, having nothing to do but enjoy life, stood waiting for them
to come out. They returned in the same procession, only now the man had a sack of something
on his shoulder, while the little chap had a smaller load poised in imitation. So Hal grinned
again, and when they were opposite him, he said, "Hello."

"Hello," said Jerry, and stopped. Then, seeing Hal's grin, he grinned back; and Hal looked
at the little chap and grinned, and the little chap grinned back. Jerry, seeing what Hal was
grinning at, grinned more than ever; so there stood all three in the middle of the road, grinning
at one another for no apparent reason.

"Gee, but that's a great kid!" said Hal.

"Gee, you bet!" said Jerry; and he set down his sack. If some one desired to admire the kid,
he was willing to stop any length of time.

"Yours?" asked Hal.

"You bet!" said Jerry, again.

"Hello, Buster!" said Hal.

"Hello yourself!" said the kid. One could see in a moment that he had been in the "melting-pot."

"What's your name?" asked Hal.

"Jerry," was the reply.

"And what's his name?" Hal nodded towards the man--

"Big Jerry."

"Got any more like you at home?"

"One more," said Big Jerry. "Baby."

"He ain't like me," said Little Jerry. "He's little."

"And you're big?" said Hal.

"He can't walk!"

"Neither can you walk!" laughed Hal, and caught him up and slung him onto his shoulder. "Come
on, we'll ride!"

So Big Jerry took up his sack again, and they started off; only this time it was Hal who fell
behind and kept step, squaring his shoulders and flinging out his heels. Little Jerry caught
onto the joke, and giggled and kicked his sturdy legs with delight. Big Jerry would look round,
not knowing what the joke was, but enjoying it just the same.

They came to the three-room cabin which was Both Jerrys' home; and Mrs. Jerry came to the door,
a black-eyed Sicilian girl, who did not look old enough to have even one baby. They had another
bout of grinning, at the end of which Big Jerry said, "You come in?"

"Sure," said Hal.

"You stay supper," added the other. "Got spaghetti."

"Gee!" said Hal. "All right, let me stay, and pay for it."

"Hell, no!" said Jerry. "You no pay!"

"No! No pay!" cried Mrs. Jerry, shaking her pretty head energetically.

"All right," said Hal, quickly, seeing that he might hurt their feelings. "I'll stay if you're
sure you have enough."

"Sure, plenty!" said Jerry. "Hey, Rosa?"

"Sure, plenty!" said Mrs. Jerry.

"Then I'll stay," said Hal. "You like spaghetti, Kid?"

"Jesus!" cried Little Jerry.

Hal looked about him at this Dago home. It was a tome in keeping with its pretty occupant.
There were lace curtains in the windows, even shinier and whiter than at the Rafferties; there
was an incredibly bright-coloured rug on the floor, and bright coloured pictures of Mount Vesuvius
and of Garibaldi on the walls. Also there was a cabinet with many interesting treasures to
look at--a bit of coral and a conch-shell, a shark's tooth and an Indian arrow-head, and a
stuffed linnet with a glass cover over him. A while back Hal would not have thought of such
things as especially stimulating to the imagination; but that was before he had begun to spend
five-sixths of his waking hours in the bowels of the earth.

He ate supper, a real Dago supper; the spaghetti proved to be real Dago spaghetti, smoking
hot, with tomato sauce and a rich flavour of meat-juice. And all through the meal Hal smacked
his lips and grinned at Little Jerry, who smacked his lips and grinned back. It was all so
different from feeding at Reminitsky's pig-trough, that Hal thought he had never had such a
good supper in his life before. As for Mr. and Mrs. Jerry, they were so proud of their wonderful
kid, who could swear in English as good as a real American, that they were in the seventh heaven.

When the meal was over, Hal leaned back and exclaimed, just as he had at the Rafferties', "Lord,
how I wish I could board here!"

He saw his host look at his wife. "All right," said he. "You come here. I board you. Hey, Rosa?"

"Sure," said Rosa.

Hal looked at them, astonished. "You're sure they'll let you?" he asked.

"Let me? Who stop me?"

"I don't know. Maybe Reminitsky. You might get into trouble."

Jerry grinned. "I no fraid," said he. "Got friends here. Carmino my cousin. You know Carmino?"

"No," said Hal.

"Pit-boss in Number One. He stand by me. Old Reminitsky go hang! You come here, I give you
bunk in that room, give you good grub. What you pay Reminitsky?"

"Twenty-seven a month."

"All right, you pay me twenty-seven, you get everything good. Can't get much stuff here, but
Rosa good cook, she fix it."

Hal's new friend--besides being a favourite of the boss--was a "shot-firer"; it was his duty
to go about the mine at night, setting off the charges of powder which the miners had got ready
by day. This was dangerous work, calling for a skilled man, and it paid pretty well; so Jerry
got on in the world and was not afraid to speak his mind, within certain limits. He ignored
the possibility that Hal might be a company spy, and astonished him by rebellious talk of the
different kinds of graft in North Valley, and at other places he had worked since coming to
America as a boy. Minetti was a Socialist, Hal learned; he took an Italian Socialist paper,
and the clerk at the post-office knew what sort of paper it was, and would "josh" him about
it. What was more remarkable, Mrs. Minetti was a Socialist also; that meant a great deal to
a man, as Jerry explained, because she was not under the domination of a priest.

SECTION 18.

Hal made the move at once, sacrificing part of a month's board, which Reminitsky would charge
against his account with the company. But he was willing to pay for the privilege of a clean
home and clean food. To his amusement he found that in the eyes of his Irish friends he was
losing caste by going to live with the Minettis. There were most rigid social lines in North
Valley, it appeared. The Americans and English and Scotch looked down upon the Welsh and Irish;
the Welsh and Irish looked down upon the Dagoes and Frenchies; the Dagoes and Frenchies looked
down upon Polacks and Hunkies, these in turn upon Greeks, Bulgarians and "Montynegroes," and
so on through a score of races of Eastern Europe, Lithuanians, Slovaks, and Croatians, Armenians,
Roumanians, Rumelians, Ruthenians--ending up with Greasers, niggers, and last and lowest, Japs.

It was when Hal went to pay another call upon the Rafferties that he made this discovery. Mary
Burke happened to be there, and when she caught sight of him, her grey eyes beamed with mischief.
"How do ye do, Mr. Minetti?" she cried.

"How do ye do, Miss Rosetti?" he countered.

"You lika da spagett?"

"You no lika da spagett?"

"I told ye once," laughed the girl--"the good old pertaties is good enough for me!"

"And you remember," said he, "what I answered?"

Yes, she remembered! Her cheeks took on the colour of the rose-leaves he had specified as her
probable diet.

And then the Rafferty children, who had got to know Hal well, joined in the teasing. "Mister
Minetti! Lika da spagetti!" Hal, when he had grasped the situation, was tempted to retaliate
by reminding them that he had offered to board with the Irish, and been turned down; but he
feared that the elder Rafferty might not appreciate this joke, so instead he pretended to have
supposed all along that the Rafferties were Italians. He addressed the elder Rafferty gravely,
pronouncing the name with the accent on the second syllable--"Signer Rafferti"; and this so
amused the old man that he chuckled over it at intervals for an hour. His heart warmed to this
lively young fellow; he forgot some of his suspicions, and after the youngsters had been sent
away to bed, he talked more or less frankly about his life as a coal-miner.

"Old Rafferty" had once been on the way to high station. He had been made tipple-boss at the
San Jose mine, but had given up his job because he had thought that his religion did not permit
him to do what he was ordered to do. It had been a crude proposition of keeping the men's score
at a certain level, no matter how much coal they might send up; and when Rafferty had quit
rather than obey such orders, he had had to leave the mine altogether; for of course everybody
knew why he had quit, and his mere presence had the effect of keeping discontent alive.

"You think there are no honest companies at all?" Hal asked.

The old man answered, "There be some, but 'tis not so easy as ye might think to be honest.
They have to meet each other's prices, and when one short-weights, the others have to. 'Tis
a way of cuttin' wages without the men findin' it out; and there be people that do not like
to fall behind with their profits." Hal found himself thinking of old Peter Harrigan, who controlled
the General Fuel Company, and had made the remark: "I am a great clamourer for dividends!"

"The trouble with the miner," continued Old Rafferty, "is that he has no one to speak for him.
He stands alone--"

During this discourse, Hal had glanced at "Red Mary," and noticed that she sat with her arms
on the table, her sturdy shoulders bowed in a fashion which told of a hard day's toil. But
here she broke into the conversation; her voice came suddenly, alive with scorn: "The trouble
with the miner is that he's a slave!"

"Ah, now--" put in the old man, protestingly.

"He has the whole world against him, and he hasn't got the sense to get together--to form a
union, and stand by it!"

There fell a sudden silence in the Rafferty home. Even Hal was startled--for this was the first
time during his stay in the camp that he had heard the dread word "union" spoken above a whisper.

"I know!" said Mary, her grey eyes full of defiance. "Ye'll not have the word spoken! But some
will speak it in spite of ye!"

"'Tis all very well," said the old man. "When ye're young, and a woman too--"

"A woman! Is it only the women that can have courage?"

"Sure," said he, with a wry smile, "'tis the women that have the tongues, and that can't he
stopped from usin' them. Even the boss must know that."

"Maybe so," replied Mary. "And maybe 'tis the women have the most to suffer in a coal-camp;
and maybe the boss knows that." The girl's cheeks were red.

"Mebbe so," said Rafferty; and after that there was silence, while he sat puffing his pipe.
It was evident that he did not care to go on, that he did not want union speeches made in his
home. After a while Mrs. Rafferty made a timid effort to change the course of the talk, by
asking after Mary's sister, who had not been well; and after they had discussed remedies for
the ailments of children, Mary rose, saying, "I'll be goin' along."

Hal rose also. "I'll walk with you, if I may," he said.

"Sure," said she; and it seemed that the cheerfulness of the Rafferty family was restored by
the sight of a bit of gallantry.

SECTION 19.

They strolled down the street, and Hal remarked, "That's the first word I've heard here about
a union."

Mary looked about her nervously. "Hush!" she whispered.

"But I thought you said you were talking about it!"

She answered, "'Tis one thing, talkin' in a friend's house, and another outside. What's the
good of throwin' away your job?"

He lowered his voice. "Would you seriously like to have a union here?"

"Seriously?" said she. "Didn't ye see Mr. Rafferty--what a coward he is? That's the way they
are! No, 'twas just a burst of my temper. I'm a bit crazy to-night--something happened to set
me off."

He thought she was going on, but apparently she changed her mind. Finally he asked, "What happened?"

"Oh, 'twould do no good to talk," she answered; and they walked a bit farther in silence.

"Tell me about it, won't you?" he said; and the kindness in his tone made its impression.

"'Tis not much ye know of a coal-camp, Joe Smith," she said. "Can't ye imagine what it's like--bein'
a woman in a place like this? And a woman they think good-lookin'!"

"Oh, so it's that!" said he, and was silent again. "Some one's been troubling you?" he ventured
after a while.

"Sure! Some one's always troublin' us women! Always! Never a day but we hear it. Winks and
nudges--everywhere ye turn."

"Who is it?"

"The bosses, the clerks--anybody that has a chance to wear a stiff collar, and thinks he can
offer money to a girl. It begins before she's out of short skirts, and there's never any peace
afterwards."

"And you can't make them understand?"

"I've made them understand me a bit; now they go after my old man."

"What?"

"Sure! D'ye suppose they'd not try that? Him that's so crazy for liquor, and can never get
enough of it!"

"And your father?--" But Hal stopped. She would not want that question asked!

She had seen his hesitation, however. "He was a decent man once," she declared. "'Tis the life
here, that turns a man into a coward. 'Tis everything ye need, everywhere ye turn--ye have
to ask favours from some boss. The room ye work in, the dead work they pile on ye; or maybe
'tis more credit ye need at the store, or maybe the doctor to come when ye're sick. Just now
'tis our roof that leaks--so bad we can't find a dry place to sleep when it rains."

"I see," said Hal. "Who owns the house?"

"Sure, there's none but company houses here."

"Who's supposed to fix it?"

"Mr. Kosegi, the house-agent. But we gave him up long ago--if he does anything, he raises the
rent. Today my father went to Mr. Cotton. He's supposed to look out for the health of the place,
and it seems hardly healthy to keep people wet in their beds."

"And what did Cotton say?" asked Hal, when she stopped again.

"Well, don't ye know Jeff Cotton--can't ye guess what he'd say? 'That's a fine girl ye got,
Burke! Why don't ye make her listen to reason?' And then he laughed, and told me old father
he'd better learn to take a hint. 'Twas bad for an old man to sleep in the rain--he might get
carried off by pneumonia."

Hal could no longer keep back the question, "What did your father do?"

"I'd not have ye think hard of my old father," she said, quickly. "He used to be a fightin'
man, in the days before O'Callahan had his way with him. But now he knows what a camp-marshal
can do to a miner!"

SECTION 20.

Mary Burke had said that the company could stand breaking the bones of its men; and not long
after Number Two started up again, Hal had a chance to note the truth of this assertion.

A miner's life depended upon the proper timbering of the room where he worked. The company
undertook to furnish the timbers, but when the miner needed them, he would find none at hand,
and would have to make the mile-long trip to the surface. He would select timbers of the proper
length, and would mark them--the understanding being that they were to be delivered to his
room by some of the labourers. But then some one else would carry them off--here was more graft
and favouritism, and the miner might lose a day or two of work, while meantime his account
was piling up at the store, and his children might have no shoes to go to school. Sometimes
he would give up waiting for timbers, and go on taking out coal; so there would be a fall of
rock--and the coroner's jury would bring in a verdict of "negligence," and the coal-operators
would talk solemnly about the impossibility of teaching caution to miners. Not so very long
ago Hal had read an interview which the president of the General Fuel Company had given to
a newspaper, in which he set forth the idea that the more experience a miner had the more dangerous
it was to employ him, because he thought he knew it all, and would not heed the wise regulations
which the company laid down for his safety!

In Number Two mine there were some places being operated by the "room and pillar" method; the
coal being taken out as from a series of rooms, the portion corresponding to the walls of the
rooms being left to uphold the roof. These walls are the "pillars"; and when the end of the
vein is reached, the miner begins to work backwards, "pulling the pillars," and letting the
roof collapse behind him. This is a dangerous task; as he works, the man has to listen to the
drumming sounds of the rock above his head, and has to judge just when to make his escape.
Sometimes he is too anxious to save a tool; or sometimes the collapse comes without warning.
In that case the victim is seldom dug out; for it must be admitted that a man buried under
a mountain is as well buried as a company could be expected to arrange it.

In Number Two mine a man was caught in this way. He stumbled as he ran, and the lower half
of his body was pinned fast; the doctor had to come and pump opiates into him, while the rescue
crew was digging him loose. The first Hal knew of the accident was when he saw the body stretched
out on a plank, with a couple of old sacks to cover it. He noticed that nobody stopped for
a second glance. Going up from work, he asked his friend Madvik, the mule driver, who answered,
"Lit'uanian feller--got mash." And that was all. Nobody knew him, and nobody cared about him.

It happened that Mike Sikoria had been working nearby, and was one of those who helped to get
the victim out. Mike's negro "buddy" had been in too great haste to get some of the rock out
of the way, and had got his hand crushed, and would not be able to work for a month or so.
Mike told Hal about it, in his broken English. It was a terrible thing to see a man trapped
like that, gasping, his eyes almost popping out of his head. Fortunately he was a young fellow,
and had no family.

Hal asked what they would do with the body; the answer was they would bury him in the morning.
The company had a piece of ground up the canyon.

"But won't they have an inquest?" he inquired.

"Inques'?" repeated the other. "What's he?"

"Doesn't the coroner see the body?"

The old Slovak shrugged his bowed shoulders; if there was a coroner in this part of the world,
he had never heard of it; and he had worked in a good many mines, and seen a good many men
put under the ground. "Put him in a box and dig a hole," was the way he described the procedure.

"And doesn't the priest come?"

"Priest too far away."

Afterwards Hal made inquiry among the English-speaking men, and learned that the coroner did
sometimes come to the camp. He would empanel a jury consisting of Jeff Cotton, the marshal,
and Predovich, the Galician Jew who worked in the company store, and a clerk or two from the
company's office, and a couple of Mexican labourers who had no idea what it was all about.
This jury would view the corpse, and ask a couple of men what had happened, and then bring
in a verdict: "We find that the deceased met his death from a fall of rock caused by his own
fault." (In one case they had added the picturesque detail: "No relatives, and damned few friends!")

For this service the coroner got a fee, and the company got an official verdict, which would
be final in case some foreign consul should threaten a damage suit. So well did they have matters
in hand that nobody in North Valley had ever got anything for death or injury; in fact, as
Hal found later, there had not been a damage suit filed against any coal-operator in that county
for twenty-three years!

This particular, accident was of consequence to Hal, because it got him a chance to see the
real work of mining. Old Mike was without a helper, and made the proposition that Hal should
take the job. It was better than a stableman's, for it paid two dollars a day.

"But will the boss let me change?" asked Hal.

"You give him ten dollar, he change you," said Mike.

"Sorry," said Hal, "I haven't got ten dollars."

"You give him ten dollar credit," said the other.

And Hal laughed. "They take scrip for graft, do they?"

"Sure they take him," said Mike.

"Suppose I treat my mules bad?" continued the other. "So I can make him change me for nothing!"

"He change you to hell!" replied Mike. "You get him cross, he put us in bad room, cost us ten
dollar a week. No, sir--you give him drink, say fine feller, make him feel good. You talk American--give
him jolly!"

SECTION 21.

Hal was glad of this opportunity to get better acquainted with his pit-boss. Alec Stone was
six feet high, and built in proportion, with arms like hams--soft with fat, yet possessed of
enormous strength. He had learned his manner of handling men on a sugar-plantation in Louisiana--a
fact which, when Hal heard it, explained much. Like a stage-manager who does not heed the real
names of his actors, but calls them by their character-names, Stone had the habit of addressing
his men by their nationalities: "You, Polack, get that rock into the car! Hey, Jap, bring them
tools over here! Shut your mouth, now, Dago, and get to work, or I'll kick the breeches off
you, sure as you're alive!"

Hal had witnessed one occasion when there was a dispute as to whose duty it was to move timbers.
There was a great two-handled cross-cut saw lying on the ground, and Stone seized it and began
to wave it, like a mighty broadsword, in the face of a little Bohemian miner. "Load them timbers,
Hunkie, or I'll carve you into bits!" And as the terrified man shrunk back, he followed, until
his victim was flat against a wall, the weapon swinging to and fro under his nose after the
fashion of "The Pit and the Pendulum." "Carve you into pieces, Hunkie! Carve you into stew-meat!"
When at last the boss stepped back, the little Bohemian leaped to load the timbers.

The curious part about it to Hal was that Stone seemed to be reasonably good-natured about
such proceedings. Hardly one time in a thousand did he carry out his bloodthirsty threats,
and like as not he would laugh when he had finished his tirade, and the object of it would
grin in turn--but without slackening his frightened efforts. After the broad-sword waving episode,
seeing that Hal had been watching, the boss remarked, "That's the way you have to manage them
wops." Hal took this remark as a tribute to his American blood, and was duly flattered.

He sought out the boss that evening, and found him with his feet upon the railing of his home.
"Mr. Stone," said he, "I've something I'd like to ask you."

"Fire away, kid," said the other.

"Won't you come up to the saloon and have a drink?"

"Want to get something out of me, hey? You can't work me, kid!" But nevertheless he slung down
his feet from the railing, and knocked the ashes out of his pipe and strolled up the street
with Hal.

"Mr. Stone," said Hal, "I want to make a change."

"What's that? Got a grouch on them mules?"

"No, sir, but I got a better job in sight. Mike Sikoria's buddy is laid up, and I'd like to
take his place, if you're willing."

"Why, that's a nigger's place, kid. Ain't you scared to take a nigger's place?"

"Why, sir?"

"Don't you know about hoodoos?"

"What I want," said Hal, "is the nigger's pay."

"No," said the boss, abruptly, "you stick by them mules. I got a good stableman, and I don't
want to spoil him. You stick, and by and by I'll give you a raise. You go into them pits, the
first thing you know you'll get a fall of rock on your head, and the nigger's pay won't be
no good to you."

They came to the saloon and entered. Hal noted that a silence fell within, and every one nodded
and watched. It was pleasant to be seen going out with one's boss.

O'Callahan, the proprietor, came forward with his best society smile and joined them, and at
Hal's invitation they ordered whiskies. "No, you stick to your job," continued the pit-boss.
"You stay by it, and when you've learned to manage mules, I'll make a boss out of you, and
let you manage men."

Some of the bystanders tittered. The pit-boss poured down his whiskey, and set the glass on
the bar. "That's no joke," said he, in a tone that every one could hear. "I learned that long
ago about niggers. They'd say to me, 'For God's sake, don't talk to our niggers like that.
Some night you'll have your house set afire.' But I said, 'Pet a nigger, and you've got a spoiled
nigger.' I'd say, 'Nigger, don't you give me any of your imp, or I'll kick the breeches off
you.' And they knew I was a gentleman, and they stepped lively."

"Have another drink," said Hal.

The pit-boss drank, and becoming more sociable, told nigger stories. On the sugar-plantations
there was a rush season, when the rule was twenty hours' work a day; when some of the niggers
tried to shirk it, they would arrest them for swearing or crap-shooting, and work them as convicts,
without pay. The pit-boss told how one "buck" had been brought before the justice of the peace,
and the charge read, "being cross-eyed"; for which offence he had been sentenced to sixty days'
hard labour. This anecdote was enjoyed by the men in the saloon--whose race-feelings seemed
to be stronger than their class-feelings.

When the pair went out again, it was late, and the boss was cordial. "Mr. Stone," began Hal,
"I don't want to bother you, but I'd like first rate to get more pay. If you could see your
way to let me have that buddy's job, I'd be more than glad to divide with you."

"Divide with me?" said Stone. "How d'ye mean?" Hal waited with some apprehension--for if Mike
had not assured him so positively, he would have expected a swing from the pit-boss's mighty arm.

"It's worth about fifteen a month more to me. I haven't any cash, but if you'd be willing to
charge off ten dollars from my store-account, it would be well worth my while."

They walked for a short way in silence. "Well, I'll tell you," said the boss, at last; "that
old Slovak is a kicker--one of these fellows that thinks he could run the mine if he had a
chance. And if you get to listenin' to him, and think you can come to me and grumble, by God--"

"That's all right, sir," put in Hal, quickly. "I'll manage that for you--I'll shut him up.
If you'd like me to, I'll see what fellows he talks with, and if any of them are trying to
make trouble, I'll tip you off."

"Now that's the talk," said the boss, promptly. "You do that, and I'll keep my eye on you and
give you a chance. Not that I'm afraid of the old fellow--I told him last time that if I heard
from him again, I'd kick the breeches off him. But when you got half a thousand of this foreign
scum, some of them Anarchists, and some of them Bulgars and Montynegroes that's been fightin'
each other at home--"

"I understand," said Hal. "You have to watch 'em."

"That's it," said the pit-boss. "And by the way, when you tell the store-clerk about that fifteen
dollars, just say you lost it at poker."

"I said ten dollars," put in Hal, quickly.

"Yes, I know," responded the other. "But I said fifteen!"

SECTION 22.

Hal told himself with satisfaction that he was now to do the real work of coal-mining. His
imagination had been occupied with it for a long time; but as so often happens in the life
of man, the first contact with reality killed the results of many years' imagining. It killed
all imagining, in fact; Hal found that his entire stock of energy, both mental and physical,
was consumed in enduring torment. If any one had told him the horror of attempting to work
in a room five feet high, he would not have believed it. It was like some of the dreadful devices
of torture which one saw in European castles, the "iron maiden" and the "spiked collar." Hal's
back burned as if hot irons were being run up and down it; every separate joint and muscle
cried aloud. It seemed as if he could never learn the lesson of the jagged ceiling above his
head--he bumped it and continued to bump it, until his scalp was a mass of cuts and bruises,
and his head ached till he was nearly blind, and he would have to throw himself flat on the ground.

Then old Mike Sikoria would grin. "I know. Like green mule! Some day get tough!"

Hal recalled the great thick callouses on the flanks of his former charges, where the harness
rubbed against them. "Yes, I'm a 'green mule,' all right!"

It was amazing how many ways there were to bruise and tear one's fingers, loading lumps of
coal into a car. He put on a pair of gloves, but these wore through in a day. And then the
gas, and the smoke of powder, stifling one; and the terrible burning of the eyes, from the
dust and the feeble light. There was no way to rub these burning eyes, because everything about
one was equally dusty. Could anybody have imagined the torment of that--any of those ladies
who rode in softly upholstered parlour-cars, or reclined upon the decks of steam-ships in gleaming
tropic seas?

Old Mike was good to his new "buddy." Mike's spine was bent and his hands were hardened by
forty years of this sort of toil, so he could do the work of two men, and entertain his friend
with comments into the bargain. The old fellow had the habit of talking all the time, like
a child; he would talk to his helper, to himself, to his tools. He would call these tools by
obscene and terrifying names--but with entire friendliness and good humour. "Get in there,
you son-of-a-gun!" he would say to his pick. "Come along here, you wop!" he would say to his
car. "In with you, now, you old buster!" he would say to a lump of coal. And he would lecture
Hal on the details of mining. He would tell stories of successful days, or of terrible mishaps.
Above all he would tell about rascality--cursing the "G. F. C.," its foremen and superintendents,
its officials, directors and stock-holders, and the world which permitted such a criminal institution
to exist.

Noon-time would come, and Hal would lie upon his back, too worn to eat. Old Mike would sit
munching; his abundant whiskers came to a point on his chin, and as his jaws moved, he looked
for all the world like an aged billy-goat. He was a kind-hearted and anxious old billy-goat,
and sought to tempt his buddy with a bit of cheese or a swig of cold coffee. He believed in
eating--no man could keep up steam if he did not stoke the furnace. Failing in this, he would
try to divert Hal's mind, telling stories of mining-life in America and Russia. He was most
proud to have an "American feller" for a buddy, and tried to make the work as easy as possible,
for fear lest Hal might quit.

Hal did not quit; but he would drag himself out towards night, so exhausted that he would fall
asleep in the cage. He would fall asleep at supper, and go in and sink down on his cot and
sleep like a log. And oh, the torture of being routed out before daybreak! Having to shake
the sleep out of his head, and move his creaking joints, and become aware of the burning in
his eyes, and the blisters and sores on his hands!

It was a week before he had a moment that was not pain; and he never got fully used to the
labour. It was impossible for any one to work so hard and keep his mental alertness, his eagerness
and sensitiveness; it was impossible to work so hard and be an adventurer--to be anything,
in fact, but a machine. Hal had heard that phrase of contempt, "the inertia of the masses,"
and had wondered about it. He no longer wondered, he knew. Could a man be brave enough to protest
to a pit-boss when his body was numb with weariness? Could he think out a definite conclusion
as to his rights and wrongs, and back his conclusion with effective action, when his mental
faculties were paralysed by such weariness of body?

Hal had come here, as one goes upon the deck of a ship in mid-ocean, to see the storm. In this
ocean of social misery, of ignorance and despair, one saw upturned, tortured faces, writhing
limbs and clutching hands; in one's ears was a storm of lamentation, upon one's cheek a spray
of blood and tears. Hal found himself so deep in this ocean that he could no longer find consolation
in the thought that he could escape whenever he wanted to: that he could say to himself, It
is sad, it is terrible--but thank God, I can get out of it when I choose! I can go back into
the warm and well-lighted saloon and tell the other passengers how picturesque it is, what
an interesting experience they are missing!

SECTION 23.

During these days of torment, Hal did not go to see "Red Mary"; but then, one evening, the
Minettis' baby having been sick, she came in to ask about it, bringing what she called "a bit
of a custard" in a bowl. Hal was suspicious enough of the ways of men, especially of business-men;
but when it came to women he was without insight--it did not occur to him as singular that
an Irish girl with many troubles at home should come out to nurse a Dago woman's baby. He did
not reflect that there were plenty of sick Irish babies in the camp, to whom Mary might have
taken her "bit of a custard." And when he saw the surprise of Rosa, who had never met Mary
before, he took it to be the touching gratitude of the poor!

There are, in truth, many kinds of women, with many arts, and no man has time to learn them
all. Hal had observed the shop-girl type, who dress themselves with many frills, and cast side-long
glances, and indulge in fits of giggles to attract the attention of the male; he was familiar
with the society-girl type, who achieve the same end with more subtle and alluring means. But
could there be a type who hold little Dago babies in their laps, and call them pretty Irish
names, and feed them custard out of a spoon? Hal had never heard of that kind, and he thought
that "Red Mary" made a charming picture--a Celtic madonna with a Sicilian infant in her arms.

He noticed that she was wearing the same faded blue calico-dress with a patch on the shoulder.
Man though he was, he realised that dress is an important consideration in the lives of women.
He was tempted to suspect that this blue calico might be the only dress that Mary owned; but
seeing it newly laundered every time, he concluded that she must have at least one other. At
any rate, here she was, crisp and fresh-looking; and with the new shining costume, she had
put on the long promised "company manner": high spirits and badinage, precisely like any belle
of the world of luxury, who powders and bedecks herself for a ball. She had been grim and complaining
in former meetings with this interesting young man; she had frightened him away, apparently;
perhaps she could win him back by womanliness and good humour.

She rallied him upon his battered scalp and his creaking back, telling him he looked ten years
older--which he was fully prepared to believe. Also she had fun with him for working under
a Slovak--another loss of caste, it appeared! This was a joke the Minettis could share in--especially
Little Jerry, who liked jokes. He told Mary how Joe Smith had had to pay fifteen dollars for
his new job, besides several drinks at O'Callahan's. Also he told how Mike Sikoria had called
Joe his "green mule." Little Jerry complained about the turn of events, for in the old days
Joe had taught him a lot of fine new games--and now he was sore, and would not play them. Also,
in the old days he had sung a lot of jolly songs, full of the most fascinating rhymes. There
was a song about a "monkey puzzle tree"! Had Mary ever seen that kind of tree? Little Jerry
never got tired of trying to imagine what it might look like.

The Dago urchin stood and watched gravely while Mary fed the custard to the baby; and when
two or three spoonfuls were held out to him, he opened his mouth wide, and afterwards licked
his lips. Gee, that was good stuff!

When the last taste was gone, he stood gazing at Mary's shining coronet. "Say," said he, "was
your hair always like that?"

Hal and Mary burst into laughter, while Rosa cried "Hush!" She was never sure what this youngster
would say next.

"Sure, did ye think I painted it?" asked Mary.

"I didn't know," said Little Jerry. "It looks so nice and new." And he turned to Hal. "Ain't it?"

"You bet," said Hal, and added, "Go on and tell her about it. Girls like compliments."

"Compliments?" echoed Little Jerry. "What's that?"

"Why," said Hal, "that's when you say that her hair is like the sunrise, and her eyes are like
twilight, or that she's a wild rose on a mountain-side."

"Oh," said the Dago urchin, somewhat doubtfully. "Anyhow," he added, "she make nice custard!"

SECTION 24.

The time came for Mary to take her departure, and Hal got up, wincing with pain, to escort
her home. She regarded him gravely, having not realised before how seriously he was suffering.
As they walked along she asked, "Why do ye do such work, when ye don't have to?"

"But I do have to! I have to earn a living!"

"Ye don't have to earn it that way! A bright young fellow like you--an American!"

"Well," said Hal, "I thought it would be interesting to see coal mining."

"Now ye've seen it," said the girl--"now quit!"

"But it won't do me any harm to go on for a while!"

"Won't it? How can ye know? When any day they may carry you out on a plank!"

Her "company manner" was gone; her voice was full of bitterness, as it always was when she
spoke of North Valley. "I know what I'm tellin' ye, Joe Smith. Didn't I lose two brothers in
it--as fine lads as ye'd find anywhere in the world! And many another lad I've seen go in laughin',
and come out a corpse--or what is worse, for workin' people, a cripple. Sometimes I'd like
to go and stand at the pit-mouth in the mornin' and cry to them, 'Go back, go back! Go down
the canyon this day! Starve, if ye have to, beg if ye have to, only find some other work but
coal-minin'!'"

Her voice had risen to a passion of protest; when she went on a new note came into it--a note
of personal terror. "It's worse now--since you came, Joe! To see ye settin' out on the life
of a miner--you, that are young and strong and different. Oh, go away, Joe, go away while ye can!"

He was astonished at her intensity. "Don't worry about me, Mary," he said. "Nothing will happen
to me. I'll go away after a while."

The path was irregular, and he had been holding her arm as they walked. He felt her trembling,
and went on again, quickly, "It's not I that should go away, Mary. It's yourself. You hate
the place--it's terrible for you to have to live here. Have you never thought of going away?"

She did not answer at once, and when she did the excitement was gone from her voice; it was
flat and dull with despair. "'Tis no use to think of me. There's nothin' I can do--there's
nothin' any girl can do when she's poor. I've tried--but 'tis like bein' up against a stone
wall. I can't even save the money to get on a train with! I've tried it--I been savin' for
two years--and how much d'ye think I got, Joe? Seven dollars! Seven dollars in two years! No--ye
can't save money in a place where there's so many things that wring the heart. Ye may hate
them for being cowards--but ye must help when ye see a man killed, and his family turned out
without a roof to cover them in the winter-time!"

"You're too tender-hearted, Mary."

"No, 'tis not that! Should I go off and leave me own brother and sister, that need me?"

"But you could earn money and send it to them."

"I earn a little here--I do cleanin' and nursin' for some that need me."

"But outside--couldn't you earn more?"

"I could get a job in a restaurant for seven or eight a week, but I'd have to spend more, and
what I sent home would not go so far, with me away. Or I could get a job in some other woman's
home, and work fourteen hours a day for it. But, Joe, 'tis not more drudgery I want, 'tis somethin'
fair to look upon--somethin' of my own!" She flung out her arms suddenly like one being stifled.
"Oh, I want somethin' that's fair and clean!"

Again he felt her trembling. Again the path was rough, and having an impulse of sympathy, he
put his arm about her. In the world of leisure, one might indulge in such considerateness,
and he assumed it would not he different with a miner's daughter. But then, when she was close
to him, he felt, rather than heard, a sob.

"Mary!" he whispered; and they stopped. Almost without realising it, he put his other arm about
her, and in a moment more he felt her warm breath on his cheek, and she was trembling and shaking
in his embrace. "Joe! Joe!" she whispered. "You take me away!"

She was a rose in a mining-camp, and Hal was deeply moved. The primrose path of dalliance stretched
fair before him, here in the soft summer night, with a moon overhead which bore the same message
as it bore in the Italian gardens of the leisure-class. But not many minutes passed before
a cold fear began to steal over Hal. There was a girl at home, waiting for him; and also there
was the resolve which had been growing in him since his coming to this place--a resolve to
find some way of compensation to the poor, to repay them for the freedom and culture he had
taken; not to prey upon them, upon any individual among them. There were the Jeff Cottons for that!

"Mary," he pleaded, "we mustn't do this."

"Why not?"

"Because--I'm not free. There is some one else."

He felt her start, but she did not draw away.

"Where?" she asked, in a low voice.

"At home, waiting for me."

"And why didn't ye tell me?"

"I don't know."

Hal realised in a moment that the girl had ground of complaint against him. According to the
simple code of her world, he had gone some distance with her; he had been seen to walk out
with her, he had been accounted her "fellow." He had led her to talk to him of herself--he
had insisted upon having her confidences. And these people who were poor did not have subtleties,
there was no room in their lives for intellectual curiosities, for Platonic friendships or
philanderings. "Forgive me, Mary!" he said.

She made no answer; but a sob escaped her, and she drew back from his arms--slowly. He struggled
with an impulse to clasp her again. She was beautiful, warm with life--and so much in need
of happiness!

But he held himself in check, and for a minute or two they stood apart. Then he asked, humbly,
"We can still be friends, Mary, can't we? You must know--I'm so sorry!"

But she could not endure being pitied. "'Tis nothin'," she said. "Only I thought I was going
to get away! That's what ye mean to me."

SECTION 25.

Hal had promised Alec Stone to keep a look-out for trouble-makers; and one evening the boss
stopped him on the street, and asked him if he had anything to report. Hal took the occasion
to indulge his sense of humour.

"There's no harm in Mike Sikoria," said he. "He likes to shoot off his head, but if he's got
somebody to listen, that's all he wants. He's just old and grouchy. But there's another fellow
that I think would bear watching."

"Who's that?" asked the boss.

"I don't know his last name. They call him Gus and he's a 'cager.' Fellow with a red face."

"I know," said Stone--"Gus Durking."

"Well, he tried his best to get me to talk about unions. He keeps bringing it up, and I think
he's some kind of trouble-maker."

"I see," said the boss. "I'll get after him."

"You won't say I told you," said Hal, anxiously.

"Oh, no--sure not." And Hal caught the trace of a smile on the pit-boss's face.

He went away, smiling in his turn. The "red-faced feller. Gus," was the person Madvik had named
as being a "spotter" for the company!

There were ins and outs to this matter of "spotting," and sometimes it was not easy to know
what to think. One Sunday morning Hal went for a walk up the canyon, and on the way he met
a young chap who got to talking with him, and after a while brought up the question of working-conditions
in North Valley. He had only been there a week, he said, but everybody he had met seemed to
be grumbling about short weight. He himself had a job as an "outside man," so it made no difference
to him, but he was interested, and wondered what Hal had found.

Straightway came the question, was this really a workingman, or had Alec Stone set some one
to spying upon his spy. This was an intelligent fellow, an American--which in itself was suspicious,
for most of the new men the company got in were from "somewhere East of Suez."

Hal decided to spar for a while. He did not know, he said, that conditions were any worse here
than elsewhere. You heard complaints, no matter what sort of job you took.

Yes, said the stranger, but matters seemed to be especially bad in the coal-camps. Probably
it was because they were so remote, and the companies owned everything in sight.

"Where have you been?" asked Hal, thinking that this might trap him.

But the other answered straight; he had evidently worked in half a dozen of the camps. In Mateo
he had paid a dollar a month for wash-house privileges, and there had never been any water
after the first three men had washed. There had been a common wash-tub for all the men, an
unthinkably filthy arrangement. At Pine Creek--Hal found the very naming of the place made
his heart stand still--at Pine Creek he had boarded with his boss, but the roof of the building
leaked, and everything he owned was ruined; the boss would do nothing--yet when the boarder
moved, he lost his job. At East Ridge, this man and a couple of other fellows had rented a
two room cabin and started to board themselves, in spite of the fact that they had to pay a
dollar-fifty a sack for potatoes and eleven cents a pound for sugar at the company store. They
had continued until they made the discovery that the water supply had run short, and that the
water for which they were paying the company a dollar a month was being pumped from the bottom
of the mine, where the filth of mules and men was plentiful!

Hal forced himself to remain non-committal; he shook his head and said it was too bad, but
the workers always got it in the neck, and he didn't see what they could do about it. So they
strolled back to the camp, the stranger evidently baffled, and Hal, for his part, feeling like
the reader of a detective story at the end of the first chapter. Was this young man the murderer,
or was he the hero? One would have to read on in the book to find out!

SECTION 26.

Hal kept his eye upon his new acquaintance, and perceived that he was talking with others.
Before long the man tackled Old Mike; and Mike of course could not refuse an invitation to
grumble, though it came from the devil himself. Hal decided that something must be done about it.

He consulted his friend Jerry, who, being a radical, might have some touch-stone by which to
test the stranger. Jerry sought him out at noon-time, and came back and reported that he was
as much in the dark as Hal. Either the man was an agitator, seeking to "start something," or
else he was a detective sent in by the company. There was only one way to find out--which was
for some one to talk freely with him, and see what happened to that person!

After some hesitation, Hal decided that he would be the victim. It rewakened his love of adventure,
which digging in a coal-mine had subdued in him. The mysterious stranger was a new sort of
miner, digging into the souls of men; Hal would countermine him, and perhaps blow him up. He
could afford the experiment better than some others--better, for example, than little Mrs.
David, who had already taken the stranger into her home, and revealed to him the fact that
her husband had been a member of the most revolutionary of all miners' organisations, the South
Wales Federation.

So next Sunday Hal invited the stranger for another walk. The man showed reluctance--until
Hal said that he wanted to talk to him. As they walked up the canyon, Hal began, "I've been
thinking about what you said of conditions in these camps, and I've concluded it would be a
good thing if we had a little shaking up here in North Valley."

"Is that so?" said the other.

"When I first came here, I used to think the men were grouchy. But now I've had a chance to
see for myself, and I don't believe anybody gets a square deal. For one thing, nobody gets
full weight in these mines--at least not unless he's some favourite of the boss. I'm sure of
it, for I've tried all sorts of experiments with my partner. We've loaded a car extra light,
and got eighteen hundredweight, and then we've loaded one high and solid, so that we'd know
it had twice as much in it--but all we ever got was twenty-two and twenty-three. There's just
no way you can get over that--though everybody knows those big cars can be made to hold two
or three tons."

"Yes, I suppose they might," said the other.

"And if you get the smallest piece of rock in, you get a 'double-O,' sure as fate; and sometimes
they say you got rock in when you didn't. There's no law to make them prove it."

"No, I suppose not."

"What it comes to is simply this--they make you think they are paying fifty-five a ton, but
they've secretly cut you down to thirty-five. And yesterday at the company-store I paid a dollar
and a half for a pair of blue overalls that I'd priced in Pedro for sixty cents."

"Well," said the other, "the company has to haul them up here, you know!"

So, gradually, Hal made the discovery that the tables were turned--the mysterious personage
was now occupied in holding him at arm's length! For some reason, Hal's sudden interest in
industrial justice had failed to make an impression.

So his career as a detective came to an inglorious end. "Say, man!" he exclaimed "What's your
game, anyhow?"

"Game?" said the other, quietly. "How do you mean?"

"I mean, what are you here for?"

"I'm here for two dollars a day--the same as you, I guess."

Hal began to laugh. "You and I are like a couple of submarines, trying to find each other under
water. I think we'd better come to the surface to do our fighting."

The other considered the simile, and seemed to like it. "You come first," said he. But he did
not smile. His quiet blue eyes were fixed on Hal with deadly seriousness.

"All right," said Hal; "my story isn't very thrilling. I'm not an escaped convict, I'm not
a company spy, as you may be thinking. Nor am I a 'natural born' coal-miner. I happen to have
a brother and some friends at home who think they know about the coal-industry, and it got
on my nerves, and I came to see for myself. That's all, except that I've found things interesting,
and want to stay on a while, so I hope you aren't a 'dick'!"

The other walked in silence, weighing Hal's words. "That's not exactly what you'd call a usual
story," he remarked, at last.

"I know," replied Hal. "The best I can say for it is that it's true."

"Well," said the stranger, "I'll take a chance on it. I have to trust somebody, if I'm ever
to get anywhere. I picked you out because I liked your face." He gave Hal another searching
look as he walked. "Your smile isn't that of a cheat. But you're young--so let me remind you
of the importance of secrecy in this place."

"I'll keep mum," said Hal; and the stranger opened a flap inside his shirt, and drew out a
letter which certified him to be Thomas Olson, an organiser for the United Mine-Workers, the
great national union of the coal-miners!

SECTION 27.

Hal was so startled by this discovery that he stopped in his tracks and gazed at the man. He
had heard a lot about "trouble-makers" in the camps, but so far the only kind he had seen were
those hired by the company to make trouble for the men. But now, here was a union organiser!
Jerry had suggested the possibility, but Hal had not thought of it seriously; an organiser
was a mythological creature, whispered about by the miners, cursed by the company and its servants,
and by Hal's friends at home. An incendiary, a fire-brand, a loudmouthed, irresponsible person,
stirring up blind and dangerous passions! Having heard such things all his life, Hal's first
impulse was of distrust. He felt like the one-legged old switchman who had given him a place
to sleep, after his beating at Pine Creek, and who had said, "Don't you talk no union business
to me!"

Seeing Hal's emotion, the organiser gave an uneasy laugh. "While you're hoping I'm not a 'dick,'
I trust you understand I'm hoping you're not one."

Hal's answer was to the point. "I was taken for an organiser once," he said, and his hands
sought the seat of his ancient bruises.

The other laughed. "You got off with a beating? You were lucky. Down in Alabama, not so long
ago, they tarred and feathered one of us."

Dismay came upon Hal's face; but after a moment he too began to laugh. "I was just thinking
about my brother and his friends--what they'd have said if I'd come home from Pine Creek in
a coat of tar and feathers!"

"Possibly," ventured the other, "they'd have said you got what you deserved."

"Yes, that seems to be their attitude. That's the rule they apply to all the world--if anything
goes wrong with you, it must he your own fault. It's a land of equal opportunity."

"And you'll notice," said the organiser, "that the more privileges people have had, the more
boldly they talk that way."

Hal began to feel a sense of comradeship with this stranger, who was able to understand one's
family troubles! It had been a long time since Hal had talked with any one from the outside
world, and he found it a relief to his mind. He remembered how, after he had got his beating,
he had lain out in the rain and congratulated himself that he was not what the guards had taken
him for. Now he was curious about the psychology of an organiser. A man must have strong convictions
to follow that occupation!

He made the remark, and the other answered, "You can have my pay any time you'll do my work.
But let me tell you, too, it isn't being beaten and kicked out of camp that bothers one most;
it isn't the camp-marshal and the spy and the blacklist. Your worst troubles are inside the
heads of the fellows you're trying to help! Have you ever thought what it would mean to try
to explain things to men who speak twenty different languages?"

"Yes, of course," said Hal. "I wonder how you ever get a start."

"Well, you look for an interpreter--and maybe he's a company spy. Or maybe the first man you
try to convert reports you to the boss. For, of course, some of the men are cowards, and some
of them are crooks; they'll sell out the next fellow for a better 'place'--maybe for a glass
of beer."

"That must have a tendency to weaken your convictions," said Hal.

"No," said the other, in a matter of fact tone. "It's hard, but one can't blame the poor devils.
They're ignorant--kept so deliberately. The bosses bring them here, and have a regular system
to keep them from getting together. And of course these European peoples have their old prejudices--national
prejudices, religious prejudices, that keep them apart. You see two fellows, one you think
is exactly as miserable as the other--but you find him despising the other, because back home
he was the other's superior. So they play into the bosses' hands."

SECTION 28.

They had come to a remote place in the canyon, and found themselves seats on a flat rock, where
they could talk in comfort.

"Put yourself in their place," said the organiser. "They're in a strange country, and one person
tells them one thing, and another tells them something else. The masters and their agents say:
'Don't trust the union agitators. They're a lot of grafters, they live easy and don't have
to work. They take your money and call you out on strike, and you lose your jobs and your home;
they sell you out, maybe, and go on to some other place to repeat the same trick.' And the
workers think maybe that's true; they haven't the wit to see that if the union leaders are
corrupt, it must be because the bosses are buying them. So you see, they're completely bedevilled;
they don't know which way to turn."

The man was speaking quietly, but there was a little glow of excitement in his face. "The company
is forever repeating that these people are satisfied--that it's we who are stirring them up.
But are they satisfied? You've been here long enough to know!"

"There's no need to discuss that," Hal answered. "Of course they're not satisfied! They've
seemed to me like a lot of children crying in the dark--not knowing what's the matter with
them, or who's to blame, or where to turn for help."

Hal found himself losing his distrust of this man. He did not correspond in any way to Hal's
imaginary picture of a union organiser; he was a blue-eyed, clean-looking young American, and
instead of being wild and loud-mouthed, he seemed rather wistful. He had indignation, of course,
but it did not take the form of ranting or florid eloquence; and this repression was making
its appeal to Hal, who, in spite of his democratic impulses, had the habits of thought of a
class which shrinks from noisiness and over-emphasis.

Also Hal was interested in his attitude towards the weaknesses of working-people. The "inertia"
of the poor, which caused so many people to despair for them--their cowardice and instability--these
were things about which Hal had heard all his life. "You can't help them," people would say.
"They're dirty and lazy, they drink and shirk, they betray each other. They've always been
like that." The idea would be summed up in a formula: "You can't change human nature!" Even
Mary Burke, herself one of the working-class, spoke of the workers in this angry and scornful
way. But Olson had faith in their manhood, and went ahead to awaken and teach them.

To his mind the path was clear and straight. "They must be taught the lesson of solidarity.
As individuals, they're helpless in the power of the great corporations; but if they stand
together, if they sell their labour as a unit--then they really count for something." He paused,
and looked at the other inquiringly. "How do you feel about unions?"

Hal answered, "They're one of the things I want to find out about. You hear this and that--there's
so much prejudice on each side. I want to help the under dog, but I want to be sure of the
right way."

"What other way is there?" And Olson paused. "To appeal to the tender hearts of the owners?"

"Not exactly; but mightn't one appeal to the world in general--to public opinion? I was brought
up an American, and learned to believe in my country. I can't think but there's some way to
get justice. Maybe if the men were to go into politics--"

"Politics?" cried Olson. "My God! How long have you been in this place?"

"Only a couple of months."

"Well, stay till November, and see what they do with the ballot-boxes in these camps!"

"I can imagine, of course--"

"No, you can't. Any more than you could imagine the graft and the misery!"

"But if the men should take to voting together--"

"How can they take to voting together--when any one who mentions the idea goes down the canyon?
Why, you can't even get naturalisation papers, unless you're a company man; they won't register
you, unless the boss gives you an O. K. How are you going to make a start, unless you have
a union?"

It sounded reasonable, Hal had to admit; but he thought of the stories he had heard about "walking
delegates," all the dreadful consequences of "union domination." He had not meant to go in
for unionism!

Olson was continuing. "We've had laws passed, a whole raft of laws about coal-mining--the eight-hour
law, the anti-scrip law, the company-store law, the mine-sprinkling law, the check-weighman
law. What difference has it made in North Valley that there are such laws on the statute-books?
Would you ever even know about them?"

"Ah, now!" said Hal. "If you put it that way--if your movement is to have the law enforced--I'm
with you!"

"But how will you get the law enforced, except by a union? No individual man can do it--it's
'down the canyon' with him if he mentions the law. In Western City our union people go to the
state officials, but they never do anything--and why? They know we haven't got the men behind
us! It's the same with the politicians as it is with the bosses--the union is the thing that
counts!"

Hal found this an entirely new argument. "People don't realise that idea--that men have to
be organised to get their legal rights."

And the other threw up his hands with a comical gesture. "My God! If you want to make a list
of the things that people don't realise about us miners!"

SECTION 29.

Olson was eager to win Hal, and went on to tell all the secrets of his work. He sought men
who believed in unions, and were willing to take the risk of trying to convert others. In each
place he visited he would get a group together, and would arrange some way to communicate with
them after he left, smuggling in propaganda literature for distribution. So there would be
the nucleus of an organisation. In a year or two they would have such a nucleus in every camp,
and then they would be ready to come into the open, calling meetings in the towns, and in places
in the canyons to which the miners would flock. So the flame of revolt would leap up; men would
join the movement faster than the companies could get rid of them, and they would make a demand
for their rights, backed with the threat of a strike throughout the entire district.

"You understand," added Olson, "we have a legal right to organise--even though the bosses disapprove.
You need not stand back on that score."

"Yes," said Hal; "but it occurs to me that as a matter of tactics, it would be better here
in North Valley if you chose some issue there's less controversy about; if, for instance, you'd
concentrate on getting a check-weighman."

The other smiled. "We'd have to have a union to back the demand; so what's the difference?"

"Well," argued Hal, "there are prejudices to be reckoned with. Some people don't like the idea
of a union--they think it means tyranny and violence--"

The organiser laughed. "You aren't convinced but that it does yourself, are you! Well, all
I can tell you is, if you want to tackle the job of getting a check-weighman in North Valley,
I'll not stand in your way!"

Here was an idea--a real idea! Life had grown dull for Hal since he had become a buddy, working
in a place five feet high. This would promise livelier times!

But was it a thing he wanted to do? So far he had been an observer of conditions in this coal-camp.
He had convinced himself that conditions were cruel, and he had pretty well convinced himself
that the cruelty was needless and deliberate. But when it came to a question of an action to
be taken--then he hesitated, and old prejudices and fears made themselves heard. He had been
told that labour was "turbulent" and "lazy," that it had to be "ruled with a strong hand";
now, was he willing to weaken the strong hand, to ally himself with those who "fomented labour
troubles"?

But this would not be the same thing, he told himself. This suggestion of Olson's was different
from trade unionism, which might be a demoralising force, leading the workers from one demand
to another, until they were seeking to "dominate industry." This would be merely an appeal
to the law, a test of that honesty and fair dealing to which the company everywhere laid claim.
If, as the bosses proclaimed, the workers were fully protected by the check-weighman law; if,
as all the world was made to believe, the reason there was no check-weighman was simply because
the men did not ask for one--why, then there would be no harm done. If on the other hand a
demand for a right that was not merely a legal right, but a moral right as well--if that were
taken by the bosses as an act of rebellion against the company--well, Hal would understand
a little more about the "turbulence" of labour! If, as Old Mike and Johannson and the rest
maintained, the bosses would "make your life one damn misery" till you left--then he would
be ready to make a few damn miseries for the bosses in return!

"It would be an adventure," said Hal, suddenly.

And the other laughed. "It would that!"

"You're thinking I'll have another Pine Creek experience," Hal added. "Well, maybe so--but
I have to try things out for myself. You see, I've got a brother at home, and when I think
about going in for revolution, I have imaginary arguments with him. I want to be able to say
'I didn't swallow anybody's theories; I tried it for myself, and this is what happened.'"

"Well," replied the organiser, "that's all right. But while you're seeking education for yourself
and your brother, don't forget that I've already got my education. I know what happens to men
who ask for a check-weighman, and I can't afford to sacrifice myself proving it again."

"I never asked you to," laughed Hal. "If I won't join your movement, I can't expect you to
join mine! But if I can find a few men who are willing to take the risk of making a demand
for a check-weighman--that won't hurt your work, will it?"

"Sure not!" said the other. "Just the opposite--it'll give me an object lesson to point to.
There are men here who don't even know they've a legal right to a check-weighman. There are
others who know they don't get their weights, but aren't sure its the company that's cheating
them. If the bosses should refuse to let any one inspect the weights, if they should go further
and fire the men who ask it--well, there'll be plenty of recruits for my union local!"

"All right," said Hal. "I'm not setting out to recruit your union local, but if the company
wants to recruit it, that's the company's affair!" And on this bargain the two shook hands.

BOOK TWO

THE SERFS OF KING COAL

SECTION 1.

Hal was now started upon a new career, more full of excitements than that of stableman or buddy,
with perils greater than those of falling rock or the hind feet of mules in the stomach. The
inertia which overwork produces had not had time to become a disease with him; youth was on
his side, with its zest for more and yet more experience. He found it thrilling to be a conspirator,
to carry about with him secrets as dark and mysterious as the passages of the mine in which
he worked.

But Jerry Minetti, the first person he told of Tom Olson's purpose in North Valley, was older
in such thrills. The care-free look which Jerry was accustomed to wear vanished abruptly, and
fear came into his eyes. "I know it come some day," he exclaimed--"trouble for me and Rosa!"

"How do you mean?"

"We get into it--get in sure. I say Rosa, 'Call yourself Socialist--what good that do? No help
any. No use to vote here--they don't count no Socialist vote, only for joke!' I say, 'Got to
have union. Got to strike!' But Rosa say, 'Wait little bit. Save little bit money, let children
grow up. Then we help, no care if we no got any home.'"

"But we're not going to start a union now!" objected Hal. "I have another plan for the present."

Jerry, however, was not to be put at ease. "No can wait!" he declared. "Men no stand it! I
say, 'It come some day quick--like blow-up in mine! Somebody start fight, everybody fight.'"
And Jerry looked at Rosa, who sat with her black eyes fixed anxiously upon her husband. "We
get into it," he said; and Hal saw their eyes turn to the room where Little Jerry and the baby
were sleeping.

Hal said nothing--he was beginning to understand the meaning of rebellion to such people. He
watched with curiosity and pity the struggle that went on; a struggle as old as the soul of
man--between the voice of self-interest, of comfort and prudence, and the call of duty, of
the ideal. No trumpet sounded for this conflict, only the still small voice within.

After a while Jerry asked what it was Hal and Olson had planned; and Hal explained that he
wanted to make a test of the company's attitude toward the check-weighman law. Hal thought
it a fine scheme; what did Jerry think?

Jerry smiled sadly. "Yes, fine scheme for young feller--no got family!"

"That's all right," said Hal, "I'll take the job--I'll be the check-weighman."

"Got to have committee," said Jerry--"committee go see boss."

"All right, but we'll get young fellows for that too--men who have no families. Some of the
fellows who live in the chicken-coops in shanty-town. They won't care what happens to them."

But Jerry would not share Hal's smile. "No got sense 'nough, them fellers. Take sense to stick
together." He explained that they would need a group of men to stand back of the committee;
such a group would have to be organised, to hold meetings in secret--it would be practically
the same thing as a union, would be so regarded by the bosses and their spotters. And no organisation
of any sort was permitted in the camps. There had been some Serbians who had wanted to belong
to a fraternal order back in their home country, but even that had been forbidden. If you wanted
to insure your life or your health, the company would attend to it--and get the profit from
it. For that matter, you could not even buy a post-office money-order, to send funds back to
the old country; the post-office clerk, who was at the same time a clerk in the company-store,
would sell you some sort of a store-draft.

So Hal was facing the very difficulties about which Olson had warned him. The first of them
was Jerry's fear. Yet Hal knew that Jerry was no "coward"; if any man had a contempt for Jerry's
attitude, it was because he had never been in Jerry's place!

"All I'll ask of you now is advice," said Hal. "Give me the names of some young fellows who
are trustworthy, and I'll get their help without anybody suspecting you."

"You my boarder!" was Jerry's reply to this.

So again Hal was "up against it." "You mean that would get you into trouble?"

"Sure! They know we talk. They know I talk Socialism, anyhow. They fire me sure!"

"But how about your cousin, the pit-boss in Number One?"

"He no help. May be get fired himself. Say damn fool--board check-weighman!"

"All right," said Hal. "Then I'll move away now, before it's too late. You can say I was a
trouble-maker, and you turned me off."

The Minettis sat gazing at each other--a mournful pair. They hated to lose their boarder, who
was such good company, and paid them such good money. As for Hal, he felt nearly as bad, for
he liked Jerry and his girl-wife, and Little Jerry--even the black-eyed baby, who made so much
noise and interrupted conversation!

"No!" said Jerry. "I no run, away! I do my share!"

"That's all right," replied Hal. "You do your share--but not just yet. You stay on in the camp
and help Olson after I'm fired. We don't want the best men put out at once."

So, after further argument, it was decided, and Hal saw little Rosa sink back in her chair
and draw a deep breath of relief. The time for martyrdom was put off; her little three-roomed
cabin, her furniture and her shining pans and her pretty white lace curtains, might be hers
for a few weeks longer!

SECTION 2.

Hal went back to Reminitsky's boarding-house; a heavy sacrifice, but not without its compensations,
because it gave him more chance to talk with the men.

He and Jerry made up a list of those who could be trusted with the secret: the list beginning
with the name of Mike Sikoria. To be put on a committee, and sent to interview a boss, would
appeal to Old Mike as the purpose for which he had been put upon earth! But they would not
tell him about it until the last minute, for fear lest in his excitement he might shout out
the announcement the next time he lost one of his cars.

There was a young Bulgarian miner named Wresmak who worked near Hal. The road into this man's
room ran up an incline, and he had hardly been able to push his "empties" up the grade. While
he was sweating and straining at the task, Alec Stone had come along, and having a giant's
contempt for physical weakness, began to cuff him. The man raised his arm--whether in offence
or to ward off the blow, no one could be sure; but Stone fell upon him and kicked him all the
way down the passage, pouring out upon him furious curses. Now the man was in another room,
where he had taken out over forty car-loads of rock, and been allowed only three dollars for
it. No one who watched his face when the pit-boss passed would doubt that this man would be
ready to take his chances in a movement of protest.

Then there was a man whom Jerry knew, who had just come out of the hospital, after contact
with the butt-end of the camp-marshal's revolver. This was a Pole, who unfortunately did not
know a word of English; but Olson, the organiser, had got into touch with another Pole, who
spoke a little English, and would pass the word on to his fellow-countryman. Also there was
a young Italian, Rovetta, whom Jerry knew and whose loyalty he could vouch for.

There was another person Hal thought of--Mary Burke. He had been deliberately avoiding her
of late; it seemed the one safe thing to do--although it seemed also a cruel thing, and left
his mind ill at ease. He went over and over what had happened. How had the trouble got started?
It is a man's duty in such cases to take the blame upon himself; but a man does not like to
take blame upon himself, and he tries to make it as light as possible. Should Hal say that
it was because he had been too officious that night in helping Mary where the path was rough?
She had not actually needed such help, she was quite as capable on her feet as he! But he had
really gone farther than that--he had had a definite sentimental impulse; and he had been a
cad--he should have known all along that all this girl's discontent, all the longing of her
starved soul, would become centred upon him, who was so "different," who had had opportunity,
who made her think of the "poetry-books"!

But here suddenly seemed a solution of the difficulty; here was a new interest for Mary, a
safe channel in which her emotions could run. A woman could not serve on a miners' committee,
but she would be a good adviser, and her sharp tongue would be a weapon to drive others into
line. Being aflame with this enterprise, Hal became impersonal, man-fashion--and so fell into
another sentimental trap! He did not stop to think that Mary's interest in the check-weighman
movement might be conditioned in part by a desire to see more of him; still less did it occur
to him that he might be glad for a pretext to see Mary.

No, he was picturing her in a new role, an activity more inspiriting than cooking and nursing.
His "poetry-book" imagination took fire; he gave her a hope and a purpose, a pathway with a
goal at the end. Had there not been women leaders in every great proletarian movement?

He went to call on her, and met her at the door of her cabin. "'Tis a cheerin' sight to see
ye, Joe Smith!" she said. And she looked him in the eye and smiled.

"The same to you, Mary Burke!" he answered.

She was game, he saw; she was going to be a "good sport." But he noticed that she was paler
than when he had seen her last. Could it be that these gorgeous Irish complexions ever faded?
He thought that she was thinner too; the old blue calico seemed less tight upon her.

Hal plunged into his theme. "Mary, I had a vision of you to-day!"

"Of me, lad? What's that?"

He laughed. "I saw you with a glory in your face, and your hair shining like a crown of gold.
You were mounted on a snow-white horse, and wore a robe of white, soft and lustrous--like Joan
of Arc, or a leader in a suffrage parade. You were riding at the head of a host--I've still
got the music in my ears, Mary!"

"Go on with ye, lad--what's all this about?"

"Come in and I'll tell you," he said.

So they went into the bare kitchen, and sat in bare wooden chairs--Mary folding her hands in
her lap like a child who has been promised a fairy-story. "Now hurry," said she. "I want to
know about this new dress ye're givin' me. Are ye tired of me old calico?"

He joined in her smile. "This is a dress you will weave for yourself, Mary, out of the finest
threads of your own nature--out of courage and devotion and self-sacrifice."

"Sure, 'tis the poetry-book again! But what is it ye're really meanin'?"

He looked about him. "Is anybody here?"

"Nobody."

But instinctively he lowered his voice as he told his story. There was an organiser of the
"big union" in the camp, and he was going to rouse the slaves to protest.

The laughter went out of Mary's face. "Oh! It's that!" she said, in a flat tone. The vision
of the snow-white horse and the soft and lustrous robe was gone. "Ye can never do anything
of that sort here!"

"Why not?"

"'Tis the men in this place. Don't ye remember what I told ye at Mr. Rafferty's? They're cowards!"

"Ah, Mary, it's easy to say that. But it's not so pleasant being turned out of your home--"

"Do ye have to tell me that?" she cried, with sudden passion. "Haven't I seen that?"

"Yes, Mary; but I want to do something--"

"Yes, and haven't I wanted to do something? Sure, I've wanted to bite off the noses of the bosses!"

"Well," he laughed, "we'll make that a part of our programme." But Mary was not to be lured
into cheerfulness; her mood was so full of pain and bewilderment that he had an impulse to
reach out and take her hand again. But he checked that; he had come to divert her energies
into a safe channel!

"We must waken these men to resistance, Mary!"

"Ye can't do it, Joe--not the English-speakin' men. The Greeks and the Bulgars, maybe--they're
fightin' at home, and they might fight here. But the Irish never--never! Them that had any
backbone went out long ago. Them that stayed has been made into boot-licks. I know them, every
man of them. They grumble, and curse the boss, but then they think of the blacklist, and they
go back and cringe at his feet."

"What such men want--"

"'Tis booze they want, and carousin' with the rotten women in the coal-towns, and sittin' up
all night winnin' each other's money with a greasy pack of cards! They take their pleasure
where they find it, and 'tis nothin' better they want."

"Then, Mary, if that's so, don't you see it's all the more reason for trying to teach them?
If not for their own sakes, for the sake of their children! The children, mustn't grow up like
that! They are learning English, at least--"

Mary gave a scornful laugh. "Have ye been up to that school?"

He answered no; and she told him there were a hundred and twenty children packed in one room,
three in a seat, and solid all round the wall. She went on, with swift anger--the school was
supposed to be paid for out of taxes, but as nobody owned any property but the company, it
was all in the company's hands. The school-board consisted of Mr. Cartwright, the mine-superintendent,
and Jake Predovich, a clerk in the store, and the preacher, the Reverend Spraggs. Old Spraggs
would bump his nose on the floor if the "super" told him to.

"Now, now!" said Hal, laughing. "You're down on him because his grandfather was an Orangeman!"

SECTION 3.

Mary Burke had been suckled upon despair, and the poison of it was deep in her blood. Hal began
to realise that it would be as hard to give her a hope as to rouse the workers whom she despised.
She was brave enough, no doubt, but how could he persuade her to be brave for men who had no
courage for themselves?

"Mary," he said, "in your heart you don't really hate these people. You know how they suffer,
you pity them for it. You give their children your last cent when they need it--"

"Ah, lad!" she cried, and he saw tears suddenly spring into her eyes. "'Tis because I love
them so that I hate them! Sometimes 'tis the bosses I would murder, sometimes 'tis the men.
What is it ye're wantin' me to do?"

And then, even before he could answer, she began to run over the list of her acquaintances
in the camp. Yes, there was one man Hal ought to talk to; he would be too old to join them,
but his advice would be invaluable, and they could be sure he would never betray them. That
was old John Edstrom, a Swede from Minnesota, who had worked in this district from the time
the mines had first started up. He had been active in the great strike eight years ago, and
had been black-listed, his four sons with him. The sons were scattered now to the four parts
of the world, but the father had stayed nearby, working as a ranch-hand and railroad labourer,
until a couple of years ago, during a rush season, he had got a chance to come back into the mines.

He was old, old, declared Mary--must be sixty. And when Hal remarked that that did not sound
so frightfully aged, she answered that one seldom heard of a man being able to work in a coal-mine
at that age; in fact, there were not many who managed to live to that age. Edstrom's wife was
dying now, and he was having a hard time.

"'Twould not be fair to let such an old gentleman lose his job," said Mary. "But at least he
could give ye good advice."

So that evening the two of them went to call on John Edstrom, in a tiny unpainted cabin in
"shanty-town," with a bare earth floor, and a half partition of rough boards to hide his dying
wife from his callers. The woman's trouble was cancer, and this made calling a trying matter,
for there was a fearful odour in the place. For some time it was impossible for Hal to force
himself to think about anything else; but finally he overcame this weakness, telling himself
that this was a war, and that a man must be ready for the hospital as well as for the parade-ground.

He looked about, and saw that the cracks of Edstrom's cabin were stopped with rags, and the
broken windowpanes mended with brown paper. The old man had evidently made an effort to keep
the place neat, and Hal noticed a row of books on a shelf. Because it was cold in these mountain
regions at night, even in September, the old man had a fire in the little cast-iron stove,
and sat huddled by it. There were only a few hairs left on his head, and his scrubby beard
was as white as anything could be in a coal-camp. The first impression of his face was of its
pallor, and then of the benevolence in the faded dark eyes; also his voice was gentle, like
a caress. He rose to greet his visitors, and put out to Hal a trembling hand, which resembled
the paw of some animal, horny and misshapen. He made a move to draw up a bench, and apologised
for his unskillful house-keeping. It occurred to Hal that a man might be able to work in a
coal-mine at sixty, and not be able to work in it at sixty-one.

Hal had requested Mary to say nothing about his purpose, until after he had a chance to judge
for himself. So now the girl inquired about Mrs. Edstrom. There was no news, the man answered;
she was lying in a stupor, as usual. Dr. Barrett had come again, but all he could do was to
give her morphine. No one could do any more, the doctor declared.

"Sure, he'd not know it if they could!" sniffed Mary.

"He's not such a bad one, when he's sober," said Edstrom, patiently.

"And how often is that?" sniffed Mary again. She added, by way of explanation to Hal, "He's
a cousin of the super."

Things were better here than in some places, said Edstrom. At Harvey's Run, where he had worked,
a man had got his eye hurt, and had lost it through the doctor's instrument slipping; broken
arms and legs had been set wrong, and either the men had to go through life as cripples, or
go elsewhere and have the bones re-broken and reset, It was like everything else--the doctor
was a part of the company machine, and if you had too much to say about him, it was down the
canyon with you. You not only had a dollar a month taken out of your pay, but if you were injured,
and he came to attend you, he would charge whatever extra he pleased.

"And you have to pay?" asked Hal.

"They take it off your account," said the old man.

"Sometimes they take it when he's done nothin' at all," added Mary. "They charged Mrs. Zamboni
twenty-five dollars for her last baby--and Dr. Barrett never set foot across her door till
three hours after the baby was in my arms!"

SECTION 4.

The talk went on. Wishing to draw the old man out, Hal spoke of various troubles of the miners,
and at last he suggested that the remedy might be found in a union. Edstrom's dark eyes studied
him, and then turned to Mary. "Joe's all right," said the girl, quickly. "You can trust him."

Edstrom made no direct answer to this, but remarked that he had once been in a strike. He was
a marked man, now, and could only stay in the camp so long as he attended strictly to his own
affairs. The part he had played in the big strike had never been forgotten; the bosses had
let him work again, partly because they had needed him at a rush time, and partly because the
pit-boss happened to be a personal friend.

"Tell him about the big strike," said Mary. "He's new in this district."

The old man had apparently accepted Mary's word for Hal's good faith, for he began to narrate
those terrible events which were a whispered tradition of the camps. There had been a mighty
effort of ten thousand slaves for freedom; and it had been crushed with utter ruthlessness.
Ever since these mines had been started, the operators had controlled the local powers of government,
and now, in the emergency, they had brought in the state militia as well, and used it frankly
to drive the strikers back to work. They had seized the leaders and active men, and thrown
them into jail without trial or charges; when the jails would hold no more, they kept some
two hundred in an open stockade, called a "bull-pen," and finally they loaded them into freight-cars,
took them at night out of the state, and dumped them off in the midst of the desert without
food or water.

John Edstrom had been one of these men. He told how one of his sons had been beaten and severely
injured in jail, and how another had been kept for weeks in a damp cellar, so that he had come
out crippled with rheumatism for life. The officers of the state militia had done these things;
and when some of the local authorities were moved to protest, the militia had arrested them--even
the judges of the civil courts had been forbidden to sit, under threat of imprisonment. "To
hell with the constitution!" had been the word of the general in command; his subordinate had
made famous the saying, "No habeas corpus; we'll give them post-mortems!"

Tom Olson had impressed Hal with his self-control, but this old man made an even deeper impression
upon him. As he listened, he became humble, touched with awe. Incredible as it might seem,
when John Edstrom talked about his cruel experiences, it was without bitterness in his voice,
and apparently without any in his heart. Here, in the midst of want and desolation, with his
family broken and scattered, and the wolf of starvation at his door, he could look back upon
the past without hatred of those who had ruined him. Nor was this because he was old and feeble,
and had lost the spirit of revolt; it was because he had studied economics, and convinced himself
that it was an evil system which blinded men's eyes and poisoned their souls. A better day
was coming, he said, when this evil system would be changed, and it would be possible for men
to be merciful to one another.

At this point in the conversation, Mary Burke gave voice once more to her corroding despair.
How could things ever be changed? The bosses were mean-hearted, and the men were cowards and
traitors. That left nobody but God to do the changing--and God had left things as they were
for such a long time!

Hal was interested to hear how Edstrom dealt with this attitude. "Mary," he said, "did you
ever read about ants in Africa?"

"No," said she.

"They travel in long columns, millions and millions of them. And when they come to a ditch,
the front ones fall in, and more and more of them on top, till they fill up the ditch, and
the rest cross over. We are ants, Mary."

"No matter how many go in," cried the girl, "none will ever get across. There's no bottom to
the ditch!"

He answered: "That's more than any ant can know. Mary. All they know is to go in. They cling
to each other's bodies, even in death; they make a bridge, and the rest go over."

"I'll step one side!" she declared, fiercely. "I'll not throw meself away."

"You may step one side," answered the other--"but you'll step back into line again. I know
you better than you know yourself, Mary."

There was silence in the little cabin. The winds of an early fall shrilled outside, and life
suddenly seemed to Hal a stern and merciless thing. He had thought in his youthful fervour
it would be thrilling to be a revolutionist; but to be an ant, one of millions and millions,
to perish in a bottomless ditch--that was something a man could hardly bring himself to face!
He looked at the bowed figure of this white haired toiler, vague in the feeble lamplight, and
found himself thinking of Rembrandt's painting, the Visit of Emmaus: the ill-lighted room in
the dirty tavern, and the two ragged men, struck dumb by the glow of light about the forehead
of their table-companion. It was not fantastic to imagine a glow of light about the forehead
of this soft-voiced old man!

"I never had any hope it would come in my time," the old man was saying gently. "I did use
to hope my boys might see it--but now I'm not sure even of that. But in all my life I never
doubted that some day the working-people will cross over to the promised land. They'll no longer
be slaves, and what they make won't be wasted by idlers. And take it from one who knows, Mary--for
a workingman or woman not to have that faith, is to have lost the reason for living."

Hal decided that it would be safe to trust this man, and told him of his check-weighman plan.
"We only want your advice," he explained, remembering Mary's warning. "Your sick wife--"

But the old man answered, sadly, "She's almost gone, and I'll soon be following. What little
strength I have left might as well be used for the cause."

SECTION 5.

This business of conspiracy was grimly real to men whose living came out of coal; but Hal,
even at the most serious moments, continued to find in it the thrill of romance. He had read
stories of revolutionists, and of the police who hunted them. That such excitements were to
be had in Russia, he knew; but if any one had told him they could be had in his own free America,
within a few hours' journey of his home city and his college-town, he could not have credited
the statement.

The evening after his visit to Edstrom, Hal was stopped on the street by his boss. Encountering
him suddenly, Hal started, like a pick-pocket who runs into a policeman.

"Hello, kid," said the pit-boss.

"Hello, Mr. Stone," was the reply.

"I want to talk to you," said the boss.

"All right, sir." And then, under his breath, "He's got me!"

"Come up to my house," said Stone; and Hal followed, feeling as if hand-cuffs were already
on his wrists.

"Say," said the man, as they walked, "I thought you were going to tell me if you'd heard any talk."

"I haven't heard any, sir."

"Well," continued Stone, "you want to get busy; there's sure to be kickers in every coal-camp."
And deep within, Hal drew a sigh of relief. It was a false alarm!

They came to the boss's house, and he took a chair on the piazza and motioned Hal to take another.
They sat in semi-darkness, and Stone dropped his voice as he began. "What I want to talk to
you about now is something else--this election."

"Election, sir?"

"Didn't you know there was one? The Congressman in this district died, and there's a special
election three weeks from next Tuesday."

"I see, sir." And Hal chuckled inwardly. He would get the information which Tom Olson had recommended
to him!

"You ain't heard any talk about it?" inquired the pit-boss.

"Nothing at all, sir. I never pay much attention to politics--it ain't in my line."

"Well, that's the way I like to hear a miner talk!" said the pit-boss, with heartiness. "If
they all had sense enough to leave politics to the politicians, they'd be a sight better off.
What they need is to tend to their own jobs."

"Yes, sir," agreed Hal, meekly--"like I had to tend to them mules, if I didn't want to get
the colic."

The boss smiled appreciatively. "You've got more sense than most of 'em. If you'll stand by
me, there'll be a chance for you to move up in the world."

"Thank you, Mr. Stone," said Hal. "Give me a chance."

"Well now, here's this election. Every year they send us a bunch of campaign money to handle.
A bit of it might come your way."

"I could use it, I reckon," said Hal, brightening visibly. "What is it you want?"

There was a pause, while Stone puffed on his pipe. He went on, in a business-like manner. "What
I want is somebody to feel things out a bit, and let me know the situation. I thought it better
not to use the men that generally work for me, but somebody that wouldn't be suspected. Down
in Sheridan and Pedro they say the Democrats are making a big stir, and the company's worried.
I suppose you know the 'G. F. C.' is Republican."

"I've heard so."

"You might think a congressman don't have much to do with us, way off in Washington; but it
has a bad effect to have him campaigning, telling the men the company's abusing them. So I'd
like you just to kind o' circulate a bit, and start the men on politics, and see if any of
them have been listening to this MacDougall talk. (MacDougall's this here Democrat, you know.)
And I want to find out whether they've been sending in literature to this camp, or have any
agents here. You see, they claim the right to come in and make speeches, and all that sort
of thing. North Valley's an incorporated town, so they've got the law on their side, in a way,
and if we shut 'em out, they make a howl in the papers, and it looks bad. So we have to get
ahead of them in quiet ways. Fortunately there ain't any hall in the camp for them to meet
in, and we've made a local ordinance against meetings on the street. If they try to bring in
circulars, something has to happen to them before they get distributed. See?"

"I see," said Hal; he thought of Tom Olson's propaganda literature!

"We'll pass the word out,--it's the Republican the company wants elected; and you be on the
lookout and see how they take it in the camp."

"That sounds easy enough," said Hal. "But tell me, Mr. Stone, why do you bother? Do so many
of these wops have votes?"

"It ain't the wops so much. We get them naturalised on purpose--they vote our way for a glass
of beer. But the English-speaking men, or the foreigners that's been here too long, and got
too big for their breeches--they're the ones we got to watch. If they get to talking politics,
they don't stop there; the first thing you know, they're listening to union agitators, and
wanting to run the camp."

"Oh yes, I see!" said Hal, and wondered if his voice sounded right.

But the pit-boss was concerned with his own troubles. "As I told Si Adams the other day, what
I'm looking for is fellows that talk some new lingo--one that nobody will ever understand!
But I suppose that would be too easy. There's no way to keep them from learning some English!"

Hal decided to make use of this opportunity to perfect his education. "Surely, Mr. Stone,"
he remarked, "you don't have to count any votes if you don't want to!"

"Well, I'll tell you," replied Stone; "it's a question of the easiest way to manage things.
When I was superintendent over to Happy Gulch, we didn't waste no time on politics. The company
was Democratic at that time, and when election night come, we wrote down four hundred votes
for the Democratic candidates. But the first thing we knew, a bunch of fellers was taken into
town and got to swear they'd voted the Republican ticket in our camp. The Republican papers
were full of it, and some fool judge ordered a recount, and we had to get busy over night and
mark up a new lot of ballots. It gave us a lot of bother!"

The pit-boss laughed, and Hal joined him discreetly.

"So you see, you have to learn to manage. If there's votes for the wrong candidate in your
camp, the fact gets out, and if the returns is too one-sided, there's a lot of grumbling. There's
plenty of bosses that don't care, but I learned my lesson that time, and I got my own method--that
is not to let any opposition start. See?"

"Yes, I see."

"Maybe a mine-boss has got no right to meddle in politics--but there's one thing he's got the
say about, and that is who works in his mine. It's the easiest thing to weed out--weed out--"
Hal never forgot the motion of beefy hands with which Alec Stone illustrated these words. As
he went on, the tones of his voice did not seem so good-natured as usual. "The fellows that
don't want to vote my way can go somewhere else to do their voting. That's all I got to say
on politics!"

There was a brief pause, while Stone puffed on his pipe. Then it may have occurred to him that
it was not necessary to go into so much detail in breaking in a political recruit. When he
resumed, it was in a good-natured tone of dismissal. "That's what you do, kid. To-morrow you
get a sprained wrist, so you can't work for a few days, and that'll give you a chance to bum
round and hear what the men are saying. Meantime, I'll see you get your wages."

"That sounds all right," said Hal; but showing only a small part of his satisfaction!

The pit-boss rose from his chair and knocked the ashes from his pipe. "Mind you--I want the
goods. I've got other fellows working, and I'm comparing 'em. For all you know, I may have
somebody watching you."

"Yes," said Hal, and grinned cheerfully. "I'll not fail to bear that in mind."

SECTION 6.

The first thing Hal did was to seek out Tom Olson and narrate this experience. The two of them
had a merry time over it. "I'm the favourite of a boss now!" laughed Hal.

But the organiser became suddenly serious. "Be careful what you do for that fellow."

"Why?"

"He might use it on you later on. One of the things they try to do if you make any trouble
for them, is to prove that you took money from them, or tried to."

"But he won't have any proofs."

"That's my point--don't give him any. If Stone says you've been playing the political game
for him, then some fellow might remember that you did ask him about politics. So don't have
any marked money on you."

Hal laughed. "Money doesn't stay on me very long these days. But what shall I say if he asks
me for a report?"

"You'd better put your job right through, Joe--so that he won't have time to ask for any report."

"All right," was the reply. "But just the same, I'm going to get all the fun there is, being
the favourite of a boss!"

And so, early the next morning when Hal went to his work he proceeded to "sprain his wrist."
He walked about in pain, to the great concern of Old Mike; and when finally he decided that
he would have to lay off, Mike followed him half way to the shaft, giving him advice about
hot and cold cloths. Leaving the old Slovak to struggle along as best he could alone, Hal went
out to bask in the wonderful sunshine of the upper world, and the still more wonderful sunshine
of a boss's favour.

First he went to his room at Reminitsky's, and tied a strip of old shirt about his wrist, and
a clean handkerchief on top of that; by this symbol he was entitled to the freedom of the camp
and the sympathy of all men, and so he sallied forth.

Strolling towards the tipple of Number One, he encountered a wiry, quick-moving little man,
with restless black eyes and a lean, intelligent face. He wore a pair of common miner's "jumpers,"
but even so, he was not to be taken for a workingman. Everything about him spoke of authority.

"Morning, Mr. Cartwright," said Hal.

"Good morning," replied the superintendent; then, with a glance at Hal's bandage, "You hurt?"

"Yes, sir. Just a bit of sprain, but I thought I'd better lay off."

"Been to the doctor?"

"No, sir. I don't think it's that bad."

"You'd better go. You never know how bad a sprain is."

"Right, sir," said Hal. Then, as the superintendent was passing, "Do you think, Mr. Cartwright,
that MacDougall stands any chance of being elected?"

"I don't know," replied the other, surprised. "I hope not. You aren't going to vote for him,
are you?"

"Oh, no. I'm a Republican--born that way. But I wondered if you'd heard any MacDougall talk."

"Well, I'm hardly the one that would hear it. You take an interest in politics?"

"Yes, sir--in a way. In fact, that's how I came to get this wrist."

"How's that? In a fight?"

"No, sir; but you see, Mr. Stone wanted me to feel out sentiment in the camp, and he told me
I'd better sprain my wrist and lay off."

The "super," after staring at Hal, could not keep from laughing. Then he looked about him.
"You want to be careful, talking about such things."

"I thought I could surely trust the superintendent," said Hal, drily.

The other measured him with his keen eyes; and Hal, who was getting the spirit of political
democracy, took the liberty of returning the gaze. "You're a wide-awake young fellow," said
Cartwright, at last. "Learn the ropes here, and make yourself useful, and I'll see you're not
passed over."

"All right, sir--thank you."

"Maybe you'll be made an election-clerk this time. That's worth three dollars a day, you know."

"Very good, sir." And Hal put on his smile again. "They tell me you're the mayor of North Valley."

"I am."

"And the justice of the peace is a clerk in your store. Well, Mr. Cartwright, if you need a
president of the board of health or a dog catcher, I'm your man--as soon, that is, as my wrist
gets well."

And so Hal went on his way. Such "joshing" on the part of a "buddy" was of course absurdly
presumptuous; the superintendent stood looking after him with a puzzled frown upon his face.

SECTION 7.

Hal did not look back, but turned into the company-store. "North Valley Trading Company" read
the sign over the door; within was a Serbian woman pointing out what she wanted to buy, and
two little Lithuanian girls watching the weighing of a pound of sugar. Hal strolled up to the
person who was doing the weighing, a middle-aged man with a yellow moustache stained with tobacco-juice.
"Morning, Judge."

"Huh!" was the reply from Silas Adams, justice of the peace in the town of North Valley.

"Judge," said Hal, "what do you think about the election?"

"I don't think about it," said the other. "Busy weighin' sugar."

"Anybody round here going to vote for MacDougall?"

"They better not tell me if they are!"

"What?" smiled Hal. "In this free American republic?"

"In this part of the free American republic a man is free to dig coal, but not to vote for
a skunk like MacDougall." Then, having tied up the sugar, the "J. P." whittled off a fresh
chew from his plug, and turned to Hal. "What'll you have?"

Hal purchased half a pound of dried peaches, so that he might have an excuse to loiter, and
be able to keep time with the jaws of the Judge. While the order was being filled, he seated
himself upon the counter. "You know," said he, "I used to work in a grocery."

"That so? Where at?"

"Peterson & Co., in American City." Hal had told this so often that he had begun to believe it.

"Pay pretty good up there?"

"Yes, pretty fair." Then, realising that he had no idea what would constitute good pay in a
grocery, Hal added, quickly, "Got a bad wrist here!"

"That so?" said the other.

He did not show much sociability; but Hal persisted, refusing to believe that any one in a
country store would miss an opening to discuss politics, even with a miner's helper. "Tell
me," said he, "just what is the matter with MacDougall?"

"The matter with him," said the Judge, "is that the company's against him." He looked hard
at the young miner. "You meddlin' in politics?" he growled. But the young miner's gay brown
eyes showed only appreciation of the earlier response; so the "J. P." was tempted into specifying
the would-be congressman's vices. Thus conversation started; and pretty soon the others in
the store joined in--"Bob" Johnson, bookkeeper and post-master, and "Jake" Predovich, the Galician
Jew who was a member of the local school-board, and knew the words for staple groceries in
fifteen languages.

Hal listened to an exposition of the crimes of the political opposition in Pedro County. Their
candidate, MacDougall, had come to the state as a "tin-horn gambler," yet now he was going
around making speeches in churches, and talking about the moral sentiment of the community.
"And him with a district chairman keeping three families in Pedro!" declared Si Adams.

"Well," ventured Hal, "if what I hear is true, the Republican chairman isn't a plaster saint.
They say he was drunk at the convention--"

"Maybe so," said the "J. P." "But we ain't playin' for the prohibition vote; and we ain't playin'
for the labour vote--tryin' to stir up the riff-raff in these coal-camps, promisin' 'em high
wages an' short hours. Don't he know he can't get it for 'em? But he figgers he'll go off to
Washington and leave us here to deal with the mess he's stirred up!"

"Don't you fret," put in Bob Johnson--"he ain't goin' to no Washin'ton."

The other two agreed, and Hal ventured again, "He says you stuff the ballot-boxes."

"What do you suppose his crowd is doin' in the cities? We got to meet 'em some way, ain't we?"

"Oh, I see," said Hal, naively. "You stuff them worse!"

"Sometimes we stuff the boxes, and sometimes we stuff the voters." There was an appreciative
titter from the others, and the "J. P." was moved to reminiscence. "Two years ago I was election
clerk, over to Sheridan, and we found we'd let 'em get ahead of us--they had carried the whole
state. 'By God,' said Alf. Raymond, 'we'll show 'em a trick from the coal-counties! And there
won't be no recount business either!' So we held back our returns till the rest had come in,
and when we seen how many votes we needed, we wrote 'em down. And that settled it."

"That seems a simple method," remarked Hal. "They'll have to get up early to beat Alf."

"You bet you!" said Si, with the complacency of one of the gang. "They call this county the
'Empire of Raymond.'"

"It must be a cinch," said Hal--"being the sheriff, and having the naming of so many deputies
as they need in these coal-camps!"

"Yes," agreed the other. "And there's his wholesale liquor business, too. If you want a license
in Pedro county, you not only vote for Alf, but you pay your bills on time!"

"Must be a fortune in that!" remarked Hal; and the Judge, the Post-master and the School-commissioner
appeared like children listening to a story of a feast. "You bet you!"

"I suppose it takes money to run politics in this county," Hal added.

"Well, Alf don't put none of it up, you can bet! That's the company's job."

This from the Judge; and the School-commissioner added, "De coin in dese camps is beer."

"Oh, I see!" laughed Hal. "The companies buy Alf's beer, and use it to get him votes!"

"Sure thing!" said the Post-master.

At this moment he happened to reach into his pocket for a cigar, and Hal observed a silver
shield on the breast of his waistcoat. "That a deputy's badge?" he inquired, and then turned
to examine the School-commissioner's costume. "Where's yours?"

"I git mine ven election comes," said Jake, with a grin.

"And yours, Judge?"

"I'm a justice of the peace, young feller," said Silas, with dignity.

Leaning round, and observing a bulge on the right hip of the School-commissioner, Hal put out
his hand towards it. Instinctively the other moved his hand to the spot.

Hal turned to the Post-master. "Yours?" he asked.

"Mine's under the counter," grinned Bob.

"And yours, Judge?"

"Mine's in the desk," said the Judge.

Hal drew a breath. "Gee!" said he. "It's like a steel trap!" He managed to keep the laugh on
his face, but within he was conscious of other feelings than those of amusement. He was losing
that "first fine careless rapture" with which he had set out to run with the hare and the hounds
in North Valley!

SECTION 8.

Two days after this beginning of Hal's political career, it was arranged that the workers who
were to make a demand for a check-weighman should meet in the home of Mrs. David. When Mike
Sikoria came up from the pit that day, Hal took him aside and told him of the gathering. A
look of delight came upon the old Slovak's face as he listened; he grabbed his buddy by the
shoulders, crying, "You mean it?"

"Sure meant it," said Hal. "You want to be on the committee to go and see the boss?"

"Pluha biedna!" cried Mike--which is something dreadful in his own language. "By Judas, I pack
up my old box again!"

Hal felt a guilty pang. Should he let this old man into the thing? "You think you'll have to
move out of camp?" he asked.

"Move out of state this time! Move back to old country, maybe!" And Hal realised that he could
not stop him now, even if he wanted to. The old fellow was so much excited that he hardly ate
any supper, and his buddy was afraid to leave him alone, for fear he might blurt out the news.

It had been agreed that those who attended the meeting should come one by one, and by different
routes. Hal was one of the first to arrive, and he saw that the shades of the house had been
drawn, and the lamps turned low. He entered by the back door, where "Big Jack" David stood
on guard. "Big Jack," who had been a member of the South Wales Federation at home, made sure
of Hal's identity, and then passed him in without a word.

Inside was Mike--the first on hand. Mrs. David, a little black-eyed woman with a never-ceasing
tongue, was bustling about, putting things in order; she was so nervous that she could not
sit still. This couple had come from their birth-place only a year or so ago, and had brought
all their wedding presents to their new home--pictures and bric-a-brac and linen. It was the
prettiest home Hal had so far been in, and Mrs. David was risking it deliberately, because
of her indignation that her husband had had to foreswear his union in order to get work in America.

The young Italian, Rovetta, came, then old John Edstrom. There being not chairs enough in the
house, Mrs. David had set some boxes against the wall, covering them with cloth; and Hal noticed
that each person took one of these boxes, leaving the chairs for the later comers. Each one
as he came in would nod to the others, and then silence would fall again.

When Mary Burke entered, Hal divined from her aspect and manner that she had sunk back into
her old mood of pessimism. He felt a momentary resentment. He was so thrilled with this adventure;
he wanted everybody else to be thrilled--especially Mary! Like every one who has not suffered
much, he was repelled by a condition of perpetual suffering in another. Of course Mary had
good reasons for her black moods--but she herself considered it necessary to apologise for
what she called her "complainin'"! She knew that he wanted her to help encourage the others;
but here she was, putting herself in a corner and watching this wonderful proceeding, as if
she had said: "I'm an ant, and I stay in line--but I'll not pretend I have any hope in it!"

Rosa and Jerry had insisted on coming, in spite of Hal's offer to spare them. After them came
the Bulgarian, Wresmak; then the Polacks, Klowoski and Zamierowski. Hal found these difficult
names to remember, but the Polacks were not at all sensitive about this; they would grin good-naturedly
while he practised, nor would they mind if he gave it up and called them Tony and Pete. They
were humble men, accustomed all their lives to being driven about. Hal looked from one to another
of their bowed forms and toil-worn faces, appearing more than ever sombre and mournful in the
dim light; he wondered if the cruel persecution which had driven them to protest would suffice
to hold them in line.

Once a newcomer, having misunderstood the orders, came to the front door and knocked; and Hal
noted that every one started, and some rose to their feet in alarm. Again he recognised the
atmosphere of novels of Russian revolutionary life. He had to remind himself that these men
and women, gathered here like criminals, were merely planning to ask for a right guaranteed
them by the law!

The last to come was an Austrian miner named Huszar, with whom Olson had got into touch. Then,
it being time to begin, everybody looked uneasily at everybody else. Few of them had conspired
before, and they did not know quite how to set about it. Olson, the one who would naturally
have been their leader, had deliberately stayed away. They must run this check-weighman affair
for themselves!

"Somebody talk," said Mrs. David at last; and then, as the silence continued, she turned to
Hal. "You're going to be the check-weighman. You talk."

"I'm the youngest man here," said Hal, with a smile. "Some older fellow talk."

But nobody else smiled. "Go on!" exclaimed old Mike; and so at last Hal stood up. It was something
he was to experience many times in the future; because he was an American, and educated, he
was forced into a position of leadership.

"As I understand it, you people want a check-weighman. Now, they tell me the pay for a check-weighman
should be three dollars a day, but we've got only seven miners among us, and that's not enough.
I will offer to take the job for twenty-five cents a day from each man, which will make a dollar-seventy-five,
less than what I'm getting now as a buddy. If we get thirty men to come in, then I'll take
ten cents a day from each, and make the full three dollars. Does that seem fair?"

"Sure!" said Mike; and the others added their assent by word or nod.

"All right. Now, there's nobody that works in this mine but knows the men don't get their weight.
It would cost the company several hundred dollars a day to give us our weight, and nobody should
be so foolish as to imagine they'll do it without a struggle. We've got to make up our minds
to stand together."

"Sure, stand together!" cried Mike.

"No get check-weighman!" exclaimed Jerry, pessimistically.

"Not unless we try, Jerry," said Hal.

And Mike thumped his knee. "Sure try! And get him too!"

"Right!" cried "Big Jack." But his little wife was not satisfied with the response of the others.
She gave Hal his first lesson in the drilling of these polyglot masses.

"Talk to them. Make them understand you!" And she pointed them out one by one with her finger:
"You! You! Wresmak, here, and you, Klowoski, and you, Zam--you other Polish fellow. Want check-weighman.
Want to get all weight. Get all our money. Understand?"

"Yes, yes!"

"Get committee, go see super! Want check-weighman. Understand? Got to have check-weighman!
No back down, no scare."

"No--no scare!" Klowoski, who understood some English, explained rapidly to Zamierowski; and
Zamierowski, whose head was still plastered where Jeff Cotton's revolver had hit it, nodded
eagerly in assent. In spite of his bruises, he would stand by the others, and face the boss.

This suggested another question. "Who's going to do the talking to the boss?"

"You do that," said Mrs. David, to Hal.

"But I'm the one that's to be paid. It's not for me to talk."

"No one else can do it right," declared the woman.

"Sure--got to be American feller!" said Mike.

But Hal insisted. If he did the talking, it would look as if the check-weighman had been the
source of the movement, and was engaged in making a good paying job for himself.

There was discussion back and forth, until finally John Edstrom spoke up. "Put me on the committee."

"You?" said Hal. "But you'll be thrown out! And what will your wife do?"

"I think my wife is going to die to-night," said Edstrom, simply.

He sat with his lips set tightly, looking straight before him. After a pause he went on: "If
it isn't to-night, it will be to-morrow, the doctor says; and after that, nothing will matter.
I shall have to go down to Pedro to bury her, and if I have to stay, it will make little difference
to me, so I might as well do what I can for the rest of you. I've been a miner all my life,
and Mr. Cartwright knows it; that might have some weight with him. Let Joe Smith and Sikoria
and myself be the ones to go and see him, and the rest of you wait, and don't give up your
jobs unless you have to."

SECTION 9.

Having settled the matter of the committee, Hal told the assembly how Alec Stone had asked
him to spy upon the men. He thought they should know about it; the bosses might try to use
it against him, as Olson had warned. "They may tell you I'm a traitor," he said. "You must
trust me."

"We trust you!" exclaimed Mike, with fervour; and the others nodded their agreement.

"All right," Hal answered. "You can rest sure of this one thing--if I get onto that tipple,
you're going to get your weights!"

"Hear, hear!" cried "Big Jack," in English fashion. And a murmur ran about the room. They did
not dare make much noise, but they made clear that that was what they wanted.

Hal sat down, and began to unroll the bandage from his wrist. "I guess I'm through with this,"
he said, and explained how he had come to wear it.

"What?" cried Old Mike. "You fool me like that?" And he caught the wrist, and when he had made
sure there was no sign of swelling upon it, he shook it so that he almost sprained it really,
laughing until the tears ran down his cheeks. "You old son-of-a-gun!" he exclaimed. Meantime
Klowoski was telling the story to Zamierowski, and Jerry Minetti was explaining it to Wresmak,
in the sort of pidgin-English which does duty in the camps. Hal had never seen such real laughter
since coming to North Valley.

But conspirators cannot lend themselves long to merriment. They came back to business again.
It was agreed that the hour for the committee's visit to the superintendent should be quitting-time
on the morrow. And then John Edstrom spoke, suggesting that they should agree upon their course
of action in case they were offered violence.

"You think there's much chance of that?" said some one.

"Sure there be!" cried Mike Sikoria. "One time in Cedar Mountain we go see boss, say air-course
blocked. What you think he do them fellers? He hit them one lick in nose, he kick them three
times in behind, he run them out!"

"Well," said Hal, "if there's going to be anything like that, we must be ready."

"What you do?" demanded Jerry.

It was time for Hal's leadership. "If he hits me one lick in the nose," he declared, "I'll
hit him one lick in the nose, that's all."

There was a bit of applause at this. That was the way to talk! Hal tasted the joys of his leadership.
But then his fine self-confidence met with a sudden check--a "lick in the nose" of his pride,
so to speak. There came a woman's voice from the corner, low and grim: "Yes! And get ye'self
killed for all your trouble!"

He looked towards Mary Burke, and saw her vivid face, flushed and frowning. "What do you mean?"
he asked. "Would you have us turn and run away?"

"I would that!" said she. "Rather than have ye killed, I would! What'll ye do if he pulls his
gun on ye?"

"Would he pull his gun on a committee?"

Old Mike broke in again. "One time in Barela--ain't I told you how I lose my cars? I tell weigh-boss
somebody steal my cars, and he pull gun on me, and he say, 'Get the hell off that tipple, you
old billy-goat, I shoot you full of holes!'"

Among his class-mates at college, Hal had been wont to argue that the proper way to handle
a burglar was to call out to him, saying, "Go ahead, old chap, and help yourself; there's nothing
here I'm willing to get shot for." What was the value of anything a burglar could steal, in
comparison with a man's own life? And surely, one would have thought, this was a good time
to apply the plausible theory. But for some reason Hal failed even to remember it. He was going
ahead, precisely as if a ton of coal per day was the one thing of consequence in life!

"What shall we do?" he asked. "We don't want to back out."

But even while he asked the question, Hal was realising that Mary was right. His was the attitude
of the leisure-class person, used to having his own way; but Mary, though she had a temper
too, was pointing the lesson of self-control. It was the second time to-night that she had
injured his pride. But now he forgave her in his admiration; he had always known that Mary
had a mind and could help him! His admiration was increased by what John Edstrom was saying--they
must do nothing that would injure the cause of the "big union," and so they must resolve to
offer no physical resistance, no matter what might be done to them.

There was vehement argument on the other side. "We fight! We fight!" declared Old Mike, and
cried out suddenly, as if in anticipation of the pain in his injured nose. "You say me stand that?"

"If you fight back," said Edstrom, "we'll all get the worst of it. The company will say we
started the trouble, and put us in the wrong. We've got to make up our mind to rely on moral
force."

So, after more discussion, it was agreed; every man would keep his temper--that is, if he could!
So they shook hands all round, pledging themselves to stand firm. But, when the meeting was
declared adjourned, and they stole out one by one into the night, they were a very sober and
anxious lot of conspirators.

SECTION 10.

Hal slept but little that night. Amid the sounds of the snoring of eight of Reminitsky's other
boarders, he lay going over in his mind various things which might happen on the morrow. Some
of them were far from pleasant things; he tried to picture himself with a broken nose, or with
tar and feathers on him. He recalled his theory as to the handling of burglars. The "G. F.
C." was a burglar of gigantic and terrible proportions; surely this was a time to call out,
"Help yourself!" But instead of doing it, Hal thought about Edstrom's ants, and wondered at
the power which made them stay in line.

When morning came, he went up into the mountains, where a man may wander and renew his moral
force. When the sun had descended behind the mountain-tops, he descended also, and met Edstrom
and Sikoria in front of the company office.

They nodded a greeting, and Edstrom told Hal that his wife had died during the day. There being
no undertaker in North Valley, he had arranged for a woman friend to take the body down to
Pedro, so that he might be free for the interview with Cartwright. Hal put his hand on the
old man's shoulder, but attempted no word of condolence; he saw that Edstrom had faced the
trouble and was ready for duty.

"Come ahead," said the old man, and the three went into the office. While a clerk took their
message to the inner office, they stood for a couple of minutes, shifting uneasily from one
foot to the other, and turning their caps in their hands in the familiar manner of the lowly.

At last Mr. Cartwright appeared in the doorway, his small sparely-built figure eloquent of
sharp authority. "Well, what's this?" he inquired.

"If you please," said Edstrom, "we'd like to speak to you. We've decided, sir, that we want
to have a check-weighman."

"What?" The word came like the snap of a whip.

"We'd like to have a check-weighman, sir."

There was a moment's silence. "Come in here." They filed into the inner office, and he shut
the door.

"Now. What's this?"

Edstrom repeated his words again.

"What put that notion into your heads?"

"Nothing, sir; only we thought we'd be better satisfied."

"You think you're not getting your weight?"

"Well, sir, you see--some of the men--we think it would be better if we had the check-weighman.
We're willing to pay for him."

"Who's this check-weighman to be?"

"Joe Smith, here."

Hal braced himself to meet the other's stare. "Oh! So it's you!" Then, after a moment, "So
that's why you were feeling so gay!"

Hal was not feeling in the least gay at the moment; but he forebore to say so. There was a silence.

"Now, why do you fellows want to throw away your money?" The superintendent started to argue
with them, showing the absurdity of the notion that they could gain anything by such a course.
The mine had been running for years on its present system, and there had never been any complaint.
The idea that a company as big and as responsible as the "G. F. C." would stoop to cheat its
workers out of a few tons of coal! And so on, for several minutes.

"Mr. Cartwright," said Edstrom, when the other had finished, "you know I've worked all my life
in mines, and most of it in this district. I am telling you something I know when I say there
is general dissatisfaction throughout these camps because the men feel they are not getting
their weight. You say there has been no public complaint; you understand the reason for this--"

"What is the reason?"

"Well," said Edstrom, gently, "maybe you don't know the reason--but anyway we've decided that
we want a check-weighman."

It was evident that the superintendent had been taken by surprise, and was uncertain how to
meet the issue. "You can imagine," he said, at last, "the company doesn't relish hearing that
its men believe it's cheating them--"

"We don't say the company knows anything about it, Mr. Cartwright. It's possible that some
people may be taking advantage of us, without either the company or yourself having anything
to do with it. It's for your protection as well as ours that a check-weighman is needed."

"Thank you," said the other, drily. His tone revealed that he was holding himself in by an
effort. "Very well," he added, at last. "That's enough about the matter, if your minds are
made up. I'll give you my decision later."

This was a dismissal, and Mike Sikoria turned humbly, and started to the door. But Edstrom
was one of the ants that did not readily "step one side"; and Mike took a glance at him, and
then stepped back into line in a hurry, as if hoping his delinquency had not been noted.

"If you please, Mr. Cartwright," said Edstrom, "we'd like your decision, so as to have the
check-weighman start in the morning."

"What? You're in such a hurry?"

"There's no reason for delay, sir. We've selected our man, and we're ready to pay him."

"Who are the men who are ready to pay him? Just you two"

"I am not at liberty to name the other men, sir."

"Oh! So it's a secret movement!"

"In a way--yes, sir."

"Indeed!" said the superintendent, ominously. "And you don't care what the company thinks about
it!"

"It's not that, Mr. Cartwright, but we don't see anything for the company to object to. It's
a simple business arrangement--"

"Well, if it seems simple to you, it doesn't to me," snapped the other. And then, getting himself
in hand, "Understand me, the company would not have the least objection to the men making sure
of their weights, if they really think it's necessary. The company has always been willing
to do the right thing. But it's not a matter that can be settled off hand. I will let you know
later."

Again they were dismissed, and again Old Mike turned, and Edstrom also. But now another ant
sprang into the ditch. "Just when will you be prepared to let the check-weighman begin work,
Mr. Cartwright?" asked Hal.

The superintendent gave him a sharp look, and again it could be seen that he made a strong
effort to keep his temper. "I'm not prepared to say," he replied. "I will let you know, as
soon as convenient to me. That's all now." And as he spoke he opened the door, putting something
into the action that was a command.

"Mr. Cartwright," said Hal, "there's no law against our having a check-weighman, is there?"

The look which these words drew from the superintendent showed that he knew full well what
the law was. Hal accepted this look as an answer, and continued, "I have been selected by a
committee of the men to act as their check-weighman, and this committee has duly notified the
company. That makes me a check-weighman, I believe, Mr. Cartwright, and so all I have to do
is to assume my duties." Without waiting for the superintendent's answer, he walked to the
door, followed by his somewhat shocked companions.

SECTION 11.

At the meeting on the night before it had been agreed to spread the news of the check-weighman
movement, for the sake of its propaganda value. So now when the three men came out from the
office, there was a crowd waiting to know what had happened; men clamoured questions, and each
one who got the story would be surrounded by others eager to hear. Hal made his way to the
boarding-house, and when he had finished his supper, he set out from place to place in the
camp, telling the men about the check-weighman plan and explaining that it was a legal right
they were demanding. All this while Old Mike stayed on one side of him, and Edstrom on the
other; for Tom Olson had insisted strenuously that Hal should not be left alone for a moment.
Evidently the bosses had given the same order; for when Hal came out from Reminitsky's, there
was "Jake" Predovich, the store-clerk, on the fringe of the crowd, and he followed wherever
Hal went, doubtless making note of every one he spoke to.

They consulted as to where they were to spend the night. Old Mike was nervous, taking the activities
of the spy to mean that they were to be thugged in the darkness. He told horrible stories of
that sort of thing. What could be an easier way for the company to settle the matter? They
would fix up some story; the world outside would believe they had been killed in a drunken
row, perhaps over some woman. This last suggestion especially troubled Hal; he thought of the
people at home. No, he must not sleep in the village! And on the other hand he could not go
down the canyon, for if he once passed the gate, he might not be allowed to repass it.

An idea occurred to him. Why not go up the canyon? There was no stockade at the upper end of
the village--nothing but wilderness and rocks, without even a road.

"But where we sleep?" demanded Old Mike, aghast.

"Outdoors," said Hal.

"Pluha biedna! And get the night air into my bones?"

"You think you keep the day air in your bones when you sleep inside?" laughed Hal.

"Why don't I, when I shut them windows tight, and cover up my bones?"

"Well, risk the night air once," said Hal. "It's better than having somebody let it into you
with a knife."

"But that fellow Predovich--he follow us up canyon too!"

"Yes, but he's only one man, and we don't have to fear him. If he went back for others, he'd
never be able to find us in the darkness."

Edstrom, whose notions of anatomy were not so crude as Mike's, gave his support to this suggestion;
so they got their blankets and stumbled up the canyon in the still, star-lit night. For a while
they heard the spy behind them, but finally his footsteps died away, and after they had moved
on for some distance, they believed they were safe till daylight. Hal had slept out many a
night as a hunter, but it was a new adventure to sleep out as the game!

At dawn they rose, and shook the dew from their blankets, and wiped it from their eyes. Hal
was young, and saw the glory of the morning, while poor Mike Sikoria groaned and grumbled over
his stiff and aged joints. He thought he had ruined himself forever, but he took courage at
Edstrom's mention of coffee, and they hurried down to breakfast at their boarding-house.

Now came a critical time, when Hal had to be left by himself. Edstrom was obliged to go down
to see to his wife's funeral; and it was obvious that if Mike Sikoria were to lay off work,
he would be providing the boss with an excuse for firing him. The law which provided for a
check-weighman had failed to provide for a check-weighman's body-guard!

Hal had announced his programme in that flash of defiance in Cartwright's office. As soon as
work started up, he went to the tipple. "Mr. Peters," he said, to the tipple-boss, "I've come
to act as check-weighman."

The tipple-boss was a man with a big black moustache, which made him look like the pictures
of Nietzsche. He stared at Hal, frankly dumbfounded. "What the devil?" said he.

"Some of the men have chosen me check-weighman," explained Hal, in a business-like manner.
"When their cars come up, I'll see to their weights."

"You keep off this tipple, young fellow!" said Peters. His manner was equally business-like.

So the would-be check-weighman came out and sat on the steps to wait. The tipple was a fairly
public place, and he judged he was as safe there as anywhere. Some of the men grinned and winked
at him as they went about their work; several found a chance to whisper words of encouragement.
And all morning he sat, like a protestant at the palace-gates of a mandarin in China, It was
tedious work, but he believed that he would be able to stand it longer than the company.

SECTION 12.

In the middle of the morning a man came up to him--"Bud" Adams, a younger brother of the "J.
P.," and Jeff Cotton's assistant. Bud was stocky, red-faced, and reputed to be handy with his
fists. So Hal rose up warily when he saw him.

"Hey, you," said Bud. "There's a telegram at the office for you."

"For me?"

"Your name's Joe Smith, ain't it?"

"Yes."

"Well, that's what it says."

Hal considered for a moment. There was no one to be telegraphing Joe Smith. It was only a ruse
to get him away.

"What's in the telegram?" he asked.

"How do I know?" said Bud.

"Where is it from?"

"I dunno that."

"Well," said Hal, "you might bring it to me here."

The other's eyes flew open. This was not a revolt, it was a revolution! "Who the hell's messenger
boy do you think I am?" he demanded.

"Don't the company deliver telegrams?" countered Hal, politely. And Bud stood struggling with
his human impulses, while Hal watched him cautiously. But apparently those who had sent the
messenger had given him precise instructions; for he controlled his wrath, and turned and strode
away.

Hal continued his vigil. He had his lunch with him; and was prepared to eat alone--understanding
the risk that a man would be running who showed sympathy with him. He was surprised, therefore,
when Johannson, the giant Swede, came and sat down by his side. There also came a young Mexican
labourer, and a Greek miner. The revolution was spreading!

Hal felt sure the company would not let this go on. And sure enough, towards the middle of
the afternoon, the tipple-boss came out and beckoned to him. "Come here, you!" And Hal went in.

The "weigh-room" was a fairly open place; but at one side was a door into an office. "This
way," said the man.

But Hal stopped where he was.

"This is where the check-weighman belongs, Mr. Peters."

"But I want to talk to you."

"I can hear you, sir." Hal was in sight of the men, and he knew that was his only protection.

The tipple-boss went back into the office; and a minute later Hal saw what had been intended.
The door opened and Alec Stone came out.

He stood for a moment looking at his political henchman. Then he came up. "Kid," he said, in
a low voice, "you're overdoing this. I didn't intend you to go so far."

"This is not what you intended, Mr. Stone," answered Hal.

The pit-boss came closer yet. "What you looking for, kid? What you expect to get out of this?"

Hal's gaze was unwavering. "Experience," he replied.

"You're feeling smart, sonny. But you'd better stop and realise what you're up against. You
ain't going to get away with it, you know; get that through your head--you ain't going to get
away with it. You'd better come in and have a talk with me."

There was a silence.

"Don't you know how it'll be, Smith? These little fires start up--but we put 'em out. We know
how to do it, we've got the machinery. It'll all be forgotten in a week or two, and then where'll
you be at? Can't you see?"

As Hal still made no reply, the other's voice dropped lower. "I understand your position. Just
give me a nod, and it'll be all right. You tell the men that you've watched the weights, and
that they're all right. They'll be satisfied, and you and me can fix it up later."

"Mr. Stone," said Hal, with intense gravity, "am I correct in the impression that you are offering
me a bribe?"

In a flash, the man's self-control vanished. He thrust his huge fist within an inch of Hal's
nose, and uttered a foul oath. But Hal did not remove his nose from the danger-zone, and over
the fist a pair of angry brown eyes gazed at the pit-boss. "Mr. Stone, you had better realise
this situation. I am in dead earnest about this matter, and I don't think it will be safe for
you to offer me violence."

For a moment or two the man continued to glare at Hal; but it appeared that he, like Bud Adams,
had been given instructions. He turned abruptly and strode back into the office.

Hal stood for a bit, until he had made sure of his composure. After which he strolled over
towards the scales. A difficulty had occurred to him for the first time--that he did not know
anything about the working of coal-scales.

But he was given no time to learn. The tipple-boss reappeared. "Get out of here, fellow!" said he.

"But you invited me in," remarked Hal, mildly.

"Well, now I invite you out again."

And so the protestant resumed his vigil at the mandarin's palace-gates.

SECTION 13.

When the quitting-whistle blew, Mike Sikoria came quickly to join Hal and hear what had happened.
Mike was exultant, for several new men had come up to him and offered to join the check-weighman
movement. The old fellow was not sure whether this was owing to his own eloquence as a propagandist,
or to the fine young American buddy he had; but in either case he was equally proud. He gave
Hal a note which had been slipped into his hand, and which Hal recognised as coming from Tom
Olson. The organiser reported that every one in the camp was talking check-weighman, and so
from a propaganda standpoint they could count their move a success, no matter what the bosses
might do. He added that Hal should have a number of men stay with him that night, so as to
have witnesses if the company tried to "pull off anything." "And be careful of the new men,"
he added; "one or two of them are sure to be spies."

Hal and Mike discussed their programme for the second night. Neither of them were keen for
sleeping out again--the old Slovak because of his bones, and Hal because he saw there were
now several spies following them about. At Reminitsky's, he spoke to some of those who had
offered their support, and asked them if they would be willing to spend the night with him
in Edstrom's cabin. Not one shrank from this test of sincerity; they all got their blankets,
and repaired to the place, where Hal lighted the lamp and held an impromptu check-weighman
meeting--and incidentally entertained himself with a spy-hunt!

One of the new-comers was a Pole named Wojecicowski; this, on top of Zamierowski, caused Hal
to give up all effort to call the Poles by their names. "Woji" was an earnest little man, with
a pathetic, tired face. He explained his presence by the statement that he was sick of being
robbed; he would pay his share for a check-weighman, and if they fired him, all right, he would
move on, and to hell with them. After which declaration he rolled up in a blanket and went
to snoring on the floor of the cabin. That did not seem to be exactly the conduct of a spy.

Another was an Italian, named Farenzena; a dark-browed and sinister-looking fellow, who might
have served as a villain in any melodrama. He sat against the wall and talked in guttural tones,
and Hal regarded him with deep suspicion. It was not easy to understand his English, but finally
Hal managed to make out the story he was telling--that he was in love with a "fanciulla," and
that the "fanciulla" was playing with him. He had about made up his mind that she was a coquette,
and not worth bothering with, so he did not care any curses if they sent him down the canyon.
"Don't fight for fanciulla, fight for check-weighman!" he concluded, with a growl.

Another volunteer was a Greek labourer, a talkative young chap who had sat with Hal at lunch-time,
and had given his name as Apostolikas. He entered into fluent conversation with Hal, explaining
how much interested he was in the check-weighman plan; he wanted to know just what they were
going to do, what chance of success they thought they had, who had started the movement and
who was in it. Hal's replies took the form of little sermons on working-class solidarity. Each
time the man would start to "pump" him, Hal would explain the importance of the present issue
to the miners, how they must stand by one another and make sacrifices for the good of all.
After he had talked abstract theories for half an hour, Apostolikas gave up and moved on to
Mike Sikoria, who, having been given a wink by Hal, talked about "scabs," and the dreadful
things that honest workingmen would do to them. When finally the Greek grew tired again, and
lay down on the floor, Hal moved over to Old Mike and whispered that the first name of Apostolikas
must be Judas!

SECTION 14.

Old Mike went to sleep quickly; but Hal had not worked for several days, and had exciting thoughts
to keep him awake. He had been lying quiet for a couple of hours, when he became aware that
some one was moving in the room. There was a lamp burning dimly, and through half-closed eyes
he made out one of the men lifting himself to a sitting position. At first he could not be
sure which one it was, but finally he recognised the Greek.

Hal lay motionless, and after a minute or so he stole another look and saw the man crouching
and listening, his hands still on the floor. Through half opened eye-lids Hal continued to
steal glimpses, while the other rose and tip-toed towards him, stepping carefully over the
sleeping forms.

Hal did his best to simulate the breathing of sleep: no easy matter, with the man stooping
over him, and a knife-thrust as one of the possibilities of the situation. He took the chance,
however; and after what seemed an age, he felt the man's fingers lightly touch his side. They
moved down to his coat-pocket.

"Going to search me!" thought Hal; and waited, expecting the hand to travel to other pockets.
But after what seemed an interminable period, he realised that Apostolikas had risen again,
and was stepping back to his place. In a minute more he had lain down, and all was still in
the cabin.

Hal's hand moved to the pocket, and his fingers slid inside. They touched something, which
he recognised instantly as a roll of bills.

"I see!" thought he. "A frame-up!" And he laughed to himself, his mind going back to early
boyhood--to a dilapidated trunk in the attic of his home, containing story-books that his father
had owned. He could see them now, with their worn brown covers and crude pictures: "The Luck
and Pluck Series," by Horatio Alger; "Live or Die," "Rough and Ready," etc. How he had thrilled
over the story of the country-boy who comes to the city, and meets the villain who robs his
employer's cash-drawer and drops the key of it into the hero's pocket! Evidently some one connected
with the General Fuel Company had read Horatio Alger!

Hal realised that he could not be too quick about getting those bills out of his pocket. He
thought of returning them to "Judas," but decided that he would save them for Edstrom, who
was likely to need money before long. He gave the Greek half an hour to go to sleep, then with
his pocket-knife he gently picked out a hole in the cinders of the floor and buried the money
as best he could. After which he wormed his way to another place, and lay thinking.

SECTION 15.

Would they wait until morning, or would they come soon? He was inclined to the latter guess,
so he was only slightly startled when, an hour or two later, he heard the knob of the cabin-door
turned. A moment later came a crash and the door was burst open, with the shoulder of a heavy
man behind it.

The room was in confusion in a second. Men sprang to their feet, crying out; others sat up
bewildered, still half asleep. The room was bright from an electric torch in the hands of one
of the invaders. "There's the fellow!" cried a voice, which Hal instantly recognised as belonging
to Jeff Cotton, the camp-marshal. "Stick 'em up, there! You, Joe Smith!" Hal did not wait to
see the glint of the marshal's revolver.

There followed a silence. As this drama was being staged for the benefit of the other men,
it was necessary to give them time to get thoroughly awake, and to get their eyes used to the
light. Meantime Hal stood, his hands in the air. Behind the torch he could make out the faces
of the marshal, Bud Adams, Alec Stone, Jake Predovich, and two or three others.

"Now, men," said Cotton, at last, "you are some of the fellows that want a check-weighman.
And this is the man you chose. Is that right?"

There was no answer.

"I'm going to show you the kind of fellow he is. He came to Mr. Stone here and offered to sell
you out."

"It's a lie, men," said Hal, quietly.

"He took some money from Mr. Stone to sell you out!" insisted the marshal.

"It's a lie," said Hal, again.

"He's got that money now!" cried the other.

And Hal cried, in turn, "They are trying to frame something on me, boys! Don't let them fool you!"

"Shut up," commanded the marshal; then, to the men, "I'll show you. I think he's got that money
on him now. Jake, search him."

The store-clerk advanced.

"Watch out, boys!" exclaimed Hal. "They will put something in my pockets." And then to Old
Mike, who had started angrily forward, "It's all right, Mike! Let them alone!"

"Jake, take off your coat," ordered Cotton. "Roll up your sleeves. Show your hands."

It was for all the world like the performance of a prestidigitator. The little Jew took off
his coat and rolled up his sleeves above his elbows. He exhibited his hands to the audience,
turning them this way and that; then, keeping them out in front of him, he came slowly towards
Hal, like a hypnotist about to put him to sleep.

"Watch him!" said Cotton. "He's got that money on him, I know."

"Look sharp!" cried Hal. "If it isn't there, they'll put it there."

"Keep your hands up, young fellow," commanded the marshal. "Keep back from him there!" This
last to Mike Sikoria and the other spectators, who were pressing nearer, peering over one another's
shoulders.

It was all very serious at the time, but afterwards, when Hal recalled the scene, he laughed
over the grotesque figure of Predovich searching his pockets while keeping as far away from
him as possible, so that every one might know that the money had actually come out of Hal's
pocket. The searcher put his hands first in the inside pockets, then in the pockets of Hal's
shirt. Time was needed to build up this climax!

"Turn around," commanded Cotton; and Hal turned, and the Jew went through his trouser-pockets.
He took out in turn Hal's watch, his comb and mirror, his handkerchief; after examining them
and holding them up, he dropped them onto the floor. There was a breathless hush when he came
to Hal's purse, and proceeded to open it. Thanks to the greed of the company, there was nothing
in the purse but some small change. Predovich closed it and dropped it to the floor.

"Wait now! He's not through!" cried the master of ceremonies. "He's got that money somewhere,
boys! Did you look in his side-pockets, Jake?"

"Not yet," said Jake.

"Look sharp!" cried the marshal; and every one craned forward eagerly, while Predovich stooped
down on one knee, and put his hand into one coat pocket and then into the other.

He took his hand out again, and the look of dismay upon his face was so obvious that Hal could
hardly keep from laughing. "It ain't dere!" he declared.

"What?" cried Cotton, and they stared at each other. "By God, he's got rid of it!"

"There's no money on me, boys!" proclaimed Hal. "It's a job they are trying to put over on us."

"He's hid it!" shouted the marshal. "Find it, Jake!"

Then Predovich began to search again, swiftly, and with less circumstance. He was not thinking
so much about the spectators now, as about all that good money gone for nothing! He made Hal
take off his coat, and ripped open the lining; he unbuttoned the trousers and felt inside;
he thrust his fingers down inside Hal's shoes.

But there was no money, and the searchers were at a standstill. "He took twenty-five dollars
from Mr. Stone to sell you out!" declared the marshal. "He's managed to get rid of it somehow."

"Boys," cried Hal, "they sent a spy in here, and told him to put money on me." He was looking
at Apostolikas as he spoke; he saw the man start and shrink back.

"That's him! He's a scab!" cried Old Mike. "He's got the money on him, I bet!" And he made
a move towards the Greek.

So the camp-marshal realised suddenly that it was time to ring down the curtain on this drama.
"That's enough of this foolishness," he declared. "Bring that fellow along here!" And in a
flash a couple of the party had seized Hal's wrists, and a third had grabbed him by the collar
of his shirt. Before the miners had time to realise what was happening, they had rushed their
prisoner out of the cabin.

The quarter of an hour which followed was an uncomfortable one for the would-be check-weighman.
Outside, in the darkness, the camp-marshal was free to give vent to his rage, and so was Alec
Stone. They poured out curses upon him, and kicked him and cuffed him as they went along. One
of the men who held his wrists twisted his arm, until he cried out with pain; then they cursed
him harder, and bade him hold his mouth. Down the dark and silent street they went swiftly,
and into the camp-marshal's office, and upstairs to the room which served as the North Valley
jail. Hal was glad enough when they left him here, slamming the iron door behind them.

SECTION 16.

It had been a crude and stupid plot, yet Hal realised that it was adapted to the intelligence
of the men for whom it was intended. But for the accident that he had stayed awake, they would
have found the money on him, and next morning the whole camp would have heard that he had sold
out. Of course his immediate friends, the members of the committee, would not have believed
it; but the mass of the workers would have believed it, and so the purpose of Tom Olson's visit
to North Valley would have been balked. Throughout the experiences which were to come to him,
Hal retained his vivid impression of that adventure; it served to him as a symbol of many things.
Just as the bosses had tried to bedevil him, to destroy his influence with his followers, so
later on he saw them trying to bedevil the labour-movement, to confuse the intelligence of
the whole country.

Now Hal was in jail. He went to the window and tried the bars--but found that they had been
made for such trials. Then he groped his way about in the darkness, examining his prison, which
proved to be a steel cage built inside the walls of an ordinary room. In one corner was a bench,
and in another corner another bench, somewhat broader, with a mattress upon it. Hal had read
a little about jails--enough to cause him to avoid this mattress. He sat upon the bare bench,
and began to think.

It is a fact that there is a peculiar psychology incidental to being in jail; just as there
is a peculiar psychology incidental to straining your back and breaking your hands loading
coal-cars in a five foot vein; and another, and quite different psychology, produced by living
at ease off the labours of coal-miners. In a jail, you have first of all the sense of being
an animal; the animal side of your being is emphasised, the animal passions of hatred and fear
are called into prominence, and if you are to escape being dominated by them, it can only be
by intense and concentrated effort of the mind. So, if you are a thinking man, you do a great
deal of thinking in a jail; the days are long, and the nights still longer--you have time for
all the thoughts you can have.

The bench was hard, and seemed to grow harder. There was no position in which it could be made
to grow soft. Hal got up and paced about, then he lay down for a while, then got up and walked
again; and all the while he thought, and all the while the jail-psychology was being impressed
upon his mind.

First, he thought about his immediate problem. What were they going to do to him? The obvious
thing would be to put him out of camp, and so be done with him; but would they rest content
with that, in their irritation at the trick he had played? Hal had heard vaguely of that native
American institution, the "third degree," but had never had occasion to think of it as a possibility
in his own life. What a difference it made, to think of it in that way!

Hal had told Tom Olson that he would not pledge himself to organise a union, but that he would
pledge himself to get a check-weighman; and Olson had laughed, and seemed quite content--apparently
assuming that it would come to the same thing. And now, it rather seemed that Olson had known
what he was talking about. For Hal found his thoughts no longer troubled with fears of labour
union domination and walking delegate tyranny; on the contrary, he became suddenly willing
for the people of North Valley to have a union, and to be as tyrannical as they knew how! And
in this change, though Hal had no idea of it, he was repeating an experience common among reformers;
many of whom begin as mild and benevolent advocates of some obvious bit of justice, and under
the operation of the jail-psychology are made into blazing and determined revolutionists. "Eternal
spirit of the chainless mind," says Byron. "Greatest in dungeons Liberty thou art!"

The poet goes on to add that "When thy sons to fetters are confined--" then "Freedom's fame
finds wings on every wind." And just as it was in Chillon, so it seemed to be in North Valley.
Dawn came, and Hal stood at the window of his cell, and heard the whistle blow and saw the
workers going to their tasks, the toil-bent, pallid faced creatures of the underworld, like
a file of baboons in the half-light. He waved his hand to them, and they stopped and stared,
and then waved back; he realised that every one of those men must be thinking about his imprisonment,
and the reason for it--and so the jail-psychology was being communicated to them. If any of
them cherished distrust of unions, or doubt of the need of organisation in North Valley--that
distrust and that doubt were being dissipated!

--There was only one thing discouraging about the matter, as Hal thought it over. Why should
the bosses have left him here in plain sight, when they might so easily have put him into an
automobile, and whisked him down to Pedro before daylight? Was it a sign of the contempt they
felt for their slaves? Did they count upon the sight of the prisoner in the window to produce
fear instead of resentment? And might it not be that they understood their workers better than
the would-be check-weighman? He recalled Mary Burke's pessimism about them, and anxiety gnawed
at his soul; and--such is the operation of the jail-psychology--he fought against this anxiety.
He hated the company for its cynicism, he clenched his hands and set his teeth, desiring to
teach the bosses a lesson, to prove to them that their workers were not slaves, but men!

SECTION 17.

Toward the middle of the morning, Hal heard footsteps in the corridor outside, and a man whom
he did not know opened the barred door and set down a pitcher of water and a tin plate with
a hunk of bread on it. When he started to leave, Hal spoke: "Just a minute, please."

The other frowned at him.

"Can you give me any idea how long I am to stay in here?"

"I cannot," said the man.

"If I'm to be locked up," said Hal, "I've certainly a right to know what is the charge against me."

"Go to blazes!" said the other, and slammed the door and went down the corridor.

Hal went to the window again, and passed the time watching the people who went by. Groups of
ragged children gathered, looking up at him, grinning and making signs--until some one appeared
below and ordered them away.

As time passed, Hal became hungry. The taste of bread, eaten alone, becomes speedily monotonous,
and the taste of water does not relieve it; nevertheless, Hal munched the bread, and drank
the water, and wished for more.

The day dragged by; and late in the afternoon the keeper came again, with another hunk of bread
and another pitcher of water. "Listen a moment," said Hal, as the man was turning away.

"I got nothin' to say to you," said the other.

"I have something to say to you," pleaded Hal. "I have read in a book--I forget where, but
it was written by some doctor--that white bread does not contain the elements necessary to
the sustaining of the human body."

"Go on!" growled the jailer. "What yer givin' us?"

"I mean," explained Hal, "a diet of bread and water is not what I'd choose to live on."

"What would yer choose?"

The tone suggested that the question was a rhetorical one; but Hal took it in good faith. "If
I could have some beefsteak and mashed potatoes--"

The door of the cell closed with a slam whose echoes drowned out the rest of that imaginary
menu. And so once more Hal sat on the hard bench, and munched his hunk of bread, and thought
jail-thoughts.

When the quitting-whistle blew, he stood at the window, and saw the groups of his friends once
again, and got their covert signals of encouragement. Then darkness fell, and another long
vigil began.

It was late; Hal had no means of telling how late, save that all the lights in the camps were
out. He made up his mind that he was in for the night, and had settled himself on the floor
with his arm for a pillow, and had dozed off to sleep, when suddenly there came a scraping
sound against the bars of his window. He sat up with a start, and heard another sound, unmistakably
the rustling of paper. He sprang to the window, where by the faint light of the stars he could
make out something dangling. He caught at it; it seemed to be an ordinary note-book, such as
stenographers use, tied on the end of a pole.

Hal looked out, but could see no one. He caught hold of the pole and jerked it, as a signal;
and then he heard a whisper which he recognised instantly as Rovetta's. "Hello! Listen. Write
your name hundred times in book. I come back. Understand?"

The command was a sufficiently puzzling one, but Hal realised that this was no time for explanations.
He answered, "Yes," and broke the string and took the notebook. There was a pencil attached,
with a piece of cloth wrapped round the point to protect it.

The pole was withdrawn, and Hal sat on the bench, and began to write, three or four times on
a page, "Joe Smith--Joe Smith--Joe Smith." It is not hard to write "Joe Smith," even in darkness,
and so, while his hand moved, Hal's mind was busy with this mystery. It was fairly to be assumed
that his committee did not want his autograph to distribute for a souvenir; they must want
it for some vital purpose, to meet some new move of the bosses. The answer to this riddle was
not slow in coming: having failed in their effort to find money on him, the bosses had framed
up a letter, which they were exhibiting as having been written by the would-be check-weigh-man.
His friends wanted his signature to disprove the authenticity of the letter.

Hal wrote a free and rapid hand, with a generous flourish; he felt sure it would be different
from Alec Stone's idea of a working-boy's scrawl. His pencil flew on and on--"Joe Smith--Joe
Smith--" page after page, until he was sure that he had written a signature for every miner
in the camp, and was beginning on the buddies. Then, hearing a whistle outside, he stopped
and sprang to the window.

"Throw it!" whispered a voice; and Hal threw it. He saw a form vanish up the street, after
which all was quiet again. He listened for a while, to see if he had roused his jailer; then
he lay down on the bench--and thought more jail-thoughts!

SECTION 18.

Morning came, and the mine-whistle blew, and Hal stood at the window again. This time he noticed
that some of the miners on their way to work had little strips of paper in their hands, which
strips they waved conspicuously for him to see. Old Mike Sikoria came along, having a whole
bunch of strips in his hands, which he was distributing to all who would take them. Doubtless
he had been warned to proceed secretly, but the excitement of the occasion had been too much
for him; he capered about like a young spring lamb, and waved the strips at Hal in plain sight
of all the world.

Such indiscreet behaviour met the return it invited. As Hal watched, he saw a stocky figure
come striding round the corner, confronting the startled old Slovak. It was Bud Adams, the
mine-guard, and his hard fists were clenched, and his whole body gathered for a blow. Mike
saw him, and was as if suddenly struck with paralysis; his toil-bent shoulders sunk together,
and his hands fell to his sides--his fingers opening, and his precious strips of paper fluttering
to the ground. Mike stared at Bud like a fascinated rabbit, making no move to protect himself.

Hal clutched the bars, with an impulse to leap to his friend's defence. But the expected blow
did not fall; the mine-guard contented himself with glaring ferociously, and giving an order
to the old man. Mike stooped and picked up the papers--the process taking him some time, as
he was unable or unwilling to take his eyes off the mine-guard's. When he got them all in his
hands, there came another order, and he gave them up to Bud. After which he fell back a step,
and the other followed, his fists still clenched, and a blow seeming about to leap from him
every moment. Mike receded another step, and then another--so the two of them backed out of
sight around the corner. Men who had been witnesses of this little drama turned and slunk off,
and Hal was given no clue as to its outcome.

A couple of hours afterwards, Hal's jailer came up, this time without any bread and water.
He opened the door and commanded the prisoner to "come along." Hal went downstairs, and entered
Jeff Cotton's office.

The camp-marshal sat at his desk with a cigar between his teeth. He was writing, and he went
on writing until the jailer had gone out and closed the door. Then he turned his revolving
chair and crossed his legs, leaning back and looking at the young miner in his dirty blue overalls,
his hair tousled and his face pale from his period of confinement. The camp-marshal's aristocratic
face wore a smile. "Well, young fellow," said he, "you've been having a lot of fun in this camp."

"Pretty fair, thank you," answered Hal.

"Beat us out all along the line, hey?" Then, after a pause, "Now, tell me, what do you think
you're going to get out of it?"

"That's what Alec Stone asked me," replied Hal. "I don't think it would do much good to explain.
I doubt if you believe in altruism any more than Stone does."

The camp-marshal took his cigar from his mouth, and flicked off the ashes. His face became
serious, and there was a silence, while he studied Hal. "You a union organiser?" he asked, at last.

"No," said Hal.

"You're an educated man; you're no labourer, that I know. Who's paying you?"

"There you are! You don't believe in altruism."

The other blew a ring of smoke across the room. "Just want to put the company in the hole,
hey? Some kind of agitator?"

"I am a miner who wants to be a check-weighman."

"Socialist?"

"That depends upon developments here."

"Well," said the marshal, "you're an intelligent chap, that I can see. So I'll lay my hand
on the table and you can study it. You're not going to serve as check-weighman in North Valley,
nor any other place that the 'G. F. C.' has anything to do with. Nor are you going to have
the satisfaction of putting the company in a hole. We're not even going to beat you up and
make a martyr of you. I was tempted to do that the other night, but I changed my mind."

"You might change the bruises on my arm," suggested Hal, in a pleasant voice.

"We're going to offer you the choice of two things," continued the marshal, without heeding
this mild sarcasm. "Either you will sign a paper admitting that you took the twenty-five dollars
from Alec Stone, in which case we will fire you and call it square; or else we will prove that
you took it, in which case we will send you to the pen for five or ten years. Do you get that?"

Now when Hal had applied for the job of check-weighman, he had been expecting to be thrown
out of the camp, and had intended to go, counting his education complete. But here, as he sat
and gazed into the marshal's menacing eyes, he decided suddenly that he did not want to leave
North Valley. He wanted to stay and take the measure of this gigantic "burglar," the General
Fuel Company.

"That's a serious threat, Mr. Cotton," he remarked. "Do you often do things like that?"

"We do them when we have to," was the reply.

"Well, it's a novel proposition. Tell me more about it. What will the charge be?"

"I'm not sure about that--we'll put it up to our lawyers. Maybe they'll call it conspiracy,
maybe blackmail. They'll make it whatever carries a long enough sentence."

"And before I enter my plea, would you mind letting me see the letter I'm supposed to have
written."

"Oh, you've heard about the letter, have you?" said the camp-marshal, lifting his eyebrows
in mild surprise. He took from his desk a sheet of paper and handed it to Hal, who read:

"Dere mister Stone, You don't need worry about the check-wayman. Pay me twenty five dollars,
and I will fix it right. Yours try, Joe Smith."

Having taken in the words of the letter, Hal examined the paper, and perceived that his enemies
had taken the trouble, not merely to forge a letter in his name, but to have it photographed,
to have a cut made of the photograph, and to have it printed. Beyond doubt they had distributed
it broadcast in the camp. And all this in a few hours! It was as Olson had said--a regular
system to keep the men bedevilled.

SECTION 19.

Hal took a minute or so to ponder the situation. "Mr. Cotton," he said, at last. "I know how
to spell better than that. Also my handwriting is a bit more fluent."

There was a trace of a smile about the marshal's cruel lips. "I know," he replied. "I've not
failed to compare them."

"You have a good secret-service department!" said Hal.

"Before you get through, young fellow, you'll discover that our legal department is equally
efficient."

"Well," said Hal, "they'll need to be; for I don't see how you can get round the fact that
I'm a check-weighman, chosen according to the law, and with a group of the men behind me."

"If that's what you're counting on," retorted Cotton, "you may as well forget it. You've got
no group any more."

"Oh! You've got rid of them?"

"We've got rid of the ring-leaders."

"Of whom?"

"That old billy-goat, Sikoria, for one."

"You've shipped him?"

"We have."

"I saw the beginning of that. Where have you sent him?"

"That," smiled the marshal, "is a job for your secret-service department!"

"And who else?"

"John Edstrom has gone down to bury his wife. It's not the first time that dough-faced old
preacher has made trouble for us, but it'll be the last. You'll find him in Pedro--probably
in the poor-house."

"No," responded Hal, quickly--and there came just a touch of elation in his voice--"he won't
have to go to the poor-house at once. You see, I've just sent twenty-five dollars to him."

The camp-marshal frowned. "Really!" Then, after a pause, "You did have that money on you! I
thought that lousy Greek had got away with it!"

"No. Your knave was honest. But so was I. I knew Edstrom had been getting short weight for
years, so he was the one person with any right to the money."

This story was untrue, of course; the money was still buried in Edstrom's cabin. But Hal meant
for the old miner to have it in the end, and meantime he wanted to throw Cotton off the track.

"A clever trick, young man!" said the marshal. "But you'll repent it before you're through.
It only makes me more determined to put you where you can't do us any harm."

"You mean in the pen? You understand, of course, it will mean a jury trial. You can get a jury
to do what you want?"

"They tell me you've been taking an interest in politics in Pedro County. Haven't you looked
into our jury-system?"

"No, I haven't got that far."

The marshal began blowing rings of smoke again.

"Well, there are some three hundred men on our jury-list, and we know them all. You'll find
yourself facing a box with Jake Predovich as foreman, three company-clerks, two of Alf Raymond's
saloon-keepers, a ranchman with a mortgage held by the company-bank, and five Mexicans who
have no idea what it's all about, but would stick a knife into your back for a drink of whiskey.
The District Attorney is a politician who favours the miners in his speeches, and favours us
in his acts; while Judge Denton, of the district court, is the law partner of Vagleman, our
chief-counsel. Do you get all that?"

"Yes," said Hal. "I've heard of the 'Empire of Raymond'; I'm interested to see the machinery.
You're quite open about it!"

"Well," replied the marshal, "I want you to know what you're up against. We didn't start this
fight, and we're perfectly willing to end it without trouble. All we ask is that you make amends
for the mischief you've done us."

"By 'making amends,' you mean I'm to disgrace myself--to tell the men I'm a traitor?"

"Precisely," said the marshal.

"I think I'll have a seat while I consider the matter," said Hal; and he took a chair, and
stretched out his legs, and made himself elaborately comfortable. "That bench upstairs is frightfully
hard," said he, and smiled mockingly upon the camp-marshal.

SECTION 20.

When this conversation was continued, it was upon a new and unexpected line. "Cotton," remarked
the prisoner, "I perceive that you are a man of education. It occurs to me that once upon a
time you must have been what the world calls a gentleman."

The blood started into the camp-marshal's face. "You go to hell!" said he.

"I did not intend to ask questions," continued Hal. "I can well understand that you mightn't
care to answer them. My point is that, being an ex-gentleman, you may appreciate certain aspects
of this case which would be beyond the understanding of a nigger-driver like Stone, or an efficiency
expert like Cartwright. One gentleman can recognise another, even in a miner's costume. Isn't
that so?"

Hal paused for an answer, and the marshal gave him a wary look. "I suppose so," he said.

"Well, to begin with, one gentleman does not smoke without inviting another to join him."

The man gave another look. Hal thought he was going to consign him to hades once more; but
instead he took a cigar from his vest-pocket and held it out.

"No, thank you," said Hal, quietly. "I do not smoke. But I like to be invited."

There was a pause, while the two men measured each other.

"Now, Cotton," began the prisoner, "you pictured the scene at my trial. Let me carry on the
story for you. You have your case all framed up, your hand-picked jury in the box, and your
hand-picked judge on the bench, your hand-picked prosecuting-attorney putting through the job;
you are ready to send your victim to prison, for an example to the rest of your employes. But
suppose that, at the climax of the proceedings, you should make the discovery that your victim
is a person who cannot be sent to prison?"

"Cannot be sent to prison?" repeated the other. His tone was thoughtful. "You'll have to explain."

"Surely not to a man of your intelligence! Don't you know, Cotton, there are people who cannot
be sent to prison?"

The camp-marshal smoked his cigar for a bit. "There are some in this county," said he. "But
I thought I knew them all."

"Well," said Hal, "has it never occurred to you that there might be some in this state?"

There followed a long silence. The two men were gazing into each other's eyes; and the more
they gazed, the more plainly Hal read uncertainty in the face of the marshal.

"Think how embarrassing it would be!" he continued. "You have your drama all staged--as you
did the night before last--only on a larger stage, before a more important audience; and at
the denouement you find that, instead of vindicating yourself before the workers in North Valley,
you have convicted yourself before the public of the state. You have shown the whole community
that you are law-breakers; worse than that--you have shown that you are jack-asses!"

This time the camp-marshal gazed so long that his cigar went out. And meantime Hal was lounging
in his chair, smiling at him strangely. It was as if a transformation was taking place before
the marshal's eyes; the miner's "jumpers" fell away from Hal's figure, and there was a suit
of evening-clothes in their place!

"Who the devil are you?" cried the man.

"Well now!" laughed Hal. "You boast of the efficiency of your secret service department! Put
them at work upon this problem. A young man, age twenty-one, height five feet ten inches, weight
one hundred and fifty-two pounds, eyes brown, hair chestnut and rather wavy, manner genial,
a favourite with the ladies--at least that's what the society notes say--missing since early
in June, supposed to be hunting mountain-goats in Mexico. As you know, Cotton, there's only
one city in the state that has any 'society,' and in that city there are only twenty-five or
thirty families that count. For a secret service department like that of the 'G. F. C.', that
is really too easy."

Again there was a silence, until Hal broke it. "Your distress is a tribute to your insight.
The company is lucky in the fact that one of its camp-marshals happens to be an ex-gentleman."

Again the other flushed. "Well, by God!" he said, half to himself; and then, making a last
effort to hold his bluff--"You're kidding me!"

"'Kidding,' as you call it, is one of the favourite occupations of society, Cotton. A good
part of our intercourse consists of it--at least among the younger set."

Suddenly the marshal rose. "Say," he demanded, "would you mind going back upstairs for a few
minutes?"

Hal could not restrain his laughter at this. "I should mind it very much," he said. "I have
been on a bread and water diet for thirty-six hours, and I should like very much to get out
and have a breath of fresh air."

"But," said the other, lamely, "I've got to send you up there."

"That's another matter," replied Hal. "If you send me, I'll go, but it's your look-out. You've
kept me here without legal authority, with no charge against me, and without giving me an opportunity
to see counsel. Unless I'm very much mistaken, you are liable criminally for that, and the
company is liable civilly. That is your own affair, of course. I only want to make clear my
position--when you ask me would I mind stepping upstairs, I, answer that I would mind very
much indeed."

The camp-marshal stood for a bit, chewing nervously on his extinct cigar. Then he went to the
door. "Hey, Gus!" he called. Hal's jailer appeared, and Cotton whispered to him, and he went
away again. "I'm telling him to get you some food, and you can sit and eat it here. Will that
suit you better?"

"It depends," said Hal, making the most of the situation. "Are you inviting me as your prisoner,
or as your guest?"

"Oh, come off!" said the other.

"But I have to know my legal status. It will be of importance to my lawyers."

"Be my guest," said the camp-marshal.

"But when a guest has eaten, he is free to go out, if he wishes to!"

"I will let you know about that before you get through."

"Well, be quick. I'm a rapid eater."

"You'll promise you won't go away before that?"

"If I do," was Hal's laughing reply, "it will be only to my place of business. You can look
for me at the tipple, Cotton!"

SECTION 21.

The marshal went out, and a few moments later the jailer came back, with a meal which presented
a surprising contrast to the ones he had previously served. There was a tray containing cold
ham, a couple of soft boiled eggs, some potato salad, and a cup of coffee with rolls and butter.

"Well, well!" said Hal, condescendingly. "That's even nicer than beefsteak and mashed potatoes!"
He sat and watched, not offering to help, while the other made room for the tray on the table
in front of him. Then the man stalked out, and Hal began to eat.

Before he had finished, the camp-marshal returned. He seated himself in his revolving chair,
and appeared to be meditative. Between bites, Hal would look up and smile at him.

"Cotton," said he, "you know there is no more certain test of breeding than table-manners.
You will observe that I have not tucked my napkin in my neck, as Alec Stone would have done."

"I'm getting you," replied the marshal.

Hal set his knife and fork side by side on his plate. "Your man has overlooked the finger-bowl,"
he remarked. "However, don't bother. You might ring for him now, and let him take the tray."

The camp-marshal used his voice for a bell, and the jailer came. "Unfortunately," said Hal,
"when your people were searching me, night before last, they dropped my purse, so I have no
tip for the waiter."

The "waiter" glared at Hal as if he would like to bite him; but the camp-marshal grinned. "Clear
out, Gus, and shut the door," said he.

Then Hal stretched his legs and made himself comfortable again. "I must say I like being your
guest better than being your prisoner!"

There was a pause.

"I've been talking it over with Mr. Cartwright," began the marshal. "I've got no way of telling
how much of this is bluff that you've been giving me, but it's evident enough that you're no
miner. You may be some newfangled kind of agitator, but I'm damned if I ever saw an agitator
that had tea-party manners. I suppose you've been brought up to money; but if that's so, why
you want to do this kind of thing is more than I can imagine."

"Tell me, Cotton," said Hal, "did you never hear of ennui?"

"Yes," replied the other, "but aren't you rather young to be troubled with that complaint?"

"Suppose I've seen others suffering from it, and wanted to try a different way of living from
theirs?"

"If you're what you say, you ought to be still in college."

"I go back for my senior year this fall."

"What college?"

"You doubt me still, I see!" said Hal, and smiled.

"What college is that?" asked the marshal.

"Well, well!" commented the marshal, when the concert was over. "Are there many more like you
at Harrigan?"

"A little group--enough to leaven the lump."

"And this is your idea of a vacation?"

"No, it isn't a vacation; it's a summer-course in practical sociology."

"Oh, I see!" said the marshal; and he smiled in spite of himself.

"All last year we let the professors of political economy hand out their theories to us. But
somehow the theories didn't seem to correspond with the facts. I said to myself, 'I've got
to check them up.' You know the phrases, perhaps--individualism, laissez faire, freedom of
contract, the right of every man to work for whom he pleases. And here you see how the theories
work out--a camp-marshal with a cruel smile on his face and a gun on his hip, breaking the
laws faster than a governor can sign them."

The camp-marshal decided suddenly that he had had enough of this "tea-party." He rose to his
feet to cut matters short. "If you don't mind, young man," said he, "we'll get down to business!"

SECTION 22.

He took a turn about the room, then he came and stopped in front of Hal. He stood with his
hands thrust into his pockets, with a certain jaunty grace that was out of keeping with his
occupation. He was a handsome devil, Hal thought--in spite of his dangerous mouth, and the
marks of dissipation on him.

"Young man," he began, with another effort at geniality. "I don't know who you are, but you're
wide awake; you've got your nerve with you, and I admire you. So I'm willing to call the thing
off, and let you go back and finish that course at college."

Hal had been studying the other's careful smile. "Cotton," he said, at last, "let me get the
proposition clear. I don't have to say I took that money?"

"No, we'll let you off from that."

"And you won't send me to the pen?"

"No. I never meant to do that, of course. I was only trying to bluff you. All I ask is that
you clear out, and give our people a chance to forget."

"But what's there in that for me, Cotton? If I had wanted to run away, I could have done it
any time during the last eight or ten weeks."

"Yes, of course, but now it's different. Now it's a matter of my consideration."

"Cut out the consideration!" exclaimed Hal. "You want to get rid of me, and you'd like to do
it without trouble. But you can't--so forget it."

The other was staring, puzzled. "You mean you expect to stay here?"

"I mean just that."

"Young man, I've had enough of this! I've got no more time to play. I don't care who you are,
I don't care about your threats. I'm the marshal of this camp, and I have the job of keeping
order in it. I say you're going to get out!"

"But, Cotton," said Hal, "this is an incorporated town! I have a right to walk on the streets--exactly
as much right as you."

"I'm not going to waste time arguing. I'm going to put you into an automobile and take you
down to Pedro!"

"And suppose I go to the District Attorney and demand that he prosecute you?"

"He'll laugh at you."

"And suppose I go to the Governor of the state?"

"He'll laugh still louder."

"All right, Cotton; maybe you know what you're doing; but I wonder--I wonder just how sure
you feel. Has it never occurred to you that your superiors might not care to have you take
these high-handed steps?"

"My superiors? Who do you mean?"

"There's one man in the state you must respect--even though you despise the District Attorney
and the Governor. That is Peter Harrigan."

"Peter Harrigan?" echoed the other; and then he burst into a laugh. "Well, you are a merry lad!"

Hal continued to study him, unmoved. "I wonder if you're sure! He'll stand for everything you've
done."

"He will!" said the other.

"For the way you treat the workers? He knows you are giving short weights."

"Oh hell!" said the other. "Where do you suppose he got the money for your college?"

There was a pause; at last the marshal asked, defiantly, "Have you got what you want?"

"Yes," replied Hal. "Of course, I thought it all along, but it's hard to convince other people.
Old Peter's not like most of these Western wolves, you know; he's a pious high-church man."

The marshal smiled grimly. "So long as there are sheep," said he, there'll be wolves in sheep's
clothing."

"I see," said Hal. "And you leave them to feed on the lambs!"

"If any lamb is silly enough to be fooled by that old worn-out skin," remarked the marshal,
"it deserves to be eaten."

Hal was studying the cynical face in front of him. "Cotton," he said, "the shepherds are asleep;
but the watch-dogs are barking. Haven't you heard them?"

"I hadn't noticed."

"They are barking, barking! They are going to wake the shepherds! They are going to save the
sheep!"

"Religion don't interest me," said the other, looking bored; "your kind any more than Old Peter's."

And suddenly Hal rose to his feet. "Cotton," said he, "my place is with the flock! I'm going
back to my job at the tipple!" And he started towards the door.

SECTION 23.

Jeff Cotton sprang forward. "Stop!" he cried.

But Hal did not stop.

"See here, young man!" cried the marshal. "Don't carry this joke too far!" And he sprang to
the door, just ahead of his prisoner. His hand moved toward his hip.

"Draw your gun, Cotton," said Hal; and, as the marshal obeyed, "Now I will stop. If I obey
you in future, it will be at the point of your revolver."

The marshal's mouth was dangerous-looking. "You may find that in this country there's not so
much between the drawing of a gun and the firing of it!"

"I've explained my attitude," replied Hal. "What are your orders?"

"Come back and sit in this chair."

So Hal sat, and the marshal went to his desk, and took up the telephone. "Number seven," he
said, and waited a moment. "That you, Tom? Bring the car right away."

He hung up the receiver, and there followed a silence; finally Hal inquired, "I'm going to Pedro?"

There was no reply.

"I see I've got on your nerves," said Hal. "But I don't suppose it's occurred to you that you
deprived me of my money last night. Also, I've an account with the company, some money coming
to me for my work? What about that?"

The marshal took up the receiver and gave another number. "Hello, Simpson. This is Cotton.
Will you figure out the time of Joe Smith, buddy in Number Two, and send over the cash. Get
his account at the store; and be quick, we're waiting for it. He's going out in a hurry." Again
he hung up the receiver.

"Tell me," said Hal, "did you take that trouble for Mike Sikoria?"

There was silence.

"Let me suggest that when you get my time, you give me part of it in scrip. I want it for a
souvenir."

Still there was silence.

"You know," persisted the prisoner, tormentingly, "there's a law against paying wages in scrip."

The marshal was goaded to speech. "We don't pay in scrip."

"But you do, man! You know you do!"

"We give it when they ask their money ahead."

"The law requires you to pay them twice a month, and you don't do it. You pay them once a month,
and meantime, if they need money, you give them this imitation money!"

"Well, if it satisfies them, where's your kick?"

"If it doesn't satisfy them, you put them on the train and ship them out?"

The marshal sat in silence, tapping impatiently with his fingers on the desk.

"Cotton," Hal began, again, "I'm out for education, and there's something I'd like you to explain
to me--a problem in human psychology. When a man puts through a deal like this, what does he
tell himself about it?"

"Young man," said the marshal, "if you'll pardon me, you are getting to be a bore."

"Oh, but we've got an automobile ride before us! Surely we can't sit in silence all the way!"
After a moment he added, in a coaxing tone, "I really want to learn, you know. You might be
able to win me over."

"No!" said Cotton, promptly. "I'll not go in for anything like that!"

"But why not?"

"Because, I'm no match for you in long-windedness. I've heard you agitators before, you're
all alike: you think the world is run by talk--but it isn't."

Hal had come to realise that he was not getting anywhere in his duel with the camp-marshal.
He had made every effort to get somewhere; he had argued, threatened, bluffed, he had even
sung songs for the marshal! But the marshal was going to ship him out, that was all there was
to it.

Hal had gone on with the quarrel, simply because he had to wait for the automobile, and because
he had endured indignities and had to vent his anger and disappointment. But now he stopped
quarrelling suddenly. His attention was caught by the marshal's words, "You think the world
is run by talk!" Those were the words Hal's brother always used! And also, the marshal had
said, "You agitators!" For years it had been one of the taunts Hal had heard from his brother,
"You will turn into one of these agitators!" Hal had answered, with boyish obstinacy, "I don't
care if I do!" And now, here the marshal was calling him an agitator, seriously, without an
apology, without the license of blood relationship. He repeated the words, "That's what gets
me about you agitators--you come in here trying to stir these people up--"

So that was the way Hal seemed to the "G. F. C."! He had come here intending to be a spectator,
to stand on the deck of the steamer and look down into the ocean of social misery. He had considered
every step so carefully before he took it! He had merely tried to be a check-weighman, nothing
more! He had told Tom Olson he would not go in for unionism; he had had a distrust of union
organisers, of agitators of all sorts--blind, irresponsible persons who went about stirring
up dangerous passions. He had come to admire Tom Olson--but that had only partly removed his
prejudices; Olson was only one agitator, not the whole lot of them!

But all his consideration for the company had counted for nothing; likewise all his efforts
to convince the marshal that he was a leisure-class person. In spite of all Hal's "tea-party
manners," the marshal had said, "You agitators!" What was he judging by, Hal wondered. Had
he, Hal Warner, come to look like one of these blind, irresponsible persons? It was time that
he took stock of himself!

Had two months of "dirty work" in the bowels of the earth changed him so? The idea was bound
to be disconcerting to one who had been a favourite of the ladies! Did he talk like it?--he
who had been "kissing the Blarney-stone!" The marshal had said he was "long-winded!" Well,
to be sure, he had talked a lot; but what could the man expect--having shut him up in jail
for two nights and a day, with only his grievances to brood over! Was that the way real agitators
were made--being shut up with grievances to brood over?

Hal recalled his broodings in the jail. He had been embittered; he had not cared whether North
Valley was dominated by labour unions. But that had all been a mood, the same as his answer
to his brother; that was jail psychology, a part of his summer course in practical sociology.
He had put it aside; but apparently it had made a deeper impression upon him than he had realised.
It had changed his physical aspect! It had made him look and talk like an agitator! It had
made him "irresponsible," "blind!"

Yes, that was it! All this dirt, ignorance, disease, this knavery and oppression, this maiming
of men in body and soul in the coal-camps of America--all this did not exist--it was the hallucination
of an "irresponsible" brain! There was the evidence of Hal's brother and the camp-marshal to
prove it; there was the evidence of the whole world to prove it! The camp-marshal and his brother
and the whole world could not be "blind!" And if you talked to them about these conditions,
they shrugged their shoulders, they called you a "dreamer," a "crank," they said you were "off
your trolley"; or else they became angry and bitter, they called you names; they said, "You
agitators!"

SECTION 24.

The camp-marshal of North Valley had been "agitated" to such an extent that he could not stay
in his chair. All the harassments of his troubled career had come pouring into his mind. He
had begun pacing the floor, and was talking away, regardless of whether Hal listened or not.

"A campful of lousy wops! They can't understand any civilised language, they've only one idea
in the world--to shirk every lick of work they can, to fill up their cars with slate and rock
and blame it on some other fellow, and go off to fill themselves with booze. They won't work
fair, they won't fight fair--they fight with a knife in the back! And you agitators with your
sympathy for them--why the hell do they come to this country, unless they like it better than
their own?"

Hal had heard this question before; but they had to wait for the automobile--and being sure
that he was an agitator now, he would make all the trouble he could! "The reason is obvious
enough," he said. "Isn't it true that the 'G. F. C.' employs agents abroad to tell them of
the wonderful pay they get in America?"

"Well, they get it, don't they? Three times what they ever got at home!"

"Yes, but it doesn't do them any good. There's another fact which the 'G. F. C.' doesn't mention--that
the cost of living is even higher than the wages. Then, too, they're led to think of America
as a land of liberty; they come, hoping for a better chance for themselves and their children;
but they find a camp-marshal who's off in his geography--who thinks the Rocky Mountains are
somewhere in Russia!"

"I know that line of talk!" exclaimed the other. "I learned to wave the starry flag when I
was a kid. But I tell you, you've got to get coal mined, and it isn't the same thing as running
a Fourth of July celebration. Some church people make a law they shan't work on Sunday--and
what comes of that? They have thirty-six hours to get soused in, and so they can't work on Monday!"

"Surely there's a remedy, Cotton! Suppose the company refused to rent buildings to saloon-keepers?"

"Good God! You think we haven't tried it? They go down to Pedro for the stuff, and bring back
all they can carry--inside them and out. And if we stop that--then our hands move to some other
camps, where they can spend their money as they please. No, young man, when you have such cattle,
you have to drive them! And it takes a strong hand to do it--a man like Peter Harrigan. If
there's to be any coal, if industry's to go on, if there's to be any progress--"

"Yes," growled the marshal. "It's easy enough for you smart young chaps to make verses, while
you're living at ease on the old man's bounty. But that don't answer any argument. Are you
college boys ready to take over his job? Or these Democrat politicians that come in here, talking
fool-talk about liberty, making labour laws for these wops--"

"I begin to understand," said Hal. "You object to the politicians who pass the laws, you doubt
their motives--and so you refuse to obey. But why didn't you tell me sooner you were an anarchist?"

"Anarchist?" cried the marshal. "Me an anarchist?"

"That's what an anarchist is, isn't it?"

"Good God! If that isn't the limit! You come here, stirring up the men--a union agitator, or
whatever you are--and you know that the first idea of these people, when they do break loose,
is to put dynamite in the shafts and set fire to the buildings!"

"Do they do that?" There was surprise in Hal's tone.

"Haven't you read what they did in the last big strike? That dough-faced old preacher, John
Edstrom, could tell you. He was one of the bunch."

"No," said Hal, "you're mistaken. Edstrom has a different philosophy. But others did, I've
no doubt. And since I've been here, I can understand their point of view entirely. When they
set fire to the buildings, it was because they thought you and Alec Stone might be inside."

The marshal did not smile.

"They want to destroy the properties," continued Hal, "because that's the only way they can
think of to punish the tyranny and greed of the owners. But, Cotton, suppose some one were
to put a new idea into their heads; suppose some one were to say to them, 'Don't destroy the
properties--take them!'"

The other stared. "Take them! So that's your idea of morality!"

"It would be more moral than the method by which Peter got them in the beginning."

"What method is that?" demanded the marshal, with some appearance of indignation. "He paid
the market-price for them, didn't he?"

"He paid the market-price for politicians. Up in Western City I happen to know a lady who was
a school-commissioner when he was buying school-lands from the state--lands that were known
to contain coal. He was paying three dollars an acre, and everybody knew they were worth three
thousand."

"Well," said Cotton, "if you don't buy the politicians, you wake up some fine morning and find
that somebody else has bought them. If you have property, you have to protect it."

"Cotton," said Hal, "you sell Old Peter your time--but surely you might keep part of your brains!
Enough to look at your monthly pay-check and realise that you too are a wage-slave, not much
better than the miners you despise."

The other smiled. "My check might be bigger, I admit; but I've figured over it, and I think
I have an easier time than you agitators. I'm top-dog, and I expect to stay on top."

"Well, Cotton, on that view of life, I don't wonder you get drunk now and then. A dog-fight,
with no faith or humanity anywhere! Don't think I'm sneering at you--I'm talking out of my
heart to you. I'm not so young, nor such a fool, that I haven't had the dog-fight aspect of
things brought to my attention. But there's something in a fellow that insists he isn't all
dog; he has at least a possibility of something better. Take these poor under-dogs sweating
inside the mountain, risking their lives every hour of the day and night to provide you and
me with coal to keep us warm--to 'keep the wheels of industry a-roll'--"

SECTION 25.

These were the last words Hal spoke. They were obvious enough words, yet when he looked back
upon the coincidence, it seemed to him a singular one. For while he was sitting there chatting,
it happened that the poor under-dogs inside the mountain were in the midst of one of those
experiences which make the romance and terror of coal-mining. One of the boys who were employed
underground, in violation of the child labour law, was in the act of bungling his task. He
was a "spragger," whose duty it was to thrust a stick into the wheel of a loaded car to hold
it; and he was a little chap, and the car was in motion when he made the attempt. It knocked
him against the wall--and so there was a load of coal rolling down grade, pursued too late
by half a dozen men. Gathering momentum, it whirled round a curve and flew from the track,
crashing into timbers and knocking them loose. With the timbers came a shower of coal-dust,
accumulated for decades in these old workings; and at the same time came an electric light
wire, which, as it touched the car, produced a spark.

And so it was that Hal, chatting with the marshal, suddenly felt, rather than heard, a deafening
roar; he felt the air about him turn into a living thing which struck him a mighty blow, hurling
him flat upon the floor. The windows of the room crashed inward upon him in a shower of glass,
and the plaster of the ceiling came down on his head in another shower.

When he raised himself, half stunned, he saw the marshal, also on the floor; these two conversationalists
stared at each other with horrified eyes. Even as they crouched, there came a crash above their
heads, and half the ceiling of the room came toward them, with a great piece of timber sticking
through. All about them were other crashes, as if the end of the world had come.

They struggled to their feet, and rushing to the door, flung it open, just as a jagged piece
of timber shattered the side-walk in front of them. They sprang back again, "Into the cellar!"
cried the marshal, leading the way to the back-stairs.

But before they had started down these stairs, they realised that the crashing had ceased.
"What is it?" gasped Hal, as they stood.

"Mine-explosion," said the other; and after a few seconds they ran to the door again.

The first thing they saw was a vast pillar of dust and smoke, rising into the sky above them.
It spread before their dazed eyes, until it made night of everything about them. There was
still a rain of lighter debris pattering down over the village; as they stared, and got their
wits about them, remembering how things had looked before this, they realised that the shaft-house
of Number One had disappeared.

"Blown up, by God!" cried the marshal; and the two ran out into the street, and looking up,
saw that a portion of the wrecked building had fallen through the roof of the jail above their
heads.

The rain of debris had now ceased, but there were clouds of dust which covered the two men
black; the clouds grew worse, until they could hardly see their way at all. And with the darkness
there fell silence, which, after the sound of the explosion and the crashing of debris, seemed
the silence of death.

For a few moments Hal stood dazed. He saw a stream of men and boys pouring from the breaker;
while from every street there appeared a stream of women; women old, women young--leaving their
cooking on the stove, their babies in the crib, with their older children screaming at their
skirts, they gathered in swarms about the pit-mouth, which was like the steaming crater of
a volcano.

Cartwright, the superintendent, appeared, running toward the fan-house. Cotton joined him,
and Hal followed. The fan-house was a wreck, the giant fan lying on the ground a hundred feet
away, its blades smashed. Hal was too inexperienced in mine-matters to get the full significance
of this; but he saw the marshal and the superintendent stare blankly at each other, and heard
the former's exclamation, "That does for us!" Cartwright said not a word; but his thin lips
were pressed together, and there was fear in his eyes.

Back to the smoking pit-mouth the two men hurried, with Hal following. Here were a hundred,
two hundred women crowded, clamouring questions all at once. They swarmed about the marshal,
the superintendent, the other bosses--even about Hal, crying hysterically in Polish and Bohemian
and Greek. When Hal shook his head, indicating that he did not understand them, they moaned
in anguish, or shrieked aloud. Some continued to stare into the smoking pit-mouth; others covered
the sight from their eyes, or sank down upon their knees, sobbing, praying with uplifted hands.

Little by little Hal began to realise the full horror of a mine-disaster. It was not noise
and smoke and darkness, nor frantic, wailing women; it was not anything above ground, but what
was below in the smoking black pit! It was men! Men whom Hal knew, whom he had worked with
and joked with, whose smiles he had shared; whose daily life he had come to know! Scores, possibly
hundreds of them, they were down here under his feet--some dead, others injured, maimed. What
would they do? What would those on the surface do for them? Hal tried to get to Cotton, to
ask him questions; but the camp-marshal was surrounded, besieged. He was pushing the women
back, exclaiming, "Go away! Go home!"

What? Go home? they cried. When their men were in the mine? They crowded about him closer,
imploring, shrieking.

"Get out!" he kept exclaiming. "There's nothing you can do! There's nothing anybody can do
yet! Go home! Go home!" He had to beat them back by force, to keep them from pushing one another
into the pit-mouth.

Everywhere Hal looked were women in attitudes of grief: standing rigid, staring ahead of them
as if in a trance; sitting down, rocking to and fro; on their knees with faces uplifted in
prayer; clutching their terrified children about their skirts. He saw an Austrian woman, a
pitiful, pale young thing with a ragged grey shawl about her head, stretching out her hands
and crying: "Mein Mann! Mein Mann!" Presently she covered her face, and her voice died into
a wail of despair: "O, mein Mann! O, mein Mann!" She turned away, staggering about like some
creature that has received a death wound. Hal's eyes followed her; her cry, repeated over and
over incessantly, became the leit-motif of this symphony of horror.

He had read about mine-disasters in his morning newspaper; but here a mine-disaster became
a thing of human flesh and blood. The unendurable part of it was the utter impotence of himself
and of all the world. This impotence became clearer to him each moment--from the exclamations
of Cotton and of the men he questioned. It was monstrous, incredible--but it was so! They must
send for a new fan, they must wait for it to be brought in, they must set it up and get it
into operation; they must wait for hours after that while smoke and gas were cleared out of
the main passages of the mine; and until this had been done, there was nothing they could do--absolutely
nothing! The men inside the mine would stay. Those who had not been killed outright would make
their way into the remoter chambers, and barricade themselves against the deadly "after damp."
They would wait, without food or water, with air of doubtful quality--they would wait and wait,
until the rescue-crew could get to them!

SECTION 26.

At moments in the midst of this confusion, Hal found himself trying to recall who had worked
in Number One, among the people he knew. He himself had been employed in Number Two, so he
had naturally come to know more men in that mine. But he had known some from the other mine--Old
Rafferty for one, and Mary Burke's father for another, and at least one of the members of his
check-weighman group--Zamierowski. Hal saw in a sudden vision the face of this patient little
man, who smiled so good-naturedly while Americans were trying to say his name. And Old Rafferty,
with all his little Rafferties, and his piteous efforts to keep the favour of his employers!
And poor Patrick Burke, whom Hal had never seen sober; doubtless he was sober now, if he was
still alive!

Then in the crowd Hal encountered Jerry Minetti, and learned that another man who had been
down was Farenzena, the Italian whose "fanciulla" had played with him; and yet another was
Judas Apostolikas--having taken his thirty pieces of silver with him into the deathtrap!

People were making up lists, just as Hal was doing, by asking questions of others. These lists
were subject to revision--sometimes under dramatic circumstances. You saw a woman weeping,
with her apron to her eyes; suddenly she would look up, give a piercing cry, and fling her
arms about the neck of some man. As for Hal, he felt as if he were encountering a ghost when
suddenly he recognised Patrick Burke, standing in the midst of a group of people. He went over
and heard the old man's story--how there was a Dago fellow who had stolen his timbers, and
he had come up to the surface for more; so his life had been saved, while the timber-thief
was down there still--a judgment of Providence upon mine-miscreants!

Presently Hal asked if Burke had been to tell his family. He had run home, he said, but there
was nobody there. So Hal began pushing his way through the throngs, looking for Mary, or her
sister Jennie, or her brother Tommie. He persisted in this search, although it occurred to
him to wonder whether the family of a hopeless drunkard would appreciate the interposition
of Providence in his behalf.

He encountered Olson, who had had a narrow escape, being employed as a surface-man near the
hoist. All this was an old story to the organiser, who had worked in mines since he was eight
years old, and had seen many kinds of disaster. He began to explain things to Hal, in a matter
of fact way. The law required a certain number of openings to every mine, also an escape-way
with ladders by which men could come out; but it cost good money to dig holes in the ground.

At this time the immediate cause of the explosion was unknown, but they could tell it was a
"dust explosion" by the clouds of coke-dust, and no one who had been into the mine and seen
its dry condition would doubt what they would find when they went down and traced out the "force"
and its effects. They were supposed to do regular sprinkling, but in such matters the bosses
used their own judgment.

Hal was only half listening to these explanations. The thing was too raw and too horrible to
him. What difference did it make whose fault it was? The accident had happened, and the question
was now how to meet the emergency! Underneath Olson's sentences he heard the cry of men and
boys being asphyxiated in dark dungeons--he heard the wailing of women, like a surf beating
on a distant shore, or the faint, persistent accompaniment of muted strings: "O, mein Mann!
O, mein Mann!"

They came upon Jeff Cotton again. With half a dozen men to help him, he was pushing back the
crowd from the pit-mouth, and stretching barbed wired to hold them back. He was none too gentle
about it, Hal thought; but doubtless women are provoking when they are hysterical. He was answering
their frenzied questions, "Yes, yes! We're getting a new fan. We're doing everything we can,
I tell you. We'll get them out. Go home and wait."

But of course no one would go home. How could a woman sit in her house, or go about her ordinary
tasks of cooking or washing, while her man might be suffering asphyxiation under the ground?
The least she could do was to stand at the pit-mouth--as near to him as she could get! Some
of them stood motionless, hour after hour, while others wandered through the village streets,
asking the same people, over and over again, if they had seen their loved ones. Several had
turned up, like Patrick Burke; there seemed always a chance for one more.

SECTION 27.

In the course of the afternoon Hal came upon Mary Burke on the street. She had long ago found
her father, and seen him off to O'Callahan's to celebrate the favours of Providence. Now Mary
was concerned with a graver matter. Number Two Mine was in danger! The explosion in Number
One had been so violent that the gearing of the fan of the other mine, nearly a mile up the
canyon, had been thrown out of order. So the fan had stopped; and when some one had gone to
Alec Stone, asking that he bring out the men, Stone had refused. "What do ye think he said?"
cried Mary. "What do ye think? 'Damn the men! Save the mules!'"

Hal had all but lost sight of the fact that there was a second mine in the village, in which
hundreds of men and boys were still at work. "Wouldn't they know about the explosion?" he asked.

"They might have heard the noise," said Mary. "But they'd not know what it was; and the bosses
won't tell them till they've got out the mules."

For all that he had seen in North Valley, Hal could hardly credit that story. "How do you know
it, Mary?"

"Young Rovetta just told me. He was there, and heard it with his own ears."

He was staring at her. "Let's go and make sure," he said, and they started up the main street
of the village. On the way they were joined by others--for already the news of this fresh trouble
had begun to spread. Jeff Cotton went past them in an automobile, and Mary exclaimed, "I told
ye so! When ye see him goin', ye know there's dirty work to be done!"

They came to the shaft-house of Number Two, and found a swarm of people, almost a riot. Women
and children were shrieking and gesticulating, threatening to break into the office and use
the mine-telephone to warn the men themselves. And here was the camp-marshal driving them back.
Hal and Mary arrived in time to see Mrs. David, whose husband was at work in Number Two, shaking
her fist in the marshal's face and screaming at him like a wild-cat. He drew his revolver upon
her; and at this Hal started forward. A blind fury seized him--he would have thrown himself
upon the marshal.

But Mary Burke stopped him, flinging her arms about him, and pinning him by main force. "No,
no!" she cried. "Stay back, man! D'ye want to get killed?"

He was amazed at her strength. He was amazed also at the vehemence of her emotion. She was
calling him a crazy fool, and names even more harsh. "Have ye no more sense than a woman? Running
into the mouth of a revolver like that!"

The crisis passed in a moment, for Mrs. David fell back, and then the marshal put up his weapon.
But Mary continued scolding Hal, trying to drag him away. "Come on now! Come out of here!"

"But, Mary! We must do something!"

"Ye can do nothin', I tell ye! Ye'd ought to have sense enough to know it. I'll not let ye
get yeself murdered! Come away now!" And half by force and half by cajoling, she got him farther
down the street.

He was trying to think out the situation. Were the men in Number Two really in danger? Could
it be possible that the bosses would take such a chance in cold blood? And right at this moment,
with the disaster in the other mine before their eyes! He could not believe it; and meantime
Mary, at his side, was declaring that the men were in no real danger--it was only Alec Stone's
brutal words that had set her crazy.

"Don't ye remember the time when the air-course was blocked before, and ye helped to get up
the mules yeself? Ye thought nothin' of it then, and 'tis the same now. They'll get everybody
out in time!"

She was concealing her real feelings in order to keep him safe; he let her lead him on, while
he tried to think of something else to do. He would think of the men in Number Two; they were
his best friends, Jack David, Tim Rafferty, Wresmak, Androkulos, Klowoski. He would think of
them, in their remote dungeons--breathing bad air, becoming sick and faint--in order that mules
might be saved! He would stop in his tracks, and Mary would drag him on, repeating over and
over, "Ye can do nothin'! Nothin'!" And then he would think, What could he do? He had put up
his best bluff to Jeff Cotton a few hours earlier, and the answer had been the muzzle of the
marshal's revolver in his face. All he could accomplish now would be to bring himself to Cotton's
attention, and be thrust out of camp forthwith.

SECTION 28.

