THE MAGIC EGG

AND OTHER STORIES

BY

FRANK R. STOCKTON

CONTENTS

  THE MAGIC EGG
  "HIS WIFE'S DECEASED SISTER"
  THE WIDOW'S CRUISE
  CAPTAIN ELI'S BEST EAR
  LOVE BEFORE BREAKFAST
  THE STAYING POWER OF SIR ROHAN
  A PIECE OF RED CALICO
  THE CHRISTMAS WRECK
  MY WELL AND WHAT CAME OUT OF IT
  MR. TOLMAN
  MY UNWILLING NEIGHBOR
  OUR ARCHERY CLUB

THE MAGIC EGG

The pretty little theatre attached to the building of the Unicorn Club had been hired for a
certain January afternoon by Mr. Herbert Loring, who wished to give therein a somewhat novel
performance, to which he had invited a small audience consisting entirely of friends and acquaintances.

Loring was a handsome fellow about thirty years old, who had travelled far and studied much.
He had recently made a long sojourn in the far East, and his friends had been invited to the
theatre to see some of the wonderful things he had brought from that country of wonders.  As
Loring was a club-man, and belonged to a family of good social standing, his circle of acquaintances
was large, and in this circle a good many unpleasant remarks had been made regarding the proposed
entertainment--made, of course, by the people who had not been invited to be present.  Some
of the gossip on the subject had reached Loring, who did not hesitate to say that he could
not talk to a crowd, and that he did not care to show the curious things he had collected to
people who would not thoroughly appreciate them.  He had been very particular in regard to
his invitations.

At three o'clock on the appointed afternoon nearly all the people who had been invited to the
Unicorn Theatre were in their seats.  No one had stayed away except for some very good reason,
for it was well known that if Herbert Loring offered to show anything it was worth seeing.

About forty people were present, who sat talking to one another, or admiring the decoration
of the theatre.  As Loring stood upon the stage--where he was entirely alone, his exhibition
requiring no assistants--he gazed through a loophole in the curtain upon a very interesting
array of faces.  There were the faces of many men and women of society, of students, of workers
in various fields of thought, and even of idlers in all fields of thought; but there was not
one which indicated a frivolous or listless disposition.  The owners of those faces had come
to see something, and they wished to see it.

For a quarter of an hour after the time announced for the opening of the exhibition Loring
peered through the hole in the curtain, and then, although all the people he had expected had
not arrived, he felt it would not do for him to wait any longer.  The audience was composed
of well-bred and courteous men and women, but despite their polite self-restraint Loring could
see that some of them were getting tired of waiting.  So, very reluctantly, and feeling that
further delay was impossible, he raised the curtain and came forward on the stage.

Briefly he announced that the exhibition would open with some fireworks he had brought from
Corea.  It was plain to see that the statement that fireworks were about to be set off on a
theatre stage, by an amateur, had rather startled some of the audience, and Loring hastened
to explain that these were not real fireworks, but that they were contrivances made of colored
glass, which were illuminated by the powerful lens of a lantern which was placed out of sight,
and while the apparent pyrotechnic display would resemble fireworks of strange and grotesque
designs, it would be absolutely without danger.  He brought out some little bunches of bits
of colored glass, hung them at some distance apart on a wire which was stretched across the
stage just high enough for him to reach it, and then lighted his lantern, which he placed in
one of the wings, lowered all the lights in the theatre, and began his exhibition.

As Loring turned his lantern on one of the clusters of glass lenses, strips, and points, and,
unseen himself, caused them to move by means of long cords attached, the effects were beautiful
and marvellous. Little wheels of colored fire rapidly revolved, miniature rockets appeared
to rise a few feet and to explode in the air, and while all the ordinary forms of fireworks
were produced on a diminutive scale, there were some effects that were entirely novel to the
audience.  As the light was turned successively upon one and another of the clusters of glass,
sometimes it would flash along the whole line so rapidly that all the various combinations
of color and motion seemed to be combined in one, and then for a time each particular set of
fireworks would blaze, sparkle, and coruscate by itself, scattering particles of colored light
as if they had been real sparks of fire.

This curious and beautiful exhibition of miniature pyrotechnics was extremely interesting to
the audience, who gazed upward with rapt and eager attention at the line of wheels, stars,
and revolving spheres. So far as interest gave evidence of satisfaction, there was never a
better satisfied audience.  At first there had been some hushed murmurs of pleasure, but very
soon the attention of every one seemed so completely engrossed by the dazzling display that
they simply gazed in silence.

For twenty minutes or longer the glittering show went on, and not a sign of weariness or inattention
was made by any one of the assembled company.  Then gradually the colors of the little fireworks
faded, the stars and wheels revolved more slowly, the lights in the body of the theatre were
gradually raised, and the stage curtain went softly down.

Anxiously, and a little pale, Herbert Loring peered through the loophole in the curtain.  It
was not easy to judge of the effects of his exhibition, and he did not know whether or not
it had been a success.  There was no applause, but, on the other hand, there was no signs that
any one resented the exhibition as a childish display of colored lights.  It was impossible
to look upon that audience without believing that they had been thoroughly interested in what
they had seen, and that they expected to see more.

For two or three minutes Loring gazed through his loophole, and then, still with some doubt
in his heart, but with a little more color in his checks, he prepared for the second part of
his performance.

At this moment there entered the theatre, at the very back of the house, a young lady.  She
was handsome and well dressed, and as she opened the door--Loring had employed no ushers or
other assistants in this little social performance--she paused for a moment and looked into
the theatre, and then noiselessly stepped to a chair in the back row and sat down.

This was Edith Starr, who, a month before, had been betrothed to Herbert Loring. Nevertheless,
solitude gradually became intolerable. I wanted to move about, and to communicate to some one
all that was lying upon my heart, but not a living creature was near me. The position was
the more unpleasant because, willy-nilly, I could hear St. Jerome walking about in his room,
and softly whistling some hackneyed tune. Somehow, I felt convinced that he was whistling not because
he wanted to, but because he knew it annoyed me.

At two o'clock, he and Woloda departed downstairs, and Nicola brought me up some luncheon. When
I told him what I had done and what was awaiting me he said:

"Pshaw, sir! Don't be alarmed. 'Keep on grinding, and you'll have flour.'"

Although this expression (which also in later days has more than once
helped me to preserve my firmness of mind) brought me a little comfort,
the fact that I received, not bread and water only, but a whole luncheon,
and even dessert, gave me much to think about.

If they had sent me no dessert, it would have meant that my punishment was to be limited to
confinement; whereas it was now evident that I was looked upon as not yet punished--that I was only
being kept away from the others, as an evil-doer, until the due time of punishment. While I
was still debating the question, the key of my prison turned, and St. Jerome entered with
a severe, official air.

"Come down and see your Grandmamma," he said without looking at me.

I should have liked first to have brushed my jacket, since it was covered with dust, but St.
Jerome said that that was quite unnecessary, since I was in such a deplorable moral condition
that my exterior was not worth considering. As he led me through the salon, Katenka, Lubotshka,
and Woloda looked at me with much the same expression as we were
wont to look at the convicts who on certain days filed past my grandmother's
house.

Likewise, when I approached Grandmamma's arm-chair to kiss her hand, she withdrew it, and thrust it
under her mantilla.

"Well, my dear," she began after a long pause, during which she regarded me from head to foot with
the kind of expression which makes one uncertain where to look or what to do, "I must say
that you seem to value my love very highly, and afford me great consolation." Then she went
on, with an emphasis on each word, "Monsieur St. Jerome, who, at my request, undertook your
education, says that he can no longer remain in the house. And why? Simply because of you."
Another pause ensued.

Presently she continued in a tone which clearly showed that her speech had been prepared beforehand,
"I had hoped that you would be grateful for all his care, and for all the trouble that he has
taken with you, that you would have appreciated his services; but you--you baby, you silly boy!--you
actually dare to raise your hand against him! Very well, very good.

I am beginning to think that you cannot understand kind treatment,
but require to be treated in a very different and humiliating fashion.
Go now directly and beg his pardon," she added in a stern and peremptory
tone as she pointed to St. Jerome, "Do you hear me?"

I followed the
direction of her finger with my eye, but on that member alighting
upon St. Jerome's coat, I turned my head away, and once more felt
my heart beating violently as I remained where I was.

"Here is the box," he said, "of which I spoke, and as I hold it up I think you all can see
it.  It is not large, being certainly not more than twelve inches in length and two deep, but
it contains some very wonderful things.  The outside of this box is covered with delicate engraving
and carving which you cannot see, and these marks and lines have, I think, some magical meaning,
but I do not know what it is.  I will now open the box and show you what is inside.  The first
thing I take out is this little stick, not thicker than a lead-pencil, but somewhat longer,
as you see.  This is a magical wand, and is covered with inscriptions of the same character
as those on the outside of the box.  The next thing is this little red bag, well filled, as
you see, which I shall put on the table, for I shall not yet need it.

"Now I take out a piece of cloth which is folded into a very small compass, but as I unfold
it you will perceive that it is more than a foot square, and is covered with embroidery.  All
those strange lines and figures in gold and red, which you can plainly see on the cloth as
I hold it up, are also characters in the same magic language as those on the box and wand.
I will now spread the cloth on the table, and then take out the only remaining thing in the
box, and this is nothing in the world but an egg--a simple, ordinary hen's egg, as you all
see as I hold it up.  It may be a trifle larger than an ordinary egg, but then, after all,
it is nothing but a common egg--that is, in appearance.  In reality it is a good deal more.

"Now I will begin the performance."  And as he stood by the back of the table, over which he
had been slightly bending, and threw his eyes over the audience, his voice was stronger, and
his face had lost all its pallor.  He was evidently warming up with his subject.

"I now take up this wand," he said, "which, while I hold it, gives me power to produce the
phenomena which you are about to behold.  You may not all believe that there is any magic whatever
about this little performance, and that it is all a bit of machinery; but whatever you may
think about it, you shall see what you shall see.

"Now with this wand I gently touch this egg which is lying on the square of cloth.  I do not
believe you can see what has happened to this egg, but I will tell you.  There is a little
line, like a hair, entirely around it.  Now that line has become a crack.  Now you can see
it, I know.  It grows wider and wider!  Look!  The shell of the egg is separating in the middle.
The whole egg slightly moves.  Do you notice that?  Now you can see something yellow showing
itself between the two parts of the shell.  See!  It is moving a good deal, and the two halves
of the shell are separating more and more.  And now out tumbles this queer little object. 
Do you see what it is?  It is a poor, weak, little chick, not able to stand, but alive--alive!
You can all perceive that it is alive.  Now you can see that it is standing on its feet, feebly
enough, but still standing.

"Behold, it takes a few steps!  You cannot doubt that it is alive, and came out of that egg.
It is beginning to walk about over the cloth. Do you notice that it is picking the embroidery?
Now, little chick, I will give you something to eat.  This little red bag contains grain, a
magical grain, with which I shall feed the chicken.  You must excuse my awkwardness in opening
the bag, as I still hold the wand; but this little stick I must not drop.  See, little chick,
there are some grains!  They look like rice, but, in fact, I have no idea what they are.  But
he knows, he knows!  Look at him!  See how he picks it up! There!  He has swallowed one, two,
three.  That will do, little chick, for a first meal.

"The grain seems to have strengthened him already, for see how lively he is, and how his yellow
down stands out on him, so puffy and warm! You are looking for some more grain, are you?  Well,
you cannot have it just yet, and keep away from those pieces of eggshell, which, by the way,
I will put back into the box.  Now, sir, try to avoid the edge of the table, and, to quiet
you, I will give you a little tap on the back with my wand.  Now, then, please observe closely.
The down which just now covered him has almost gone.  He is really a good deal bigger, and
ever so much uglier.  See the little pin-feathers sticking out over him!  Some spots here and
there are almost bare, but he is ever so much more active.  Ha!  Listen to that!  He is so
strong that you can hear his beak as he pecks at the table.  He is actually growing bigger
and bigger before our very eyes!  See that funny little tail, how it begins to stick up, and
quills are showing at the end of his wings.

"Another tap, and a few more grains.  Careful, sir!  Don't tear the cloth!  See how rapidly
he grows!  He is fairly covered with feathers, red and black, with a tip of yellow in front.
You could hardly get that fellow into an ostrich egg!  Now, then, what do you think of him?
He is big enough for a broiler, though I don't think any one would want to take him for that
purpose.  Some more grain, and another tap from my wand.  See!  He does not mind the little
stick, for he has been used to it from his very birth.  Now, then, he is what you would call
a good half-grown chick.  Rather more than half grown, I should say.  Do you notice his tail?
There is no mistaking him for a pullet.  The long feathers are beginning to curl over already.
He must have a little more grain.  Look out, sir, or you will be off the table!  Come back
here!  This table is too small for him, but if he were on the floor you could not see him so well.

"Another tap.  Now see that comb on the top of his head; you scarcely noticed it before, and
now it is bright red.  And see his spurs beginning to show--on good thick legs, too.  There
is a fine young fellow for you!  Look how he jerks his head from side to side, like the young
prince of a poultry-yard, as he well deserves to be!"

The attentive interest which had at first characterized the audience now changed to excited
admiration and amazement.  Some leaned forward with mouths wide open.  Others stood up so that
they could see better. Ejaculations of astonishment and wonder were heard on every side, and
a more thoroughly fascinated and absorbed audience was never seen.

"Now, my friends," Loring continued, "I will give this handsome fowl another tap.  Behold the
result--a noble, full-grown cock!  Behold his spurs!  They are nearly an inch long!  See, there
is a comb for you! And what a magnificent tail of green and black, contrasting so finely with
the deep red of the rest of his body!  Well, sir, you are truly too big for this table.  As
I cannot give you more room, I will set you up higher.  Move over a little, and I will set
this chair on the table. There!  Upon the seat!  That's right, but don't stop.  There is the
back, which is higher yet!  Up with you!  Ha!  There, he nearly upset the chair, but I will
hold it.  See!  He has turned around.  Now, then, look at him.  See his wings as he flaps them!
He could fly with such wings.  Look at him!  See that swelling breast!  Ha, ha!  Listen!  Did
you ever hear a crow like that?  It fairly rings through the house. Yes, I knew it!  There
is another!"

At this point the people in the house were in a state of wild excitement.  Nearly all of them
were on their feet, and they were in such a condition of frantic enthusiasm that Loring was
afraid some of them might make a run for the stage.

"Come, sir," cried Loring, now almost shouting, "that will do.  You have shown us the strength
of your lungs.  Jump down on the seat of the chair; now on the table.  There, I will take away
the chair, and you can stand for a moment on the table and let our friends look at you; but
only for a moment.  Take that tap on your back.  Now do you see any difference?  Perhaps you
may not, but I do.  Yes, I believe you all do. He is not the big fellow he was a minute ago.
He is really smaller--only a fine cockerel.  A nice tail that, but with none of the noble sweep
that it had a minute ago.  No, don't try to get off the table.  You can't escape my wand. 
Another tap.  Behold a half-grown chicken, good to eat, but with not a crow in him.  Hungry,
are you? But you need not pick at the table that way.  You get no more grain, but only this
little tap.  Ha, ha!  What are you coming to?  There is a chicken barely feathered enough for
us to tell what color he is going to be.

"Another tap will take still more of the conceit out of him.  Look at him!  There are his pin-feathers,
and his bare spots.  Don't try to get away; I can easily tap you again.  Now then.  Here is
a lovely little chick, fluffy with yellow down.  He is active enough, but I shall quiet him.
One tap, and now what do you see?  A poor, feeble chicken, scarcely able to stand, with his
down all packed close to him as if he had been out in the rain.  Ah, little chick, I will take
the two halves of the egg-shell from which you came, and put them on each side of you. Come,
now get in!  I close them up.  You are lost to view.  There is nothing to be seen but a crack
around the shell!  Now it has gone! There, my friends; as I hold it on high, behold the magic
egg, exactly as it was when I first took it out of the box, into which I will place it again,
with the cloth and the wand and the little red bag, and shut it up with a snap.  I will let
you take one more look at this box before I put it away behind the scenes.  Are you satisfied
with what I have shown you?  Do you think it is really as wonderful as you supposed it would be?"

At these words the whole audience burst into riotous applause, during which Loring disappeared,
but he was back in a moment.

"Thank you!" he cried, bowing low, and waving his arms before him in the manner of an Eastern
magician making a salaam.  From side to side he turned, bowing and thanking, and then, with
a hearty "Good-by to you; good-by to you all!" he stepped back and let down the curtain.

For some moments the audience remained in their seats as if they were expecting something more,
and then they rose quietly and began to disperse.  Most of them were acquainted with one another,
and there was a good deal of greeting and talking as they went out of the theatre.

When Loring was sure the last person had departed, he turned down the lights, locked the door,
and gave the key to the steward of the club.

He walked to his home a happy man.  His exhibition had been a perfect success, with not a break
or a flaw in it from beginning to end.

"I feel," thought the young man, as he strode along, "as if I could fly to the top of that
steeple, and flap and crow until all the world heard me."

That evening, as was his daily custom, Herbert Loring called upon Miss Starr.  He found the
young lady in the library.

"I came in here," she said, "because I have a good deal to talk to you about, and I do not
want interruptions."

With this arrangement the young man expressed his entire satisfaction, and immediately began
to inquire the cause of her absence from his exhibition in the afternoon.

"But I was there," said Edith.  "You did not see me, but I was there. Mother had a headache,
and I went by myself."

"You were there!" exclaimed Loring, almost starting from his chair.  "I don't understand. 
You were not in your seat."

 "No," answered Edith.  "I was on the very back row of seats.
You could not see me, and I did not wish you to see me."

"Edith!" exclaimed Loring, rising to his feet and leaning over the library table, which was
between them.  "When did you come?  How much of the performance did you see?"

"I was late," she said.  "I did not arrive until after the fireworks, or whatever they were."

For a moment Loring was silent, as if he did not understand the situation.

"Fireworks!" he said.  "How did you know there had been fireworks?"

"I heard the people talking of them as they left the theatre," she answered.

"And what did they say?" he inquired quickly.

"They seemed to like them very well," she replied, "but I do not think they were quite satisfied.
From what I heard some persons say, I inferred that they thought it was not very much of a
show to which you had invited them."

Again Loring stood in thought, looking down at the table.  But before he could speak again,
Edith sprang to her feet.

"Herbert Loring," she cried, "what does all this mean?  I was there during the whole of the
exhibition of what you called the magic egg.  I saw all those people wild with excitement at
the wonderful sight of the chicken that came out of the egg, and grew to full size, and then
dwindled down again, and went back into the egg, and, Herbert, there was no egg, and there
was no little box, and there was no wand, and no embroidered cloth, and there was no red bag,
nor any little chick, and there was no full-grown fowl, and there was no chair that you put
on the table!  There was nothing, absolutely nothing, but you and that table!  Even the table
was not what you said it was.  It was not an unpainted pine table with four straight legs.
It was a table of dark polished wood, and it stood on a single post with feet.  There was nothing
there that you said was there.  Everything was a sham and a delusion; every word you spoke
was untrue.  And yet everybody in that theatre, excepting you and me, saw all the things that
you said were on the stage.  I know they saw them all, for I was with the people, and heard
them, and saw them, and at times I fairly felt the thrill of enthusiasm which possessed them
as they glared at the miracles and wonders you said were happening."

Loring smiled.  "Sit down, my dear Edith," he said.  "You are excited, and there is not the
slightest cause for it.  I will explain the whole affair to you.  It is simple enough.  You
know that study is the great object of my life.  I study all sorts of things; and just now
I am greatly interested in hypnotism.  The subject has become fascinating to me.  I have made
a great many successful trials of my power, and the affair of this afternoon was nothing but
a trial of my powers on a more extensive scale than anything I have yet attempted.  I wanted
to see if it were possible for me to hypnotize a considerable number of people without any
one suspecting what I intended to do. The result was a success.  I hypnotized all those people
by means of the first part of my performance, which consisted of some combinations of colored
glass with lights thrown upon them.  They revolved, and looked like fireworks, and were strung
on a wire high up on the stage.

"I kept up the glittering and dazzling show--which was well worth seeing, I can assure you--until
the people had been straining their eyes upward for almost half an hour.  And this sort of
thing--I will tell you if you do not know it--is one of the methods of producing hypnotic sleep.

"There was no one present who was not an impressionable subject, for I was very careful in
sending out my invitations, and when I became almost certain that my audience was thoroughly
hypnotized, I stopped the show and began the real exhibition, which was not really for their
benefit, but for mine.

"Of course, I was dreadfully anxious for fear I had not succeeded entirely, and that there
might be at least some one person who had not succumbed to the hypnotic influences, and so
I tested the matter by bringing out that table and telling them it was something it was not.
If I had had any reason for supposing that some of the audience saw the table as it really
was, I had an explanation ready, and I could have retired from my position without any one
supposing that I had intended making hypnotic experiments.  The rest of the exhibition would
have been some things that any one could see, and as soon as possible I would have released
from their spell those who were hypnotized.  But when I became positively assured that every
one saw a light pine table with four straight legs, I confidently went on with the performances
of the magic egg."

Edith Starr was still standing by the library table.  She had not heeded Loring's advice to
sit down, and she was trembling with emotion.

"Herbert Loring," she said, "you invited my mother and me to that exhibition.  You gave us
tickets for front seats, where we would be certain to be hypnotized if your experiment succeeded,
and you would have made us see that false show, which faded from those people's minds as soon
as they recovered from the spell, for as they went away they were talking only of the fireworks,
and not one of them mentioned a magic egg, or a chicken, or anything of the kind.  Answer me
this: did you not intend that I should come and be put under that spell?"

Loring smiled.  "Yes," he said, "of course I did.  But then your case would have been different
from that of the other spectators: I should have explained the whole thing to you, and I am
sure we would have had a great deal of pleasure, and profit too, in discussing your experiences.
The subject is extremely--"

"Explain to me!" she cried.  "You would not have dared to do it!  I do not know how brave you
may be, but I know you would not have had the courage to come here and tell me that you had
taken away my reason and my judgment, as you took them away from all those people, and that
you had made me a mere tool of your will--glaring and panting with excitement at the wonderful
things you told me to see where nothing existed.  I have nothing to say about the others. 
They can speak for themselves if they ever come to know what you did to them.  I speak for
myself.  I stood up with the rest of the people.  I gazed with all my power, and over and over
again I asked myself if it could be possible that anything was the matter with my eyes or my
brain, and if I could be the only person there who could not see the marvellous spectacle that
you were describing.  But now I know that nothing was real, not even the little pine table--not
even the man!"

"Not even me!" exclaimed Loring.  "Surely I was real enough!"

"On that stage, yes," she said.  "But you there proved you were not the Herbert Loring to whom
I promised myself.  He was an unreal being.  If he had existed he would not have been a man
who would have brought me to that public place, all ignorant of his intentions, to cloud my
perceptions, to subject my intellect to his own, and make me believe a lie.  If a man should
treat me in that way once he would treat me so at other times, and in other ways, if he had
the chance.  You have treated me in the past as to-day you treated those people who glared
at the magic egg.  In the days gone by you made me see an unreal man, but you will never do
it again!  Good-by."

"Edith," cried Loring, "you don't--"

But she had disappeared through a side door, and he never spoke to her again.

Walking home through the dimly lighted streets, Loring involuntarily spoke aloud.

"And this," he said, "is what came out of the magic egg!"  "I never saw you look so woe-begone."

THE WIDOW'S CRUISE

The Widow Ducket lived in a small village about ten miles from the New Jersey sea-coast.  In
this village she was born, here she had married and buried her husband, and here she expected
somebody to bury her; but she was in no hurry for this, for she had scarcely reached middle
age. She was a tall woman with no apparent fat in her composition, and full of activity, both
muscular and mental.

She rose at six o'clock in the morning, cooked breakfast, set the table, washed the dishes
when the meal was over, milked, churned, swept, washed, ironed, worked in her little garden,
attended to the flowers in the front yard, and in the afternoon knitted and quilted and sewed,
and after tea she either went to see her neighbors or had them come to see her.  When it was
really dark she lighted the lamp in her parlor and read for an hour, and if it happened to
be one of Miss Mary Wilkins's books that she read she expressed doubts as to the realism of
the characters therein described.

These doubts she expressed to Dorcas Networthy, who was a small, plump woman, with a solemn
face, who had lived with the widow for many years and who had become her devoted disciple.
Whatever the widow did, that also did Dorcas--not so well, for her heart told her she could
never expect to do that, but with a yearning anxiety to do everything as well as she could.
She rose at five minutes past six, and in a subsidiary way she helped to get the breakfast,
to eat it, to wash up the dishes, to work in the garden, to quilt, to sew, to visit and receive,
and no one could have tried harder than she did to keep awake when the widow read aloud in
the evening.

All these things happened every day in the summertime, but in the winter the widow and Dorcas
cleared the snow from their little front path instead of attending to the flowers, and in the
evening they lighted a fire as well as a lamp in the parlor.

Sometimes, however, something different happened, but this was not often, only a few times
in the year.  One of the different things occurred when Mrs. Ducket and Dorcas were sitting
on their little front porch one summer afternoon, one on the little bench on one side of the
door, and the other on the little bench on the other side of the door, each waiting until she
should hear the clock strike five, to prepare tea.  But it was not yet a quarter to five when
a one-horse wagon containing four men came slowly down the street.  Dorcas first saw the wagon,
and she instantly stopped knitting.

"Mercy on me!" she exclaimed.  "Whoever those people are, they are strangers here, and they
don't know where to stop, for they first go to one side of the street and then to the other."

The widow looked around sharply.  "Humph!" said she.  "Those men are sailormen.  You might
see that in a twinklin' of an eye.  Sailormen always drive that way, because that is the way
they sail ships.  They first tack in one direction and then in another."

"Mr. Ducket didn't like the sea?" remarked Dorcas, for about the three hundredth time.

"No, he didn't," answered the widow, for about the two hundred and fiftieth time, for there
had been occasions when she thought Dorcas put this question inopportunely.  "He hated it,
and he was drowned in it through trustin' a sailorman, which I never did nor shall.  Do you
really believe those men are comin' here?"

"Upon my word I do!" said Dorcas, and her opinion was correct.

The wagon drew up in front of Mrs. Ducket's little white house, and the two women sat rigidly,
their hands in their laps, staring at the man who drove.

This was an elderly personage with whitish hair, and under his chin a thin whitish beard, which
waved in the gentle breeze and gave Dorcas the idea that his head was filled with hair which
was leaking out from below.

"Is this the Widow Ducket's?" inquired this elderly man, in a strong, penetrating voice.

"That's my name," said the widow, and laying her knitting on the bench beside her, she went
to the gate.  Dorcas also laid her knitting on the bench beside her and went to the gate.

"I was told," said the elderly man, "at a house we touched at about a quarter of a mile back,
that the Widow Ducket's was the only house in this village where there was any chance of me
and my mates getting a meal.  We are four sailors, and we are making from the bay over to Cuppertown,
and that's eight miles ahead yet, and we are all pretty sharp set for something to eat."

"This is the place," said the widow, "and I do give meals if there is enough in the house and
everything comes handy."

"Does everything come handy to-day?" said he.

"It does," said she, "and you can hitch your horse and come in; but I haven't got anything
for him."

"Oh, that's all right," said the man, "we brought along stores for him, so we'll just make
fast and then come in."

The two women hurried into the house in a state of bustling preparation, for the furnishing
of this meal meant one dollar in cash.

The four mariners, all elderly men, descended from the wagon, each one scrambling with alacrity
over a different wheel.

A box of broken ship-biscuit was brought out and put on the ground in front of the horse, who
immediately set himself to eating with great satisfaction.

Tea was a little late that day, because there were six persons to provide for instead of two,
but it was a good meal, and after the four seamen had washed their hands and faces at the pump
in the back yard and had wiped them on two towels furnished by Dorcas, they all came in and
sat down.  Mrs. Ducket seated herself at the head of the table with the dignity proper to the
mistress of the house, and Dorcas seated herself at the other end with the dignity proper to
the disciple of the mistress.  No service was necessary, for everything that was to be eaten
or drunk was on the table.

When each of the elderly mariners had had as much bread and butter, quickly baked soda-biscuit,
dried beef, cold ham, cold tongue, and preserved fruit of every variety known, as his storage
capacity would permit, the mariner in command, Captain Bird, pushed back his chair, whereupon
the other mariners pushed back their chairs.

"Madam," said Captain Bird, "we have all made a good meal, which didn't need to be no better
nor more of it, and we're satisfied; but that horse out there has not had time to rest himself
enough to go the eight miles that lies ahead of us, so, if it's all the same to you and this
good lady, we'd like to sit on that front porch awhile and smoke our pipes.  I was a-looking
at that porch when I came in, and I bethought to myself what a rare good place it was to smoke
a pipe in."

"There's pipes been smoked there," said the widow, rising, "and it can be done again.  Inside
the house I don't allow tobacco, but on the porch neither of us minds."

 So the four captains betook themselves to the porch, two of
them seating themselves on the little bench on one side of the door,
and two of them on the little bench on the other side of the door, and
lighted their pipes.

"Shall we clear off the table and wash up the dishes," said Dorcas, "or wait until they are gone?"

"We will wait until they are gone," said the widow, "for now that they are here we might as
well have a bit of a chat with them.  When a sailorman lights his pipe he is generally willin'
to talk, but when he is eatin' you can't get a word out of him."

Without thinking it necessary to ask permission, for the house belonged to her, the Widow Ducket
brought a chair and put it in the hall close to the open front door, and Dorcas brought another
chair and seated herself by the side of the widow.

"Do all you sailormen belong down there at the bay?" asked Mrs. Ducket; thus the conversation
began, and in a few minutes it had reached a point at which Captain Bird thought it proper
to say that a great many strange things happen to seamen sailing on the sea which lands-people
never dream of.

"Such as anything in particular?" asked the widow, at which remark Dorcas clasped her hands
in expectancy.

At this question each of the mariners took his pipe from his mouth and gazed upon the floor
in thought.

"There's a good many strange things happened to me and my mates at sea. Would you and that
other lady like to hear any of them?" asked Captain Bird.

"We would like to hear them if they are true," said the widow.

"There's nothing happened to me and my mates that isn't true," said Captain Bird, "and here
is something that once happened to me:  I was on a whaling v'yage when a big sperm-whale, just
as mad as a fiery bull, came at us, head on, and struck the ship at the stern with such tremendous
force that his head crashed right through her timbers and he went nearly half his length into
her hull.  The hold was mostly filled with empty barrels, for we was just beginning our v'yage,
and when he had made kindling-wood of these there was room enough for him.  We all expected
that it wouldn't take five minutes for the vessel to fill and go to the bottom, and we made
ready to take to the boats; but it turned out we didn't need to take to no boats, for as fast
as the water rushed into the hold of the ship, that whale drank it and squirted it up through
the two blow-holes in the top of his head, and as there was an open hatchway just over his
head, the water all went into the sea again, and that whale kept working day and night pumping
the water out until we beached the vessel on the island of Trinidad--the whale helping us wonderful
on our way over by the powerful working of his tail, which, being outside in the water, acted
like a propeller.  I don't believe any thing stranger than that ever happened to a whaling ship."

"No," said the widow, "I don't believe anything ever did."

Captain Bird now looked at Captain Sanderson, and the latter took his pipe out of his mouth
and said that in all his sailing around the world he had never known anything queerer than
what happened to a big steamship he chanced to be on, which ran into an island in a fog. Everybody
on board thought the ship was wrecked, but it had twin screws, and was going at such a tremendous
speed that it turned the island entirely upside down and sailed over it, and he had heard tell
that even now people sailing over the spot could look down into the water and see the roots
of the trees and the cellars of the houses.

Captain Sanderson now put his pipe back into his mouth, and Captain Burress took out his pipe.

"I was once in an obelisk-ship," said he, "that used to trade regular between Egypt and New
York, carrying obelisks.  We had a big obelisk on board.  The way they ship obelisks is to
make a hole in the stern of the ship, and run the obelisk in, p'inted end foremost; and this
obelisk filled up nearly the whole of that ship from stern to bow.  We was about ten days out,
and sailing afore a northeast gale with the engines at full speed, when suddenly we spied breakers
ahead, and our Captain saw we was about to run on a bank.  Now if we hadn't had an obelisk
on board we might have sailed over that bank, but the captain knew that with an obelisk on
board we drew too much water for this, and that we'd be wrecked in about fifty-five seconds
if something wasn't done quick.  So he had to do something quick, and this is what he did:
He ordered all steam on, and drove slam-bang on that bank.  Just as he expected, we stopped
so suddint that that big obelisk bounced for'ard, its p'inted end foremost, and went clean
through the bow and shot out into the sea.  The minute it did that the vessel was so lightened
that it rose in the water and we easily steamed over the bank.  There was one man knocked overboard
by the shock when we struck, but as soon as we missed him we went back after him and we got
him all right.  You see, when that obelisk went overboard, its butt-end, which was heaviest,
went down first, and when it touched the bottom it just stood there, and as it was such a big
obelisk there was about five and a half feet of it stuck out of the water.  The man who was
knocked overboard he just swum for that obelisk and he climbed up the hiryglyphics.  It was
a mighty fine obelisk, and the Egyptians had cut their hiryglyphics good and deep, so that
the man could get hand and foot-hold; and when we got to him and took him off, he was sitting
high and dry on the p'inted end of that obelisk.  It was a great pity about the obelisk, for
it was a good obelisk, but as I never heard the company tried to raise it, I expect it is standing
there yet."

Captain Burress now put his pipe back into his mouth and looked at Captain Jenkinson, who removed
his pipe and said:

"The queerest thing that ever happened to me was about a shark.  We was off the Banks, and
the time of year was July, and the ice was coming down, and we got in among a lot of it.  Not
far away, off our weather bow, there was a little iceberg which had such a queerness about
it that the captain and three men went in a boat to look at it.  The ice was mighty clear ice,
and you could see almost through it, and right inside of it, not more than three feet above
the waterline, and about two feet, or maybe twenty inches, inside the ice, was a whopping big
shark, about fourteen feet long,--a regular man-eater,--frozen in there hard and fast.  `Bless
my soul,' said the captain, `this is a wonderful curiosity, and I'm going to git him out.'
Just then one of the men said he saw that shark wink, but the captain wouldn't believe him,
for he said that shark was frozen stiff and hard and couldn't wink.  You see, the captain had
his own idees about things, and he knew that whales was warm-blooded and would freeze if they
was shut up in ice, but he forgot that sharks was not whales and that they're cold-blooded
just like toads.  And there is toads that has been shut up in rocks for thousands of years,
and they stayed alive, no matter how cold the place was, because they was cold-blooded, and
when the rocks was split, out hopped the frog.  But, as I said before, the captain forgot sharks
was cold-blooded, and he determined to git that one out.

"Now you both know, being housekeepers, that if you take a needle and drive it into a hunk
of ice you can split it.  The captain had a sail-needle with him, and so he drove it into the
iceberg right alongside of the shark and split it.  Now the minute he did it he knew that the
man was right when he said he saw the shark wink, for it flopped out of that iceberg quicker
nor a flash of lightning."

"What a happy fish he must have been!" ejaculated Dorcas, forgetful of precedent, so great
was her emotion.

"Yes," said Captain Jenkinson, "it was a happy fish enough, but it wasn't a happy captain.
You see, that shark hadn't had anything to eat, perhaps for a thousand years, until the captain
came along with his sail-needle."

"Surely you sailormen do see strange things," now said the widow, "and the strangest thing
about them is that they are true."

"Yes, indeed," said Dorcas, "that is the most wonderful thing."

"You wouldn't suppose," said the Widow Ducket, glancing from one bench of mariners to the other,
"that I have a sea-story to tell, but I have, and if you like I will tell it to you."

Captain Bird looked up a little surprised.

"We would like to hear it--indeed, we would, madam," said he.

"Ay, ay!" said Captain Burress, and the two other mariners nodded.

"It was a good while ago," she said, "when I was living on the shore near the head of the bay,
that my husband was away and I was left alone in the house.  One mornin' my sister-in-law,
who lived on the other side of the bay, sent me word by a boy on a horse that she hadn't any
oil in the house to fill the lamp that she always put in the window to light her husband home,
who was a fisherman, and if I would send her some by the boy she would pay me back as soon
as they bought oil.  The boy said he would stop on his way home and take the oil to her, but
he never did stop, or perhaps he never went back, and about five o'clock I began to get dreadfully
worried, for I knew if that lamp wasn't in my sister-in-law's window by dark she might be a
widow before midnight. So I said to myself, `I've got to get that oil to her, no matter what
happens or how it's done.'  Of course I couldn't tell what might happen, but there was only
one way it could be done, and that was for me to get into the boat that was tied to the post
down by the water, and take it to her, for it was too far for me to walk around by the head
of the bay.  Now, the trouble was, I didn't know no more about a boat and the managin' of it
than any one of you sailormen knows about clear starchin'.  But there wasn't no use of thinkin'
what I knew and what I didn't know, for I had to take it to her, and there was no way of doin'
it except in that boat.  So I filled a gallon can, for I thought I might as well take enough
while I was about it, and I went down to the water and I unhitched that boat and I put the
oil-can into her, and then I got in, and off I started, and when I was about a quarter of a
mile from the shore--"

"Madam," interrupted Captain Bird, "did you row or--or was there a sail to the boat?"

The widow looked at the questioner for a moment.  "No," said she, "I didn't row.  I forgot
to bring the oars from the house; but it didn't matter, for I didn't know how to use them,
and if there had been a sail I couldn't have put it up, for I didn't know how to use it, either.
I used the rudder to make the boat go.  The rudder was the only thing I knew anything about.
I'd held a rudder when I was a little girl, and I knew how to work it.  So I just took hold
of the handle of the rudder and turned it round and round, and that made the boat go ahead,
you know, and--"

"Madam!" exclaimed Captain Bird, and the other elderly mariners took their pipes from their mouths.

"Yes, that is the way I did it," continued the widow, briskly.  "Big steamships are made to
go by a propeller turning round and round at their back ends, and I made the rudder work in
the same way, and I got along very well, too, until suddenly, when I was about a quarter of
a mile from the shore, a most terrible and awful storm arose.  There must have been a typhoon
or a cyclone out at sea, for the waves came up the bay bigger than houses, and when they got
to the head of the bay they turned around and tried to get out to sea again.  So in this way
they continually met, and made the most awful and roarin' pilin' up of waves that ever was known.

"My little boat was pitched about as if it had been a feather in a breeze, and when the front
part of it was cleavin' itself down into the water the hind part was stickin' up until the
rudder whizzed around like a patent churn with no milk in it.  The thunder began to roar and
the lightnin' flashed, and three seagulls, so nearly frightened to death that they began to
turn up the whites of their eyes, flew down and sat on one of the seats of the boat, forgettin'
in that awful moment that man was their nat'ral enemy.  I had a couple of biscuits in my pocket,
because I had thought I might want a bite in crossing, and I crumbled up one of these and fed
the poor creatures.  Then I began to wonder what I was goin' to do, for things were gettin'
awfuller and awfuller every instant, and the little boat was a-heavin' and a-pitchin' and a-rollin'
and h'istin' itself up, first on one end and then on the other, to such an extent that if I
hadn't kept tight hold of the rudder-handle I'd slipped off the seat I was sittin' on.

"All of a sudden I remembered that oil in the can; but just as I was puttin' my fingers on
the cork my conscience smote me.  `Am I goin' to use this oil,' I said to myself, `and let
my sister-in-law's husband be wrecked for want of it?'  And then I thought that he wouldn't
want it all that night, and perhaps they would buy oil the next day, and so I poured out about
a tumblerful of it on the water, and I can just tell you sailormen that you never saw anything
act as prompt as that did. In three seconds, or perhaps five, the water all around me, for
the distance of a small front yard, was just as flat as a table and as smooth as glass, and
so invitin' in appearance that the three gulls jumped out of the boat and began to swim about
on it, primin' their feathers and lookin' at themselves in the transparent depths, though I
must say that one of them made an awful face as he dipped his bill into the water and tasted
kerosene.

"Now I had time to sit quiet in the midst of the placid space I had made for myself, and rest
from workin' of the rudder.  Truly it was a wonderful and marvellous thing to look at.  The
waves was roarin' and leapin' up all around me higher than the roof of this house, and sometimes
their tops would reach over so that they nearly met and shut out all view of the stormy sky,
which seemed as if it was bein' torn to pieces by blazin' lightnin', while the thunder pealed
so tremendous that it almost drowned the roar of the waves.  Not only above and all around
me was every thing terrific and fearful, but even under me it was the same, for there was a
big crack in the bottom of the boat as wide as my hand, and through this I could see down into
the water beneath, and there was--"

"Madam!" ejaculated Captain Bird, the hand which had been holding his pipe a few inches from
his mouth now dropping to his knee; and at this motion the hands which held the pipes of the
three other mariners dropped to their knees.

"Of course it sounds strange," continued the widow, "but I know that people can see down into
clear water, and the water under me was clear, and the crack was wide enough for me to see
through, and down under me was sharks and swordfishes and other horrible water creatures, which
I had never seen before, all driven into the bay, I haven't a doubt, by the violence of the
storm out at sea.  The thought of my bein' upset and fallin' in among those monsters made my
very blood run cold, and involuntary-like I began to turn the handle of the rudder, and in
a moment I shot into a wall of ragin' sea-water that was towerin' around me.  For a second
I was fairly blinded and stunned, but I had the cork out of that oil-can in no time, and very
soon--you'd scarcely believe it if I told you how soon--I had another placid mill-pond surroundin'
of me.  I sat there a-pantin' and fannin' with my straw hat, for you'd better believe I was
flustered, and then I began to think how long it would take me to make a line of mill-ponds
clean across the head of the bay, and how much oil it would need, and whether I had enough.
So I sat and calculated that if a tumblerful of oil would make a smooth place about seven yards
across, which I should say was the width of the one I was in,--which I calculated by a measure
of my eye as to how many breadths of carpet it would take to cover it,--and if the bay was
two miles across betwixt our house and my sister-in-law's, and, although I couldn't get the
thing down to exact figures, I saw pretty soon that I wouldn't have oil enough to make a level
cuttin' through all those mountainous billows, and besides, even if I had enough to take me
across, what would be the good of goin' if there wasn't any oil left to fill my sister-in-law's
lamp?

"While I was thinkin' and calculatin' a perfectly dreadful thing happened, which made me think
if I didn't get out of this pretty soon I'd find myself in a mighty risky predicament.  The
oil-can, which I had forgotten to put the cork in, toppled over, and before I could grab it
every drop of the oil ran into the hind part of the boat, where it was soaked up by a lot of
dry dust that was there.  No wonder my heart sank when I saw this.  Glancin' wildly around
me, as people will do when they are scared, I saw the smooth place I was in gettin' smaller
and smaller, for the kerosene was evaporatin', as it will do even off woollen clothes if you
give it time enough.  The first pond I had come out of seemed to be covered up, and the great,
towerin', throbbin' precipice of sea-water was a-closin' around me.

"Castin' down my eyes in despair, I happened to look through the crack in the bottom of the
boat, and oh, what a blessed relief it was! for down there everything was smooth and still,
and I could see the sand on the bottom, as level and hard, no doubt, as it was on the beach.
Suddenly the thought struck me that that bottom would give me the only chance I had of gettin'
out of the frightful fix I was in.  If I could fill that oil-can with air, and then puttin'
it under my arm and takin' a long breath if I could drop down on that smooth bottom, I might
run along toward shore, as far as I could, and then, when I felt my breath was givin' out,
I could take a pull at the oil-can and take another run, and then take another pull and another
run, and perhaps the can would hold air enough for me until I got near enough to shore to wade
to dry land.  To be sure, the sharks and other monsters were down there, but then they must
have been awfully frightened, and perhaps they might not remember that man was their nat'ral
enemy.  Anyway, I thought it would be better to try the smooth water passage down there than
stay and be swallowed up by the ragin' waves on top.

"So I blew the can full of air and corked it, and then I tore up some of the boards from the
bottom of the boat so as to make a hole big enough for me to get through,--and you sailormen
needn't wriggle so when I say that, for you all know a divin'-bell hasn't any bottom at all
and the water never comes in,--and so when I got the hole big enough I took the oil-can under
my arm, and was just about to slip down through it when I saw an awful turtle a-walkin' through
the sand at the bottom.  Now, I might trust sharks and swordfishes and sea-serpents to be frightened
and forget about their nat'ral enemies, but I never could trust a gray turtle as big as a cart,
with a black neck a yard long, with yellow bags to its jaws, to forget anything or to remember
anything.  I'd as lieve get into a bath-tub with a live crab as to go down there.  It wasn't
of no use even so much as thinkin' of it, so I gave up that plan and didn't once look through
that hole again."

"And what did you do, madam?" asked Captain Bird, who was regarding her with a face of stone.

"I used electricity," she said.  "Now don't start as if you had a shock of it.  That's what
I used.  When I was younger than I was then, and sometimes visited friends in the city, we
often amused ourselves by rubbing our feet on the carpet until we got ourselves so full of
electricity that we could put up our fingers and light the gas.  So I said to myself that if
I could get full of electricity for the purpose of lightin' the gas I could get full of it
for other purposes, and so, without losin' a moment, I set to work.  I stood up on one of the
seats, which was dry, and I rubbed the bottoms of my shoes backward and forward on it with
such violence and swiftness that they pretty soon got warm and I began fillin' with electricity,
and when I was fully charged with it from my toes to the top of my head, I just sprang into
the water and swam ashore.  Of course I couldn't sink, bein' full of electricity."

Captain Bird heaved a long sigh and rose to his feet, whereupon the other mariners rose to
their feet "Madam," said Captain Bird, "what's to pay for the supper and--the rest of the entertainment?"

"The supper is twenty-five cents apiece," said the Widow Ducket, "and everything else is free,
gratis."

Whereupon each mariner put his hand into his trousers pocket, pulled out a silver quarter,
and handed it to the widow.  Then, with four solemn "Good evenin's," they went out to the front
gate.

"Cast off, Captain Jenkinson," said Captain Bird, "and you, Captain Burress, clew him up for'ard.
You can stay in the bow, Captain Sanderson, and take the sheet-lines.  I'll go aft."

All being ready, each of the elderly mariners clambered over a wheel, and having seated themselves,
they prepared to lay their course for Cuppertown.

But just as they were about to start, Captain Jenkinson asked that they lay to a bit, and clambering
down over his wheel, he reentered the front gate and went up to the door of the house, where
the widow and Dorcas were still standing.

"Madam," said he, "I just came back to ask what became of your brother-in-law through his wife's
not bein' able to put no light in the window?"

"The storm drove him ashore on our side of the bay," said she, "and the next mornin' he came
up to our house, and I told him all that had happened to me.  And when he took our boat and
went home and told that story to his wife, she just packed up and went out West, and got divorced
from him.  And it served him right, too."

"Thank you, ma'am," said Captain Jenkinson, and going out of the gate, he clambered up over
the wheel, and the wagon cleared for Cuppertown.

When the elderly mariners were gone, the Widow Ducket, still standing in the door, turned to
Dorcas.

"Think of it!" she said.  "To tell all that to me, in my own house! And after I had opened
my one jar of brandied peaches, that I'd been keepin' for special company!"

"In your own house!" ejaculated Dorcas.  "And not one of them brandied peaches left!"

The widow jingled the four quarters in her hand before she slipped them into her pocket.

"Anyway, Dorcas," she remarked, "I think we can now say we are square with all the world, and
so let's go in and wash the dishes."

"Yes," said Dorcas, "we're square."

CAPTAIN ELI'S BEST EAR

The little seaside village of Sponkannis lies so quietly upon a protected spot on our Atlantic
coast that it makes no more stir in the world than would a pebble which, held between one's
finger and thumb, should be dipped below the surface of a millpond and then dropped. About
the post-office and the store--both under the same roof--the greater number of the houses cluster,
as if they had come for their week's groceries, or were waiting for the mail, while toward
the west the dwellings become fewer and fewer, until at last the village blends into a long
stretch of sandy coast and scrubby pine-woods.  Eastward the village ends abruptly at the foot
of a windswept bluff, on which no one cares to build.

Among the last houses in the western end of the village stood two neat, substantial dwellings,
one belonging to Captain Eli Bunker, and the other to Captain Cephas Dyer.  These householders
were two very respectable retired mariners, the first a widower about fifty, and the other
a bachelor of perhaps the same age, a few years more or less making but little difference in
this region of weather-beaten youth and seasoned age.

Each of these good captains lived alone, and each took entire charge of his own domestic affairs,
not because he was poor, but because it pleased him to do so.  When Captain Eli retired from
the sea he was the owner of a good vessel, which he sold at a fair profit; and Captain Cephas
had made money in many a voyage before he built his house in Sponkannis and settled there.

When Captain Eli's wife was living she was his household manager.  But Captain Cephas had never
had a woman in his house, except during the first few months of his occupancy, when certain
female neighbors came in occasionally to attend to little matters of cleaning which, according
to popular notions, properly belong to the sphere of woman.

But Captain Cephas soon put an end to this sort of thing.  He did not like a woman's ways,
especially her ways of attending to domestic affairs.  He liked to live in sailor fashion,
and to keep house in sailor fashion.  In his establishment everything was shipshape, and everything
which could be stowed away was stowed away, and, if possible, in a bunker.  The floors were
holystoned nearly every day, and the whole house was repainted about twice a year, a little
at a time, when the weather was suitable for this marine recreation.  Things not in frequent
use were lashed securely to the walls, or perhaps put out of the way by being hauled up to
the ceiling by means of blocks and tackle.  His cooking was done sailor fashion, like everything
else, and he never failed to have plum-duff on Sunday.  His well was near his house, and every
morning he dropped into it a lead and line, and noted down the depth of water.  Three times
a day he entered in a little note-book the state of the weather, the height of the mercury
in barometer and thermometer, the direction of the wind, and special weather points when necessary.

Captain Eli managed his domestic affairs in an entirely different way. He kept house woman
fashion--not, however, in the manner of an ordinary woman, but after the manner of his late
wife, Miranda Bunker, now dead some seven years.  Like his friend, Captain Cephas, he had had
the assistance of his female neighbors during the earlier days of his widowerhood.  But he
soon found that these women did not do things as Miranda used to do them, and, although he
frequently suggested that they should endeavor to imitate the methods of his late consort,
they did not even try to do things as she used to do them, preferring their own ways.  Therefore
it was that Captain Eli determined to keep house by himself, and to do it, as nearly as his
nature would allow, as Miranda used to do it.  He swept his doors and he shook his door-mats;
he washed his paint with soap and hot water; he dusted his furniture with a soft cloth, which
he afterwards stuck behind a chest of drawers. He made his bed very neatly, turning down the
sheet at the top, and setting the pillow upon edge, smoothing it carefully after he had done
so.  His cooking was based on the methods of the late Miranda.  He had never been able to make
bread rise properly, but he had always liked ship-biscuit, and he now greatly preferred them
to the risen bread made by his neighbors.  And as to coffee and the plainer articles of food
with which he furnished his table, even Miranda herself would not have objected to them had
she been alive and very hungry.

The houses of the two captains were not very far apart, and they were good neighbors, often
smoking their pipes together and talking of the sea.  But this was always on the little porch
in front of Captain Cephas's house, or by his kitchen fire in the winter.  Captain Eli did
not like the smell of tobacco smoke in his house, or even in front of it in summer-time, when
the doors were open.  He had no objection himself to the odor of tobacco, but it was contrary
to the principles of woman housekeeping that rooms should smell of it, and he was always true
to those principles.

It was late in a certain December, and through the village there was a pleasant little flutter
of Christmas preparations.  Captain Eli had been up to the store, and he had stayed there a
good while, warming himself by the stove, and watching the women coming in to buy things for
Christmas.  It was strange how many things they bought for presents or for holiday use--fancy
soap and candy, handkerchiefs and little woollen shawls for old people, and a lot of pretty
little things which he knew the use of, but which Captain Cephas would never have understood
at all had he been there.

As Captain Eli came out of the store he saw a cart in which were two good-sized Christmas trees,
which had been cut in the woods, and were going, one to Captain Holmes's house, and the other
to Mother Nelson's. Captain Holmes had grandchildren, and Mother Nelson, with never a child
of her own, good old soul, had three little orphan nieces who never wanted for anything needful
at Christmas-time or any other time.

Captain Eli walked home very slowly, taking observations in his mind. It was more than seven
years since he had had anything to do with Christmas, except that on that day he had always
made himself a mince-pie, the construction and the consumption of which were equally difficult.
It is true that neighbors had invited him, and they had invited Captain Cephas, to their Christmas
dinners, but neither of these worthy seamen had ever accepted any of these invitations.  Even
holiday food, when not cooked in sailor fashion, did not agree with Captain Cephas, and it
would have pained the good heart of Captain Eli if he had been forced to make believe to enjoy
a Christmas dinner so very inferior to those which Miranda used to set before him.

But now the heart of Captain Eli was gently moved by a Christmas flutter.  It had been foolish,
perhaps, for him to go up to the store at such a time as this, but the mischief had been done.
Old feelings had come back to him, and he would be glad to celebrate Christmas this year if
he could think of any good way to do it.  And the result of his mental observations was that
he went over to Captain Cephas's house to talk to him about it.

Captain Cephas was in his kitchen, smoking his third morning pipe. Captain Eli filled his pipe,
lighted it, and sat down by the fire.

"Cap'n," said he, "what do you say to our keepin Christmas this year? A Christmas dinner is
no good if it's got to be eat alone, and you and me might eat ourn together.  It might be in
my house, or it might be in your house--it won't make no great difference to me which.  Of
course, I like woman housekeepin', as is laid down in the rules of service fer my house.  But
next best to that I like sailor housekeepin', so I don't mind which house the dinner is in,
Cap'n Cephas, so it suits you."

Captain Cephas took his pipe from his mouth.  "You're pretty late thinkin' about it," said
he, "fer day after to-morrow's Christmas."

"That don't make no difference," said Captain Eli.  "What things we want that are not in my
house or your house we can easily get either up at the store or else in the woods."

"In the woods!" exclaimed Captain Cephas.  "What in the name of thunder do you expect to get
in the woods for Christmas?"

"A Christmas tree," said Captain Eli.  "I thought it might be a nice thing to have a Christmas
tree fer Christmas.  Cap'n Holmes has got one, and Mother Nelson's got another.  I guess nearly
everybody's got one.  It won't cost anything--I can go and cut it."

Captain Cephas grinned a grin, as if a great leak had been sprung in the side of a vessel,
stretching nearly from stem to stern.

"A Christmas tree!" he exclaimed.  "Well, I am blessed!  But look here, Cap'n Eli.  You don't
know what a Christmas tree's fer.  It's fer children, and not fer grown-ups.  Nobody ever does
have a Christmas tree in any house where there ain't no children."

Captain Eli rose and stood with his back to the fire.  "I didn't think of that," he said, "but
I guess it's so.  And when I come to think of it, a Christmas isn't much of a Christmas, anyway,
without children."

"You never had none," said Captain Cephas, "and you've kept Christmas."

"Yes," replied Captain Eli, reflectively, "we did do it, but there was always a lackment--Miranda
has said so, and I have said so."

"You didn't have no Christmas tree," said Captain Cephas.

"No, we didn't.  But I don't think that folks was as much set on Christmas trees then as they
'pear to be now.  I wonder," he continued, thoughtfully gazing at the ceiling, "if we was to
fix up a Christmas tree--and you and me's got a lot of pretty things that we've picked up all
over the world, that would go miles ahead of anything that could be bought at the store fer
Christmas trees--if we was to fix up a tree real nice, if we couldn't get some child or other
that wasn't likely to have a tree to come in and look at it, and stay awhile, and make Christmas
more like Christmas.  And then, when it went away, it could take along the things that was
hangin' on the tree, and keep 'em fer its own."

"That wouldn't work," said Captain Cephas.  "If you get a child into this business, you must
let it hang up its stockin' before it goes to bed, and find it full in the mornin', and then
tell it an all-fired lie about Santa Claus if it asks any questions.  Most children think more
of stockin's than they do of trees--so I've heard, at least."

"I've got no objections to stockin's," said Captain Eli.  "If it wanted to hang one up, it
could hang one up either here or in my house, wherever we kept Christmas."

"You couldn't keep a child all night," sardonically remarked Captain Cephas, "and no more could
I.  Fer if it was to get up a croup in the night, it would be as if we was on a lee shore with
anchors draggin' and a gale a-blowin'."

"That's so," said Captain Eli.  "You've put it fair.  I suppose if we did keep a child all
night, we'd have to have some sort of a woman within hail in case of a sudden blow."

Captain Cephas sniffed.  "What's the good of talkin'?" said he.  "There ain't no child, and
there ain't no woman that you could hire to sit all night on my front step or on your front
step, a-waitin' to be piped on deck in case of croup."

"No," said Captain Eli.  "I don't suppose there's any child in this village that ain't goin'
to be provided with a Christmas tree or a Christmas stockin', or perhaps both--except, now
I come to think of it, that little gal that was brought down here with her mother last summer,
and has been kept by Mrs. Crumley sence her mother died."

"And won't be kept much longer," said Captain Cephas, "fer I've hearn Mrs. Crumley say she
couldn't afford it."

"That's so," said Captain Eli.  "If she can't afford to keep the little gal, she can't afford
to give no Christmas trees nor stockin's, and so it seems to me, cap'n, that that little gal
would be a pretty good child to help us keep Christmas."

"You're all the time forgettin'," said the other, "that nuther of us can keep a child all night."

Captain Eli seated himself, and looked ponderingly into the fire. "You're right, cap'n," said
he.  "We'd have to ship some woman to take care of her.  Of course, it wouldn't be no use to
ask Mrs. Crumley?"

Captain Cephas laughed.  "I should say not."

"And there doesn't seem to be anybody else," said his companion.  "Can you think of anybody,
cap'n?"

"There ain't anybody to think of," replied Captain Cephas, "unless it might be Eliza Trimmer.
She's generally ready enough to do anything that turns up.  But she wouldn't be no good--her
house is too far away for either you or me to hail her in case a croup came up suddint."

"That's so," said Captain Eli.  "She does live a long way off."

"So that settles the whole business," said Captain Cephas.  "She's too far away to come if
wanted, and nuther of us couldn't keep no child without somebody to come if they was wanted,
and it's no use to have a Christmas tree without a child.  A Christmas without a Christmas
tree don't seem agreeable to you, cap'n, so I guess we'd better get along just the same as
we've been in the habit of doin', and eat our Christmas dinner, as we do our other meals in
our own houses."

Captain Eli looked into the fire.  "I don't like to give up things if I can help it.  That
was always my way.  If wind and tide's ag'in' me, I can wait till one or the other, or both
of them, serve."

 "Yes," said Captain Cephas, "you was always that kind of a
man."

"That's so.  But it does 'pear to me as if I'd have to give up this time, though it's a pity
to do it, on account of the little gal, fer she ain't likely to have any Christmas this year.
She's a nice little gal, and takes as natural to navigation as if she'd been born at sea. I've
given her two or three things because she's so pretty, but there's nothing she likes so much
as a little ship I gave her."

"Perhaps she was born at sea," remarked Captain Cephas.

"Perhaps she was," said the other; "and that makes it the bigger pity."

For a few moments nothing was said.  Then Captain Eli suddenly exclaimed, "I'll tell you what
we might do, cap'n!  We might ask Mrs. Trimmer to lend a hand in givin' the little gal a Christmas.
She ain't got nobody in her house but herself, and I guess she'd be glad enough to help give
that little gal a regular Christmas.  She could go and get the child, and bring her to your
house or to my house, or wherever we're goin' to keep Christmas, and--"

"Well," said Captain Cephas, with an air of scrutinizing inquiry, "what?"

"Well," replied the other, a little hesitatingly, "so far as I'm concerned,--that is, I don't
mind one way or the other,--she might take her Christmas dinner along with us and the little
gal, and then she could fix her stockin' to be hung up, and help with the Christmas tree, and--"

"Well," demanded Captain Cephas, "what?"

"Well," said Captain Eli, "she could--that is, it doesn't make any difference to me one way
or the other--she might stay all night at whatever house we kept Christmas in, and then you
and me might spend the night in the other house, and then she could be ready there to help
the child in the mornin', when she came to look at her stockin'."

Captain Cephas fixed upon his friend an earnest glare.  "That's pretty considerable of an idea
to come upon you so suddint," said he.  "But I can tell you one thing: there ain't a-goin'
to be any such doin's in my house.  If you choose to come over here to sleep, and give up your
house to any woman you can find to take care of the little gal, all right.  But the thing can't
be done here."

There was a certain severity in these remarks, but they appeared to affect Captain Eli very
pleasantly.

"Well," said he, "if you're satisfied, I am.  I'll agree to any plan you choose to make.  It
doesn't matter to me which house it's in, and if you say my house, I say my house.  All I want
is to make the business agreeable to all concerned.  Now it's time fer me to go to my dinner,
and this afternoon we'd better go and try to get things straightened out, because the little
gal, and whatever woman comes with her, ought to be at my house to-morrow before dark.  S'posin'
we divide up this business: I'll go and see Mrs. Crumley about the little gal, and you can
go and see Mrs. Trimmer."

"No, sir," promptly replied Captain Cephas, "I don't go to see no Mrs. Trimmer.  You can see
both of them just the same as you can see one--they're all along the same way.  I'll go cut
the Christmas tree."

"All right," said Captain Eli.  "It don't make no difference to me which does which.  But if
I was you, cap'n, I'd cut a good big tree, because we might as well have a good one while we're
about it."

When he had eaten his dinner, and washed up his dishes, and had put everything away in neat,
housewifely order, Captain Eli went to Mrs. Crumley's house, and very soon finished his business
there.  Mrs. Crumley kept the only house which might be considered a boarding-house in the
village of Sponkannis; and when she had consented to take charge of the little girl who had
been left on her hands she had hoped it would not be very long before she would hear from some
of her relatives in regard to her maintenance.  But she had heard nothing, and had now ceased
to expect to hear anything, and in consequence had frequently remarked that she must dispose
of the child some way or other, for she couldn't afford to keep her any longer.  Even an absence
of a day or two at the house of the good captain would be some relief, and Mrs. Crumley readily
consented to the Christmas scheme.  As to the little girl, she was delighted.  She already
looked upon Captain Eli as her best friend in the world.

It was not so easy to go to Mrs. Trimmer's house and put the business before her.  "It ought
to be plain sailin' enough," Captain Eli said to himself, over and over again, "but, fer all
that, it don't seem to be plain sailin'."

But he was not a man to be deterred by difficult navigation, and he walked straight to Eliza
Trimmer's house.

Mrs. Trimmer was a comely woman about thirty-five, who had come to the village a year before,
and had maintained herself, or at least had tried to, by dressmaking and plain sewing.  She
had lived at Stetford, a seaport about twenty miles away, and from there, three years before,
her husband, Captain Trimmer, had sailed away in a good-sized schooner, and had never returned.
She had come to Sponkannis because she thought that there she could live cheaper and get more
work than in her former home.  She had found the first quite possible, but her success in regard
to the work had not been very great.

When Captain Eli entered Mrs. Trimmer's little room, he found her busy mending a sail.  Here
fortune favored him.  "You turn your hand to 'most anything, Mrs. Trimmer," said he, after
he had greeted her.

"Oh, yes," she answered, with a smile, "I am obliged to do that. Mending sails is pretty heavy
work, but it's better than nothing."

"I had a notion," said he, "that you was ready to turn your hand to any good kind of business,
so I thought I would step in and ask you if you'd turn your hand to a little bit of business
I've got on the stocks."

She stopped sewing on the sail, and listened while Captain Eli laid his plan before her.  "It's
very kind in you and Captain Cephas to think of all that," said she.  "I have often noticed
that poor little girl, and pitied her.  Certainly I'll come, and you needn't say anything about
paying me for it.  I wouldn't think of asking to be paid for doing a thing like that.  And
besides,"--she smiled again as she spoke,--"if you are going to give me a Christmas dinner,
as you say, that will make things more than square."

Captain Eli did not exactly agree with her, but he was in very good humor, and she was in good
humor, and the matter was soon settled, and Mrs. Trimmer promised to come to the captain's
house in the morning and help about the Christmas tree, and in the afternoon to go to get the
little girl from Mrs. Crumley's and bring her to the house.

Captain Eli was delighted with the arrangements.  "Things now seem to be goin' along before
a spankin' breeze," said he.  "But I don't know about the dinner.  I guess you will have to
leave that to me.  I don't believe Captain Cephas could eat a woman-cooked dinner.  He's accustomed
to livin sailor fashion, you know, and he has declared over and over again to me that woman-cookin'
doesn't agree with him."

"But I can cook sailor fashion," said Mrs. Trimmer,--"just as much sailor fashion as you or
Captain Cephas, and if he don't believe it, I'll prove it to him; so you needn't worry about that."

When the captain had gone, Mrs. Trimmer gayly put away the sail.  There was no need to finish
it in a hurry, and no knowing when she would get her money for it when it was done.  No one
had asked her to a Christmas dinner that year, and she had expected to have a lonely time of
it. But it would be very pleasant to spend Christmas with the little girl and the two good
captains.  Instead of sewing any more on the sail, she got out some of her own clothes to see
if they needed anything done to them.

The next morning Mrs. Trimmer went to Captain Eli's house, and finding Captain Cephas there,
they all set to work at the Christmas tree, which was a very fine one, and had been planted
in a box.  Captain Cephas had brought over a bundle of things from his house, and Captain Eli
kept running here and there, bringing, each time that he returned, some new object, wonderful
or pretty, which he had brought from China or Japan or Corea, or some spicy island of the Eastern
seas; and nearly every time he came with these treasures Mrs. Trimmer declared that such things
were too good to put upon a Christmas tree, even for such a nice little girl as the one for
which that tree was intended.  The presents which Captain Cephas brought were much more suitable
for the purpose; they were odd and funny, and some of them pretty, but not expensive, as were
the fans and bits of shellwork and carved ivories which Captain Eli wished to tie upon the
twigs of the tree.

There was a good deal of talk about all this, but Captain Eli had his own way.

"I don't suppose, after all," said he, "that the little gal ought to have all the things. 
This is such a big tree that it's more like a family tree.  Cap'n Cephas can take some of my
things, and I can take some of his things, and, Mrs. Trimmer, if there's anything you like,
you can call it your present and take it for your own, so that will be fair and comfortable
all round. "But I ordered you, I begged of you, to do so.

What is the matter with you?"

"I-I-I will not--I cannot!" I gasped, and the tears, long pent up
and accumulated in my breast, burst forth like a stream which breaks
its dikes and goes flowing madly over the country.  She had said there ought to be an early supper, so that the child would have time to
enjoy the Christmas tree before she became sleepy.

This meal was prepared entirely by Captain Eli, and in sailor fashion, not woman fashion, so
that Captain Cephas could make no excuse for eating his supper at home.  Of course they all
ought to be together the whole of that Christmas eve.  As for the big dinner on the morrow,
that was another affair, for Mrs. Trimmer undertook to make Captain Cephas understand that
she had always cooked for Captain Trimmer in sailor fashion, and if he objected to her plum-duff,
or if anybody else objected to her mince-pie, she was going to be very much surprised.

Captain Cephas ate his supper with a good relish, and was still eating when the rest had finished.
As to the Christmas tree, it was the most valuable, if not the most beautiful, that had ever
been set up in that region.  It had no candles upon it, but was lighted by three lamps and
a ship's lantern placed in the four corners of the room, and the little girl was as happy as
if the tree were decorated with little dolls and glass balls.  Mrs. Trimmer was intensely pleased
and interested to see the child so happy, and Captain Eli was much pleased and interested to
see the child and Mrs. Trimmer so happy, and Captain Cephas was interested, and perhaps a little
amused in a superior fashion, to see Captain Eli and Mrs. Trimmer and the little child so happy.

Then the distribution of the presents began.  Captain Eli asked Captain Cephas if he might
have the wooden pipe that the latter had brought for his present.  Captain Cephas said he might
take it, for all he cared, and be welcome to it.  Then Captain Eli gave Captain Cephas a red
bandanna handkerchief of a very curious pattern, and Captain Cephas thanked him kindly.  After
which Captain Eli bestowed upon Mrs. Trimmer a most beautiful tortoise-shell comb, carved and
cut and polished in a wonderful way, and with it he gave a tortoise-shell fan, carved in the
same fashion, because he said the two things seemed to belong to each other and ought to go
together; and he would not listen to one word of what Mrs. Trimmer said about the gifts being
too good for her, and that she was not likely ever to use them.

"It seems to me," said Captain Cephas, "that you might be giving something to the little gal."

Then Captain Eli remembered that the child ought not to be forgotten, and her soul was lifted
into ecstasy by many gifts, some of which Mrs. Trimmer declared were too good for any child
in this wide, wide world. But Captain Eli answered that they could be taken care of by somebody
until the little girl was old enough to know their value.

Then it was discovered that, unbeknown to anybody else, Mrs. Trimmer had put some presents
on the tree, which were things which had been brought by Captain Trimmer from somewhere in
the far East or the distant West.  These she bestowed upon Captain Cephas and Captain Eli.
And the end of all this was that in the whole of Sponkannis, from the foot of the bluff to
the east, to the very last house on the shore to the west, there was not one Christmas eve
party so happy as this one.

Captain Cephas was not quite so happy as the three others were, but he was very much interested.
About nine o'clock the party broke up, and the two captains put on their caps and buttoned
up their pea-jackets, and started for Captain Cephas's house, but not before Captain Eli had
carefully fastened every window and every door except the front door, and had told Mrs. Trimmer
how to fasten that when they had gone, and had given her a boatswain's whistle, which she might
blow out of the window if there should be a sudden croup and it should be necessary for any
one to go anywhere.  He was sure he could hear it, for the wind was exactly right for him to
hear a whistle from his house.  When they had gone Mrs. Trimmer put the little girl to bed,
and was delighted to find in what a wonderfully neat and womanlike fashion that house was kept.

It was nearly twelve o'clock that night when Captain Eli, sleeping in his bunk opposite that
of Captain Cephas, was aroused by hearing a sound.  He had been lying with his best ear uppermost,
so that he should hear anything if there happened to be anything to hear.  He did hear something,
but it was not a boatswain's whistle; it was a prolonged cry, and it seemed to come from the sea.

In a moment Captain Eli was sitting on the side of his bunk, listening intently.  Again came
the cry.  The window toward the sea was slightly open, and he heard it plainly.

"Cap'n!" said he, and at the word Captain Cephas was sitting on the side of his bunk, listening.
He knew from his companion's attitude, plainly visible in the light of a lantern which hung
on a hook at the other end of the room, that he had been awakened to listen.  Again came the cry.

"That's distress at sea," said Captain Cephas.  "Harken!"

They listened again for nearly a minute, when the cry was repeated.

"Bounce on deck, boys!" said Captain Cephas, getting out on the floor. "There's some one in
distress off shore."

Captain Eli jumped to the floor, and began to dress quickly.

"It couldn't be a call from land?" he asked hurriedly.  "It don't sound a bit to you like a
boatswain's whistle, does it?"

"No," said Captain Cephas, disdainfully.  "It's a call from sea." Then, seizing a lantern,
he rushed down the companionway.

As soon as he was convinced that it was a call from sea, Captain Eli was one in feeling and
action with Captain Cephas.  The latter hastily opened the draughts of the kitchen stove, and
put on some wood, and by the time this was done Captain Eli had the kettle filled and on the
stove.  Then they clapped on their caps and their pea-jackets, each took an oar from a corner
in the back hall, and together they ran down to the beach.

The night was dark, but not very cold, and Captain Cephas had been to the store that morning
in his boat.

Whenever he went to the store, and the weather permitted, he rowed there in his boat rather
than walk.  At the bow of the boat, which was now drawn up on the sand, the two men stood and
listened.  Again came the cry from the sea.

"It's something ashore on the Turtle-back Shoal," said Captain Cephas.

"Yes," said Captain Eli, "and it's some small craft, fer that cry is down pretty nigh to the
water."

"Yes," said Captain Cephas.  "And there's only one man aboard, or else they'd take turns a-hollerin'."

"He's a stranger," said Captain Eli, "or he wouldn't have tried, even with a cat-boat, to get
in over that shoal on ebb-tide."

As they spoke they ran the boat out into the water and jumped in, each with an oar.  Then they
pulled for the Turtle-back Shoal.

Although these two captains were men of fifty or thereabout, they were as strong and tough
as any young fellows in the village, and they pulled with steady strokes, and sent the heavy
boat skimming over the water, not in a straight line toward the Turtle-back Shoal, but now
a few points in the darkness this way, and now a few points in the darkness that way, then
with a great curve to the south through the dark night, keeping always near the middle of the
only good channel out of the bay when the tide was ebbing.

Now the cries from seaward had ceased, but the two captains were not discouraged.

"He's heard the thumpin' of our oars," said Captain Cephas.

"He's listenin', and he'll sing out again if he thinks we're goin' wrong," said Captain Eli.
"Of course he doesn't know anything about that."

And so when they made the sweep to the south the cry came again, and Captain Eli grinned. 
"We needn't to spend no breath hollerin'," said he.  "He'll hear us makin' fer him in a minute."

When they came to head for the shoal they lay on their oars for a moment, while Captain Cephas
turned the lantern in the bow, so that its light shone out ahead.  He had not wanted the shipwrecked
person to see the light when it would seem as if the boat were rowing away from him. He had
heard of castaway people who became so wild when they imagined that a ship or boat was going
away from them that they jumped overboard.

When the two captains reached the shoal, they found there a cat-boat aground, with one man
aboard.  His tale was quickly told.  He had expected to run into the little bay that afternoon,
but the wind had fallen, and in trying to get in after dark, and being a stranger, he had run
aground.  If he had not been so cold, he said, he would have been willing to stay there till
the tide rose; but he was getting chilled, and seeing a light not far away, he concluded to
call for help as long as his voice held out.

The two captains did not ask many questions.  They helped anchor the cat-boat, and then they
took the man on their boat and rowed him to shore.  He was getting chilled sitting out there
doing nothing, and so when they reached the house they made him some hot grog, and promised
in the morning, when the tide rose, they would go out and help him bring his boat in.  Then
Captain Cephas showed the stranger to a bunk, and they all went to bed.  Such experiences had
not enough of novelty to the good captains to keep them awake five minutes.

In the morning they were all up very early, and the stranger, who proved to be a seafaring
man with bright blue eyes, said that, as his cat-boat seemed to be riding all right at its
anchorage, he did not care to go out after her just yet.  Any time during flood-tide would
do for him, and he had some business that he wanted to attend to as soon as possible.

This suited the two captains very well, for they wished to be on hand when the little girl
discovered her stocking.

"Can you tell me," said the stranger, as he put on his cap, "where I can find a Mrs. Trimmer,
who lives in this village?"

At these words all the sturdy stiffness which, from his youth up, had characterized the legs
of Captain Eli entirely went out of them, and he sat suddenly upon a bench.  For a few moments
there was silence.

Then Captain Cephas, who thought some answer should be made to the question, nodded his head.

"I want to see her as soon as I can," said the stranger.  "I have come to see her on particular
business that will be a surprise to her.  I wanted to be here before Christmas began, and that's
the reason I took that cat-boat from Stetford, because I thought I'd come quicker that way
than by land.  But the wind fell, as I told you.  If either one of you would be good enough
to pilot me to where Mrs. Trimmer lives, or to any point where I can get a sight of the place,
I'd be obliged."

Captain Eli rose and with hurried but unsteady steps went into the house (for they had been
upon the little piazza), and beckoned to his friend to follow.  The two men stood in the kitchen
and looked at each other.  The face of Captain Eli was of the hue of a clam-shell.

"Go with him, cap'n," he said in a hoarse whisper.  "I can't do it."

"To your house?" inquired the other.

"Of course.  Take him to my house.  There ain't no other place where she is.  Take him along."

Captain Cephas's countenance wore an air of the deepest concern, but he thought that the best
thing to do was to get the stranger away.

 As they walked rapidly toward Captain Eli's house there was
very little said by either Captain Cephas or the stranger.  The latter
seemed anxious to give Mrs. Trimmer a surprise, and not to say anything
which might enable another person to interfere with his project.

The two men had scarcely stepped upon the piazza when Mrs. Trimmer, who had been expecting
early visitors, opened the door.  She was about to call out "Merry Christmas!" but, her eyes
falling upon a stranger, the words stopped at her lips.  First she turned red, then she turned
pale, and Captain Cephas thought she was about to fall.  But before she could do this the stranger
had her in his arms.  She opened her eyes, which for a moment she had closed, and, gazing into
his face, she put her arms around his neck.  Then Captain Cephas came away, without thinking
of the little girl and the pleasure she would have in discovering her Christmas stocking.

When he had been left alone, Captain Eli sat down near the kitchen stove, close to the very
kettle which he had filled with water to heat for the benefit of the man he had helped bring
in from the sea, and, with his elbows on his knees and his fingers in his hair, he darkly pondered.

"If I'd only slept with my hard-o'-hearin' ear up," he said to himself, "I'd never have heard it."

In a few moments his better nature condemned this thought.

"That's next to murder," he muttered, "fer he couldn't have kept himself from fallin' asleep
out there in the cold, and when the tide riz held have been blowed out to sea with this wind.
If I hadn't heard him, Captain Cephas never would, fer he wasn't primed up to wake, as I was."

But, notwithstanding his better nature, Captain Eli was again saying to himself, when his friend
returned, "If I'd only slept with my other ear up!"

Like the honest, straightforward mariner he was, Captain Cephas made an exact report of the
facts.  "They was huggin' when I left them," he said, "and I expect they went indoors pretty
soon, fer it was too cold outside.  It's an all-fired shame she happened to be in your house,
cap'n, that's all I've got to say about it. It's a thunderin' shame."

Captain Eli made no answer.  He still sat with his elbows on his knees and his hands in his hair.

"A better course than you laid down fer these Christmas times was never dotted on a chart,"
continued Captain Cephas.  "From port of sailin' to port of entry you laid it down clear and
fine.  But it seems there was rocks that wasn't marked on the chart."

"Yes," groaned Captain Eli, "there was rocks."

Captain Cephas made no attempt to comfort his friend, but went to work to get breakfast.

When that meal--a rather silent one--was over, Captain Eli felt better. "There was rocks,"
he said, "and not a breaker to show where they lay, and I struck 'em bow on.  So that's the
end of that voyage.  But I've tuk to my boats, cap'n, I've tuk to my boats."

"I'm glad to hear you've tuk to your boats," said Captain Cephas, with an approving glance
upon his friend.

About ten minutes afterwards Captain Eli said, "I'm goin' up to my house."

"By yourself?" said the other.

"Yes, by myself.  I'd rather go alone.  I don't intend to mind anything, and I'm goin' to tell
her that she can stay there and spend Christmas,--the place she lives in ain't no place to
spend Christmas,--and she can make the little gal have a good time, and go 'long just as we
intended to go 'long--plum-duff and mince-pie all the same.  I can stay here, and you and me
can have our Christmas dinner together, if we choose to give it that name.  And if she ain't
ready to go to-morrow, she can stay a day or two longer.  It's all the same to me, if it's
the same to you, cap'n."

Captain Cephas having said that it was the same to him, Captain Eli put on his cap and buttoned
up his pea-jacket, declaring that the sooner he got to his house the better, as she might be
thinking that she would have to move out of it now that things were different.

Before Captain Eli reached his house he saw something which pleased him.  He saw the sea-going
stranger, with his back toward him, walking rapidly in the direction of the village store.

Captain Eli quickly entered his house, and in the doorway of the room where the tree was he
met Mrs. Trimmer, beaming brighter than any morning sun that ever rose.

"Merry Christmas!" she exclaimed, holding out both her hands.  "I've been wondering and wondering
when you'd come to bid me `Merry Christmas'--the merriest Christmas I've ever had."

Captain Eli took her hands and bid her "Merry Christmas" very gravely.

She looked a little surprised.  "What's the matter, Captain Eli?" she exclaimed.  "You don't
seem to say that as if you meant it."

"Oh, yes, I do," he answered.  "This must be an all-fired--I mean a thunderin' happy Christmas
fer you, Mrs. Trimmer."

"Yes," said she, her face beaming again.  "And to think that it should happen on Christmas
day--that this blessed morning, before anything else happened, my Bob, my only brother, should--"

"Your what!" roared Captain Eli, as if he had been shouting orders in a raging storm.

Mrs. Trimmer stepped back almost frightened.  "My brother," said she. "Didn't he tell you he
was my brother--my brother Bob, who sailed away a year before I was married, and who has been
in Africa and China and I don't know where?  It's so long since I heard that he'd gone into
trading at Singapore that I'd given him up as married and settled in foreign parts.  And here
he has come to me as if he'd tumbled from the sky on this blessed Christmas morning."

Captain Eli made a step forward, his face very much flushed.

"Your brother, Mrs. Trimmer--did you really say it was your brother?"

"Of course it is," said she.  "Who else could it be?"  Then she paused for a moment and looked
steadfastly at the captain.

"You don't mean to say, Captain Eli," she asked, "that you thought it was--"

"Yes, I did," said Captain Eli, promptly.

Mrs. Trimmer looked straight in the captain's eyes, then she looked on the ground.  Then she
changed color and changed back again.

"I don't understand," she said hesitatingly, "why--I mean what difference it made."

"Difference!" exclaimed Captain Eli.  "It was all the difference between a man on deck and
a man overboard--that's the difference it was to me.  I didn't expect to be talkin' to you
so early this Christmas mornin', but things has been sprung on me, and I can't help it I just
want to ask you one thing:  Did you think I was gettin' up this Christmas tree and the Christmas
dinner and the whole business fer the good of the little gal, and fer the good of you, and
fer the good of Captain Cephas?"

Mrs. Trimmer had now recovered a very fair possession of herself.  "Of course I did," she answered,
looking up at him as she spoke.  "Who else could it have been for!"

"Well," said he, "you were mistaken.  It wasn't fer any one of you.  It was all fer me--fer
my own self."

"You yourself?" said she.  "I don't see how."

"But I see how," he answered.  "It's been a long time since I wanted to speak my mind to you,
Mrs. Trimmer, but I didn't ever have no chance. And all these Christmas doin's was got up to
give me the chance not only of speakin' to you, but of showin' my colors better than I could
show them in any other way.  Everything went on a-skimmin' till this mornin', when that stranger
that we brought in from the shoal piped up and asked fer you.  Then I went overboard--at least,
I thought I did--and sunk down, down, clean out of soundin's."

"That was too bad, captain," said she, speaking very gently, "after all your trouble and kindness."

"But I don't know now," he continued, "whether I went overboard or whether I am on deck.  Can
you tell me, Mrs. Trimmer?"

She looked up at him.  Her eyes were very soft, and her lips trembled just a little.  "It seems
to me, captain," she said, "that you are on deck--if you want to be."

The captain stepped closer to her.  "Mrs. Trimmer," said he, "is that brother of yours comin'
back?"

"Yes," she answered, surprised at the sudden question.  "He's just gone up to the store to
buy a shirt and some things.  He got himself splashed trying to push his boat off last night."

"Well, then," said Captain Eli, "would you mind tellin' him when he comes back that you and
me's engaged to be married?  I don't know whether I've made a mistake in the lights or not,
but would you mind tellin' him that?"

Mrs. Trimmer looked at him.  Her eyes were not so soft as they had been, but they were brighter.
"I'd rather you'd tell him that yourself," said she.

The little girl sat on the floor near the Christmas tree, just finishing a large piece of red-and-white
candy which she had taken out of her stocking.  "People do hug a lot at Christmas-time," said
she to herself.  Then she drew out a piece of blue-and-white candy and began on that.

Captain Cephas waited a long time for his friend to return, and at last he thought it would
be well to go and look for him.  When he entered the house he found Mrs. Trimmer sitting on
the sofa in the parlor, with Captain Eli on one side of her and her brother on the other, and
each of them holding one of her hands.

"It looks as if I was in port, don't it?" said Captain Eli to his astonished friend.  "Well,
here I am, and here's my fust mate," inclining his head toward Mrs. Trimmer.  "And she's in
port too, safe and sound.  And that strange captain on the other side of her, he's her brother
Bob, who's been away for years and years, and is just home from Madagascar."

"Singapore," amended Brother Bob.

Captain Cephas looked from one to the other of the three occupants of the sofa, but made no
immediate remark.  Presently a smile of genial maliciousness stole over his face, and he asked,
"How about the poor little gal?  Have you sent her back to Mrs. Crumley's?"

The little girl came out from behind the Christmas tree, her stocking, now but half filled,
in her hand.  "Here I am," she said.  "Don't you want to give me a Christmas hug, Captain Cephas?
You and me's the only ones that hasn't had any."

The Christmas dinner was as truly and perfectly a sailor-cooked meal as ever was served on
board a ship or off it.  Captain Cephas had said that, and when he had so spoken there was
no need of further words.

It was nearly dark that afternoon, and they were all sitting around the kitchen fire, the three
seafaring men smoking, and Mrs. Trimmer greatly enjoying it.  There could be no objection to
the smell of tobacco in this house so long as its future mistress enjoyed it.  The little girl
sat on the floor nursing a Chinese idol which had been one of her presents.

"After all," said Captain Eli, meditatively, "this whole business come out of my sleepin' with
my best ear up.  Fer if I'd slept with my hard-o'-hearin' ear up--"  Mrs. Trimmer put one finger
on his lips. "All right," said Captain Eli, "I won't say no more.  But it would have been different."

Even now, several years after that Christmas, when there is no Mrs. Trimmer, and the little
girl, who has been regularly adopted by Captain Eli and his wife, is studying geography, and
knows more about latitude and longitude than her teacher at school, Captain Eli has still a
slight superstitious dread of sleeping with his best ear uppermost.

"Of course it's the most all-fired nonsense," he says to himself over and over again.  Nevertheless,
he feels safer when it is his "hard-o'-hearin' ear" that is not upon the pillow.

LOVE BEFORE BREAKFAST

I was still a young man when I came into the possession of an excellent estate.  This consisted
of a large country house, surrounded by lawns, groves, and gardens, and situated not far from
the flourishing little town of Boynton.  Being an orphan with no brothers or sisters, I set
up here a bachelor's hall, in which, for two years, I lived with great satisfaction and comfort,
improving my grounds and furnishing my house. When I had made all the improvements which were
really needed, and feeling that I now had a most delightful home to come back to, I thought
it would be an excellent thing to take a trip to Europe, give my mind a run in fresh fields,
and pick up a lot of bric-a-brac and ideas for the adornment and advantage of my house and mind.

It was the custom of the residents in my neighborhood who owned houses and travelled in the
summer to let their houses during their absence, and my business agent and myself agreed that
this would be an excellent thing for me to do.  If the house were let to a suitable family
it would yield me a considerable income, and the place would not present on my return that
air of retrogression and desolation which I might expect if it were left unoccupied and in
charge of a caretaker.

My agent assured me that I would have no trouble whatever in letting my place, for it offered
many advantages and I expected but a reasonable rent.  I desired to leave everything just as
it stood, house, furniture, books, horses, cows, and poultry, taking with me only my clothes
and personal requisites, and I desired tenants who would come in bringing only their clothes
and personal requisites, which they could quietly take away with them when their lease should
expire and I should return home.

In spite, however, of the assurances of the agent, it was not easy to let my place.  The house
was too large for some people, too small for others, and while some applicants had more horses
than I had stalls in my stable, others did not want even the horses I would leave.  I had engaged
my steamer passage, and the day for my departure drew near, and yet no suitable tenants had
presented themselves.  I had almost come to the conclusion that the whole matter would have
to be left in the hands of my agent, for I had no intention whatever of giving up my projected
travels, when early one afternoon some people came to look at the house.  Fortunately I was
at home, and I gave myself the pleasure of personally conducting them about the premises. 
It was a pleasure, because as soon as I comprehended the fact that these applicants desired
to rent my house I wished them to have it.

The family consisted of an elderly gentleman and his wife, with a daughter of twenty or thereabout.
This was a family that suited me exactly.  Three in number, no children, people of intelligence
and position, fond of the country, and anxious for just such a place as I offered them--what
could be better?

The more I walked about and talked with these good people and showed them my possessions, the
more I desired that the young lady should take my house.  Of course her parents were included
in this wish, but it was for her ears that all my remarks were intended, although sometimes
addressed to the others, and she was the tenant I labored to obtain.  I say "labored" advisedly,
because I racked my brain to think of inducements which might bring them to a speedy and favorable
decision.

Apart from the obvious advantages of the arrangement, it would be a positive delight to me
during my summer wanderings in Europe to think that that beautiful girl would be strolling
through my grounds, enjoying my flowers, and sitting with her book in the shady nooks I had
made so pleasant, lying in my hammocks, spending her evening hours in my study, reading my
books, writing at my desk, and perhaps musing in my easy-chair.  Before these applicants appeared
it had sometimes pained me to imagine strangers in my home; but no such thought crossed my
mind in regard to this young lady, who, if charming in the house and on the lawn, grew positively
entrancing when she saw my Jersey cows and my two horses, regarding them with an admiration
which even surpassed my own.

Long before we had completed the tour of inspection I had made up my mind that this young lady
should come to live in my house.  If obstacles should show themselves they should be removed.
I would tear down, I would build, I would paper and paint, I would put in all sorts of electric
bells, I would reduce the rent until it suited their notions exactly, I would have my horses'
tails banged if she liked that kind of tails better than long ones--I would do anything to
make them definitely decide to take the place before they left me.  I trembled to think of
her going elsewhere and giving other householders a chance to tempt her.  She had looked at
a good many country houses, but it was quite plain that none of them had pleased her so well
as mine.

I left them in my library to talk the matter over by themselves, and in less than ten minutes
the young lady herself came out on the lawn to tell me that her father and mother had decided
to take the place and would like to speak with me.

"I am so glad," she said as we went in.  "I am sure I shall enjoy every hour of our stay here.
It is so different from anything we have yet seen."

When everything had been settled I wanted to take them again over the place and point out a
lot of things I had omitted.  I particularly wanted to show them some lovely walks in the woods.
But there was no time, for they had to catch a train.

Her name was Vincent--Cora Vincent, as I discovered from her mother's remarks.

As soon as they departed I had my mare saddled and rode into town to see my agent.  I went
into his office exultant.

"I've let my house," I said, "and I want you to make out the lease and have everything fixed
and settled as soon as possible.  This is the address of my tenants."

The agent asked me a good many questions, being particularly anxious to know what rent had
been agreed upon.

"Heavens!" he exclaimed, when I mentioned the sum, "that is ever so much less than I told you
you could get.  I am in communication now with a party whom I know would pay you considerably
more than these people.  Have you definitely settled with them?  Perhaps it is not too late
to withdraw."

"Withdraw!" I cried.  "Never!  They are the only tenants I want.  I was determined to get them,
and I think I must have lowered the rent four or five times in the course of the afternoon.
I took a big slice out of it before I mentioned the sum at all.  You see," said I, very impressively,
"these Vincents exactly suit me."  And then I went on to state fully the advantages of the
arrangement, omitting, however, any references to my visions of Miss Vincent swinging in my
hammocks or musing in my study-chair.

It was now May 15, and my steamer would sail on the twenty-first.  The intervening days I employed,
not in preparing for my travels, but in making every possible arrangement for the comfort and
convenience of my incoming tenants.  The Vincents did not wish to take possession until June
1, and I was sorry they had not applied before I had engaged my passage, for in that case I
would have selected a later date. It is said that some medical men have put up a purse and that
the two germs are being matched to fight a ten round contest under
National Sporting Club rules.

***

Those who have said that the unemployment donation makes for prolonged holiday have just been
dealt a sorry blow. It appears that one North of England man in receipt of this pay has deliberately
started work.

***

Plans for the housing of 12,000 Government clerks have just been passed. While 12,000 may suffice
for a nucleus, we cannot help thinking that once again the Government isn't really trying.

***

A
postman going his rounds at Kingston found a deserted baby on the
lawn of a front garden.

It speaks well for the honesty of postal servants that the child was at once given up.

***
We are pleased to announce with regard to the German waiter who,
in 1913, gave a Scotsman a bad sixpence for change, that reassuring
news has just reached Scotland that the fellow, is still alive.

***

A
morning paper states that a gentleman who had been at the War Office
since August 1914 was given a big reception on his return home. The
name of the Departmental Chief whom he had been waiting to see has
not yet been disclosed.

***

A morning paper tells us that FRISCO
of New York, who is alleged to have invented the Jazz, has declined
an invitation to visit London. Coward!

***

By the way, they might
have told us whether the offer to FRISCO came from London or New York.

"It seems to me," he said, smiling a little grimly, "that the Vincents had better be kept away
from your house until you have gone.  If you do anything more to it you may find out that it
would have been more profitable to have shut it up while you are away."

He did call, however, partly because I wished him to and partly because he was curious to see
the people  I was so anxious to install in my home, and to whom he was to be my legal representative.
He reported the next day that he had found no one at home but Miss Vincent, and that she had
said that she and her mother would be very glad to come out the next week and go over the place
before they took possession.

"Next week!" I exclaimed.  "I shall be gone then!"

"But I shall be here," said Mr. Barker, "and I'll show them about and take their suggestions."

This did not suit me at all.  It annoyed me very much to think of Barker showing Miss Vincent
about my place.  He was a good-looking young man and not at all backward in his manners.

"After all," said I, "I suppose that everything that ought to be done has been done.  I hope
you told her that."

"Of course not," said he.  "That would have been running dead against your orders.  Besides,
it's my business to show people about places.  I don't mind it."

This gave me an unpleasant and uneasy feeling.  I wondered if Mr. Barker were the agent I ought
to have, and if a middle-aged man with a family and more experience might not be better able
to manage my affairs.

"Barker," said I, a little later, "there will be no use of your going every month to the Vincents
to collect their rent.  I shall write to Mr. Vincent to pay as he pleases.  He can send a check
monthly or at the end of the season, as it may be convenient.  He is perfectly responsible,
and I would much prefer to have the money in a lump when I come back."

Barker grinned.  "All right," said he, "but that's not the way to do business, you know."

I may have been mistaken, but I fancied that I saw in my agent's face an expression which indicated
that he intended to call on the first day of each month, on the pretext of telling Vincent
that it was not necessary to pay the rent at any particular time, and that he also proposed
to make many other intervening visits to inquire if repairs were needed.  This might have been
a good deal to get out of his expression, but I think I could have got more if I had thought
longer.

On the day before that on which I was to sail, my mind was in such a disturbed condition that
I could not attend to my packing or anything else.  It almost enraged me to think that I was
deliberately leaving the country ten days before my tenants would come to my house.  There
was no reason why I should do this.  There were many reasons why I should not.  There was Barker.
I was now of the opinion that he would personally superintend the removal of the Vincents and
their establishment to my home.  I remembered that the only suggestion he had made about the
improvement of the place had been the construction of a tennis-court.  I knew that he was a
champion player.  Confound it! What a dreadful mistake I had made in selecting such a man for
my house-agent.  With my mind's eye I could already see Miss Vincent and Barker selecting a
spot for tennis and planning the arrangements of the court.

I took the first train to New York and went directly to the steamboat office.  It is astonishing
how many obstacles can be removed from a man's path if he will make up his mind to give them
a good kick.  I found that my steamer was crowded.  The applications for passage exceeded the
accommodations, and the agent was delighted to transfer me to the steamer that sailed on June
3.  I went home exultant.  Barker drove over in the evening to take his last instructions,
and a blank look came over his face when I told him that business had delayed my departure,
and that I should not sail the next day.  If I had told him that part of that business was
the laying out of a tennis-court he might have looked blanker.

Of course the date of my departure did not concern the Vincents, provided the house was vacated
by June 1, and I did not inform them of the change in my plans, but when the mother and daughter
came out the next week they were much surprised to find me waiting to receive them instead
of Barker.  I hope that they were also pleased, and I am sure that they had every reason to
be so.  Mrs. Vincent, having discovered that I was a most complacent landlord, accommodated
herself easily to my disposition and made a number of minor requirements, all of which I granted
without the slightest hesitation.  I was delighted at last to put her into the charge of my
housekeeper, and when the two had betaken themselves to the bedrooms I invited Miss Vincent
to come out with me to select a spot for a tennis-court.  The invitation was accepted with
alacrity, for tennis, she declared, was a passion with her.

The selection of that tennis-court took nearly an hour, for there were several good places
for one and it was hard to make a selection; besides, I could not lose the opportunity of taking
Miss Vincent into the woods and showing her the walks I had made and the rustic seats I had
placed in pleasant nooks.  Of course she would have discovered these, but it was a great deal
better for her to know all about them before she came.  At last Mrs. Vincent sent a maid to
tell her daughter that it was time to go for the train, and the court had not been definitely
planned.

The next day I went to Miss Vincent's house with a plan of the grounds, and she and I talked
it over until the matter was settled.  It was necessary to be prompt about this, I explained,
as there would be a great deal of levelling and rolling to be done.

I also had a talk with the old gentleman about books.  There were several large boxes of my
books in New York which I had never sent out to my country house.  Many of these I thought
might be interesting to him, and I offered to have them taken out and left at his disposal.
When he heard the titles of some of the books in the collection he was much interested, but
insisted that before he made use of them they should be catalogued, as were the rest of my
effects.  I hesitated a moment, wondering if I could induce Barker to come to New York and
catalogue four big boxes of books, when, to my surprise, Miss Vincent incidentally remarked
that if they were in any place where she could get at them she would be pleased to help catalogue
them; that sort of thing was a great pleasure to her.  Instantly I proposed that I should send
the books to the Vincent house, that they should there be taken out so that Mr. Vincent could
select those he might care to read during the summer, that I would make a list of these, and
if Vincent would assist me I would be grateful for the kindness, and those that were not desired
could be returned to the storehouse.

What a grand idea was this!  I had been internally groaning because I could think of no possible
pretence, for further interviews with Miss Vincent, and here was something better than I could
have imagined.  Her father declared that he could not put me to so much trouble, but I would
listen to none of his words, and the next morning my books were spread over his library floor.

The selection and cataloguing of the volumes desired occupied the mornings of three days. 
The old gentleman's part was soon done, but there were many things in the books which were
far more interesting to me than their titles, and to which I desired to draw Miss Vincent's
attention.  All this greatly protracted our labors.  She was not only a beautiful girl, but
her intelligence and intellectual grasp were wonderful.  I could not help telling her what
a great pleasure it would be to me to think, while wandering in foreign lands, that such an
appreciative family would be enjoying my books and my place.

"You are so fond of your house and everything you have," said she, "that we shall almost feel
as if we were depriving you of your rights. But I suppose that Italian lakes and the Alps will
make you forget for a time even your beautiful home."

"Not if you are in it," I longed to say, but I restrained myself.  I did not believe that it
was possible for me to be more in love with this girl than I was at that moment, but, of course,
it would be the rankest stupidity to tell her so.  To her I was simply her father's landlord.

I went to that house the next day to see that the boxes were properly repacked, and I actually
went the next day to see if the right boxes had gone into the country, and the others back
to the storehouse. The first day I saw only the father.  The second day it was the mother who
assured me that everything had been properly attended to.  I began to feel that if I did not
wish a decided rebuff I would better not make any more pretences of business at the Vincent house.

There were affairs of my own which should have been attended to, and I ought to have gone home
and attended to them, but I could not bear to do so.  There was no reason to suppose she would
go out there before the first of June.

Thinking over the matter many times, I came to the conclusion that if I could see her once
more I would be satisfied.  Then I would go away, and carry her image with me into every art-gallery,
over every glacier, and under every lovely sky that I should enjoy abroad, hoping all the time
that, taking my place, as it were, in my home, and making my possessions, in a measure, her
own, she would indirectly become so well acquainted with me that when I returned I might speak
to her without shocking her.

To obtain this final interview there was but one way.  I had left my house on Saturday, the
Vincents would come on the following Monday, and I would sail on Wednesday.  I would go on
Tuesday to inquire if they found everything to their satisfaction.  This would be a very proper
attention from a landlord about to leave the country.

When I reached Boynton I determined to walk to my house, for I did not wish to encumber myself
with a hired vehicle.  I might be asked to stay to luncheon.  A very strange feeling came over
me as I entered my grounds.  They were not mine.  For the time being they belonged to somebody
else.  I was merely a visitor or a trespasser if the Vincents thought proper so to consider
me.  If they did not like people to walk on the grass I had no right to do it.

None of my servants had been left on the place, and the maid who came to the door informed
me that Mr. Vincent had gone to New York that morning, and that Mrs. Vincent and her daughter
were out driving.  I ventured to ask if she thought they would soon return, and she answered
that she did not think they would, as they had gone to Rock Lake, which, from the way they
talked about it, must be a long way off.

Rock Lake!  When I had driven over there with my friends, we had taken luncheon at the inn
and returned in the afternoon.  And what did they know of Rock Lake?  Who had told them of
it?  That officious Barker, of course.

"Will you leave a message, sir?" said the maid, who, of course, did not know me.

"No," said I, and as I still stood gazing at the piazza floor, she remarked that if I wished
to call again she would go out and speak to the coachman and ask him if anything had been said
to him about the time of the party's return.

Worse and worse!  Their coachman had not driven them!  Some one who knew the country had been
their companion.  They were not acquainted in the neighborhood, and there could not be a shadow
of a doubt that it was that obtrusive Barker who had indecently thrust himself upon them on
the very next day after their arrival, and had thus snatched from me this last interview upon
which I had counted so earnestly.

I had no right to ask any more questions.  I left no message nor any name, and I had no excuse
for saying I would call again.

I got back to my hotel without having met any one whom I knew, and that night I received a
note from Barker, stating that he had fully intended coming to the steamer to see me off, but
that an engagement would prevent him.  He sent, however, his best good wishes for my safe passage,
and assured me that he would keep me fully informed of the state of my affairs on this side.

"Engagement!" I exclaimed.  "Is he going to drive with her again to-morrow?"

My steamer sailed at two o'clock the next day, and after an early breakfast I went to the company's
office to see if I could dispose of my ticket.  It had become impossible, I told the agent,
for me to leave America at present.  He said it was a very late hour to sell my ticket, but
that he would do what he could, and if an applicant turned up he would give him my room and
refund the money.  He wanted me to change to another date, but I declined to do this.  I was
not able to say when I should sail.

I now had no plan of action.  All I knew was that I could not leave America without finding
out something definite about this Barker business.  That is to say, if it should be made known
to me that instead of attending to my business, sending a carpenter to make repairs, if such
were necessary, or going personally to the plumber to make sure that that erratic personage
would give his attention to any pipes in regard to which Mr. Vincent might have written, Barker
should mingle in sociable relations with my tenants, and drive or play tennis with the young
lady of the house, then would I immediately have done with him.  I would withdraw my business
from his hands and place it in those of old Mr. Poindexter.  More than that, it might be my
duty to warn Miss Vincent's parents against Barker.  I did not doubt that he was a very good
house and land-agent, but in selecting him as such I had no idea of introducing him to the
Vincents in a social way.  In fact, the more I thought about it the more I became convinced
that if ever I mentioned Barker to my tenants it would be to warn them against him.  From certain
points of view he was actually a dangerous man.

This, however, I would not do until I found my agent was really culpable.  To discover what
Barker had done, what he was doing, and what he intended to do, was now my only business in
life.  Until I had satisfied myself on these points I could not think of starting out upon
my travels.

Now that I had determined I would not start for Europe until I had satisfied myself that Mr.
Barker was contenting himself with attending to my business, and not endeavoring to force himself
into social relations with my tenants, I was anxious that the postponement of my journey should
be unknown to my friends and acquaintances, and I was, therefore, very glad to see in a newspaper,
published on the afternoon of the day of my intended departure, my name among the list of passengers
who had sailed upon the Mnemonic.  For the first time I commended the super-enterprise of a
reporter who gave more attention to the timeliness of his news than to its accuracy.

I was stopping at a New York hotel, but I did not wish to stay there. Until I felt myself ready
to start on my travels the neighborhood of Boynton would suit me better than anywhere else.
I did not wish to go to the town itself, for Barker lived there, and I knew many of the townspeople;
but there were farmhouses not far away where I might spend a week.  After considering the matter,
I thought of something that might suit me.  About three miles from my house, on an unfrequented
road, was a mill which stood at the end of an extensive sheet of water, in reality a mill-pond,
but commonly called a lake.  The miller, an old man, had recently died, and his house near
by was occupied by a newcomer whom I had never seen.  If I could get accommodations there it
would suit me exactly.  I left the train two stations below Boynton and walked over to the mill.

The country-folk in my neighborhood are always pleased to take summer boarders if they can
get them, and the miller and his wife were glad to give me a room, not imagining that I was
the owner of a good house not far away.  The place suited my requirements very well.  It was
near her, and I might live here for a time unnoticed, but what I was going to do with my opportunity
I did not know.  Several times the conviction forced itself upon me that I should get up at
once and go to Europe by the first steamer, and so show myself that I was a man of sense.

This conviction was banished on the second afternoon of my stay at the mill.  I was sitting
under a tree in the orchard near the house, thinking and smoking my pipe, when along the road
which ran by the side of the lake came Mr. Vincent on my black horse General and his daughter
on my mare Sappho.  Instinctively I pulled my straw hat over my eyes, but this precaution was
not necessary.  They were looking at the beautiful lake, with its hills and overhanging trees,
and saw me not!

When the very tip of Sappho's tail had melted into the foliage of the road, I arose to my feet
and took a deep breath of the happy air.  I had seen her, and it was with her father she was
riding.

I do not believe I slept a minute that night through thinking of her, and feeling glad that
I was near her, and that she had been riding with her father.

When the early dawn began to break an idea brighter than the dawn broke upon me: I would get
up and go nearer to her.  It is amazing how much we lose by not getting up early on the long
summer days.  How beautiful the morning might be on this earth I never knew until I found myself
wandering by the edge of my woods and over my lawn with the tender gray-blue sky above me and
all the freshness of the grass and flowers and trees about me, the birds singing among the
branches, and she sleeping sweetly somewhere within that house with its softly defined lights
and shadows.  How I wished I knew what room she occupied!

The beauties and joys of that hour were lost to every person on the place, who were all, no
doubt, in their soundest sleep.  I did not even see a dog.  Quietly and stealthily stepping
from bush to hedge, I went around the house, and as I drew near the barn I fancied I could
hear from a little room adjoining it the snores of the coachman.  The lazy rascal would probably
not awaken for two or three hours yet, but I would ran no risks, and in half an hour I had
sped away.

Now I knew exactly why I was staying at the house of the miller.  I was doing so in order that
I might go early in the mornings to my own home, in which the girl I loved lay dreaming, and
that for the rest of the day and much of the night I might think of her.

"What place in Europe," I said to myself, "could be so beautiful, so charming, and so helpful
to reflection as this sequestered lake, these noble trees, these stretches of undulating meadow?"

Even if I should care to go abroad, a month or two later would answer all my purposes.  Why
had I ever thought of spending five months away?

There was a pretty stream which ran from the lake and wended its way through a green and shaded
valley, and here, with a rod, I wandered and fished and thought.  The miller had boats, and
in one of these I rowed far up the lake where it narrowed into a creek, and between the high
hills which shut me out from the world I would float and think.

Every morning, soon after break of day, I went to my home and wandered about my grounds.  If
it rained I did not mind that.  I like a summer rain.

Day by day I grew bolder.  Nobody in that household thought of getting up until seven o'clock.
For two hours, at least, I could ramble undisturbed through my grounds, and much as I had once
enjoyed these grounds, they never afforded me the pleasure they gave me now.  In these happy
mornings I felt all the life and spirits of a boy.  I went into my little field and stroked
the sleek sides of my cows as they nibbled the dewy grass.  I even peeped through the barred
window of Sappho's box and fed her, as I had been used to doing, with bunches of clover.  I
saw that the young chickens were flourishing.  I went into the garden and noted the growth
of the vegetables, feeling glad that she would have so many fine strawberries and tender peas.

I had not the slightest doubt that she was fond of flowers, and for her sake now, as I used
to do for my own sake, I visited the flower beds and borders.  Not far from the house there
was a cluster of old-fashioned pinks which I was sure were not doing very well.  They had been
there too long, perhaps, and they looked stunted and weak.  In the miller's garden I had noticed
great beds of these pinks, and I asked his wife if I might have some, and she, considering
them as mere wild flowers, said I might have as many as I liked.  She might have thought I
wanted simply the blossoms, but the next morning I went over to my house with a basket filled
with great matted masses of the plants taken up with the roots and plenty of earth around them,
and after twenty minutes' work in my own bed of pinks, I had taken out all the old plants and
filled their places with fresh, luxuriant masses of buds and leaves and blossoms.  How glad
she would be when she saw the fresh life that had come to that flower-bed!  With light footsteps
I went away, not feeling the weight of the basket filled with the old plants and roots.

The summer grew and strengthened, and the sun rose earlier, but as that had no effect upon
the rising of the present inhabitants of my place, it gave me more time for my morning pursuits.
Gradually I constituted myself the regular flower-gardener of the premises.  How delightful
the work was, and how foolish I thought I had been never to think of doing this thing for myself!
but no doubt it was because I was doing it for her that I found it so pleasant.

Once again I had seen Miss Vincent.  It was in the afternoon, and I had rowed myself to the
upper part of the lake, where, with the high hills and the trees on each side of me, I felt
as if I were alone in the world.  Floating, idly along, with my thoughts about three miles
away, I heard the sound of oars, and looking out on the open part of the lake, I saw a boat
approaching.  The miller was rowing, and in the stern sat an elderly gentleman and a young
lady.  I knew them in an instant: they were Mr. and Miss Vincent.

With a few vigorous strokes I shot myself into the shadows, and rowed up the stream into the
narrow stretches among the lily-pads, under a bridge, and around a little wooded point, where
I ran the boat ashore and sprang upon the grassy bank.  Although I did not believe the miller
would bring them as far as this, I went up to a higher spot and watched for half an hour; but
I did not see them again.  How relieved I was! It would have been terribly embarrassing had
they discovered me.  And how disappointed I was that the miller turned back so soon!

I now extended the supervision of my grounds.  I walked through the woods, and saw how beautiful
they were in the early dawn.  I threw aside the fallen twigs and cut away encroaching saplings,
which were beginning to encumber the paths I had made, and if I found a bough which hung too
low I cut it off.  There was a great beech-tree, between which and a dogwood I had the year
before suspended a hammock.  In passing this, one morning, I was amazed to see a hammock swinging
from the hooks I had put in the two trees.  This was a retreat which I had supposed no one
else would fancy or even think of!  In the hammock was a fan--a common Japanese fan.  For fifteen
minutes I stood looking at that hammock, every nerve a-tingle.  Then I glanced around.  The
spot had been almost unfrequented since last summer.  Little bushes, weeds, and vines had sprung
up here and there between the two trees.  There were dead twigs and limbs lying about, and
the short path to the main walk was much overgrown.

I looked at my watch.  It was a quarter to six.  I had yet a good hour for work, and with nothing
but my pocket-knife and my hands I began to clear away the space about that hammock.  When
I left it, it looked as it used to look when it was my pleasure to lie there and swing and
read and reflect.

To approach this spot it was not necessary to go through my grounds, for my bit of woods adjoined
a considerable stretch of forest-land, and in my morning walks from the mill I often used a
path through these woods.  The next morning when I took this path I was late because I had
unfortunately overslept myself.  When I reached the hammock it wanted fifteen minutes to seven
o'clock.  It was too late for me to do anything, but I was glad to be able to stay there even
for a few minutes, to breathe that air, to stand on that ground, to touch that hammock.  I
did more than that.  Why shouldn't I?  I got into it.  It was a better one than that I had
hung there.  It was delightfully comfortable.  At this moment, gently swinging in that woodland
solitude, with the sweet odors of the morning all about me, I felt myself nearer to her than
I had ever been before.

But I knew I must not revel in this place too long.  I was on the point of rising to leave
when I heard approaching footsteps.  My breath stopped.  Was I at last to be discovered?  This
was what came of my reckless security.  But perhaps the person, some workman most likely, would
pass without noticing me.  To remain quiet seemed the best course, and I lay motionless.

But the person approaching turned into the little pathway.  The footsteps came nearer.  I sprang
from the hammock.  Before me was Miss Vincent!

What was my aspect I know not, but I have no doubt I turned fiery red. She stopped suddenly,
but she did not turn red.

"Oh, Mr. Ripley," she exclaimed, "good morning!  You must excuse me.  I did not know--"

That she should have had sufficient self-possession to say good morning amazed me.  Her whole
appearance, in fact, amazed me.  There seemed to be something wanting in her manner.  I endeavored
to get myself into condition.

"You must be surprised," I said, "to see me here.  You supposed I was in Europe, but--"

As I spoke I made a couple of steps toward her, but suddenly stopped. One of my coat buttons
had caught in the meshes of the hammock.  It was confoundedly awkward.  I tried to loosen the
button, but it was badly entangled.  Then I desperately pulled at it to tear it off.

"Oh, don't do that," she said.  "Let me unfasten it for you." And taking the threads of the
hammock in one of her little hands and the button in the other, she quickly separated them.
"I should think buttons would be very inconvenient things--at least, in hammocks," she said
smiling.  "You see, girls don't have any such trouble."

I could not understand her manner.  She seemed to take my being there as a matter of course.

"I must beg a thousand pardons for this--this trespass," I said.

"Trespass!" said she, with a smile.  "People don't trespass on their own land--"

"But it is not my land," said I.  "It is your father's for the time being.  I have no right
here whatever.  I do not know how to explain, but you must think it very strange to find me
here when you supposed I had started for Europe."

"Oh!  I knew you had not started for Europe," said she, "because I have seen you working in
the grounds--"

"Seen me!" I interrupted.  "Is it possible?"

"Oh, yes," said she.  "I don't know how long you had been coming when I first saw you, but
when I found that fresh bed of pinks all transplanted from somewhere, and just as lovely as
they could be, instead of the old ones, I spoke to the man; but he did not know anything about
it, and said he had not had time to do anything to the flowers, whereas I had been giving him
credit for ever so much weeding and cleaning up.  Then I supposed that Mr. Barker, who is just
as kind and attentive as he can be, had done it; but I could hardly believe he was the sort
of man to come early in the morning and work out of doors,"--("Oh, how I wish he had come!"
I thought.  "If I had caught him here working among the flowers!"),--"and when he came that
afternoon to play tennis I found that he had been away for two days, and could not have planted
the pinks.  So I simply got up early one morning and looked out, and there I saw you, with
your coat off, working just as hard as ever you could."

I stepped back, my mind for a moment a perfect blank.

"What could you have thought of me?" I exclaimed presently.

"Really, at first I did not know what to think," said she.  "Of course I did not know what
had detained you in this country, but I remembered that I had heard that you were a very particular
person about your flowers and shrubs and grounds, and that most likely you thought they would
be better taken care of if you kept an eye on them, and that when you found there was so much
to do you just went to work and did it.  I did not speak of this to anybody, because if you
did not wish it to be known that you were taking care of the grounds it was not my business
to tell people about it.  But yesterday, when I found this place where I had hung my hammock
so beautifully cleared up and made so nice and clean and pleasant in every way, I thought I
must come down to tell you how much obliged I am, and also that you ought not to take so much
trouble for us.  If you think the grounds need more attention, I will persuade my father to
hire another man, now and then, to work about the place.  Really, Mr. Ripley, you ought not
to have to--"

I was humbled, abashed.  She had seen me at my morning devotions, and this was the way she
interpreted them.  She considered me an overnice fellow who was so desperately afraid his place
would be injured that he came sneaking around every morning to see if any damage had been done
and to put things to rights.

She stood for a moment as if expecting me to speak, brushed a buzzing fly from her sleeve,
and then, looking at me with a gentle smile, she turned a little as if she were about to leave.

I could not let her go without telling her something.  Her present opinion of me must not rest
in her mind another minute.  And yet, what story could I devise?  How, indeed, could I devise
anything with which to deceive a girl who spoke and looked at me as this girl did?  I could
not do it.  I must rush away speechless and never see her again, or I must tell her all.  I
came a little nearer to her.

"Miss Vincent," said I, "you do not understand at all why I am here--why I have been here so
much--why I did not go to Europe.  The truth is, I could not leave.  I do not wish to be away;
I want to come here and live here always--"

"Oh, dear!" she interrupted, "of course it is natural that you should not want to tear yourself
away from your lovely home.  It would be very hard for us to go away now, especially for father
and me, for we have grown to love this place so much.  But if you want us to leave, I dare say--"

"I want you to leave!" I exclaimed.  "Never!  When I say that I want to live here myself, that
my heart will not let me go anywhere else, I mean that I want you to live here too--you, your
mother and father--that I want--"

 "Oh, that would be perfectly splendid!" she said.  "I have
ever so often thought that it was a shame that you should be deprived
of the pleasures you so much enjoy, which I see you can find here and
nowhere else. Paris is said to be in extreme fermentation, and we are in
some anxiety for our friend M. P, who was to go there from Montmorency
last week. I shall not close my letter till I have heard from him.

September
4.

I resume my pen after a sleepless night, and with an oppression of mind
not to be described. Paris is the scene of proscription and massacres.
The prisoners, the clergy, the noblesse, all that are supposed inimical
to public faction, or the objects of private revenge, are sacrificed
without mercy. We are here in the utmost terror and consternation--we
know not the end nor the extent of these horrors, and every one is
anxious for himself or his friends.

Our society consists mostly of females, and we do not venture out, but hover together like the
fowls of heaven, when warned by a vague yet instinctive dread of the approaching storm. We
tremble at the sound of voices in the street, and cry, with the agitation of Macbeth, "there's
knocking at the gate." I do not indeed envy, but I most sincerely regret, the peace and safety
of England.--I have no courage to add more, but will enclose a hasty
translation of the letter we received from M. P, by last night's post.

Humanity cannot comment upon it without shuddering.--Ever Yours, &c.

"Rue St. Honore, Sept. 2, 1792.

"In a moment like this, I should be easily excused a breach of promise in not writing; yet when I recollect
the apprehension which the kindness of my amiable friends will feel on my account, I determine,
even amidst the danger and desolation that surround me, to relieve
them.--Would to Heaven I had nothing more alarming to communicate
than my own situation!

I may indeed suffer by accident; but thousands of wretched victims
are at this moment marked for sacrifice, and are massacred with an
execrable imitation of rule and order: a ferocious and cruel multitude,
headed by chosen assassins, are attacking the prisons, forcing the
houses of the noblesse and priests, and, after a horrid mockery of
judicial condemnation, execute them on the spot.

The tocsin is rung, alarm guns are fired, the streets resound with
fearful shrieks, and an undefinable sensation of terror seizes on
one's heart.

I feel that I have committed an imprudence in venturing to Paris; but the barriers are now shut,
and I must abide the event. I know not to what these proscriptions tend, or if all who are
not their advocates are to be their victims; but an ungovernable
rage animates the people: many of them have papers in their hands
that seem to direct them to their objects, to whom they hurry in crouds
with an eager and savage fury.--I have just been obliged to quit my
pen.



It was a quarter of an hour later and we were still sitting together in the hammock.

"You may think," said she, "that, knowing what I did, it was very queer for me to come out
to you this morning, but I could not help it.  You were getting dreadfully careless, and were
staying so late and doing things which people would have been bound to notice, especially as
father is always talking about our enjoying the fresh hours of the morning, that I felt I could
not let you go on any longer.  And when it came to that fan business I saw plainly that you
must either immediately start for Europe or--"

"Or what?" I interrupted.

"Or go to my father and regularly engage yourself as a--"

I do not know whether she was going to say "gardener" or not, but it did not matter.  I stopped
her.

It was perhaps twenty minutes later, and we were standing together at the edge of the woods.
She wanted me to come to the house to take breakfast with them.

"Oh, I could not do that!" I said.  "They would be so surprised.  I should have so much to
explain before I could even begin to state my case."

"Well, then, explain," said she.  "You will find father on the front piazza.  He is always
there before breakfast, and there is plenty of time.  After all that has been said here, I
cannot go to breakfast and look commonplace while you run away."

"But suppose your father objects?" said I.

"Well, then you will have to go back and take breakfast with your miller," said she.

I never saw a family so little affected by surprises as those Vincents. When I appeared on
the front piazza the old gentleman did not jump.  He shook hands with me and asked me to sit
down, and when I told him everything he did not even ejaculate, but simply folded his hands
together and looked out over the railing.

"It seemed strange to Mrs. Vincent and myself," he said, "when we first noticed your extraordinary
attachment for our daughter, but, after all, it was natural enough."

"Noticed it!" I exclaimed.  "When did you do that?"

"Very soon," he said.  "When you and Cora were cataloguing the books at my house in town I
noticed it and spoke to Mrs. Vincent, but she said it was nothing new to her, for it was plain
enough on the day when we first met you here that you were letting the house to Cora, and that
she had not spoken of it to me because she was afraid I might think it wrong to accept the
favorable and unusual arrangements you were making with us if I suspected the reason for them.
We talked over the matter, but, of course, we could do nothing, because there was nothing to
do, and Mrs. Vincent was quite sure you would write to us from Europe.  But when my man Ambrose
told me he had seen some one working about the place in the very early morning, and that, as
it was a gentleman, he supposed it must be the landlord, for nobody else would be doing such
things, Mrs. Vincent and I looked out of the window the next day, and when we found it was
indeed you who were coming here every day, we felt that the matter was serious and were a good
deal troubled.  We found, however, that you were conducting affairs in a very honorable way,--that
you were not endeavoring to see Cora, and that you did not try to have any secret correspondence
with her,--and as we had no right to prevent you from coming on your grounds, we concluded
to remain quiet until you should take some step which we would be authorized to notice.  Later,
when Mr. Barker came and told me that you had not gone to Europe, and were living with a miller
not far from here--"

"Barker!" I cried.  "The scoundrel!"

"You are mistaken, sir," said Mr. Vincent.  "He spoke with the greatest kindness of you, and
said that as it was evident you had your own reasons for wishing to stay in the neighborhood,
and did not wish the fact to be known, he had spoken of it to no one but me, and he would not
have done this had he not thought it would prevent embarrassment in case we should meet."

Would that everlasting Barker ever cease meddling in my affairs?

"Do you suppose," I asked, "that he imagined the reason for my staying here?"

"I do not know," said the old gentleman, "but after the questions I put to him I have no doubt
he suspected it.  I made many inquiries of him regarding you, your family, habits, and disposition,
for this was a very vital matter to me, sir, and I am happy to inform you that he said nothing
of you that was not good, so I urged him to keep the matter to himself.  I determined, however,
that if you continued your morning visits I should take an early opportunity of accosting you
and asking an explanation."

"And you never mentioned anything of this to your daughter?" said I.

"Oh, no," he answered.  "We carefully kept everything from her."

"But, my dear sir," said I, rising, "you have given me no answer.  You have not told me whether
or not you will accept me as a son-in-law."

He smiled.  "Truly," he said, "I have not answered you; but the fact is, Mrs. Vincent and I
have considered the matter so long, and having come to the conclusion that if you made an honorable
and straightforward proposition, and if Cora were willing to accept you, we could see no reason
to object to--"

At this moment the front door opened and Cora appeared.

"Are you going to stay to breakfast?" she asked.  "Because, if you are, it is ready."

I stayed to breakfast.

I am now living in my own house, not in the two tower rooms, but in the whole mansion, of which
my former tenant, Cora, is now mistress supreme.  Mr. and Mrs. Vincent expect to spend the
next summer here and take care of the house while we are travelling.

Mr. Barker, an excellent fellow and a most thorough business man, still manages my affairs,
and there is nothing on the place that flourishes so vigorously as the bed of pinks which I
got from the miller's wife.

By the way, when I went back to my lodging on that eventful day, the miller's wife met me at
the door.

"I kept your breakfast waitin' for you for a good while," said she, "but as you didn't come,
I supposed you were takin' breakfast in your own house, and I cleared it away."

"Do you know who I am?" I exclaimed.

"Oh, yes, sir," she said.  "We did not at first, but when everybody began to talk about it
we couldn't help knowin' it."

"Everybody!" I gasped.  "And may I ask what you and everybody said about me?"

"I think it was the general opinion, sir," said she, "that you were suspicious of them tenants
of yours, and nobody wondered at it, for when city people gets into the country and on other
people's property, there's no trustin' them out of your sight for a minute."

I could not let the good woman hold this opinion of my tenants, and I briefly told her the
truth.  She looked at me with moist admiration in her eyes.

"I am glad to hear that, sir," said she.  "I like it very much.  But if I was you I wouldn't
be in a hurry to tell my husband and the people in the neighborhood about it.  They might be
a little disappointed at first, for they had a mighty high opinion of you when they thought
that you was layin' low here to keep an eye on them tenants of yours."

THE STAYING POWER OF SIR ROHAN

During the winter in which I reached my twenty fifth year I lived with my mother's brother,
Dr. Alfred Morris, in Warburton, a small country town, and I was there beginning the practice
of medicine.  I had been graduated in the spring, and my uncle earnestly advised me to come
to him and act as his assistant, which advice, considering the fact that he was an elderly
man, and that I might hope to succeed him in his excellent practice, was considered good advice
by myself and my family.

At this time I practised very little, but learned a great deal, for as I often accompanied
my uncle on his professional visits, I could not have taken a better postgraduate course.

I had an invitation to spend the Christmas of that year with the Collingwoods, who had opened
their country house, about twelve miles from Warburton, for the entertainment of a holiday
house party.  I had gladly accepted the invitation, and on the day before Christmas I went
to the livery stable in the village to hire a horse and sleigh for the trip.  At the stable
I met Uncle Beamish, who had also come to hire a conveyance.

"Uncle Beamish," as he was generally called in the village, although I am sure he had no nephews
or nieces in the place, was an elderly man who had retired from some business, I know not what,
and was apparently quite able to live upon whatever income he had.  He was a good man, rather
illiterate, but very shrewd.  Generous in good works, I do not think he was fond of giving
away money, but his services were at the call of all who needed them.

I liked Uncle Beamish very much, for he was not only a good story-teller, but he was willing
to listen to my stories, and when I found he wanted to hire a horse and sleigh to go to the
house of his married sister, with whom he intended to spend Christmas, and that his sister
lived on Upper Hill turnpike, on which road the Collingwood house was situated, I proposed
that we should hire a sleigh together.

"That will suit me," said Uncle Beamish.  "There couldn't have been a better fit if I had been
measured for it.  Less than half a mile after you turn into the turnpike, you pass my sister's
house.  Then you can drop me and go on to the Collingwoods', which I should say isn't more
than three miles further."

The arrangement was made, a horse and sleigh ordered, and early in the afternoon we started
from Warburton.

The sleighing was good, but the same could not be said of the horse. He was a big roan, powerful
and steady, but entirely too deliberate in action.  Uncle Beamish, however, was quite satisfied
with him.

"What you want when you are goin' to take a journey with a horse," said he, "is stayin' power.
Your fast trotter is all very well for a mile or two, but if I have got to go into the country
in winter, give me a horse like this."

I did not agree with him, but we jogged along quite pleasantly until the afternoon grew prematurely
dark and it began to snow.

"Now," said I, giving the roan a useless cut, "what we ought to have is a fast horse, so that
we may get there before there is a storm."

"No, doctor, you're wrong," said Uncle Beamish.  "What we want is a strong horse that will
take us there whether it storms or not, and we have got him.  And who cares for a little snow
that won't hurt nobody?"

I did not care for snow, and we turned up our collars and went as merrily as people can go
to the music of slowly jingling sleigh-bells.

The snow began to fall rapidly, and, what was worse, the wind blew directly in our faces, so
that sometimes my eyes were so plastered up with snowflakes that I could scarcely see how to
drive.  I never knew snow to fall with such violence.  The roadway in front of us, as far as
I could see it, was soon one unbroken stretch of white from fence to fence.

"This is the big storm of the season," said Uncle Beamish, "and it is a good thing we started
in time, for if the wind keeps blowin', this road will be pretty hard to travel in a couple
of hours."

In about half an hour the wind lulled a little and I could get a better view of our surroundings,
although I could not see very far through the swiftly descending snow.

"I was thinkin'," said Uncle Beamish, "that it might be a good idee, when we get to Crocker's
place, to stop a little, and let you warm your fingers and nose.  Crocker's is ruther more
than half-way to the pike."

"Oh, I do not want to stop anywhere," I replied quickly.  "I am all right."

Nothing was said for some time, and then Uncle Beamish remarked:

"I don't want to stop any more than you do, but it does seem strange that we ain't passed Crocker's
yit.  We could hardly miss his house, it is so close to the road.  This horse is slow, but
I tell you one thing, doctor, he's improvin'.  He is goin' better than he did.  That's the
way with this kind.  It takes them a good while to get warmed up, but they keep on gettin'
fresher instead of tireder."

The big roan was going better, but still we did not reach Crocker's, which disappointed Uncle
Beamish, who wanted to be assured that the greater part of his journey was over.

"We must have passed it," he said, "when the snow was so blindin'."

I did not wish to discourage him by saying that I did not think we had yet reached Crocker's,
but I believed I had a much better appreciation of our horse's slowness than he had.

Again the wind began to blow in our faces, and the snow fell faster, but the violence of the
storm seemed to encourage our horse, for his pace was now greatly increased.

"That's the sort of beast to have," exclaimed Uncle Beamish, spluttering as the snow blew in
his mouth.  "He is gettin' his spirits up just when they are most wanted.  We must have passed
Crocker's a good while ago, and it can't be long before we get to the pike.  And it's time
we was there, for it's darkenin'."

On and on we went, but still we did not reach the pike.  We had lost a great deal of time during
the first part of the journey, and although the horse was travelling so much better now, his
pace was below the average of good roadsters.

"When we get to the pike," said Uncle Beamish, "you can't miss it, for this road doesn't cross
it.  All you've got to do is to turn to the left, and in ten minutes you will see the lights
in my sister's house. And I'll tell you, doctor, if you would like to stop there for the night,
she'd be mighty glad to have you."

"Much obliged," replied I, "but I shall go on.  It's not late yet, and I can reach the Collingwoods'
in good time."

We now drove on in silence, our horse actually arching his neck as he thumped through the snow.
Drifts had begun to form across the road, but through these he bravely plunged.

"Stayin' power is what we want, doctor!" exclaimed Uncle Beamish. "Where would your fast trotter
be in drifts like these, I'd like to know?  We got the right horse when we got this one, but
I wish we had been goin' this fast all the time."

It grew darker and darker, but at last we saw, not far in front of us, a light.

"That beats me," said Uncle Beamish.  "I don't remember no other house so near the road.  It
can't be we ain't passed Crocker's yit!  If we ain't got no further than that, I'm in favor
of stoppin'.  I'm not afraid of a snow-storm, but I ain't a fool nuther, and if we haven't
got further than Crocker's it will be foolhardy to try to push on through the dark and these
big drifts, which will be gettin' bigger."

I did not give it up so easily.  I greatly wished to` reach my destination that night.  But
there were three wills in the party, and one of them belonged to the horse.  Before I had any
idea of such a thing, the animal made a sudden turn,--too sudden for safety,--passed through
a wide gateway, and after a few rapid bounds which, to my surprise, I could not restrain, he
stopped suddenly.

"Hello!" exclaimed Uncle Beamish, peering forward, "here's a barn door."  And he immediately
began to throw off the far robe that covered our knees.

"What are you going to do?" I asked.

"I'm goin' to open the barn door and let the horse go in," said he. "He seems to want to. 
I don't know whether this is Crocker's barn or not.  It don't look like it, but I may be mistaken.
Anyway, we will let the horse in, and then go to the house.  This ain't no night to be travellin'
any further, doctor, and that is the long and the short of it.  If the people here ain't Crockers,
I guess they are Christians!"

I had not much time to consider the situation, for while he had been speaking, Uncle Beamish
had waded through the snow, and finding the barn door unfastened, had slid it to one side.
Instantly the horse entered the dark barn, fortunately finding nothing in his way.

"Now," said Uncle Beamish, "if we can get somethin' to tie him with, so that he don't do no
mischief, we can leave him here and go up to the house."  I carried a pocket lantern, and quickly
lighted it.  "By George!" said Uncle Beamish, as I held up the lantern, "this ain't much of
a barn--it's no more than a wagon-house.  It ain't Crocker's--but no matter; we'll go up to
the house.  Here is a hitchin'-rope."

We fastened the horse, threw a robe over him, shut the barn door behind us, and slowly made
our way to the back of the house, in which there was a lighted window.  Mounting a little portico,
we reached a door, and were about to knock when it was opened for us.  A woman, plainly a servant,
stood in a kitchen, light and warm.

"Come right in," she said.  "I heard your bells.  Did you put your horse in the barn?"

"Yes," said Uncle Beamish, "and now we would like to see--"

"All right," interrupted the woman, moving toward an inner door.  "Just wait here for a minute.
I'm going up to tell her."

"I don't know this place," said Uncle Beamish, as we stood by the kitchen stove, "but I expect
it belongs to a widow woman."

"What makes you think that?" I asked.

"'Cause she said she was goin' to tell HER.  If there had been a man in the house, she would
have gone to tell HIM."

In a few moments the woman returned.

"She says you are to take off your wet things and then go into the sitting-room.  She'll be
down in a minute."

I looked at Uncle Beamish, thinking it was his right to make explanations, but, giving me a
little wink, he began to take off his overcoat.  It was plain to perceive that Uncle Beamish
desired to assume that a place of refuge would be offered us.

"It's an awful bad night," he said to the woman, as he sat down to take off his arctic overshoes.

"It's all that," said she.  "You may hang your coats over them chairs. It won't matter if they
do drip on this bare floor.  Now, then, come right into the sitting-room."

In spite of my disappointment, I was glad to be in a warm house, and hoped we might be able
to stay there.  I could hear the storm beating furiously against the window-panes behind the
drawn shades.  There was a stove in the sitting-room, and a large lamp.

"Sit down," said the woman.  "She will be here in a minute."

"It strikes me," said Uncle Beamish, when we were left alone, "that somebody is expected in
this house, most likely to spend Christmas, and that we are mistook for them, whoever they are."

"I have the same idea," I replied, "and we must explain as soon as possible."

"Of course we will do that," said he, "but I can tell you one thing: whoever is expected ain't
comin', for he can't get here.  But we've got to stay here tonight, no matter who comes or
doesn't come, and we've got to be keerful in speakin' to the woman of the house.  If she is
one kind of a person, we can offer to pay for lodgin's and horse-feed; but if she is another
kind, we must steer clear of mentionin' pay, for it will make her angry.  You had better leave
the explainin' business to me."

I was about to reply that I was more than willing to do so when the door opened and a person
entered--evidently the mistress of the house. She was tall and thin, past middle age, and plainly
dressed.  Her pale countenance wore a defiant look, and behind her spectacles blazed a pair
of dark eyes, which, after an instant's survey of her visitors, were fixed steadily upon me.
She made but a step into the room, and stood holding the door.  We both rose from our chairs.

"You can sit down again," she said sharply to me.  "I don't want you. Now, sir," she continued,
turning to Uncle Beamish, "please come with me."

Uncle Beamish gave a glance of surprise at me, but he immediately followed the old lady out
of the room, and the door was closed behind them.

For ten minutes, at least, I sat quietly waiting to see what would happen next--very much surprised
at the remark that had been made to me, and wondering at Uncle Beamish's protracted absence.
Suddenly he entered the room and closed the door.

"Here's a go!" said he, slapping his leg, but very gently.  "We're mistook the worst kind.
We're mistook for doctors." "That is only half a mistake," said I.  "What is the matter, and
what can I do?"

"Nothin'," said he, quickly,--"that is, nothin' your own self.  Just the minute she got me
outside that door she began pitchin' into you. `I suppose that's young Dr. Glover,' said she.
I told her it was, and then she went on to say, givin' me no chance to explain nothin', that
she didn't want to have anything to do with you; that she thought it was a shame to turn people's
houses into paupers' hospitals for the purpose of teachin' medical students; that she had heard
of you, and what she had heard she hadn't liked.  All this time she kept goin' upstairs, and
I follerin' her, and the fust thing I knowed she opened a door and went into a room, and I
went in after her, and there, in a bed, was a patient of some kind.  I was took back dreadful,
for the state of the case came to me like a flash.  Your uncle had been sent for, and I was
mistook for him.  Now, what to say was a puzzle to me, and I began to think pretty fast.  It
was an awkward business to have to explain things to that sharp-set old woman.  The fact is,
I didn't know how to begin, and was a good deal afraid, besides, but she didn't give me no
time for considerin'.  `I think it's her brain,' said she, `but perhaps you'll know better.
Catherine, uncover your head!'  And with that the patient turned over a little and uncovered
her head, which she had had the sheet over.  It was a young woman, and she gave me a good look,
but she didn't say nothin'.  Now I WAS in a state of mind."

"Of course you must have been," I answered.  "Why didn't you tell her that you were not a doctor,
but that I was.  It would have been easy enough to explain matters.  She might have thought
my uncle could not come and he had sent me, and that you had come along for company.  The patient
ought to be attended to without delay."

"She's got to be-attended to," said Uncle Beamish, "or else there will be a row and we'll have
to travel--storm or no storm.  But if you had heard what that old woman said about young doctors,
and you in particular, you would know that you wasn't goin' to have anything to do with this
case--at least, you wouldn't show in it.  But I've got no more time for talkin'.  I came down
here on business.  When the old lady said, `Catherine, hold out your hand!' and she held it
out, I had nothin' to do but step up and feel her pulse.  I know how to do that, for I have
done a lot of nussin' in my life.  And then it seemed nat'ral to ask her to put out her tongue,
and when she did it I gave a look at it and nodded my head.  `Do you think it is her brain?'
said the old woman, half whisperin'.  `Can't say anything about that yit,' said I.  `I must
go down-stairs and get the medicine-case.  The fust thing to do is to give her a draught, and
I will bring it up to her as soon as it is mixed.'  You have got a pocket medicine-case with
you, haven't you?"

"Oh, yes," said I.  "It is in my overcoat."

"I knowed it," said Uncle Beamish.  "An old doctor might go visitin' without his medicine-case,
but a young one would be sure to take it along, no matter where he was goin'.  Now you get
it, please, quick."

"My notion is," said he, when I returned from the kitchen with the case, "that you mix somethin'
that might soothe her a little, if she has got anything the matter with her brain, and which
won't hurt her if she hasn't.  And then, when I take it up to her, you tell me what symptoms
to look for.  I can do it--I have spent nights lookin' for symptoms.  Then, when I come down
and report, you might send her up somethin' that would keep her from gettin' any wuss till
the doctor can come in the mornin', for he ain't comin' here to-night."

"A very good plan," said I.  "Now, what can I give her?  What is the patient's age?"

"Oh, her age don't matter much," said Uncle Beamish, impatiently.  "She may be twenty, more
or less, and any mild stuff will do to begin with."

"I will give her some sweet spirits of nitre," said I, taking out a little vial.  "Will you
ask the servant for a glass of water and a teaspoon?"

"Now," said I, when I had quickly prepared the mixture, "she can have a teaspoonful of this,
and another in ten minutes, and then we will see whether we will go on with it or not."

"And what am I to look for?" said he.

"In the first place," said I, producing a clinical thermometer, "you must take her temperature.
You know how to do that?"

"Oh, yes," said he.  "I have done it hundreds of times.  She must hold it in her mouth five
minutes."

"Yes, and while you are waiting," I continued, "you must try to find out, in the first place,
if there are, or have been, any signs of delirium.  You might ask the old lady, and besides,
you may be able to judge for yourself."

"I can do that," said he.  "I have seen lots of it."

"Then, again," said I, "you must observe whether or not her pupils are dilated.  You might
also inquire whether there had been any partial paralysis or numbness in any part of the body.
These things must be looked for in brain trouble.  Then you can come down, ostensibly to prepare
another prescription, and when you have reported, I have no doubt I can give you something
which will modify, or I should say--"

"Hold her where she is till mornin'," said Uncle Beamish. "That's what you mean.  Be quick.
Give me that thermometer and the tumbler, and when I come down again, I reckon you can fit
her out with a prescription just as good as anybody."

He hurried away, and I sat down to consider.  I was full of ambition, full of enthusiasm for
the practice of my profession.  I would have been willing to pay largely for the privilege
of undertaking an important case by myself, in which it would depend upon me whether or not
I should call in a consulting brother.  So far, in the cases I had undertaken, a consulting
brother had always called himself in--that is, I had practised in hospitals or with my uncle.
Perhaps it might be found necessary, notwithstanding all that had been said against me, that
I should go up to take charge of this case.  I wished I had not forgotten to ask the old man
how he had found the tongue and pulse.

In less than a quarter of an hour Uncle Beamish returned.

"Well," said I, quickly, "what are the symptoms?"

"I'll give them to you," said he, taking his seat.  "I'm not in such a hurry now, because I
told the old woman I would like to wait a little and see how that fust medicine acted.  The
patient spoke to me this time.  When I took the thermometer out of her mouth she says, `You
are comin' up ag'in, doctor?' speakin' low and quickish, as if she wanted nobody but me to hear."

"But how about the symptoms?" said I, impatiently.

"Well," he answered, "in the fust place her temperature is ninety-eight and a half, and that's
about nat'ral, I take it."

"Yes," I said, "but you didn't tell me about her tongue and pulse."

"There wasn't nothin' remarkable about them," said he.

"All of which means," I remarked, "that there is no fever.  But that is not at all a necessary
accompaniment of brain derangements.  How about the dilatation of her pupils?"

"There isn't none," said Uncle Beamish; "they are ruther squinched up, if anything.  And as
to delirium, I couldn't see no signs of it, and when I asked the old lady about the numbness,
she said she didn't believe there had been any."

"No tendency to shiver, no disposition to stretch?"

"No," said the old man, "no chance for quinine."

"The trouble is," said I, standing before the stove and fixing my mind upon the case with earnest
intensity, "that there are so few symptoms in brain derangement.  If I could only get hold
of something tangible--"

"If I was you," interrupted Uncle Beamish, "I wouldn't try to get hold of nothin'.  I would
just give her somethin' to keep her where she is till mornin'.  If you can do that, I'll guarantee
that any good doctor can take her up and go on with her to-morrow."

Without noticing the implication contained in these remarks, I continued my consideration of
the case.

"If I could get a drop of her blood," said I.

"No, no!" exclaimed Uncle Beamish, "I'm not goin' to do anything of that sort.  What in the
name of common sense would you do with her blood?"

"I would examine it microscopically," I said.  "I might find out all I want to know."

Uncle Beamish did not sympathize with this method of diagnosis.

"If you did find out there was the wrong kind of germs, you couldn't do anything with them
to-night, and it would just worry you," said the old man.  "I believe that nature will get
along fust-rate without any help, at least till mornin'.  But you've got to give her some medicine--not
so much for her good as for our good.  If she's not treated we're bounced.  Can't you give
her somethin' that would do anybody good, no matter what's the matter with 'em?  If it was
the spring of the year I would say sarsaparilla.  If you could mix her up somethin' and put
into it some of them benevolent microbes the doctors talk about, it would be a good deed to
do to anybody."

"The benign bacilli," said I.  "Unfortunately I haven't any of them with me."

"And if you had," he remarked, "I'd be in favor of givin' 'em to the old woman.  I take it
they would do, her more good than anybody else. Come along now, doctor; it is about time for
me to go up-stairs and see how the other stuff acted--not on the patient, I don't mean, but
on the old woman.  The fact is, you know, it's her we're dosin'."

"Not at all," said I, speaking a little severely.  "I am trying to do my very best for the
patient, but I fear I cannot do it without seeing her.  Don't you think that if you told the
old lady how absolutely necessary--"

"Don't say anything more about that!" exclaimed Uncle Beamish.  "I hoped I wouldn't have to
mention it, but she told me ag'in that she would never have one of those unfledged medical
students, just out of the egg-shell, experimentin' on any of her family, and from what she
said about you in particular, I should say she considered you as a medical chick without even
down on you."

"What can she know of me?"  I asked indignantly.

"Give it up," said he.  "Can't guess it.  But that ain't the p'int. The p'int is, what are
you goin' to give her?  When I was young the doctors used to say, When you are in doubt, give
calomel--as if you were playin' trumps."

"Nonsense, nonsense," said I, my eyes earnestly fixed upon my open medical case.

"I suppose a mustard-plaster on the back of her neck--"

"Wouldn't do at all," I interrupted.  "Wait a minute, now--yes--I know what I will do: I will
give her sodium bromide--ten grains."

"`Which will hit if it's a deer and miss if it's a calf' as the hunter said?" inquired Uncle
Beamish.

"It will certainly not injure her," said I, "and I am quite sure it will be a positive advantage.
If there has been cerebral disturbance, which has subsided temporarily, it will assist her
to tide over the interim before its recurrence."

"All right," said Uncle Beamish, "give it to me, and I'll be off.  It's time I showed up ag'in."

He did not stay up-stairs very long this time.

"No symptoms yit, but the patient looked at me as if she wanted to say somethin'; but she didn't
git no chance, for the old lady set herself down as if she was planted in a garden-bed and
intended to stay there. But the patient took the medicine as mild as a lamb."

"That is very good," said I.  "It may be that she appreciates the seriousness of her ewe better
than we do."

"I should say she wants to git well," he replied.  "She looks like that sort of a person to
me.  The old woman said she thought we would have to stay awhile till the storm slackened,
and I said, yes, indeed, and there wasn't any chance of its slackenin' to-night; besides, I
wanted to see the patient before bedtime."

At this moment the door opened and the servant-woman came in.

"She says you are to have supper, and it will be ready in about half an hour.  One of you had
better go out and attend to your horse, for the man is not coming back to-night."

"I will go to the barn," said I, rising.  Uncle Beamish also rose and said he would go with me.

"I guess you can find some hay and oats," said the woman, as we were putting on our coats and
overshoes in the kitchen, "and here's a lantern.  We don't keep no horse now, but there's feed
left."

As we pushed through the deep snow into the barn, Uncle Beamish said:

"I've been tryin' my best to think where we are without askin' any questions, and I'm dead
beat.  I don't remember no such house as this on the road."

"Perhaps we got off the road," said I.

"That may be," said he, as we entered the barn.  "It's a straight road from Warburton to the
pike near my sister's house, but there's two other roads that branch off to the right and strike
the pike further off to the east.  Perhaps we got on one of them in all that darkness and perplexin'
whiteness, when it wasn't easy to see whether we were keepin' a straight road or not."

The horse neighed as we approached with a light.

"I would not be at all surprised," said I, "if this horse had once belonged here and that was
the reason why, as soon as he got a chance, he turned and made straight for his old home."

"That isn't unlikely," said Uncle Beamish, "and that's the reason we did not pass Crocker's.
But here we are, wherever it is, and here we've got to stay till mornin'."

We found hay and oats and a pump in the corner of the wagon-house, and having put the horse
in the stall and made him as comfortable as possible with some old blankets, we returned to
the house, bringing our valises with us.

Our supper was served in the sitting-room because there was a good fire there, and the servant
told us we would have to eat by ourselves, as "she" was not coming down.

"We'll excuse her," said Uncle Beamish, with an alacrity of expression that might have caused
suspicion.

We had a good supper, and were then shown a room on the first floor on the other side of the
hall, where the servant said we were to sleep.

We sat by the stove awhile, waiting for developments, but as Uncle Beamish's bedtime was rapidly
approaching, he sent word to the sick-chamber that he was coming up for his final visit.

This time he stayed up-stairs but a few minutes.

"She's fast asleep," said he, "and the old woman says she'll call me if I'm needed in the night,
and you'll have to jump up sharp and overhaul that medicine-case if that happens."

The next morning, and very early in the morning, I was awaked by Uncle Beamish, who stood at
my side.

"Look here," said he, "I've been outside.  It's stopped snowin' and it's clearin' off.  I've
been to the barn and I've fed the horse, and I tell you what I'm in favor of doin'.  There's
nobody up yit, and I don't want to stay here and make no explanations to that old woman.  I
don't fancy gittin' into rows on Christmas mornin'.  We've done all the good we can here, and
the best thing we can do now is to git away before anybody is up, and leave a note sayin' that
we've got to go on without losin' time, and that we will send another doctor as soon as possible.
My sister's doctor don't live fur away from her, and I know she will be willin' to send for
him.  Then our duty will be done, and what the old woman thinks of us won't make no, difference
to nobody."

"That plan suits me," said I, rising.  "I don't want to stay here, and as I am not to be allowed
to see the patient, there is no reason why I should stay.  What we have done will more than
pay for our supper and lodgings, so that our consciences are clear."

"But you must write a note," said Uncle Beamish.  "Got any paper?"

I tore a leaf from my note-book, and went to the window, where it was barely light enough for
me to see how to write.

"Make it short," said the old man.  "I'm awful fidgety to git off."

I made it very short, and then, valises in hand, we quietly took our way to the kitchen.

"How this floor does creak!" said Uncle Beamish.  "Git on your overcoat and shoes as quick
as you can, and we'll leave the note on this table."

I had just shaken myself into my overcoat when Uncle Beamish gave a subdued exclamation, and
quickly turning, I saw entering the kitchen a female figure in winter wraps and carrying a
hand-bag.

"By George!" whispered the old man, "it's the patient!"

The figure advanced directly toward me.

"Oh, Dr. Glover!" she whispered, "I am so glad to get down before you went away!"

I stared in amazement at the speaker, but even in the dim light I recognized her.  This was
the human being whose expected presence at the Collingwood mansion was taking me there to spend
Christmas.

"Kitty!" I exclaimed--"Miss Burroughs, I mean,--what is the meaning of this?"

"Don't ask me for any meanings now," she said.  "I want you and your uncle to take me to the
Collingwoods'.  I suppose you are on your way there, for they wrote you were coming.  And oh!
let us be quick, for I'm afraid Jane will come down, and she will be sure to wake up aunty.
I saw one of you go out to the barn, and knew you intended to leave, so I got ready just as
fast as I could.  But I must leave some word for aunty."

"I have written a note,"  said I. "But are you well enough to travel?"

"Just let me add a line to it," said she.  "I am as well as I ever was."

I gave her a pencil, and she hurriedly wrote something on the paper which I had left on the
kitchen table.  Then, quickly glancing around, she picked up a large carving-fork, and sticking
it through the paper into the soft wood of the table, she left it standing there.

"Now it won't blow away when we open the door," she whispered.  "Come on."

"You cannot go out to the barn," I said; "we will bring up the sleigh."

"Oh, no, no, no," she answered, "I must not wait here.  If I once get out of the house I shall
feel safe.  Of course I shall go anyway, but I don't want any quarrelling on this Christmas
morning."

"I'm with you there," said Uncle Beamish, approvingly.  "Doctor, we can take her to the barn
without her touching the snow.  Let her sit in this arm-chair, and we can carry her between
us.  She's no weight."

In half a minute the kitchen door was softly closed behind us, and we were carrying Miss Burroughs
to the barn.  My soul was in a wild tumult.  Dozens of questions were on my tongue, but I had
no chance to ask any of them.

Uncle Beamish and I returned to the porch for the valises, and then, closing the back door,
we rapidly began to make preparations for leaving.

"I suppose," said Uncle Beamish, as we went into the stable, leaving Miss Burroughs in the
wagon-house, "that this business is all right? You seem to know the young woman, and she is
of age to act for herself."

 "Whatever she wants to do," I answered, "is perfectly right.
You may trust to that.  I do not understand the matter any more than
you do, but I know she is expected at the Collingwoods', and wants to
go there."

"Very good," said Uncle Beamish.  "We'll git away fust and ask explanations afterwards."

"Dr. Glover," said Miss Burroughs, as we led the horse into the wagon-house, "don't put the
bells on him.  Stuff them gently under the seat--as softly as you can.  But how are we all
to go away?  I have been looking at that sleigh, and it is intended only for two."

"It's rather late to think of that, miss," said Uncle Beamish, "but there's one thing that's
certain.  We're both very polite to ladies, but neither of us is willin' to be left behind
on this trip.  But it's a good-sized sleigh, and we'll all pack in, well enough.  You and me
can sit on the seat, and the doctor can stand up in front of us and drive.  In old times it
was considered the right thing for the driver of the sleigh to stand up and do his drivin'."

The baggage was carefully stowed away, and, after a look around the dimly lighted wagon-house,
Miss Burroughs and Uncle Beamish got into the sleigh, and I tucked the big fur robe around them.

"I hate to make a journey before breakfast," said Uncle Beamish, as I was doing this, "especially
on Christmas mornin', but somehow or other there seems to be somethin' jolly about this business,
and we won't have to wait so long for breakfast, nuther.  It can't be far from my sister's,
and we'll all stop there and have breakfast.  Then you two can leave me and go on.  She'll
be as glad to see any friends of mine as if they were her own.  And she'll be pretty sure,
on a mornin' like this, to have buckwheat cakes and sausages."

Miss Burroughs looked at the old man with a puzzled air, but she asked him no questions.

"How are you going to keep yourself warm, Dr. Glover?" she said.

"Oh, this long ulster will be enough for me," I replied, "and as I shall stand up, I could
not use a robe, if we had another."

In fact, the thought of being with Miss Burroughs and the anticipation of a sleigh-ride alone
with her after we had left Uncle Beamish with his sister, had put me into such a glow that
I scarcely knew it was cold weather.

"You'd better be keerful, doctor," said Uncle Beamish.  "You don't want to git rheumatism in
your j'ints on this Christmas mornin'.  Here's this horse-blanket that we are settin' on. 
We don't need it, and you'd better wrap it round you, after you git in, to keep your legs warm."

"Oh, do!" said Miss Burroughs.  "It may look funny, but we will not meet anybody so early as this."

"All right!" said I, "and now we are ready to start."

I slid back the barn door and then led the horse outside.  Closing the door, and making as
little noise as possible in doing it, I got into the sleigh, finding plenty of room to stand
up in front of my companions.  Now I wrapped the horse-blanket about the lower part of my body,
and as I had no belt with which to secure it, Miss Burroughs kindly offered to fasten it round
my waist by means of a long pin which she took from her hat.  It is impossible to describe
the exhilaration that pervaded me as she performed this kindly office.  After thanking her
warmly, I took the reins and we started.

"It is so lucky," whispered Miss Burroughs, "that I happened to think about the bells.  We
don't make any noise at all."

This was true.  The slowly uplifted hoofs of the horse descended quietly into the soft snow,
and the sleigh-runners slipped along without a sound.

"Drive straight for the gate, doctor," whispered Uncle Beamish.  "It don't matter nothin' about
goin' over flower-beds and grass-plats in such weather."

I followed his advice, for no roadway could be seen.  But we had gone but a short distance
when the horse suddenly stopped.

"What's the matter?" asked Miss Burroughs, in a low voice.  "Is it too deep for him?"

"We're in a drift," said Uncle Beamish.  "But it's not too deep.  Make him go ahead, doctor."

I clicked gently and tapped the horse with the whip, but he did not move.

"What a dreadful thing," whispered Miss Burroughs, leaning forward, "for him to stop so near
the house!  Dr. Glover, what does this mean?" And, as she spoke, she half rose behind me. 
"Where did Sir Rohan come from?"

"Who's he?" asked Uncle Beamish, quickly.

"That horse," she answered.  "That's my aunt's horse.  She sold him a few days ago."

"By George!" ejaculated Uncle Beamish, unconsciously raising his voice a little.  "Wilson bought
him, and his bringin' us here is as plain as A B C.  And now he don't want to leave home."

"But he has got to do it," said I, jerking the horse's head to one side and giving him a cut
with the whip.

"Don't whip him," whispered Miss Burroughs; "it always makes him more stubborn.  How glad I
am I thought of the bells!  The only way to get him to go is to mollify him."

"But how is that to be done?" I asked anxiously.

"You must give him sugar and pat his neck.  If I had some sugar and could get out--"

"But you haven't it, and you can't git out," said Uncle Beamish.  "Try him again doctor!"

I jerked the reins impatiently.  "Go along!" said I.  But he did not go along.

"Haven't you got somethin' in your medicine-case you could mollify him with?" said Uncle Beamish.
"Somethin' sweet that he might like?"

For an instant I caught at this absurd suggestion, and my mind ran over the contents of my
little bottles.  If I had known his character, some sodium bromide in his morning feed might,
by this time, have mollified his obstinacy.

"If I could be free of this blanket," said I, fumbling at the pin behind me, "I would get out
and lead him into the road."

"You could not do it," said Miss Burroughs.  "You might pull his head off, but he wouldn't
move.  I have seen him tried."

At this moment a window-sash in the second story of the house was raised, and there, not thirty
feet from us, stood an elderly female, wrapped in a gray shawl, with piercing eyes shining
through great spectacles.

"You seem to be stuck," said she, sarcastically.  "You are worse stuck than the fork was in
my kitchen table."

We made no answer.  I do not know how Miss Burroughs looked or felt, or what was the appearance
of Uncle Beamish, but I know I must have been very red in the face.  I gave the horse a powerful
crack and shouted to him to go on.  There was no need for low speaking now.

"You needn't be cruel to dumb animals," said the old lady, "and you can't budge him.  He never
did like snow, especially in going away from home.  You cut a powerful queer figure, young
man, with that horse-blanket around you.  You don't look much like a practising physician."

"Miss Burroughs," I exclaimed, "please take that pin out of this blanket.  If I can get at
his head I know I can pull him around and make him go."

But she did not seem to hear me.  "Aunty," she cried, "it's a shame to stand there and make
fun of us.  We have got a perfect right to go away if we want to, and we ought not to be laughed
at."

The old lady paid no attention to this remark.

"And there's that false doctor," she said.  "I wonder how he feels just now."

"False doctor!" exclaimed Miss Burroughs.  "I don't understand."

"Young lady," said Uncle Beamish, "I'm no false doctor.  I intended to tell you all about it
as soon as I got a chance, but I haven't had one. And, old lady, I'd like you to know that
I don't say I'm a doctor, but I do say I'm a nuss, and a good nuss, and you can't deny it."

To this challenge the figure at the window made no answer.

"Catherine," said she, "I can't stand here and take cold, but I just want to know one thing:
Have you positively made up your mind to marry that young doctor in the horse-blanket?"

This question fell like a bomb-shell into the middle of the stationary sleigh.

I had never asked Kitty to marry me.  I loved her with all my heart and soul, and I hoped,
almost believed, that she loved me.  It had been my intention, when we should be left together
in the sleigh this morning, after dropping Uncle Beamish at his sister's house, to ask her
to marry me.

The old woman's question pierced me as if it had been a flash of lightning coming through the
frosty air of a winter morning.  I dropped the useless reins and turned.  Kitty's face was
ablaze.  She made a movement as if she was about to jump out of the sleigh and flee.

"Oh, Kitty!" said I, bending down toward her, "tell her yes!  I beg I entreat, I implore you
to tell her yes!  Oh, Kitty! if you don't say yes I shall never know another happy day."

For one moment Kitty looked up into my face, and then said she:

"It is my positive intention to marry him!"

With the agility of a youth, Uncle Beamish threw the robe from him and sprang out into the
deep snow.  Then, turning toward us, he took off his hat.

"By George!" said he, "you're a pair of trumps.  I never did see any human bein's step up to
the mark more prompt.  Madam," he cried, addressing the old lady, "you ought to be the proudest
woman in this county at seein' such a thing as this happen under your window of a Christmas
mornin'.  And now the best thing that you can do is to invite us all in to have breakfast."

"You'll have to come in," said she, "or else stay out there and freeze to death, for that horse
isn't going to take you away.  And if my niece really intends to marry the young man, and has
gone so far as to start to run away with him,--and with a false doctor,--of course I've got
no more to say about it, and you can come in and have breakfast."  And with that she shut down
the window.

"That's talkin'," said Uncle Beamish.  "Sit still, doctor, and I'll lead him around to the
back door.  I guess he'll move quick enough when you want him to turn back."

Without the slightest objection Sir Rohan permitted himself to be turned back and led up to
the kitchen porch.

"Now you two sparklin' angels get out," said Uncle Beamish, "and go in. I'll attend to the horse."

Jane, with a broad grin on her face, opened the kitchen door.

"Merry Christmas to you both!" said she.

"Merry Christmas!" we cried, and each of us shook her by the hand.

"Go in the sitting-room and get warm," said Jane.  "She'll be down pretty soon."

I do not know how long we were together in that sitting-room.  We had thousands of things to
say, and we said most of them.  Among other things, we managed to get in some explanations
of the occurrences of the previous night.  Kitty told her tale briefly.  She and her aunt,
to whom she was making a visit, and who wanted her to make her house her home, had had a quarrel
two days before.  Kitty was wild to go to the Collingwoods', and the old lady, who, for some
reason, hated the family, was determined she should not go.  But Kitty was immovable, and never
gave up until she found that her aunt had gone so far as to dispose of her horse, thus making
it impossible to travel in such weather, there being no public conveyances passing the house.
Kitty was an orphan, and had a guardian who would have come to her aid, but she could not write
to him in time, and, in utter despair, she went to bed.  She would not eat or drink, she would
not speak, and she covered up her head.

"After a day and a night," said Kitty, "aunty got dreadfully frightened and thought something
was the matter with my brain.  Her family are awfully anxious about their brains.  I knew she
had sent for the doctor and I was glad of it, for I thought he would help me.  I must say I
was surprised when I first saw that Mr. Beamish, for I thought he was Dr. Morris.  Now tell
me about your coming here."

"And so," she said, when I had finished, "you had no idea that you were prescribing for me!
Please do tell me what were those medicines you sent up to me and which I took like a truly
good girl."

"I didn't know it at the time," said I, "but I sent you sixty drops of the deepest, strongest
love in a glass of water, and ten grains of perfect adoration."

"Nonsense!" said Kitty, with a blush, and at that moment Uncle Beamish knocked at the door.

"I thought I'd just step in and tell you," said he, "that breakfast will be comin' along in
a minute.  I found they were goin' to have buckwheat cakes, anyway, and I prevailed on Jane
to put sausages in the bill of fare.  Merry Christmas to you both!  I would like to say more,
but here comes the old lady and Jane."

The breakfast was a strange meal, but a very happy one.  The old lady was very dignified. 
She made no allusion to Christmas or to what had happened, but talked to Uncle Beamish about
people in Warburton.

I have a practical mind, and, in spite of the present joy, I could not help feeling a little
anxiety about what was to be done when breakfast was over.  But just as we were about to rise
from the table we were all startled by a great jingle of sleigh-bells outside.  The old lady
arose and stopped to the window.

"There!" said she, turning toward us.  "Here's a pretty kettle of fish! There's a two-horse
sleigh outside, with a man driving, and a gentleman in the back seat who I am sure is Dr. Morris,
and he has come all the way on this bitter cold morning to see the patient I sent for him to
come to.  Now, who is going to tell him he has come on a fool's errand?"

"Fool's errand!" I cried.  "Every one of you wait in here and I'll go out and tell him."

When I dashed out of doors and stood by the side of my uncle's sleigh, he was truly an amazed man.

"I will get in, uncle," said I, "and if you will let John drive the horses slowly around the
yard, I will tell you how I happen to be here."

The story was a much longer one than I expected it to be, and John must have driven those horses
backward and forward for half an hour.

"Well," said my uncle, at last, "I never saw your Kitty, but I knew her father and her mother,
and I will go in and take a look at her.  If I like her, I will take you all on to the Collingwoods',
and drop Uncle Beamish at his sister's house."

"I'll tell you what it is, young doctor," said Uncle Beamish, at parting, "you ought to buy
that big roan horse.  He has been a regular guardian angel to us this Christmas."

"Oh, that would never do at all," cried Kitty.  "His patients would all die before he got there."

"That is, if they had anything the matter with them," added my uncle.

A PIECE OF RED CALICO

Before beginning the relation of the following incidents, I wish to state that I am a young
married man, doing business in a large city, in the suburbs of which I live.

"The floorwalker said you had," said I.

"We had it, but we're out of it now.  You'll get that goods at an upholsterers."

I went up-stairs.

"They told me they were up here," I said.

"Not these plain goods.  You'll find them downstairs at the back of the store, over on that side."

"Match it!" I cried.  I wish I had thought of Turkey red before."

"I wish from my heart you had!" said I.

THE CHRISTMAS WRECK

"Well, sir," said old Silas, as he gave a preliminary puff to the pipe he had just lighted,
and so satisfied himself that the draught was all right, "the wind's a-comin', an' so's Christmas.
But it's no use bein' in a hurry fur either of 'em, fur sometimes they come afore you want
'em, anyway."

Silas was sitting in the stern of a small sailing-boat which he owned, and in which he sometimes
took the Sandport visitors out for a sail, and at other times applied to its more legitimate
but less profitable use, that of fishing.  That afternoon he had taken young Mr. Nugent for
a brief excursion on that portion of the Atlantic Ocean which sends its breakers up on the
beach of Sandport. I don't. Coping with her own dicey health had been a major motivator for
Isabelle's interest in healing others. She will tell you more about it in the chapters to come.
Isabelle had been fending off cancer since its first blow up when she was 26 years old. I view
that 30 plus years of defeating Death as a great success rather than consider her ultimate defeat
as a failure.

Isabelle Moser was born in 1940 and died in 1996.

I think the greatest accomplishment of her 56 years was to meld virtually
all available knowledge about health and healing into a workable and
most importantly, a simple model that allowed her to have amazing
success.

Her "system" is simple enough that even a generally well-educated non-medico like me can grasp it.
  This is a good time to spin a yarn."

"Very well," said old Silas.  "I'll spin her."

The bare-legged boy whose duty it was to stay forward and mind the jib came aft as soon as
he smelt a story, and took a nautical position, which was duly studied by Mr. Nugent, on a
bag of ballast in the bottom of the boat.

"It's nigh on to fifteen year ago," said Silas, "that I was on the bark Mary Auguster, bound
for Sydney, New South Wales, with a cargo of canned goods.  We was somewhere about longitood
a hundred an' seventy, latitood nothin', an' it was the twenty-second o' December, when we
was ketched by a reg'lar typhoon which blew straight along, end on, fur a day an' a half. 
It blew away the storm-sails.  It blew away every yard, spar, shroud, an' every strand o' riggin',
an' snapped the masts off close to the deck.  It blew away all the boats.  It blew away the
cook's caboose, an' everythin' else on deck.  It blew off the hatches, an' sent 'em spinnin'
in the air about a mile to leeward.  An' afore it got through, it washed away the cap'n an'
all the crew 'cept me an' two others.  These was Tom Simmons, the second mate, an' Andy Boyle,
a chap from the Adirondack Mount'ins, who'd never been to sea afore.  As he was a landsman,
he ought, by rights, to 'a' been swep' off by the wind an' water, consid'rin' that the cap'n
an' sixteen good seamen had gone a'ready.  But he had hands eleven inches long, an' that give
him a grip which no typhoon could git the better of.  Andy had let out that his father was
a miller up there in York State, an' a story had got round among the crew that his granfather
an' great-gran'father was millers, too; an' the way the fam'ly got such big hands come from
their habit of scoopin' up a extry quart or two of meal or flour fur themselves when they was
levellin' off their customers' measures.  He was a good-natered feller, though, an' never got
riled when I'd tell him to clap his flour-scoops onter a halyard.

"We was all soaked, an' washed, an' beat, an' battered.  We held on some way or other till
the wind blowed itself out, an' then we got on our legs an' began to look about us to see how
things stood.  The sea had washed into the open hatches till the vessel was more'n half full
of water, an' that had sunk her, so deep that she must 'a' looked like a canal-boat loaded
with gravel.  We hadn't had a thing to eat or drink durin' that whole blow, an' we was pretty
ravenous.  We found a keg of water which was all right, and a box of biscuit which was what
you might call softtack, fur they was soaked through an' through with sea-water.  We eat a
lot of them so, fur we couldn't wait, an' the rest we spread on the deck to dry, fur the sun
was now shinin' hot enough to bake bread.  We couldn't go below much, fur there was a pretty
good swell on the sea, an' things was floatin' about so's to make it dangerous.  But we fished
out a piece of canvas, which we rigged up ag'in' the stump of the mainmast so that we could
have somethin' that we could sit down an' grumble under.  What struck us all the hardest was
that the bark was loaded with a whole cargo of jolly things to eat, which was just as good
as ever they was, fur the water couldn't git through the tin cans in which they was all put
up, an' here we was with nothin' to live on but them salted biscuit.  There wasn't no way of
gittin' at any of the ship's stores, or any of the fancy prog, fur everythin' was stowed away
tight under six or seven feet of water, an' pretty nigh all the room that was left between
decks was filled up with extry spars, lumber, boxes, an' other floatin' stuff.  All was shiftin',
an' bumpin', an' bangin' every time the vessel rolled.

"As I said afore, Tom was second mate, an' I was bo's'n.  Says I to Tom, `The thing we've got
to do is to put up some kind of a spar with a rag on it fur a distress flag, so that we'll
lose no time bein' took off.'  `There's no use a-slavin' at anythin' like that,' says Tom,
`fur we've been blowed off the track of traders, an' the more we work the hungrier we'll git,
an' the sooner will them biscuit be gone.'

"Now when I heared Tom say this I sot still an' began to consider. Bein' second mate, Tom was,
by rights, in command of this craft.  But it was easy enough to see that if he commanded there'd
never be nothin' fur Andy an' me to do.  All the grit he had in him he'd used up in holdin'
on durin' that typhoon.  What he wanted to do now was to make himself comfortable till the
time come for him to go to Davy Jones's locker--an' thinkin',  most likely, that Davy couldn't
make it any hotter fur him than it was on that deck, still in latitood nothin' at all, fur
we'd been blowed along the line pretty nigh due west.  So I calls to Andy, who was busy turnin'
over the biscuits on the deck. `Andy,' says I, when he had got under the canvas, `we's goin'
to have a 'lection fur skipper.  Tom, here, is about played out.  He's one candydate, an' I'm
another.  Now, who do you vote fur?  An' mind yer eye, youngster, that you don't make no mistake.'
`I vote fur you' says Andy.  `Carried unanermous!' says I.  `An' I want you to take notice
that I'm cap'n of what's left of the Mary Auguster, an' you two has got to keep your minds
on that, an' obey orders.'  If Davy Jones was to do all that Tom Simmons said when he heared
this, the old chap would be kept busier than he ever was yit.  But I let him growl his growl
out, knowin' he'd come round all right, fur there wasn't no help fur it, consid'rin' Andy an'
me was two to his one.  Pretty soon we all went to work, an' got up a spar from below, which
we rigged to the stump of the foremast, with Andy's shirt atop of it.

"Them sea-soaked, sun-dried biscuit was pretty mean prog, as you might think, but we eat so
many of 'em that afternoon, an' 'cordingly drank so much water, that I was obliged to put us
all on short rations the next day.  `This is the day afore Christmas,' says Andy Boyle, `an'
to-night will be Christmas eve, an' it's pretty tough fur us to be sittin' here with not even
so much hardtack as we want, an' all the time thinkin' that the hold of this ship is packed
full of the gayest kind of good things to eat.'  `Shut up about Christmas!' says Tom Simmons.
`Them two youngsters of mine, up in Bangor, is havin' their toes and noses pretty nigh froze,
I 'spect, but they'll hang up their stockin's all the same to-night, never thinkin' that their
dad's bein' cooked alive on a empty stomach.'  `Of course they wouldn't hang 'em up,' says
I, if they knowed what a fix you was in, but they don't know it, an' what's the use of grumblin'
at 'em fur bein' a little jolly?' `Well,' says Andy `they couldn't be more jollier than I'd
be if I could git at some of them fancy fixin's down in the hold.  I worked well on to a week
at 'Frisco puttin' in them boxes, an' the names of the things was on the outside of most of
'em; an' I tell you what it is, mates, it made my mouth water, even then, to read 'em, an'
I wasn't hungry, nuther, havin' plenty to eat three times a day.  There was roast beef, an'
roast mutton, an' duck, an' chicken, an' soup, an' peas, an' beans, an' termaters, an' plum-puddin',
an' mince-pie--'  `Shut up with your mince-pie!' sung out Tom Simmons.  `Isn't it enough to
have to gnaw on these salt chips, without hearin' about mince-pie?'  `An' more'n that' says
Andy, `there was canned peaches, an' pears, an' plums, an' cherries.'

"Now these things did sound so cool an' good to me on that br'ilin' deck that I couldn't stand
it, an' I leans over to Andy, an' I says: `Now look-a here; if you don't shut up talkin' about
them things what's stowed below, an' what we can't git at nohow, overboard you go!'  `That
would make you short-handed,' says Andy, with a grin.  `Which is more'n you could say,' says
I, `if you'd chuck Tom an' me over'--alludin' to his eleven-inch grip.  Andy didn't say no
more then, but after a while he comes to me, as I was lookin' round to see if anything was
in sight, an' says he, `I spose you ain't got nothin' to say ag'in' my divin' into the hold
just aft of the foremast, where there seems to be a bit of pretty clear water, an' see if I
can't git up somethin'?' `You kin do it, if you like,' says I, `but it's at your own risk.
You can't take out no insurance at this office.'  `All right, then,' says Andy; `an' if I git
stove in by floatin' boxes, you an' Tom'll have to eat the rest of them salt crackers.'  `Now,
boy,' says I,--an' he wasn't much more, bein' only nineteen year old,--`you'd better keep out
o' that hold.  You'll just git yourself smashed.  An' as to movin' any of them there heavy
boxes, which must be swelled up as tight as if they was part of the ship, you might as well
try to pull out one of the Mary Auguster's ribs.'  `I'll try it,' says Andy, `fur to-morrer
is Christmas, an' if I kin help it I ain't goin' to be floatin' atop of a Christmas dinner
without eatin' any on it.'  I let him go, fur he was a good swimmer an' diver, an' I did hope
he might root out somethin' or other, fur Christmas is about the worst day in the year fur
men to be starvin' on, an' that's what we was a-comin' to.

"Well, fur about two hours Andy swum, an' dove, an' come up blubberin', an' dodged all sorts
of floatin' an' pitchin' stuff, fur the swell was still on.  But he couldn't even be so much
as sartin that he'd found the canned vittles. ***

"London from above," says a Daily Mail correspondent, "is gloriously, tenderly, wistfully beautiful."
We rather gather that it is the lid of Carmelite House that gives it just that little note of
wistfulness.

***

"How to Prepare Marble Beef" is the subject of a contemporary's "Hints to Young Housekeepers,"
We had always supposed that that sort of thing could be safely left
to the butcher.

***

The demobilised members of a Herefordshire band
have all grown too big for their uniforms. The contra-bombardon man,
we understand, also complains that his instrument is too tight round
the chest.

***

"The one unselfish friend of man is the dog," said
Sir FREDERICK BANBURY, M.P. A less courageous man would certainly
have mentioned the PRESIDENT of the United States.

"So Andy he come up, so fagged out that it was as much as he could do to get his clothes on,
though they wasn't much, an' then he stretched himself out under the canvas an' went to sleep,
an' it wasn't long afore he was talkin' about roast turkey an' cranberry sass, an' punkin-pie,
an' sech stuff, most of which we knowed was under our feet that present minnit.  Tom Simmons
he just b'iled over, an' sung out: `Roll him out in the sun an' let him cook!  I can't stand
no more of this!'  But I wasn't goin' to have Andy treated no sech way as that, fur if it hadn't
been fur Tom Simmons' wife an' young uns, Andy'd been worth two of him to anybody who was consid'rin'
savin' life.  But I give the boy a good punch in the ribs to stop his dreamin', fur I was as
hungry as Tom was, an' couldn't stand no nonsense about Christmas dinners.

"It was a little arter noon when Andy woke up, an' he went outside to stretch himself.  In
about a minute he give a yell that made Tom an' me jump.  `A sail!' he hollered. `A sail!'
An' you may bet your life, young man, that 'twasn't more'n half a second afore us two had scuffled
out from under that canvas, an' was standin' by Andy.  `There she is!' he shouted, `not a mile
to win'ard.'  I give one look, an' then I sings out:  `'Tain't a sail!  It's a flag of distress!
Can't you see, you land-lubber, that that's the Stars and Stripes upside down?'  `Why, so it
is,' says Andy, with a couple of reefs in the joyfulness of his voice. An' Tom he began to
growl as if somebody had cheated him out of half a year's wages.

"The flag that we saw was on the hull of a steamer that had been driftin' down on us while
we was sittin' under our canvas.  It was plain to see she'd been caught in the typhoon, too,
fur there wasn't a mast or a smoke-stack on her.  But her hull was high enough out of the water
to catch what wind there was, while we was so low sunk that we didn't make no way at all. 
There was people aboard, and they saw us, an' waved their hats an' arms, an' Andy an' me waved
ours; but all we could do was to wait till they drifted nearer, fur we hadn't no boats to go
to 'em if we'd wanted to.

"`I'd like to know what good that old hulk is to us,' says Tom Simmons. `She can't take us
off.'  It did look to me somethin' like the blind leadin' the blind.  But Andy he sings out:
`We'd be better off aboard of her, fur she ain't water-logged, an', more'n that, I don't s'pose
her stores are all soaked up in salt water.'  There was some sense in that, an' when the steamer
had got to within half a mile of us, we was glad to see a boat put out from her with three
men in it.  It was a queer boat, very low an' flat, an' not like any ship's boat I ever see.
But the two fellers at the oars pulled stiddy, an' pretty soon the boat was 'longside of us,
an' the three men on our deck.  One of 'em was the first mate of the other wreck, an' when
he found out what was the matter with us, he spun his yarn, which was a longer one than ours.
His vessel was the Water Crescent, nine hundred tons, from 'Frisco to Melbourne, an' they had
sailed about six weeks afore we did.  They was about two weeks out when some of their machinery
broke down, an' when they got it patched up it broke ag'in, worse than afore, so that they
couldn't do nothin' with it.  They kep' along under sail for about a month, makin' mighty poor
headway till the typhoon struck 'em, an' that cleaned their decks off about as slick as it
did ours, but their hatches wasn't blowed off, an' they didn't ship no water wuth mentionin',
an' the crew havin' kep' below, none of 'em was lost.  But now they was clean out of provisions
an' water, havin' been short when the breakdown happened, fur they had sold all the stores
they could spare to a French brig in distress that they overhauled when about a week out. 
When they sighted us they felt pretty sure they'd git some provisions out of us.  But when
I told the mate what a fix we was in his jaw dropped till his face was as long as one of Andy's
hands. Howsomdever, he said he'd send the boat back fur as many men as it could bring over,
an' see if they couldn't git up some of our stores. Even if they was soaked with salt water,
they'd be better than nothin'. Part of the cargo of the Water Crescent was tools an' things
fur some railway contractors out in Australier, an' the mate told the men to bring over some
of them irons that might be used to fish out the stores.  All their ship's boats had been blowed
away, an' the one they had was a kind of shore boat for fresh water, that had been shipped
as part of the cargo, an' stowed below.  It couldn't stand no kind of a sea, but there wasn't
nothin' but a swell on, an' when it come back it had the cap'n in it, an' five men, besides
a lot of chains an' tools.

"Them fellers an' us worked pretty nigh the rest of the day, an' we got out a couple of bar'ls
of water, which was all right, havin' been tight bunged, an' a lot of sea-biscuit, all soaked
an sloppy, but we only got a half-bar'l of meat, though three or four of the men stripped an'
dove fur more'n an hour.  We cut up some of the meat an' eat it raw, an' the cap'n sent some
over to the other wreck, which had drifted past us to leeward, an' would have gone clean away
from us if the cap'n hadn't had a line got out an' made us fast to it while we was a-workin'
at the stores.

"That night the cap'n took us three, as well as the provisions we'd got out, on board his hull,
where the 'commodations was consid'able better than they was on the half-sunk Mary Auguster.
An' afore we turned in he took me aft an' had a talk with me as commandin' off'cer of my vessel.
`That wreck o' yourn,' says he, `has got a vallyble cargo in it, which isn't sp'iled by bein'
under water.  Now, if you could get that cargo into port it would put a lot of money in your
pocket, fur the owners couldn't git out of payin' you fur takin' charge of it an' havin' it
brung in.  Now I'll tell you what I'll do.  I'll lie by you, an' I've got carpenters aboard
that'll put your pumps in order, an' I'll set my men to work to pump out your vessel.  An'
then, when she's afloat all right, I'll go to work ag'in at my vessel--which I didn't s'pose
there was any use o' doin', but whilst I was huntin' round amongst our cargo to-day I found
that some of the machinery we carried might be worked up so's to take the place of what is
broke in our engine.  We've got a forge aboard, an' I believe we can make these pieces of machinery
fit, an' git goin' ag'in.  Then I'll tow you into Sydney, an' we'll divide the salvage money.
I won't git nothin' fur savin' my vessel, coz that's my business, but you wasn't cap'n o' yourn,
an' took charge of her a-purpose to save her, which is another thing.'

"I wasn't at all sure that I didn't take charge of the Mary Auguster to save myself an' not
the vessel, but I didn't mention that, an' asked the cap'n how he expected to live all this time.

"`Oh, we kin git at your stores easy enough,' says he, when the water's pumped out.'  `They'll
be mostly sp'iled,' says I.  `That don't matter' says he.  `Men'll eat anything when they can't
git nothin' else.'  An' with that he left me to think it over.

"I must say, young man, an' you kin b'lieve me if you know anything about sech things, that
the idee of a pile of money was mighty temptin' to a feller like me, who had a girl at home
ready to marry him, and who would like nothin' better'n to have a little house of his own,
an' a little vessel of his own, an' give up the other side of the world altogether.  But while
I was goin' over all this in my mind, an' wonderin' if the cap'n ever could git us into port,
along comes Andy Boyle, an' sits down beside me.  `It drives me pretty nigh crazy,' says he,
`to think that to-morrer's Christmas, an' we've got to feed on that sloppy stuff we fished
out of our stores, an' not much of it, nuther, while there's all that roast turkey an' plum-puddin'
an' mince-pie a-floatin' out there just afore our eyes, an' we can't have none of it.'  `You
hadn't oughter think so much about eatin', Andy,' says I,`but if I was talkin' about them things
I wouldn't leave out canned peaches.  By George!  On a hot Christmas like this is goin' to
be, I'd be the jolliest Jack on the ocean if I could git at that canned fruit.' `Well, there's
a way,' says Andy, `that we might git some of 'em.  A part of the cargo of this ship is stuff
far blastin' rocks--ca'tridges, 'lectric bat'ries, an' that sort of thing; an' there's a man
aboard who's goin' out to take charge of 'em.  I've been talkin' to this bat'ry man, an' I've
made up my mind it'll be easy enough to lower a little ca'tridge down among our cargo an' blow
out a part of it.' `What 'u'd be the good of it,' says I, `blowed into chips?'  `It might smash
some,' says he, `but others would be only loosened, an' they'd float up to the top, where we
could git 'em, specially them as was packed with pies, which must be pretty light.'  `Git out,
Andy,' says I, `with all that stuff!'  An' he got out.

"But the idees he'd put into my head didn't git out, an' as I laid on my back on the deck,
lookin' up at the stars, they sometimes seemed to put themselves into the shape of a little
house, with a little woman cookin' at the kitchin fire, an' a little schooner layin' at anchor
just off shore.  An' then ag'in they'd hump themselves up till they looked like a lot of new
tin cans with their tops off, an' all kinds of good things to eat inside, specially canned
peaches--the big white kind, soft an' cool, each one split in half, with a holler in the middle
filled with juice.  By George, sir! the very thought of a tin can like that made me beat my
heels ag'in the deck.  I'd been mighty hungry, an' had eat a lot of salt pork, wet an' raw,
an' now the very idee of it, even cooked, turned my stomach.  I looked up to the stars ag'in,
an' the little house an' the little schooner was clean gone, an' the whole sky was filled with
nothin' but bright new tin cans.

"In the mornin' Andy he come to me ag'in.  `Have you made up your mind,' says he, `about gittin'
some of them good things fur Christmas dinner?'  `Confound you!' says I, `you talk as if all
we had to do was to go an' git 'em.'  `An' that's what I b'lieve we kin do,' says he, `with
the help of that bat'ry man.' `Yes,' says I, `an' blow a lot of the cargo into flinders, an'
damage the Mary Auguster so's she couldn't never be took into port.'  An' then I told him what
the cap'n had said to me, an' what I was goin' to do with the money.  `A little ca'tridge,'
says Andy, `would do all we want, an' wouldn't hurt the vessel, nuther.  Besides that, I don't
b'lieve what this cap'n says about tinkerin' up his engine.  'Tain't likely he'll ever git
her runnin' ag'in, nor pump out the Mary Auguster, nuther.  If I was you I'd a durned sight
ruther have a Christmas dinner in hand than a house an' wife in the bush.'  `I ain't thinkin'
o' marryin' a girl in Australier,' says I.  An' Andy he grinned, an' said I wouldn't marry
nobody if I had to live on sp'iled vittles till I got her.

"A little arter that I went to the cap'n an' I told him about Andy's idee, but he was down
on it.  `It's your vessel, an' not mine,' says he, `an' if you want to try to git a dinner
out of her I'll not stand in your way.  But it's my 'pinion you'll just damage the ship, an'
do nothin'.'  Howsomdever, I talked to the bat'ry man about it, an' he thought it could be
done, an' not hurt the ship, nuther.  The men was all in favor of it, fur none of 'em had forgot
it was Christmas day. But Tom Simmons he was ag'in' it strong, fur he was thinkin' he'd git
some of the money if we got the Mary Auguster into port.  He was a selfish-minded man, was
Tom, but it was his nater, an' I s'pose he couldn't help it.

"Well, it wasn't long afore I began to feel pretty empty an' mean, an' if I'd wanted any of
the prog we got out the day afore, I couldn't have found much, fur the men had eat it up nearly
all in the night. In Canada of that era you didn't have to go to high school to enter university,
you only had to pass the written government entrance exams. At age 16, never having spent a
single day in high school, I passed the university entrance exams
with a grade of 97 percent.  There we lowered a small ca'tridge down the main
hatchway, an' let it rest down among the cargo.  Then we rowed back to the steamer, uncoilin'
the wire as we went.  The bat'ry man clumb up on deck, an' fixed his wire to a 'lectric machine,
which he'd got all ready afore we started.  Andy an' me didn't git out of the boat.  We had
too much sense fur that, with all them hungry fellers waitin' to jump in her.  But we just
pushed a little off, an' sot waitin', with our mouths awaterin', fur him to touch her off.
He seemed to be a long time about it, but at last he did it, an' that instant there was a bang
on board the Mary Auguster that made my heart jump.  Andy an' me pulled fur her like mad, the
others a-hollerin' arter us, an' we was on deck in no time.  The deck was all covered with
the water that had been throwed up.  But I tell you, sir, that we poked an' fished about, an'
Andy stripped an' went down an' swum all round, an' we couldn't find one floatin' box of canned
goods.  There was a lot of splinters, but where they come from we didn't know.  By this time
my dander was up, an' I just pitched around savage.  That little ca'tridge wasn't no good,
an' I didn't intend to stand any more foolin'.  We just rowed back to the other wreck, an'
I called to the ba'try man to come down, an' bring some bigger ca'tridges with him, fur if
we was goin' to do anything we might as well do it right.  So he got down with a package of
bigger ones, an' jumped into the boat.  The cap'n he called out to us to be keerful, an' Tom
Simmons leaned over the rail an' swored; but I didn't pay no 'tention to nuther of 'em, an'
we pulled away.

"When I got aboard the Mary Auguster, I says to the bat'ry man:  `We don't want no nonsense
this time, an' I want you to put in enough ca'tridges to heave up somethin' that'll do fur
a Christmas dinner.  I don't know how the cargo is stored, but you kin put one big ca'tridge
'midship, another for'ard, an' another aft, an' one or nuther of 'em oughter fetch up somethin'.'
Well, we got the three ca'tridges into place.  They was a good deal bigger than the one we
fust used, an' we j'ined 'em all to one wire, an' then we rowed back, carryin' the long wire
with us.  When we reached the steamer, me an' Andy was a-goin' to stay in the boat as we did
afore, but the cap'n sung out that he wouldn't allow the bat'ry to be touched off till we come
aboard. `Ther's got to be fair play,' says he.  `It's your vittles, but it's my side that's
doin' the work.  After we've blasted her this time you two can go in the boat an' see what
there is to git hold of, but two of my men must go along.'  So me an' Andy had to go on deck,
an' two big fellers was detailed to go with us in the little boat when the time come, an' then
the bat'ry man he teched her off.

"Well, sir, the pop that followed that tech was somethin' to remember. It shuck the water,
it shuck the air, an' it shuck the hull we was on. A reg'lar cloud of smoke an' flyin' bits
of things rose up out of the Mary Auguster; an' when that smoke cleared away, an' the water
was all b'ilin' with the splash of various-sized hunks that come rainin' down from the sky,
what was left of the Mary Auguster was sprinkled over the sea like a wooden carpet fur water-birds
to walk on.

"Some of the men sung out one thing, an' some another, an' I could hear Tom Simmons swear;
but Andy an' me said never a word, but scuttled down into the boat, follered close by the two
men who was to go with us. Then we rowed like devils fur the lot of stuff that was bobbin'
about on the water, out where the Mary Auguster had been.  In we went among the floatin' spars
and ship's timbers, I keepin' the things off with an oar, the two men rowin', an' Andy in the bow.

"Suddenly Andy give a yell, an' then he reached himself for'ard with sech a bounce that I thought
he'd go overboard.  But up he come in a minnit, his two 'leven-inch hands gripped round a box.
He sot down in the bottom of the boat with the box on his lap an' his eyes screwed on some
letters that was stamped on one end.  `Pidjin-pies!' he sings out. `'Tain't turkeys, nor 'tain't
cranberries but, by the Lord Harry, it's Christmas pies all the same!'  After that Andy didn't
do no more work, but sot holdin' that box as if it had been his fust baby.  But we kep' pushin'
on to see what else there was.  It's my 'pinion that the biggest part of that bark's cargo
was blowed into mince-meat, an' the most of the rest of it was so heavy that it sunk.  But
it wasn't all busted up, an' it didn't all sink.  There was a big piece of wreck with a lot
of boxes stove into the timbers, and some of these had in 'em beef ready b'iled an' packed
into cans, an' there was other kinds of meat, an' dif'rent sorts of vegetables, an' one box
of turtle soup.  I looked at every one of 'em as we took 'em in, an' when we got the little
boat pretty well loaded I wanted to still keep on searchin'; but the men they said that shore
boat 'u'd sink if we took in any more cargo, an' so we put back, I feelin' glummer'n I oughter
felt, fur I had begun to be afeared that canned fruit, sech as peaches, was heavy, an' li'ble
to sink.

"As soon as we had got our boxes aboard, four fresh men put out in the boat, an' after a while
they come back with another load.  An' I was mighty keerful to read the names on all the boxes.
Some was meat-pies, an' some was salmon, an' some was potted herrin's, an' some was lobsters.
But nary a thing could I see that ever had growed on a tree.

"Well, sir, there was three loads brought in altogether, an' the Christmas dinner we had on
the for'ard deck of that steamer's hull was about the jolliest one that was ever seen of a
hot day aboard of a wreck in the Pacific Ocean.  The cap'n kept good order, an' when all was
ready the tops was jerked off the boxes, and each man grabbed a can an' opened it with his
knife.  When he had cleaned it out, he tuk another without doin' much questionin' as to the
bill of fare.  Whether anybody got pidjin-pie 'cept Andy, I can't say, but the way we piled
in Delmoniker prog would 'a' made people open their eyes as was eatin' their Christmas dinners
on shore that day. I only know that I went blindly on, my face covered with my hands that I might
see nothing.

"Where are you going to?" asked a well-known voice. "I want you, my
boy."

I would have passed on, but Papa caught hold of me, and said
sternly:

"Come here, you impudent rascal.  But none of
us give our minds to stuff like this arter the glorious Christmas dinner that we'd quarried
out of the Mary Auguster.  Every man that wasn't on duty went below and turned in fur a snooze--all
'cept me, an' I didn't feel just altogether satisfied.  To be sure, I'd had an A1 dinner, an',
though a little mixed, I'd never eat a jollier one on any Christmas that I kin look back at.
But, fur all that, there was a hanker inside o' me.  I hadn't got all I'd laid out to git when
we teched off the Mary Auguster.  The day was blazin' hot, an' a lot of the things I'd eat
was pretty peppery.  `Now,' thinks I, `if there had been just one can o' peaches sech as I
seen shinin' in the stars last night!'  An' just then, as I was walkin' aft, all by myself,
I seed lodged on the stump of the mizzenmast a box with one corner druv down among the splinters.
It was half split open, an' I could see the tin cans shinin' through the crack.  I give one
jump at it, an' wrenched the side off.  On the top of the first can I seed was a picture of
a big white peach with green leaves.  That box had been blowed up so high that if it had come
down anywhere 'cept among them splinters it would 'a' smashed itself to flinders, or killed
somebody.  So fur as I know, it was the only thing that fell nigh us, an' by George, sir, I
got it!  When I had finished a can of 'em I hunted up Andy, an' then we went aft an' eat some
more. `Well,' says Andy, as we was a-eatin', `how d'ye feel now about blowin' up your wife,
an' your house, an' that little schooner you was goin' to own?'

"`Andy,' says I, `this is the joyfulest Christmas I've had yit, an' if I was to live till twenty
hundred I don't b'lieve I'd have no joyfuler, with things comin' in so pat; so don't you throw
no shadders.'

"`Shadders!' says Andy.  `That ain't me.  I leave that sort of thing fur Tom Simmons.'

"`Shadders is cool,' says I, `an' I kin go to sleep under all he throws.'

"Well, sir," continued old Silas, putting his hand on the tiller and turning his face seaward,
"if Tom Simmons had kept command of that wreck, we all would 'a' laid there an' waited an'
waited till some of us was starved, an' the others got nothin' fur it, fur the cap'n never
mended his engine, an' it wasn't more'n a week afore we was took off, an' then it was by a
sailin' vessel, which left the hull of the Water Crescent behind her, just as she would 'a'
had to leave the Mary Auguster if that jolly old Christmas wreck had been there.

"An' now, sir," said Silas, "d'ye see that stretch o' little ripples over yander, lookin' as
if it was a lot o' herrin' turnin' over to dry their sides?  Do you know what that is?  That's
the supper wind.  That means coffee, an' hot cakes, an' a bit of br'iled fish, an' pertaters,
an' p'r'aps, if the old woman feels in a partiklar good humor, some canned peaches--big white
uns, cut in half, with a holler place in the middle filled with cool, sweet juice."

MY WELL AND WHAT CAME OUT OF IT

Early in my married life I bought a small country estate which my wife and I looked upon as
a paradise.  After enjoying its delight for a little more than a year our souls were saddened
by the discovery that our Eden contained a serpent.  This was an insufficient water-supply.

It had been a rainy season when we first went there, and for a long time our cisterns gave
us full aqueous satisfaction, but early this year a drought had set in, and we were obliged
to be exceedingly careful of our water.

It was quite natural that the scarcity of water for domestic purposes should affect my wife
much more than it did me, and perceiving the discontent which was growing in her mind, I determined
to dig a well. The very next day I began to look for a well-digger.  Such an individual was
not easy to find, for in the region in which I lived wells had become unfashionable; but I
determined to persevere in my search, and in about a week I found a well-digger.

He was a man of somewhat rough exterior, but of an ingratiating turn of mind.  It was easy
to see that it was his earnest desire to serve me.

"And now, then," said he, when we had had a little conversation about terms, "the first thing
to do is to find out where there is water. Have you a peach-tree on the place?"  We walked
to such a tree, and he cut therefrom a forked twig.

"I thought," said I, "that divining-rods were always of hazel wood."

"A peach twig will do quite as well," said he, and I have since found that he was right.  Divining-rods
of peach will turn and find water quite as well as those of hazel or any other kind of wood.

He took an end of the twig in each hand, and, with the point projecting in front of him, he
slowly walked along over the grass in my little orchard.  Presently the point of the twig seemed
to bend itself downward toward the ground.

"There," said he, stopping, "you will find water here."

"I do not want a well here," said I.  "This is at the bottom of a hill, and my barn-yard is
at the top.  Besides, it is too far from the house."

"Very good," said he.  "We will try somewhere else."

His rod turned at several other places, but I had objections to all of them.  A sanitary engineer
had once visited me, and he had given me a great deal of advice about drainage, and I knew
what to avoid.

