"Clark, what in your honest opinion is the right standard for determining conduct? Is the only
right standard for every one, the probable action of Jesus Christ? Would you say that the highest,
best law for a man to live by was contained in asking the question, What would Jesus do?' And
then doing it regardless of results? In other words, do you think men everywhere ought to follow
Jesus' example as closely as they can in their daily lives?" Clark turned red, and moved uneasily
in his chair before he answered the editor's question.

"Why--yes--I suppose if you put it on the ground of what men ought to do there is no other
standard of conduct. But the question is, What is feasible? Is it possible to make it pay?
To succeed in the newspaper business we have got to conform to custom and the recognized methods
of society. We can't do as we would in an ideal world."

"Do you mean that we can't run the paper strictly on Christian principles and make it succeed?"

"Yes, that's just what I mean. It can't be done. We'll go bankrupt in thirty days."

Norman did not reply at once. He was very thoughtful.

"We shall have occasion to talk this over again, Clark. Meanwhile I think we ought to understand
each other frankly. I have pledged myself for a year to do everything connected with the paper
after answering the question, What would Jesus do?' as honestly as possible. I shall continue
to do this in the belief that not only can we succeed but that we can succeed better than we
ever did."

Clark rose. "The report does not go in?"

"It does not. There is plenty of good material to take its place, and you know what it is."

Clark hesitated. "Are you going to say anything about the absence of the report?"

"No, let the paper go to press as if there had been no such thing as a prize fight yesterday."

Clark walked out of the room to his own desk feeling as if the bottom had dropped out of everything.
He was astonished, bewildered, excited and considerably angered. His great respect for Norman
checked his rising indignation and disgust, but with it all was a feeling of growing wonder
at the sudden change of motive which had entered the office of the DAILY NEWS and threatened,
as he firmly believed, to destroy it.

Before noon every reporter, pressman and employee on the DAILY NEWS was informed of the remarkable
fact that the paper was going to press without a word in it about the famous prize fight of
Sunday. The reporters were simply astonished beyond measure at the announcement of the fact.
Every one in the stereotyping and composing rooms had something to say about the unheard of
omission. Two or three times during the day when Mr. Norman had occasion to visit the composing
rooms the men stopped their work or glanced around their cases looking at him curiously. He
knew that he was being observed, but said nothing and did not appear to note it.

There had been several minor changes in the paper, suggested by the editor, but nothing marked.
He was waiting and thinking deeply.

He felt as if he needed time and considerable opportunity for the exercise of his best judgment
in several matters before he answered his ever present question in the right way. It was not
because there were not a great many things in the life of the paper that were contrary to the
spirit of Christ that he did not act at once, but because he was yet honestly in doubt concerning
what action Jesus would take.

When the DAILY NEWS came out that evening it carried to its subscribers a distinct sensation.

The presence of the report of the prize fight could not have produced anything equal to the
effect of its omission. Hundreds of men in the hotels and stores down town, as well as regular
subscribers, eagerly opened the paper and searched it through for the account of the great
fight; not finding it, they rushed to the NEWS stands and bought other papers. Even the newsboys
had not a understood the fact of omission. One of them was calling out "DAILY NEWS! Full 'count
great prize fight 't Resort. NEWS, sir?"

A man on the corner of the avenue close by the NEWS office bought the paper, looked over its
front page hurriedly and then angrily called the boy back.

"Here, boy! What's the matter with your paper? There's no prize fight here! What do you mean
by selling old papers?"

"Old papers nuthin'!" replied the boy indignantly. "Dat's today's paper. What's de matter wid you?"

"But there is no account of the prize fight here! Look!"

The man handed back the paper and the boy glanced at k hurriedly. Then he whistled, while a
bewildered look crept over his face. Seeing another boy running by with papers he called out
"Say, Sam, le'me see your pile." A hasty examination revealed the remarkable fact that all
the copies of the NEWS were silent on the subject of the prize fight.

"Here, give me another paper!" shouted the customer; "one with the prize fight account."

He received it and walked off, while the two boys remained comparing notes and lost in wonder
at the result. "Sump'n slipped a cog in the Newsy, sure," said the first boy. But he couldn't
tell why, and ran over to the NEWS office to find out.

There were several other boys at the delivery room and they were all excited and disgusted.
The amount of slangy remonstrance hurled at the clerk back of the long counter would have driven
any one else to despair.

He was used to more or less of it all the time, and consequently hardened to it. Mr. Norman
was just coming downstairs on his way home, and he paused as he went by the door of the delivery
room and looked in.

"What's the matter here, George?" he asked the clerk as he noted the unusual confusion.

"The boys say they can't sell any copies of the NEWS tonight because the prize fight isn't
in it," replied George, looking curiously at the editor as so many of the employees had done
during the day. Mr. Norman hesitated a moment, then walked into the room and confronted the boys.

"How many papers are there here? Boys, count them out, and I'll buy them tonight."

There was a combined stare and a wild counting of papers on the part of the boys.

"Give them their money, George, and if any of the other boys come in with the same complaint
buy their unsold copies. Is that fair?" he asked the boys who were smitten into unusual silence
by the unheard of action on the part of the editor.

"Fair! Well, I should--But will you keep this up? Will dis be a continual performance for the
benefit of de fraternity?"

Mr. Norman smiled slightly but he did not think it was necessary to answer the question.

He walked out of the office and went home. On the way he could not avoid that constant query,
"Would Jesus have done it?" It was not so much with reference to this last transaction as to
the entire motive that had urged him on since he had made the promise.

The newsboys were necessarily sufferers through the action he had taken. Why should they lose
money by it? They were not to blame. He was a rich man and could afford to put a little brightness
into their lives if he chose to do it. He believed, as he went on his way home, that Jesus
would have done either what he did or something similar in order to be free from any possible
feeling of injustice.

Chapter Four

DURING the week he was in receipt of numerous letters commenting on the absence from the News
of the account of the prize fight. Two or three of these letters may be of interest.

Editor of the News:

Dear Sir--I have been thinking for some time of changing my paper. I want a journal that is
up to the times, progressive and enterprising, supplying the public demand at all points. The
recent freak of your paper in refusing to print the account of the famous contest at the Resort
has decided me finally to change my paper.

Please discontinue it.

Very truly yours,-------

Here followed the name of a business man who had been a subscriber for many years.

Edward Norman,

Editor of the Daily News, Raymond:

Dear Ed.--What is this sensation you have given the people of your burg? What new policy have
you taken up? Hope you don't intend to try the "Reform Business" through the avenue of the
press. It's dangerous to experiment much along that line. Take my advice and stick to the enterprising
modern methods you have made so successful for the News. The public wants prize fights and
such. Give it what it wants, and let some one else do the reforming business.

Yours,-------

Here followed the name of one of Norman's old friends, the editor of a daily in an adjoining town.

My Dear Mr. Norman:

I hasten to write you a note of appreciation for the evident carrying out of your promise.
It is a splendid beginning and no one feels the value of it more than I do. I know something
of what it will cost you, but not all. Your pastor,

HENRY MAXWELL.

One other letter which he opened immediately after reading this from Maxwell revealed to him
something of the loss to his business that possibly awaited him.

Mr. Edward Norman,

Editor of the Daily News:

Dear Sir--At the expiration of my advertising limit, you will do me the favor not to continue
it as you have done heretofore. I enclose check for payment in full and shall consider my account
with your paper closed after date.

Very truly yours,-------

Here followed the name of one of the largest dealers in tobacco in the city. He had been in
the habit of inserting a column of conspicuous advertising and paying for it a very large price.

Norman laid this letter down thoughtfully, and then after a moment he took up a copy of his
paper and looked through the advertising columns. There was no connection implied in the tobacco
merchant's letter between the omission of the prize fight and the withdrawal of the advertisement,
but he could not avoid putting the two together. In point of fact, he afterward learned that
the tobacco dealer withdrew his advertisement because he had heard that the editor of the NEWS
was about to enter upon some queer reform policy that would be certain to reduce its subscription
list.

But the letter directed Norman's attention to the advertising phase of his paper. He had not
considered this before.

As he glanced over the columns he could not escape the conviction that his Master could not
permit some of them in his paper.

What would He do with that other long advertisement of choice liquors and cigars? As a member
of a church and a respected citizen, he had incurred no special censure because the saloon
men advertised in his columns. No one thought anything about it. It was all legitimate business.
Why not? Raymond enjoyed a system of high license, and the saloon and the billiard hall and
the beer garden were a part of the city's Christian civilization. He was simply doing what
every other business man in Raymond did. And it was one of the best paying sources of revenue.
What would the paper do if it cut these out? Could it live? That was the question. But was
that the question after all? "What would Jesus do?" That was the question he was answering,
or trying to answer, this week. Would Jesus advertise whiskey and tobacco in his paper?

Edward Norman asked it honestly, and after a prayer for help and wisdom he asked Clark to come
into the office.

Clark came in, feeling that the paper was at a crisis, and prepared for almost anything after
his Monday morning experience. This was Thursday.

"Clark," said Norman, speaking slowly and carefully, "I have been looking at our advertising
columns and have decided to dispense with some of the matter as soon as the contracts run out.
I wish you would notify the advertising agent not to solicit or renew the ads that I have marked
here."

He handed the paper with the marked places over to Clark, who took it and looked over the columns
with a very serious air.

"This will mean a great loss to the NEWS. How long do you think you can keep this sort of thing
up?" Clark was astounded at the editor's action and could not understand it.

"Clark, do you think if Jesus was the editor and proprietor of a daily paper in Raymond He
would permit advertisements of whiskey and tobacco in it?"

"Well no--I--don't suppose He would. But what has that to do with us? We can't do as He would.
Newspapers can't be run on any such basis."

"Why not?" asked Norman quietly.

"Why not? Because they will lose more money than they make, that's all!" Clark spoke out with
an irritation that he really felt. "We shall certainly bankrupt the paper with this sort of
business policy."

"Do you think so?" Norman asked the question not as if he expected an answer, but simply as
if he were talking with himself. After a pause he said:

"You may direct Marks to do as I have said. I believe it is what Christ would do, and as I
told you, Clark, that is what I have promised to try to do for a year, regardless of what the
results may be to me. I cannot believe that by any kind of reasoning we could reach a conclusion
justifying our Lord in the advertisement, in this age, of whiskey and tobacco in a newspaper.
There are some other advertisements of a doubtful character I shall study into. Meanwhile,
I feel a conviction in regard to these that cannot be silenced."

Clark went back to his desk feeling as if he had been in the presence of a very peculiar person.
He could not grasp the meaning of it all. He felt enraged and alarmed. He was sure any such
policy would ruin the paper as soon as it became generally known that the editor was trying
to do everything by such an absurd moral standard. What would become of business if this standard
was adopted? It would upset every custom and introduce endless confusion. It was simply foolishness.
It was downright idiocy. So Clark said to himself, and when Marks was informed of the action
he seconded the managing editor with some very forcible ejaculations. What was the matter with
the chief? Was he insane? Was he going to bankrupt the whole business?

But Edward Norman had not yet faced his most serious problem. When he came down to the office
Friday morning he was confronted with the usual program for the Sunday morning edition. The
NEWS was one one of the few evening papers in Raymond to issue a Sunday edition, and it had
always been remarkably successful financially. There was an average of one page of literary
and religious items to thirty or forty pages of sport, theatre, gossip, fashion, society and
political material. This made a very interesting magazine of all sorts of reading matter, and
had always been welcomed by all the subscribers, church members and all, as a Sunday morning
necessity. Edward Norman now faced this fact and put to himself the question: "What would Jesus
do?" If He was editor of a paper, would he deliberately plan to put into the homes of all the
church people and Christians of Raymond such a collection of reading matter on the one day
in the week which ought to be given up to something better holier? He was of course familiar
with the regular arguments of the Sunday paper, that the public needed something of the sort;
and the working man especially, who would not go to church any way, ought to have something
entertaining and instructive on Sunday, his only day of rest. But suppose the Sunday morning
paper did not pay? Suppose there was no money in it? How eager would the editor or publisher
be then to supply this crying need of the poor workman? Edward Norman communed honestly with
himself over the subject.

Taking everything into account, would Jesus probably edit a Sunday morning paper? No matter
whether it paid. That was not the question. As a matter of fact, the Sunday NEWS paid so well
that it would be a direct loss of thousands of dollars to discontinue it. Besides, the regular
subscribers had paid for a seven-day paper. Had he any right now to give them less than they
supposed they had paid for?

He was honestly perplexed by the question. So much was involved in the discontinuance of the
Sunday edition that for the first time he almost decided to refuse to be guided by the standard
of Jesus' probable action. He was sole proprietor of the paper; it was his to shape as he chose.
He had no board of directors to consult as to policy. But as he sat there surrounded by the
usual quantity of material for the Sunday edition he reached some definite conclusions. And
among them was a determination to call in the force of the paper and frankly state his motive
and purpose. He sent word for Clark and the other men it the office, including the few reporters
who were in the building and the foreman, with what men were in the composing room (it was
early in the morning and they were not all in) to come into the mailing room. This was a large
room, and the men came in curiously and perched around on the tables and counters. It was a
very unusual proceeding, but they all agreed that the paper was being run on new principles
anyhow, and they all watched Mr. Norman carefully as he spoke.

"I called you in here to let you know my further plans for the NEWS. I propose certain changes
which I believe are necessary. I understand very well that some things I have already done
are regarded by the men as very strange. I wish to state my motive in doing what I have done."

Here he told the men what he had already told Clark, and they stared as Clark had done, and
looked as painfully conscious.

"Now, in acting on this standard of conduct I have reached a conclusion which will, no doubt,
cause some surprise.

"I have decided that the Sunday morning edition of the NEWS shall be discontinued after next
Sunday's issue. I shall state in that issue my reasons for discontinuing. In order to make
up to the subscribers the amount of reading matter they may suppose themselves entitled to,
we can issue a double number on Saturday, as is done by many evening papers that make no attempt
at a Sunday edition. I am convinced that from a Christian point of view more harm than good
has been done by our Sunday morning paper. I do not believe that Jesus would be responsible
for it if He were in my place today. It will occasion some trouble to arrange the details caused
by this change with the advertisers and subscribers. That is for me to look after. The change
itself is one that will take place. So far as I can see, the loss will fall on myself. Neither
the reporters nor the pressmen need make any particular changes in their plans."

He looked around the room and no one spoke. He was struck for the first time in his life with
the fact that in all the years of his newspaper life he had never had the force of the paper
together in this way. Would Jesus do that? That is, would He probably run a newspaper on some
loving family plan, where editors, reporters, pressmen and all meet to discuss and devise and
plan for the making of a paper that should have in view--

He caught himself drawing almost away from the facts of typographical unions and office rules
and reporters' enterprise and all the cold, businesslike methods that make a great daily successful.
But still the vague picture that came up in the mailing room would not fade away when he had
gone into his office and the men had gone back to their places with wonder in their looks and
questions of all sorts on their tongues as they talked over the editor's remarkable actions.

Clark came in and had a long, serious talk with his chief. He was thoroughly roused, and his
protest almost reached the point of resigning his place. Norman guarded himself carefully.
Every minute of the interview was painful to him, but he felt more than ever the necessity
of doing the Christ-like thing. Clark was a very valuable man. It would be difficult to fill
his place. But he was not able to give any reasons for continuing the Sunday paper that answered
the question, "What would Jesus do?" by letting Jesus print that edition.

"It comes to this, then," said Clark frankly, "you will bankrupt the paper in thirty days.
We might as well face that future fact."

"I don't think we shall. Will you stay by the NEWS until it is bankrupt?" asked Norman with
a strange smile.

"Mr. Norman, I don't understand you. You are not the same man this week that I always knew before."

"I don't know myself either, Clark. Something remarkable has caught me up and borne me on.
But I was never more convinced of final success and power for the paper. You have not answered
my question. Will you stay with me?"

Chapter Five

SUNDAY morning dawned again on Raymond, and Henry Maxwell's church was again crowded. Before
the service began Edward Norman attracted great attention. He sat quietly in his usual place
about three seats from the pulpit. The Sunday morning issue of the NEWS containing the statement
of its discontinuance had been expressed in such remarkable language that every reader was
struck by it. No such series of distinct sensations had ever disturbed the usual business custom
of Raymond. The events connected with the NEWS were not all. People were eagerly talking about
strange things done during the week by Alexander Powers at the railroad shops, and Milton Wright
in his stores on the avenue. The service progressed upon a distinct wave of excitement in the
pews. Henry Maxwell faced it all with a calmness which indicated a strength and purpose more
than usual. His prayers were very helpful. His sermon was not so easy to describe. How would
a minister be apt to preach to his people if he came before them after an entire week of eager
asking, "How would Jesus preach? What would He probably say?" It is very certain that he did
not preach as he had done two Sundays before. Tuesday of the past week he had stood by the
grave of the dead stranger and said the words, "Earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust,"
and still he was moved by the spirit of a deeper impulse than he could measure as he thought
of his people and yearned for the Christ message when he should be in his pulpit again.

Now that Sunday had come and the people were there to hear, what would the Master tell them?
He agonized over his preparation for them, and yet he knew he had not been able to fit his
message into his ideal of the Christ. Nevertheless no one in the First Church could remember
ever hearing such a sermon before. There was in it rebuke for sin, especially hypocrisy, there
was definite rebuke of the greed of wealth and the selfishness of fashion, two things that
First Church never heard rebuked this way before, and there was a love of his people that gathered
new force as the sermon went on. When it was finished there were those who were saying in their
hearts, "The Spirit moved that sermon." And they were right.

Then Rachel Winslow rose to sing, this time after the sermon, by Mr. Maxwell's request. Rachel's
singing did not provoke applause this time. What deeper feeling carried the people's hearts
into a reverent silence and tenderness of thought? Rachel was beautiful. But her consciousness
of her remarkable loveliness had always marred her singing with those who had the deepest spiritual
feeling. It had also marred her rendering of certain kinds of music with herself. Today this
was all gone. There was no lack of power in her grand voice. But there was an actual added
element of humility and purity which the audience distinctly felt and bowed to.

Before service closed Mr. Maxwell asked those who had remained the week before to stay again
for a few moments of consultation, and any others who were willing to make the pledge taken
at that time. When he was at liberty he went into the lecture-room. To his astonishment it
was almost filled. This time a large proportion of young people had come, but among them were
a few business men and officers of the church.

As before, he, Maxwell, asked them to pray with him. And, as before, a distinct answer came
from the presence of the divine Spirit. There was no doubt in the minds of any present that
what they purposed to do was so clearly in line with the divine will, that a blessing rested
upon it in a very special manner.

They remained some time to ask questions and consult together. There was a feeling of fellowship
such as they had never known in their church membership. Mr. Norman's action was well understood
by them all, and he answered several questions.

"What will be the probable result of your discontinuance of the Sunday paper?" asked Alexander
Powers, who sat next to him.

"I don't know yet. I presume it will result in the falling off of subscriptions and advertisements.
I anticipate that."

"Do you have any doubts about your action. I mean, do you regret it, or fear it is not what
Jesus would do?" asked Mr. Maxwell.

"Not in the least. But I would like to ask, for my own satisfaction, if any of you here think
Jesus would issue a Sunday morning paper?"

No one spoke for a minute. Then Jasper Chase said, "We seem to think alike on that, but I have
been puzzled several times during the week to know just what He would do. It is not always
an easy question to answer."

"I find that trouble," said Virginia Page. She sat by Rachel Winslow. Every one who knew Virginia
Page was wondering how she would succeed in keeping her promise. "I think perhaps I find it
specially difficult to answer that question on account of my money. Our Lord never owned any
property, and there is nothing in His example to guide me in the use of mine. I am studying
and praying. I think I see clearly a part of what He would do, but not all. What would He do
with a million dollars? is my question really. I confess I am not yet able to answer it to
my satisfaction.

"I could tell you what you could do with a part of it," said Rachel, turning her face toward
Virginia. "That does not trouble me," replied Virginia with a slight smile. "What I am trying
to discover is a principle that will enable me to come to the nearest possible to His action
as it ought to influence the entire course of my life so far as my wealth and its use are concerned."

"That will take time," said the minister slowly. All the rest of the room were thinking hard
of the same thing. Milton Wright told something of his experience. He was gradually working
out a plan for his business relations with his employees, and it was opening up a new world
to him and to them. A few of the young men told of special attempts to answer the question.
There was almost general consent over the fact that the application of the Christ spirit and
practice to the everyday life was the serious thing. It required a knowledge of Him and an
insight into His motives that most of them did not yet possess.

When they finally adjourned after a silent prayer that marked with growing power the Divine
Presence, they went away discussing earnestly their difficulties and seeking light from one
another.

Rachel Winslow and Virginia Page went out together. Edward Norman and Milton Wright became
so interested in their mutual conference that they walked on past Norman's house and came back
together. Jasper Chase and the president of the Endeavor Society stood talking earnestly in
one corner of the room. Alexander Powers and Henry Maxwell remained, even after the others
had gone.

"I want you to come down to the shops tomorrow and see my plan and talk to the men. Somehow
I feel as if you could get nearer to them than any one else just now."

"I don't know about that, but I will come," replied Mr. Maxwell a little sadly. How was he
fitted to stand before two or three hundred working men and give them a message? Yet in the
moment of his weakness, as he asked the question, he rebuked himself for it. What would Jesus
do? That was an end to the discussion.

He went down the next day and found Mr. Powers in his office. It lacked a few minutes of twelve
and the superintendent said, "Come upstairs, and I'll show you what I've been trying to do."

They went through the machine shop, climbed a long flight of stairs and entered a very large,
empty room. It had once been used by the company for a store room.

"Since making that promise a week ago I have had a good many things to think of," said the
superintendent, "and among them is this: The company gives me the use of this room, and I am
going to fit it up with tables and a coffee plant in the corner there where those steam pipes
are. My plan is to provide a good place where the men can come up and eat their noon lunch,
and give them, two or three times a week, the privilege of a fifteen minutes' talk on some
subject that will be a real help to them in their lives."

Maxwell looked surprised and asked if the men would come for any such purpose.

"Yes, they'll come. After all, I know the men pretty well. They are among the most intelligent
working men in the country today. But they are, as a whole, entirely removed from church influence.
I asked, 'What would Jesus do?' and among other things it seemed to me He would begin to act
in some way to add to the lives of these men more physical and spiritual comfort. It is a very
little thing, this room and what it represents, but I acted on the first impulse, to do the
first thing that appealed to my good sense, and I want to work out this idea. I want you to
speak to the men when they come up at noon. I have asked them to come up and see the place
and I'll tell them something about it."

Maxwell was ashamed to say how uneasy he felt at being asked to speak a few words to a company
of working men. How could he speak without notes, or to such a crowd? He was honestly in a
condition of genuine fright over the prospect. He actually felt afraid of facing those men.
He shrank from the ordeal of confronting such a crowd, so different from the Sunday audiences
he was familiar with.

There were a dozen rude benches and tables in the room, and when the noon whistle sounded the
men poured upstairs from the machine shops below and, seating themselves at the tables, began
to cat their lunch. There were present about three hundred of them. They had read the superintendent's
notice which he had posted up in various places, and came largely out of curiosity.

They were favorably impressed. The room was large and airy, free from smoke and dust, and well
warmed from the steam pipes. At about twenty minutes to one Mr. Powers told the men what he
had in mind. He spoke very simply, like one who understands thoroughly the character of his
audience, and then introduced the Rev. Henry Maxwell of the First Church, his pastor, who had
consented to speak a few minutes.

