 And again the question as to whether he was mad or those
who considered they were in their right minds while they committed all these deeds stood before
him with renewed force and demanded an answer.

Tired of pacing up and down, tired of thinking, he sat down on the sofa near the lamp and mechanically
opened the Testament which the Englishman had given him as a remembrance, and which he had
thrown on the table when he emptied his pockets on coming in.

"It is said one can find an answer to everything here," he thought, and opened the Testament
at random and began reading Matt. xviii.

"Yes, yes, that is true," he said, remembering that he had known the peace and joy of life
only when he had humbled himself. (Matt. xviii. 5, 6.)

"What is this for, 'Whosoever shall receive?' Receive where? And what does 'in my name' mean?"
he asked, feeling that these words did not tell him anything. "And why 'the millstone round
his neck and the depths of the sea?' No, that is not it: it is not clear," and he remembered
how more than once in his life he had taken to reading the Gospels, and how want of clearness
in these passages had repulsed him. He went on to read the seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth
verses about the occasions of stumbling, and that they must come, and about punishment by casting
men into hell fire, and some kind of angels who see the face of the Father in Heaven. "What
a pity that this is so incoherent," he thought, "yet one feels that there is something good in it."

"For the Son of Man came to save that which was lost," he continued to read. And if so be that
he find it, verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth over it more than over the ninety and nine
which have not gone astray.

"Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in Heaven that one of these little ones
should perish."

"Yes, it is not the will of the Father that they should perish, and here they are perishing
by hundreds and thousands. And there is no possibility of saving them," he thought. So when
his fellow-servants saw what was done, they were exceeding sorry, and came and told unto their
lord all that was done. Then his lord called him unto him and saith to him, Thou wicked servant,
I forgave thee all that debt because thou besought me; shouldst not thou also have mercy on
thy fellow-servant as I had mercy on thee?"

"And is this all?" Nekhludoff suddenly exclaimed aloud, and the inner voice of the whole of
his being said, "Yes, it is all." And it happened to Nekhludoff, as it often happens to men
who are living a spiritual life. The thought that seemed strange at first and paradoxical or
even to be only a joke, being confirmed more and more often by life's experience, suddenly
appeared as the simplest, truest certainty. In this way the idea that the only certain means
of salvation from the terrible evil from which men were suffering was that they should always
acknowledge themselves to be sinning against God, and therefore unable to punish or correct
others, because they were dear to Him. It became clear to him that all the dreadful evil he
had been witnessing in prisons and jails and the quiet self-satisfaction of the perpetrators
of this evil were the consequences of men trying to do what was impossible; trying to correct
evil while being evil themselves; vicious men were trying to correct other vicious men, and
thought they could do it by using mechanical means, and the only consequence of all this was
that the needs and the cupidity of some men induced them to take up this so-called punishment
and correction as a profession, and have themselves become utterly corrupt, and go on unceasingly
depraving those whom they torment. Now he saw clearly what all the terrors he had seen came
from, and what ought to be done to put a stop to them. The answer he could not find was the
same that Christ gave to Peter. It was that we should forgive always an infinite number of
times because there are no men who have not sinned themselves, and therefore none can punish
or correct others.

"But surely it cannot be so simple," thought Nekhludoff, and yet he saw with certainty, strange
as it had seemed at first, that it was not only a theoretical but also a practical solution
of the question. The usual objection, "What is one to do with the evil doers? Surely not let
them go unpunished?" no longer confused him. This objection might have a meaning if it were
proved that punishment lessened crime, or improved the criminal, but when the contrary was
proved, and it was evident that it was not in people's power to correct each other, the only
reasonable thing to do is to leave off doing the things which are not only useless, but harmful,
immoral and cruel.

For many centuries people who were considered criminals have been tortured. Well, and have
they ceased to exist? No; their numbers have been increased not alone by the criminals corrupted
by punishment but also by those lawful criminals, the judges, procureurs, magistrates and jailers,
who judge and punish men. Nekhludoff now understood that society and order in general exists
not because of these lawful criminals who judge and punish others, but because in spite of
men being thus depraved, they still pity and love one another.

In hopes of finding a confirmation of this thought in the Gospel, Nekhludoff began reading
it from the beginning. When he had read the Sermon on the Mount, which had always touched him,
he saw in it for the first time to-day not beautiful abstract thoughts, setting forth for the
most part exaggerated and impossible demands, but simple, clear, practical laws. If these laws
were carried out in practice (and this was quite possible) they would establish perfectly new
and surprising conditions of social life, in which the violence that filled Nekhludoff with
such indignation would cease of itself. Not only this, but the greatest blessing that is obtainable
to men, the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth would be established. There were five of these laws.

The first (Matt. v. 21-26), that man should not only do no murder, but not even be angry with
his brother, should not consider any one worthless: "Raca," and if he has quarrelled with any
one he should make it up with him before bringing his gift to God--i.e., before praying.

The second (Matt. v. 27-32), that man should not only not commit adultery but should not even
seek for enjoyment in a woman's beauty, and if he has once come together with a woman he should
never be faithless to her.

The third (Matt. 33-37), that man should never bind himself by oath.

The fourth (Matt. 38-42), that man should not only not demand an eye for an eye, but when struck
on one cheek should hold out the other, should forgive an offence and bear it humbly, and never
refuse the service others demand of him.

The fifth (Matt. 43-48), that man should not only not hate his enemy and not fight him, but
love him, help him, serve him.

Nekhludoff sat staring at the lamp and his heart stood still. Recalling the monstrous confusion
of the life we lead, he distinctly saw what that life could be if men were brought up to obey
these rules, and rapture such as he had long not felt filled his soul, just as if after long
days of weariness and suffering he had suddenly found ease and freedom.

He did not sleep all night, and as it happens to many and many a man who reads the Gospels
he understood for the first time the full meaning of the words read so often before but passed
by unnoticed. He imbibed all these necessary, important and joyful revelations as a sponge
imbibes water. And all he read seemed so familiar and seemed to confirm, to form into a conception,
what he had known long ago, but had never realised and never quite believed. Now he realised
and believed it, and not only realised and believed that if men would obey these laws they
would obtain the highest blessing they can attain to, he also realised and believed that the
only duty of every man is to fulfil these laws; that in this lies the only reasonable meaning
of life, that every stepping aside from these laws is a mistake which is immediately followed
by retribution. This flowed from the whole of the teaching, and was most strongly and clearly
illustrated in the parable of the vineyard.

The husbandman imagined that the vineyard in which they were sent to work for their master
was their own, that all that was in was made for them, and that their business was to enjoy
life in this vineyard, forgetting the Master and killing all those who reminded them of his
existence. "Are we not doing the same," Nekhludoff thought, "when we imagine ourselves to be
masters of our lives, and that life is given us for enjoyment? This evidently is an incongruity.
We were sent here by some one's will and for some reason. And we have concluded that we live
only for our own joy, and of course we feel unhappy as labourers do when not fulfilling their
Master's orders. The Master's will is expressed in these commandments. If men will only fulfil
these laws, the Kingdom of Heaven will be established on earth, and men will receive the greatest
good that they can attain to.

"'Seek ye first the Kingdom and His righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.'

"And so here it is, the business of my life. Scarcely have I finished one and another has commenced."
And a perfectly new life dawned that night for Nekhludoff, not because he had entered into
new conditions of life, but because everything he did after that night had a new and quite
different significance than before. How this new period of his life will end time alone will prove.