STATION AMUSEMENTS IN NEW ZEALAND

By Lady Barker

Preface.

The interest shown by the public in the simple and true account of every-day life in New Zealand,
published by the author three years ago, has encouraged her to enlarge upon the theme. This
volume is but a continuation of "Station Life," with this difference: that whereas that little
book dwelt somewhat upon practical matters, these pages are entirely devoted to reminiscences
of the idler hours of a settler's life.

Many readers have friends and relations out in those beautiful distant islands, and though
her book should possess no wider interest, the author hopes that these at least will care to
know exactly what sort of life their absent dear ones are leading. One thing is certain: that
few books can ever have afforded so much pleasure to their authors, or can have appeared more
completely to write themselves, than "Station Life," and this, its sequel.

M. A. B.

Chapter I: A Bush picnic.

Since my return to England, two years ago, I have been frequently asked by my friends and acquaintances,
"How did you amuse yourself up at the station?" I am generally tempted to reply, "We were all
too busy to need amusement;" but when I come to think the matter over calmly and dispassionately,
I find that a great many of our occupations may be classed under the head of play rather than
work. But that would hardly give a fair idea of our lives there, either. It would be more correct
to say perhaps, that most of our simple pleasures were composed of a solid layer of usefulness
underneath the froth of fun and frolic. I purpose therefore in these sketches to describe some
of the pursuits which afforded us a keen enjoyment at the time,--an enjoyment arising from
perfect health, simple tastes, and an exquisite climate.

It will be as well to begin with the description of one of the picnics, which were favourite
amusements in our home, nestled in a valley of the Malvern Hills of Canterbury. These hills
are of a very respectable height, and constitute in fact the lowest slopes of the great Southern
Alps, which rise to snow-clad peaks behind them. Our little wooden homestead stood at the head
of a sunny, sheltered valley, and around it we could see the hills gradually rolling into downs,
which in their turn were smoothed out, some ten or twelve miles off, into the dead level of
the plains. The only drawback to the picturesque beauty of these lower ranges is the absence
of forest, or as it is called there, bush. Behind the Malvern Hills, where they begin to rise
into steeper ascents, lies many and many a mile of bush-clad mountain, making deep blue shadows
when the setting sun brings the grand Alpine range into sharp white outline against the background
of dazzling Italian sky. But just here, where my beloved antipodean home stood, we had no trees
whatever, except those which we had planted ourselves, and whose growth we watched with eager
interest. I dwell a little upon this point, to try to convey to any one who may glance at these
pages, how we all,--dwellers among tree-less hills as we were,--longed and pined for the sights
and sounds of a "bush."

Quite out of view from the house or garden, and about seven miles away, lay a mountain pass,
or saddle, over a range, which was densely wooded, and from whose highest peak we could see
a wide extent of timbered country. Often in our evening rides we have gone round by that saddle,
in spite of a break-neck track and quicksands and bogs, just to satisfy our constant longing
for green leaves, waving branches, and the twitter of birds. Whenever any wood was wanted for
building a stockyard, or slabbing a well, or making a post-and-rail fence around a new paddock,
we were obliged to take out a Government license to cut wood in this splendid bush. Armed with
the necessary document the next step was to engage "bushmen," or woodcutters by profession,
who felled and cut the timber into the proper lengths, and stacked it neatly in a clearing,
where it could get dry and seasoned. These stacks were often placed in such inaccessible and
rocky parts of the steep mountain side, that they had to be brought down to the flat in rude
little sledges, drawn by a bullock, who required to be trained to the work, and to possess
so steady and equable a disposition as to be indifferent to the annoyance of great logs of
heavy wood dangling and bumping against his heels as the sledge pursued its uneven way down
the bed of a mountain torrent, in default of a better road.

Imagine, then, a beautiful day in our early New Zealand autumn. For a week past, a furious
north-westerly gale had been blowing down the gorges of the Rakaia and the Selwyn, as if it
had come out of a funnel, and sweeping across the great shelterless plains with irresistible
force. We had been close prisoners to the house all those days, dreading to open a door to
go out for wood or water, lest a terrific blast should rush in and whip the light shingle roof
off. Not an animal could be seen out of doors; they had all taken shelter on the lee-side of
the gorse hedges, which are always planted round a garden to give the vegetables a chance of
coming up. On the sky-line of the hills could be perceived towards evening, mobs of sheep feeding
with their heads up-wind, and travelling to the high camping-grounds which they always select
in preference to a valley. The yellow tussocks were bending all one way, perfectly flat to
the ground, and the shingle on the gravel walk outside rattled like hail against the low latticed
windows. The uproar from the gale was indescribable, and the little fragile house swayed and
shook as the furious gusts hurled themselves against it. Inside its shelter, the pictures were
blowing out from the walls, until I expected them to be shaken off their hooks even in those
rooms which had plank walls lined with papered canvas; whilst in the kitchen, store-room, etc.,
whose sides were made of cob, the dust blew in fine clouds from the pulverized walls, penetrating
even to the dairy, and settling half an inch thick on my precious cream. At last, when our
skin felt like tightly drawn parchment, and our ears and eyes had long been filled with powdered
earth, the wind dropped at sunset as suddenly as it had risen five days before. We ventured
out to breathe the dust-laden atmosphere, and to look if the swollen creeks (swollen because
snow-fed) had done or threatened to do any mischief, and saw on the south-west horizon great
fleecy masses of cloud driving rapidly up before a chill icy breeze. Hurrah, here comes a sou'-wester!
The parched-up earth, the shrivelled leaves, the dusty grass, all needed the blessed damp air.
In an hour it was upon us. We had barely time to house the cows and horses, to feed the fowls,
and secure them in their own shed, and to light a roaring coal (or rather lignite, for it is
not true coal) fire in the drawing-room, when, with a few warning splashes, the deluge of cold
rain came steadily down, and we went to sleep to the welcome sound of its refreshing patter.

All that I have been describing was the weather of the past week. Disagreeable as it might
have been, it was needed in both its hot and cold, dry and wet extremes, to make a true New
Zealand day. The furious nor'-wester had blown every fleck of cloud below the horizon, and
dried the air until it was as light as ether. The "s'utherly buster," on the other hand, had
cooled and refreshed everything in the most delicious way, and a perfect day had come at last.
What words can describe the pleasure it is to inhale such an atmosphere? One feels as if old
age or sickness or even sorrow, could hardly exist beneath such a spotless vault of blue as
stretched out above our happy heads. I have often been told that this feeling of intense pleasure
on a fine day, which is peculiar to New Zealand, is really a very low form of animal enjoyment.
It may be so, but I only know that I never stood in the verandah early in the morning of such
a day as I am trying to sketch in pen and ink now, without feeling the highest spiritual joy,
the deepest thankfulness to the loving Father who had made His beautiful world so fair, and
who would fain lead us through its paths of pleasantness to a still more glorious, home, which
will be free from the shadows brooding from beneath sin's out-stretched wings over this one.
As I stood in the porch I have often fancied I could seethe animals and even the poultry expressing
in dumb brute fashion, their joy and gratitude to the God from whom all blessings flow.

But to return to the verandah, although we have never left it. Presently F---- came out, and
I said with a sigh, born of deep content and happiness, "What a day!" "Yes," answered F----:
"a heavenly day indeed: well worth waiting for. I want to go and see how the men are getting
on in the bush. Will you like to come too?" "Of course I will. What can be more enchanting
than the prospect of spending such sunny hours in that glorious bush?" So after breakfast I
give my few simple orders to the cook, and prepare, to pack a "Maori kit," or flat basket made
of flax, which could be fastened to my side-saddle, with the preparations for our luncheon.
First some mutton chops had to be trimmed and prepared, all ready to be cooked when we got
there. These were neatly folded up in clean paper; and a little packet of tea, a few lumps
of white sugar, a tiny wooden contrivance for holding salt and pepper, and a couple of knives
and forks, were added to the parcel.

So much for the contents of the basket. They needed to be carefully packed so as not to rattle
in any way, or Helen, my pretty bay mare, would soon have got rid of the luncheon--and me.
I wrapped up three or four large raw potatoes in separate bits of paper, and slipped them into
F----'s pockets when he was looking another way, and then began the real difficulty of my picnic:
how was the little tin tea-pot and an odd delf cup to be carried? F---- objected to put them
also in his pocket, assuring me that I could make very good tea by putting my packet of the
fragrant leaves into the bushmen's kettle, and drinking it afterwards out of one of their pannikins.
He tried to bribe me to this latter piece of simplicity by promising to wash the tin pannikin
out for me first. Now I was not dainty or over particular; I could not have enjoyed my New
Zealand life so thoroughly if I had been either; but I did not like the idea of using the bushmen's
tea equipage. In the first place, the tea never tastes the same when made in their way, and
allowed to boil for a moment or two after the leaves have been thrown in, before the kettle
is taken off the fire; and in the next place, it is very difficult to drink tea out of a pannikin;
for it becomes so hot directly we put the scalding liquid into it, that long after the tea
is cool enough to drink, the pannikin still continues too hot to touch. But I said so pathetically,
"You know how wretched I am without my tea," that F----'s heart relented, and he managed to
stow away the little teapot and the cup. That cup bore a charmed life. It accompanied me on
all my excursions, escaping unbroken; and is, I believe, in existence now, spending its honoured
old age in the recesses of a cupboard.

After the luncheon, the next question to be decided is, which of the dogs are to join the expedition.
Hector, of course; he is the master's colley, and would no more look at a sheep, except in
the way of business, than he would fly. Rose, a little short-haired terrier, was the most fascinating
of dog companions, and I pleaded hard for her, as she was an especial pet; though there were
too many lambs belonging to a summer lambing (in New Zealand the winter is the usual lambing
season) in the sheltered paddocks beneath the bush, to make it quite safe for her to be one
of the party. She would not kill or hurt a lamb on any account, but she always appeared anxious
to play with the little creatures; and as her own spotless coat was as white as theirs, she
often managed to get quite close to a flock of sheep before they perceived that she belonged
to the dreaded race of dogs. When the timid animals found out their mistake, a regular stampede
used to ensue; and it was not supposed to be good for the health of the old or young sheep
to hurry up the hill-sides in such wild fashion as that in which they rushed away from Rose's
attempts to intrude on their society. Nettle may come, for he is but a tiny terrier, and so
fond of his mistress that he never strays a yard away from her horse's heels. Brisk, my beautiful,
stupid water-spaniel, is also allowed an outing. He is perfect to look at, but not having had
any educational advantages in his youth, is an utter fool; amiable, indeed, but not the less
a fool. Garibaldi, another colley, is suffering a long penal sentence of being tied up to his
barrel, on account of divers unlawful chases after sheep which were not wanted; and dear old
Jip, though she pretends to be very anxious to accompany us; is far too fat and too rheumatic
to keep pace with our long stretching gallop up the valley.

At last we were fairly off about eleven o'clock, and an hour's easy canter, intersected by
many "flat-jumps," or rather "water-jumps," across the numerous creeks, brought unto the foot
of the bush-clad mountain. After that our pace became a very sober one, as the track resembled
a broken rocky staircase more than a bridle-path. But such as it was, our sure-footed horses
carried us safely up and down its rugged steeps, without making a single false step. No mule
can be more sure-footed than a New Zealand horse. He will carry his rider anywhere, if only
that rider trusts entirely to him, nor attempts to guide him in any way. During the last half-hour
of our slow and cat-like climb, we could hear the ring of the bushmen's axes, and the warning
shouts preceding the crashing fall of a Black Birch. Fallen logs and deep ruts made by the
sledges in their descent, added to the difficulties of the track; and I was so faint-hearted
as to entreat piteously, on more than one occasion, when Helen paused and shook her head preparatory
to climbing over a barricade, to be "taken off." But F---- had been used to these dreadful
roads for too many years to regard them in the same light as I did, and would answer carelessly,
"Nonsense: you're as safe as if you were sitting in an arm-chair." All I can say is, it might
have been so, but I did not feel at all like it.

However, the event proved him to have been right, and we reached the clearing in safety. Here
we dismounted, and led the horses to a place where they could nibble some grass, and rest in
the cool shade. The saddles and bridles were soon removed, and halters improvised out of the
New Zealand flax, which can be turned to so many uses. Having provided for the comfort of our
faithful animals, our next step was to look for the bushmen. The spot which we had reached
was their temporary home in the heart of the forest, but their work was being carried on elsewhere.
I could not have told from which side the regular ringing axe-strokes proceeded, so confusing
were the echoes from the cliffs around us; but after a moment's silent pause F---- said, "If
we follow that track (pointing to a slightly cleared passage among the trees) we shall come
upon them." So I kilted up my linsey skirt, and hung up my little jacket, necessary for protection
against the evening air, on a bough out of the wekas' reach, whilst I followed F---- through
tangled creepers, "over brake, over brier," towards the place from whence the noise of falling
trees proceeded. By the time we reached it, our scratched hands and faces bore traces of the
thorny undergrowth which had barred our way; but all minor discomforts were forgotten in the
picturesque beauty of the spot. Around us lay the forest-kings, majestic still in their overthrow,
whilst substantial stacks of cut-up and split timber witnessed to the skill and industry of
the stalwart figures before us, who reddened through their sunburn with surprise and shyness
at seeing a lady. They need not have been afraid of me, for I had long ago made friends with
them, and during the preceeding winter had established a sort of night-school in my dining-room,
for all the hands employed on the station, and these two men had been amongst my most constant
pupils. One of them, a big Yorkshire-man, was very backward in his "larning," and though he
plodded on diligently, never got beyond the simplest words in the largest type. Small print
puzzled him at once, and he had a habit of standing or sitting with his back to me whilst repeating
his lessons. Nothing would induce him to face me. The moment it became his turn to go on with
the chapter out of the Bible, with which we commenced our studies, that instant he turned his
broad shoulders towards me, and I could only, hear the faintest murmurs issuing from the depths
of a great beard. Remonstrance would have scared my shy pupil away, so I was fain to put up
with his own method of instruction.

But this is a digression, and I want to make you see with my eyes the beautiful glimpses of
distant country lying around the bold wooded cliff on which we were standing. The ground fell
away from our feet so completely in some places, that we could see over the tops of the high
trees around us, whilst in others the landscape appeared framed in an arch of quivering foliage.
A noisy little creek chattered and babbled as it hurried along to join its big brother down
below, and kept a fringe of exquisite ferns, which grew along its banks, brightly green by
its moisture. Each tree, if taken by itself, was more like an umbrella than anything else to
English eyes, for in these primitive forests, where no kind pruning hand has ever touched them,
they shoot up, straight and branchless, into the free air above, where they spread a leafy
crown out to the sunbeams. Beneath the dense shade of these matted branches grew a luxuriant
shrubbery, whose every leaf was a marvel of delicate beauty, and ferns found here a home such
as they might seek elsewhere in vain. Flowers were very rare, and I did not observe many berries,
but these conditions vary in different parts of the beautiful middle island.

That was a fair and fertile land stretching out before us, intersected by the deep banks of
the Rakaia, with here and there a tiny patch of emerald green and a white dot, representing
the house and English grass paddock of a new settler. In the background the bush-covered mountains
rose ever higher and higher in bolder outline, till they shook off their leafy clothing, and
stood out in steep cliffs and scaurs from the snow-clad glacier region of the mountain range
running from north to south, and forming the back bone of the island. I may perhaps make you
see the yellow, river-furrowed plains, and the great confusion of rising ground behind them,
but cannot make you see, still less feel, the atmosphere around, quivering in a summer haze
in the valley beneath, and stirred to the faintest summer wind-sighs as it moved among the
pines and birches overhead. Its lightness was its most striking peculiarity. You felt as if
your lungs could never weary of inhaling deep breaths of such an air. Warm without oppression,
cool without a chill. I can find nothing but paradoxes to describe it. As for fatigue, one's
muscles might get tired, and need rest, but the usual depression and weariness attending over-exertion
could not exist in such an atmosphere. One felt like a happy child; pleased at nothing, content
to exist where existence was a pleasure.

You could not find more favourable specimens of New Zealand colonists than the two men, Trew
and Domville, who stood before us in their working dress of red flannel shirts and moleskin
trousers, "Cookham" boots and digger's plush hats. Three years before this day they had landed
at Port Lyttleton, with no other capital than their strong, willing arms, and their sober,
sensible heads. Very different is their appearance to-day from what it was on their arrival;
and the change in their position and circumstances is as great. Their bodily frames have filled
out and developed under the influence of the healthy climate and abundance of mutton, until
they look ten years younger and twice as strong, and each man owns a cottage and twenty acres
of freehold land, at which he works in spare time, as well as having more pounds than he ever
possessed pence in the old country, put safely away in the bank. There can be no doubt about
the future of any working man or woman in our New Zealand colonies. It rests in their own hands,
under God's blessing, and the history of the whole human race shows us that He always has blessed
honest labour and rightly directed efforts to do our duty in this world. Sobriety and industry
are the first essentials to success. Possessing these moral qualifications, and a pair of hands,
a man may rear up his children in those beautiful distant lands in ignorance of what hunger;
or thirst, or grinding poverty means. Hitherto the want of places of worship, and schools for
the children, have been a sad drawback to the material advantages of colonization at the Antipodes;
but these blessings are increasing every day, and the need of them creates the supply.

The great mistake made in England, next to that of sending out worthless idle paupers, who
have never done a hand's turn for themselves here, and are still less likely to do it elsewhere,
is for parents and guardians to ship off to New Zealand young men who have received the up-bringing
and education of gentlemen, without a shilling in their pockets, under the vague idea that
something will turn up for them in a new place. There is nothing which can turn up, for the
machinery of civilization is reduced to the most primitive scale in these countries; and I
have known 500 pounds per annum regarded as a monstrous salary to be drawn by a hard-worked
official of some twenty years standing and great experience in the colony. From this we may
judge of the chances of remunerative employment for a raw unfledged youth, with a smattering
of classical learning. At first they simply "loaf" (as it is called there) on their acquaintances
and friends. At the end of six months their clothes are beginning to look shabby; they feel
they ought to do something, and they make day by day the terrible discovery that there is nothing
for them to do in their own rank of life. Many a poor clergyman's son, sooner than return to
the home which has been so pinched to furnish forth his passage money and outfit, takes a shepherd's
billet, though he generally makes a very bad shepherd for the first year or two; or drives
bullocks, or perhaps wanders vaguely over the country, looking for work, and getting food and
lodging indeed, for inhospitality is unknown, but no pay. Sometimes they go to the diggings,
only to find that money is as necessary there as anywhere, and that they are not fitted to
dig in wet holes for eight or ten hours a day. Often these poor young men go home again, and
it is the best thing they can do, for at least they have gained some knowledge of life, on
its dark as well as its brighter side. But still oftener, alas, they go hopelessly to the bad,
degenerating into billiard markers, piano players at dancing saloons, cattle drivers, and their
friends probably lose sight of them.

Once I was riding with my husband up a lovely gulley, when we heard the crack of a stockwhip,
sounding strangely through the deep eternal silence of a New Zealand valley, and a turn of
the track showed us a heavy, timber-laden bullock-waggon labouring slowly along. At the head
of the long team sauntered the driver, in the usual rough-and-ready costume, with his soft
plush hat pulled low over his face, and pulling vigorously at a clay pipe. In spite of all
the outer surroundings, something in the man's walk and dejected attitude struck my imagination,
and I made some remark to my companion. The sound of my voice reached the bullock-driver's
ears; he looked up, and on seeing a lady, took his pipe out of his mouth, his hat off his head,
and forcing his beasts a little aside, stood at their head to let us pass. I smiled and nodded,
receiving in return a perfect and profound bow, and the most melancholy glance I have ever
seen in human eyes. "Good gracious, F----," I cried, when we had passed, "who is that man?"
"That is Sir So-and-So's third son," he replied: "they sent him out here without a shilling,
five years ago, and that is what he has come to: a working man, living with working men. He
looks heart-broken, poor fellow, doesn't he?" I, acting upon impulse, as any woman would have
done, turning back and rode up to him, finding it very difficult to frame my pity and sympathy
in coherent words. "No thank you, ma'am," was all the answer I could get, in the most refined,
gentlemanly tone of voice: "I'm very well as I am. I should only have the struggle all over
again if I made any change now. It is the truest kindness to leave me alone." He would not
even shake hands with me; so I rode back; discomfited, to hear from F---- that he had made
many attempts to befriend him, but without success. "In fact," concluded F----, with some embarrassment,
"he drinks dreadfully, poor fellow. Of course that is the secret of all his wretchedness, but
I believe despair drove him to it in the first instance."

I have also known an ex-dragoon officer working as a clerk in an attorney's office at fifteen
shillings a week, who lived like a mechanic, and yet spake and stepped like his old self; one
listened involuntarily for the clink of the sabre and spur whenever he moved across the room.

This has been a terrible digression, almost a social essay in fact; but I have it so much at
heart to dissuade fathers and mothers from sending their sons so far away without any certainty
of employment. Capitalists, even small ones, do well in New Zealand: the labouring classes
still better; but there is no place yet for the educated gentleman without money, and with
hands unused to and unfit for manual labour and the downward path is just as smooth and pleasant
at first there, as anywhere else.

Trew and Domville soon got over their momentary shyness, and answered my inquiries about their
families. Then I had a short talk with them, but on the principle that it is "ill speaking
to a fasting man," we agreed to adjourn to the clearing, where they had built a rough log hut
for temporary shelter, and have our dinner. They had provided themselves with some bacon; but
were very glad to accept of F----'s offer of mutton, to be had for the trouble of fetching
it. When we reached the little shanty, Trew produced some capital bread, he had baked the evening
before in a camp-oven; F----'s pockets were emptied of their load of potatoes, which were put
to roast in the wood embers; rashers of bacon and mutton chops spluttered and fizzed side-by-side
on a monster gridiron with tall feet, so as to allow it to stand by itself over the clear fire,
and we turned our chops from time to time by means of a fork extemporized out of a pronged stick.

Over another fire, a little way to leeward, hung the bushmen's kettle on an iron tripod, and,
so soon as it boiled, my little teapot was filled before Domville threw in his great fist-full
of tea. I had brought a tiny phial of cream in the pocket of my saddle, but the men thought
it spoiled the flavour of the tea, which they always drink "neat," as they call it. The Temperance
Society could draw many interesting statistics from the amount of hard work which is done in
New Zealand on tea. Now, I am sorry to say, beer is creeping up to the stations, and is served
out at shearing time and so on; but in the old days all the hard work used to be done on tea,
and tea alone, the men always declaring they worked far better on it than on beer. "When we
have as much good bread and mutton as we can eat," they would say, "we don't feel to miss the
beer we used to drink in England;" and at the end of a year or two of tea and water-drinking,
their bright eyes and splendid physical condition showed plainly enough which was the best
kind of beverage to work, and work hard too, upon.

So there we sat round the fire: F---- with the men, and I, a little way off, out of the smoke,
with the dogs. Overhead, the sunlight streamed down on the grass which had sprung up, as it
always does in a clearing; the rustle among the lofty tree tops made a delicious murmur high
up in the air; a waft of cool breeze flitted past us laden with the scent of newly-cut wood
(and who does not know that nice, clean perfume?); innumerable paroquets almost brushed us
with their emerald-green wings, whilst the tamer robin or the dingy but melodious bell-bird
came near to watch the intruders. The sweet clear whistle of the tui or parson-bird--so called
from his glossy black suit and white wattles curling exactly where a clergy-man's bands would
be,--could be heard at a distance; whilst overhead the soft cooing of the wild pigeons, and
the hoarse croak of the ka-ka or native parrot, made up the music of the birds' orchestra.
Ah, how delicious it all was,--the Robinson Crusoe feel of the whole thing; the heavenly air,
the fluttering leaves, the birds' chirrups and whistle, and the foreground of happy, healthy men!

Rose and I had enough to do, even with Nettle's assistance, in acting as police to keep off
those bold thieves, the wekas, who are as impudent as they are tame and fearless. In appearance
they resemble exactly a stout hen pheasant, without its long tail; but they belong to the apterix
family, and have no wings, only a tiny useless pinion at each shoulder, furnished with a claw
like a small fish-hook: what is the use of this claw I was never able to discover. When startled
or hunted, the weka glides, for it can scarcely be called running, with incredible swiftness
and in perfect silence, to the nearest cover. A tussock, a clump of flax, a tuft of tall tohi
grass, all serve as hiding-places; and, wingless as she is, the weka can hold her own very
well against her enemies, the dogs. I really believe the great desire of Brisk's life was to
catch a weka. He started many, but used to go sniffing and barking round the flax bush where
it had taken refuge at first, long after the clever, cunning bird had glided from its shelter
to another cover further off.

After dinner was over and Domville had brought back the tin plates and pannikins from the creek
where he had washed them up, pipes were lighted, and a few minutes smoking served to rest and
refresh the men, who had been working since their six o'clock breakfast. The daylight hours
were too precious however to be wasted in smoking. Trew and Domville would not have had that
comfortable nest-egg standing in their name at the bank in Christchurch, if they had spent
much time over their pipes; so after a very short "spell" they got up from the fallen log of
wood which had served them for a bench, and suggested that F---- should accompany them back
to where their work lay. "You don't mind being left?" asked F----. "Certainly not," replied
I. "I have got the dogs for company, and a book in my pocket. I daresay I shall not read much,
however, for it is so beautiful to sit here and watch the changing lights and shadows."

And so it was, most beautiful and thoroughly delightful. I sat on the short sweet grass, which
springs upon the rich loam of fallen leaves the moment sunlight is admitted into the heart
of a bush. No one plants it; probably the birds carry the seeds; yet it grows freely after
a clearing has been made. Nature lays down a green sward directly on the rich virgin mould,
and sets to work besides to cover up the unsightly stems and holes of the fallen timber with
luxuriant tufts of a species of hart's-tongue fern, which grows almost as freely as an orchid
on decayed timber. I was so still and silent that innumerable forest birds came about me. A
wood pigeon alighted on a branch close by, and sat preening her radiant plumage in a bath of
golden sunlight. The profound stillness was stirred now and then by a soft sighing breeze which
passed over the tree tops, and made the delicate foliage of the undergrowth around me quiver
and rustle. I had purposely scattered the remains of our meal in a spot where the birds could
see the crumbs, and it was not long before the clever little creatures availed themselves of
the unexpected feast. So perfectly tame and friendly were they, that I felt as if I were the
intruder, and bound by all the laws of aerial chivalry to keep the peace. But this was no easy
matter where Rose and Nettle were concerned, for when an imprudent weka appeared on the sylvan
scene, looking around-as if to say, "Who's afraid?" it was more than I could do to keep the
little terriers from giving chase. Brisk, too, blundered after them, but I had no fear of his
destroying the charm of the day by taking even a weka's life.

Thus the delicious afternoon wore on, until it was time to boil the kettle once more, and make
a cup of tea before setting out homewards. The lengthening shadows added fresh tenderness and
beauty to the peaceful scene, and the sky began to paint itself in its exquisite sunset hues.
It has been usual to praise the tints of tropic skies when the day is declining; but never,
in any of my wanderings to East and West Indies, have I seen such gorgeous evening colours
as those which glorify New Zealand skies.

A loud coo-ee summoned F---- to tea, and directly afterwards the horses were re-saddled, the
now empty flax basket filled with the obnoxious teapot and cup, wrapped in many layers of flax
leaves, to prevent their rattling, and we bade good night to the tired bushmen. We left them
at their tea, and I was much struck to observe that though they looked like men who had done
a hard day's work, there was none of the exhaustion we often see in England depicted on the
labouring man's face. Instead of a hot crowded room, these bushmen were going to sleep in their
log hut, where the fresh pure air could circulate through every nook and cranny. They had each
their pair of red blankets, one to spread over a heap of freshly cut tussocks, which formed
a delicious elastic mattrass, and the other to serve as a coverlet. During the day these blankets
were always hung outside on a tree, out of the reach of the most investigating weka. You may
be sure I had not come empty-handed in the way of books and papers, and my last glance as I
rode away rested on Trew opening a number of Good Words [Note: Evening Hours was not in existence
at that time, or else its pages are just what those simple God-fearing men would have appreciated
and enjoyed. Good Words and the Leisure Hour used to be their favourite periodicals, and the
kindness of English friends kept me also well supplied with copies of Miss Marsh's little books,
which were read with the deepest and most eager interest.] with the pleased-expression of a
child examining a packet of toys.

And so we rode slowly home through the delicious gloaming, with the evening air cooled to freshness
so soon as the sun had sunk below the great mountains to the west, from behind which he shot
up glorious rays of gold and crimson against the blue ethereal sky, causing the snowy peaks
to look more exquisitely pure from the background of gorgeous colour. During the flood of sunlight
all day, we had not perceived a single fleck of cloud; but now lovely pink wreaths, floating
in mid-air, betrayed that here and there a "nursling of the sky" lingered behind the cloud-masses
which we thought had all been blown away yesterday.

The short twilight hour was over, and the stars were filtering their soft radiance on our heads
by the time we heard the welcoming barks of the homestead, and saw the glimmer of the lighted
lamp in our sitting-room, shining out of the distant gloom. And so ended, in supper and a night
of deep dreamless sleep, one of the many happy picnic days of my New Zealand life.

Chapter II: Eel-fishing.

One of the greatest drawbacks in an English gentleman's eyes to living in New Zealand is the
want of sport. There is absolutely none. There used to be a few quails, but they are almost
extinct now; and during four years' residence in very sequestered regions I only saw one. Wild
ducks abound on some of the rivers, but they are becoming fewer and shyer every year. The beautiful
Paradise duck is gradually retreating to those inland lakes lying at the foot of the Southern
Alps, amid glaciers and boulders which serve as a barrier to keep back his ruthless foe. Even
the heron, once so plentiful on the lowland rivers, is now seldom seen. As I write these lines
a remorseful recollection comes back upon me of overhanging cliffs, and of a bend in a swirling
river, on whose rapid current a beautiful wounded heron--its right wing shattered--drifts helplessly
round and round with the eddying water, each circle bringing it nearer in-shore to our feet.
I can see now its bright fearless eye, full of suffering, but yet unconquered: its slender
neck proudly arched, and bearing up the small graceful head with its coronal or top-knot raised
in defiance, as if to protest to the last against the cruel shot which had just been fired.
I was but a spectator, having merely wandered that far to look at my eel-lines, yet I felt
as guilty as though my hand had pulled the trigger. Just as the noble bird drifted to our feet,--for
I could not help going down to the river's edge, where Pepper (our head shepherd) stood, looking
very contrite,--it reared itself half out of the water, with a hissing noise and threatening
bill, resolved to sell its liberty as dearly as it could; but the effort only spread a brighter
shade of crimson on the waters surface for a brief moment, and then, with glazing eye and drooping
crest, the dying creature turned over on its side and was borne helpless to our feet. By the
time Pepper extended his arm and drew it in, with the quaint apology, "I'm sorry I shot yer,
old feller! I, am, indeed," the heron was dead; and that happened to be the only one I ever
came across during my mountain life. Once I saw some beautiful red-shanks flying down the gorge
of the Selwyn, and F---- nearly broke his neck in climbing the crag from whence one of them
rose in alarm at the noise of our horses' feet on the shingle. There were three eggs in the
inaccessible cliff-nest, and he brought me one, which I tried in vain to hatch under a sitting
duck. Betty would not admit the intruder among her own eggs, but resolutely pushed it out of
her nest twenty times a day, until at last I was obliged to blow it and send it home to figure
in a little boy's collection far away in Kent.

I have seen very good blue duck shooting on the Waimakiriri river, but 50 per cent. of the
birds were lost for want of a retriever bold enough to face that formidable river. Wide as
was the beautiful reach, on whose shore the sportsmen stood, and calmly as the deep stream
seemed to glide beneath its high banks, the wounded birds, flying low on the water, had hardly
dropped when they disappeared, sucked beneath by the strong current, and whirled past us in
less time than it takes one to write a line. We had retrievers with us who would face the waves
of an inland lake during a nor'-wester,--which is giving a dog very high praise indeed; but
there was no canine Bayard at hand to brave those treacherous depths, and bring out our game,
so the sport soon ceased; for what was the good of shooting the beautiful, harmless creatures
when we could not make use of them as food?

I often accompanied F---- on his eel-fishing expeditions, but more for the sake of companionship
than from any amusement I found in the sport. I may here confess frankly that I cannot understand
anyone being an inveterate eel-fisher, for of all monotonous pursuits, it is the most self-repeating
in its forms. Even the first time I went out I found it delightful only in anticipation; and
this is the one midnight excursion which I shall attempt to re-produce for you. 

Our colonel we missed sadly, but earnestly hoped to welcome him back soon. Our regiment numbered
162 men and eight officers at this time.

May 28th. There was lively firing this morning on the picket lines, but the cannons were quiet.
We were expecting reinforcements and we needed them if we were ever to take Port Hudson. This
was the seventh day of the siege and we were pretty well fagged out. We had to fight for every foot
of ground. But we had carried the first two earthworks by storm. It had been one continual fight since
we started in but there was a cessation of hostilities for a short time, and the lull was a great
relief, for my ears had been half-deafened by the awful roar of artillery and cracking of musketry.
There were three men killed and about twenty wounded, and thirty in our regiment missing.
Again in our little company we had several wounded, one fatally. So I think that I must have
been in great danger several times, but I felt that a kind Providence watched over me, and brought
me out safely.

The regiment at this time was under the command of Major McManus, Colonel Bissell being sick
with remittent fever at Bayou Sara and the lieutenant-colonel prostrated at New Orleans. The colored
regiments fought bravely and made some splendid charges.

May 31st. There has been some firing by the infantry and artillery
during the day.

About ten o'clock last night we withdrew our forces very cautiously, bringing away all the
wounded we could reach, but there were some poor unfortunates lying up under the breastworks
that it was impossible to reach. Every time we tried to get to them the Rebs would fire on
us. We threw them canteens of water but it was of little use. We marched back and lay upon
the battlefield of the preceding day.

June 1st. We marched back into the woods and were there in support of a battery. It was very trying
for us. The Rebs had a perfect range on us and several times a day they would throw those immense
twelve-inch shells right into our midst. We could hear them coming for several seconds and we
all stood close to the trees for protection. There must have been a large number killed that
day. The next day there was a cessation of hostilities to bury the dead. At about seven o'clock
the enemy made a terrible onslaught on our right but they were repulsed with heavy loss. We
fell into our places expecting to be called into action but we were spared for once. We remained there
until the 7th when Lieutenant-Colonel Weld came up from New Orleans and assumed command.

June 7th. We were ordered to the front to relieve the One Hundred
and Fifty-ninth New York in the rifle-pits.

We went out in the night as the enemy's sharpshooters rendered it very dangerous to go in the
daytime. We had rifle pits dug about two hundred yards from the rifle-pits of the Rebs, and
we had loop-holes made from which to fire. About one hundred yards back of us was planted one of
our batteries and as they fired over our heads anyone might imagine what a deafening report
rang in our ears. We boys got the range of the rifle-pits of "Mr. Secesh" opposite, perfectly,
consequently they didn't dare show their heads. Though from their hiding place they annoyed
us all day. After dark we usually held some conversation with the Rebs across the ravine. We would
ask them if they wanted any soft bread. If they did we would put some in a mortar and send
it over. They said they didn't care to have any sent that way and as we didn't have much to
spare we didn't send any. Our bean soup and coffee and such other food as might be handy was
sent out before daylight in the morning and after dark at night. We were here in this trench
or pit for three long days and nights and one can imagine how we
suffered from heat and thirst.

We were relieved on the tenth by the One Hundred and Fifty-ninth
New York.

We returned to our old camp-ground June 11th between 12 and 1 A.M.
A general assault was planned but owing to some misunderstanding the
plan failed.

June 14th, Sunday. The day was an eventful one in the siege of Port Hudson, of which the Twenty-fifth
Connecticut was engaged. We were under way at an early hour, for we formed the reserve in the
attacking column. Colonel Birge was in command of the reserve. We were up at 3 A.M., had a little hard-tack
and coffee and started under command of Captain Naughton at 4. Suddenly we heard a terrifying
yell and the crash and roar of artillery and musketry. Soon the dead and wounded began to be
brought in. All kinds of conflicting stories were circulated as to the success of our brave
fellows. Very soon General Payne was wounded, and Colonel H. W. Birge assumed command, we forming
the reserve. Soon we were ordered forward. On through the scene of our first day's fight, then
down through a ravine, where a road had been cut. Here we halted at the foot of the hill where
we formed in battle line and made another charge right up over the hill, exposed to a raking
fire, as we went over the crest and down through the ravine before we could reach the breastworks.
There we lost two lieutenants. A large number of men were killed or wounded. We arrived at
the other side of the hill in great confusion. I shall never forget that horrible scene. There
were parts of several regiments all mixed up together, entangled among fallen trees. But after
getting straightened out, and the line once more formed, the order
to charge was countermanded and we had to lay up there in that fearful
hot sun all day.

I was taken sick and had to rest for awhile but I soon got better and joined the regiment. At about
10 P.M. we were ordered down into the outer ditch of the breastworks. We were there but a short
time, when we were ordered to the right to our old position in the rifle-pits, which we reached
at midnight.

General Payne had been wounded in the leg in the forenoon, but we could not get up where he was
to give him any aid, consequently he had to lay there in the burning sun till night, when he was
brought away in safety. It was a scorching hot day and a number were sunstruck, some cases
proving fatal. I was exhausted and had to lie down in the shade. It was a miserable Sunday scrape
and ended like all the rest that had been started on a Sunday, disastrously. The loss of life was
very great.

We were relieved at night by the Twenty-eighth Connecticut and returned once more to our old camp-ground,
where, after the whizzing of the bullets and the cracking of firearms had died away, all was
still but the groans that could be heard upon the bloody battlefield.

June 15th. The day after the second assault on Port Hudson, General Banks issued a call for
volunteers "for a storming column of a thousand men to vindicate the Flag of the Union, and
the memory of its defenders who had fallen. Let them come forward, every officer and soldier
who shares its perils and its glory shall receive a medal fit to commemorate the first grand
success of the campaign of 1863 for the freedom of the Mississippi River. His name will be placed
upon the roll of honor." The next day, June 16, the order was promulgated and two days later, June
18, these "stormers," as they were called, were gathered into a camp by themselves and put into
training calculated to promote physical strength and endurance.

By every conceivable way they prepared themselves for the work that they were expected to do.
These brave men knew that all the arrangements for their support had been made but the expected
order did not come. They had had three or four dreadful experiences in charging earthworks
and yet these men were willing to assault those same earthworks again.

June 26th. There has been considerable bombarding on account of the Rebels opening some big
guns but I think they are doing very little damage. We heard today that the enemy had driven
our army across the Potomac and that there was great excitement throughout the North. We hoped
that the report was false. Last night I was detailed to go on picket being sent out to an outpost
about a mile from the reserve. We stood by our arms most of the time during the night. There was
brisk firing on our left most of the time.

June 27th. Came in from picket. Today we have been reviewed by Major-General Banks. He made
a temperance speech to us. I think he must have thought that we were getting to be a pretty
tough set of fellows. I don't see how he could have thought that, when we couldn't get very
much that was intoxicating, only what quinine and whiskey Uncle Sam issued to us when we came
off picket duty.

July 1st.

There has been a reason for my not writing in my diary for a few days. We had been told that
no soldiers' letters could be sent North and I put off writing in the hope that I could record
the fall of Port Hudson, that Rebel stronghold. But still the siege drags slowly along. Our
days were divided between rifle-pits and making assaults. The Rebs hold their rifle-pits and
we advance ours or remain stationary.

Yesterday, the colored brigade carried a hill by storm and have held
it, notwithstanding the great effort made by the Rebels to regain it.

Sunday, July 3rd. We attacked Port Hudson at two points, but were beaten back with great loss.
The battle still rages and omnipotence still holds the scales in equal balance. This is the
25th day of the siege and we are still stuck outside the fortification. Last Sunday we made
a general assault. We got inside three times but for want of support were driven back. Men were
mowed down on our right and left. It was a wonder how I was preserved. I have been in four direct
assaults on the breastworks, several skirmishes and yet not a scratch have I received.

Port Hudson, July 4th, (Independence Day). As will be seen, we had no idea of what was going
on more than two hundred miles up the river at Vicksburg, or fifteen hundred miles at Gettysburg.
The same dispatch was sent to General Banks at Port Hudson.

At Gettysburg the army of the Potomac had inflicted a terrible defeat on the army of Northern Virginia.
I really believe this is the quietest Fourth of July I have ever spent. Verily, I don't believe there
has been as much powder burnt here as in New York or Boston. I wouldn't wonder if Hartford,
with its swarm of boys, could outstrip us. Every little while there's a bang, a boom and the
bursting of a shell, for we must keep the besieged from falling asleep and stir them up occasionally.
Now, the music is becoming lively, the gunboats and the batteries are pitching in and altogether
we are giving them Hail Columbia to the tune of Yankee Doodle.

For the last few days we have been in a very enviable frame of mind, expecting every day to be
ordered to participate in another assault. Yet the orders have not come and each night we have
drawn a long breath and exclaimed one more day of grace. Well, so it is, but while we are
getting uneasy for another fight we have a strong desire to avoid charging on the breastworks again.
We've been in three, and some of us four, assaults on the Rebel fortifications and each time we
have been driven back.

The first of July, General Banks made us a great speech promising us that within three days
we would be inside Port Hudson. But the three days have passed and those rascally Rebs still persist
in keeping us outside. Although the fortifications could probably be stormed any day, yet why waste
life when a few days will bring them to terms, as they are now reduced to mule-meat and a little
corn. Deserters are coming in fast. One day as many as one hundred and fifty came in saying they
couldn't stand mule-meat any longer. Now I am feeling sure that within a few days I shall be
able to record the fall of Port Hudson. The Rebel cavalry are harassing our rear ranks continually.
They made a dash day before yesterday from Clinton and Jackson, striking here and there and
picked up some stragglers and foraging parties. A few days ago they dashed into Springfield Landing
whence we draw our stores and ammunition, but our cavalry went after them so quick they found pressing
business in other quarters.

On the other side of the Mississippi quite a force came down. They attacked Donaldsonville
a few days ago demanding the surrender of the town. But the provost-marshal gathered his forces
together, amounting to about two hundred, got inside his fortifications, and waited for them to
come up. The contest was kept up from midnight till daylight, when the sudden appearance of a gunboat
caused the Rebels to skedaddle, leaving about one hundred dead on the field, several hundred
wounded and one hundred and twenty prisoners.

Now comes the great surprise of all. The confounded Rebs have got into Bayou Boeuf and destroyed
or captured the whole of our division property stored there. Tents, baggage, knapsacks, company
and regimental books are all gone. At this time we were all as poor as Job's turkey. Except for
the rags that cover us, we haven't a thing. Were I where I could, I should like to write a letter
to the Soldiers' Aid Society for some handkerchiefs, being reduced to the last shift, i. e.,
the flap of an old shirt picked up in a deserted mansion. Word comes from Colonel Bissell
that he is slowly improving. We are hoping that we shall see him with us again soon. But I really
believe his sickness saved his life, for it is doubtful if he would have come out alive from the
charge the regiment made on the 27th of May.

We are having some very hot weather. We are spending most of our time on picket duty and trying
to keep cool. You would have laughed if you could have seen us at our meals wearing only shirt
and drawers, while our comical colored boy, Adam, squatted down on the ground in front of us
keeping the flies off. This Adam was a corker. Speaking of Mobile one day, he said: "Reckon
you couldn't fool dis nigga much in dat town. Specks he was born and raised dar. Yah! yah!
yah! Reckon he knows ebry hole dar from de liquor-shops to de meeting houses."

July 8th. The dispatch from General Grant, previously referred to, was received. The booming
of big guns, the cheers and shouts of the Union soldiers and the strains of patriotic music informed
the besieged that something had happened. They were not slow to find
out the cause of the rejoicing.

General Gardner sent a flag of truce to General Banks to know if the report that Vicksburg
had surrendered was true and received in reply a copy of General Grant's dispatch. The garrison
had done their duty with brave fortitude. The Union lines were already in some places up to their
breastworks. Starvation was staring them in the face and taking everything into consideration about
the only thing for General Gardner to do was to surrender. Should the expected charge have been
made by the "stormers" it would have been a waste of life for they could not expect to hold their
position.

The 8th was spent in arranging terms for the surrender of the fortress and on the 9th, the storming
column led the advance as the victorious army marched into Port Hudson
to put the Stars and Stripes in the place of the stars and bars.

President Lincoln's long-desired hope was realized and he could now say: "The Father of Waters again
goes unmolested to the sea." The time of the nine-months' men was soon to expire and the Twenty-fifth
Connecticut left very soon for New Orleans, but was detained at Donaldsonville for a few days.

About fifty years ago the people in the North were probably in a frenzy of excitement. We soldiers
in the South had learned to take things cool.

Vicksburg, the stumbling block, had fallen; Port Hudson had caved in; Lee and his army had
gone to one eternal smash; Port Hudson had scarcely surrendered when we were called upon again
to take the field. Those confounded Rebels didn't know how to stay whipped, and General Taylor,
reinforced by General Magruder's Texicans, had again taken the field. They attacked us at Donaldsonville
with a much larger force in proportion to ours but got soundly thrashed; we being strongly reinforced,
came out to meet them and got whipped, and so the matter rested.

The commanding officer of the brigade was flanked through carelessness
and they had to fall back with a loss of two cannon.

Our brigade was on the reserve. We fell in and rushed to the rescue but too late, for they were
in full retreat. A new line was formed, the Twenty-fifth deployed as skirmishers and sent forward.
After advancing quite a distance through the corn we were ordered back and our whole force fell
back about half a mile, where we were still holding a strong position. The Rebels meanwhile had
left and fortified at Labordieville, some twenty miles distant. The Twenty-fifth Connecticut
regiment, after one of the most trying campaigns of the war, was about to take another sea
voyage.

Here are a few verses which I have written on the siege of Port Hudson:

PORT HUDSON.

Well do I remember, how fifty years ago, Down on the banks of the Mississippi, We met the Southern
foe, And faced a storm of shot and shell; That many a life was sacrificed Mid battle hell
of smoke and flame On the field of Port Hudson.

Well do I remember, how those days, The gallant Third Brigade went
Marching down into the woods Like men on dress parade; Though from
the wood in front The foe their deadly missiles sent.

Thinning our ranks Those days at Bloody Port Hudson.

How on the left the Connecticut Thirteenth engaged in desperate fight And left in front the Twenty-fifth
was marshaled on the right; Side by side, New York and Maine for honors did contend, When Rebel
yell and Yankee cheer was heard at Port Hudson.

And though we drove away the foe How dear was victory won, For when the din of battle ceased,
The burning sun shone down upon the bloody field And shone on foe and friend, Who bravely
met a soldier's fate, That day on the field of Port Hudson.

Now fifty years have gone, How soon they pass away, Since we did wear
the army blue; And now we wear the gray, For time has turned our hair
to gray, To show us near the end, And soon will none be left to Tell
the tale of Port Hudson.

Were I to pledge those bygone days Oh this would be my toast: "Here's to the dear old Stars
and Stripes, Our country's pride and boast; Here's to the Union Volunteers, Who did the flag
defend, And here's to my old comrades Who fought at Port Hudson."

August 8th. It was a beautiful morning and we were in camp waiting
for orders to start. We had orders to be ready to go on board the
Steamer Thomas Scott at twelve o'clock. At two o'clock we were gliding
down the old Mississippi. We stopped at New Orleans, took some horses
aboard and started again at about six o'clock. Arrived at the mouth
of the Mississippi at midnight. Here we waited for a pilot, took him
on board and was off again.

August 9th, Sunday. At 6:30 o'clock we
passed the bar, left the pilot and in a short time were out of sight
of land. The captain of the boat said he would land us in New York
by Saturday night, if all went well.

August 10th. It was a fine morning
and we were enjoying ourselves with a deck passage at that.

August
11th. This morning we passed several lighthouses; one was upon Tortugas
Island.

August 12th. The old steamer was making good speed. Comrade
Chadwick died last night; this morning he was buried at sea. He was
a member of our regiment and enlisted from Andover, this state.

August
13th. This morning was very fine, but the ship rolled and pitched
considerable, owing to being in the Gulf Stream.

August 14th. The
old ship was making good speed and we were hoping to get into New
York harbor by Saturday night, as it was getting pretty tiresome on
the old filthy vessel, with the vermin almost unbearable.

August
15th. This was a beautiful day and the old steamer continued making
good time.

August 16th. The day was fine and we expected to get into
port at night and our expectations were realized, about seven o'clock
after being in this dirty place for a whole week.

August 17th. We
arrived in port last night but had to stay upon the ship another night.
I managed to get a small loaf of bread and if I remember correctly,
I wasn't long devouring it, for we had had nothing but hard-tack and
raw salt pork to eat and condensed water to drink since we went aboard
the ship at New Orleans. This (Sunday) morning we were allowed to
go ashore and were kept penned up till about night when we went aboard
the good-looking old boat, City of Hartford. We arrived in Hartford,
if my memory serves me correctly, at about 10 o'clock Monday morning,
August 18th, 1863, and I guess we were about as tough a looking set
of fellows as ever came off the boat. Yes, I must admit, we were a
pretty hard looking set, what there was left of us, for we had dwindled
down to less than one-third the number which left Hartford about a
year previous. What a change had come over us. Why, some of our friends
didn't know us, we had changed so. One comrade in particular I will
mention, Wm. Goodrich. He went from Glastonbury in my company. He
was a big fine looking man, weighing two hundred and fifty pounds
when we went away, and when he came home he hardly weighed one hundred
and fifty. Was it any wonder that our friends couldn't recognize us
with the beards we had grown on our faces, and the soiled clothing
we were wearing? It is quite as necessary
to be a good shot, for a grey pig standing under the lee of a boulder of exactly his own colour
is a much more difficult object to hit from the opposite side of a ravine than a stag; and
a wild boar is every whit as keen of scent and sharp of eye and ear as any antlered "Monarch
of the Glen."

Imagine then a beautiful winter's morning without wind or rain. There has been perhaps a sharp
frost over-night, but after a couple of hours of sunshine the air is as warm and bright as
midsummer. We used to be glad enough of a wood fire at breakfast; but after that meal had been
eaten we went into the verandah, open to the north-east (our warm quarter), which made a delicious
winter parlour, and basked in the blazing sunshine. I used often to bring out a chair and a
table, and work and read there all the morning, without either hat or jacket. But it sometimes
happened that once or twice a week, on just such a lovely morning, F---- would proclaim his
intention of going out to look for pigs, and, sooner than be left behind, I nearly always begged
to be allowed to come too. There was no fear of my getting tired or lagging behind; and as
I was willing to make myself generally useful, by carrying the telescope, a revolver for close
quarters, and eke a few sandwiches, the offer of my company used to be graciously accepted.
We could seldom procure the loan of a good pig-dog, and after one excursion with a certain
dog of the name of "Pincher," I preferred going out by ourselves.

 On that occasion F---- did not take his rifle, as there was no
chance of getting a long shot at our game; for the dog would surely
bring the pig to bay, and then the hunter must trust to a revolver or
the colonial boar-spear, half a pair of shears (I suppose it should be
called a shear) bound firmly on a flax stick by green flax-leaves. We
had heard of pigs having been seen by our out-station shepherd at the
back of the run, and as we were not encumbered by the heavy rifle, we
mounted our horses and rode as far as we could towards the range where
the pigs had been grubbing up the hill sides in unmolested security for
some time past. Five miles from home the ground became so rough that
our horses could go no further; we therefore jumped off, tied them to
a flax-bush, taking off the saddles in case they broke loose, and
proceeded on foot over the jungly, over-grown saddle. On the other side
we came upon a beautiful gully, with a creek running through it, whose
banks were so densely fringed with scrub that we could not get through
to the stream, which we heard rippling amid the tangled shrubs. If we
could only have reached the water our best plan would have been to get
into it and follow its windings up the ravine; but even Pincher could
hardly squeeze and burrow through the impenetrable fence of matapo and
goi, which were woven together by fibres of a thorny creeper called "a
lawyer" by the shepherds.

It was very tantalising, for in less than five minutes we heard trusty Pincher "speaking" to
a boar, and knew that he had baled it up against a tree, and was calling to us to come and
help him. F----ran about like a lunatic, calling out; "Coming Pincher: round him up, good dog!"
and so forth; but they were all vain promises, for he could not get in. I did my best in searching
for an opening, and gave many false hopes of having found one. At last I said, "If I run up
the mountain side, and look down on that mass of scrub, perhaps I may see some way into it
from above." "No: do you stay here, and see, if the pig breaks cover, which way he goes." Up
the steep hill, therefore, F---- rushed, as swiftly and lightly as one of his own mountain
sheep; and in a minute or two I saw him standing, revolver in hand, on an overhanging rock,
peering anxiously down on the leafy mass below.

Pincher and the creek made such a noise between them that I could not hear what F---- said,
and only guessed from his despairing gestures that there was no trap door visible in the green
roof. I signalled as well as I could that he was to come down directly, for his-standing-place
looked most insecure. Insecure indeed it proved. As I spoke the great fragment of rock loosely
embedded in earth on the mountain side gave way with a crash, and came tumbling majestically
down on the top of the scrub. As for F----, he described a series of somersaults in the air,
which however agreeable in themselves, were very trying to the nerves of the spectatrix below.
My first dread was least the rock should crush him, but to my great joy I saw at once that
it was rolling slowly down the hill, whilst F----'s vigorous bound off it as it gave way, had
carried him well into the middle of the leafy cushion beneath him, where he presently landed
flat on his back!

I expected every moment to hear the revolver go off, but mercifully it did not do so; and as
his thorny bed was hardly to be endured, F---- soon kicked himself off it, and before I could
realize that he was unhurt, had scrambled to his feet, and was rushing off, crying in school-boy
glee, "That will fetch him out" That (the rock) certainly did fetch him (the pig) out in a
moment, and Pincher availed himself of the general confusion to seize hold of his enemy's hind
leg, which he never afterwards let go. The boar kept snapping and champing his great tusks;
but Pincher, even with the leg in his mouth, was too active to be caught: so as the boar found
that it was both futile and undignified to try to run away with a dog hanging on his hind-quarters,
he tried another plan. Making for a clump of Ti-ti palms he went to bay, and contrived to take
up a very good defensive position. Pincher would have never given up his mouthful of leg if
F---- had not called him off, for it seemed impossible to fire the revolver whilst the dog
held on. This change of tactics was much against Pincher's judgment, and he kept rushing furiously
in between F---- and the boar. As for me, I prudently retired behind a big boulder, on which
I could climb if the worst came to the worst, and called out from time to time, to both dog
and man, "Oh, don't!"

They did not even hear me, for the din of battle was loud. The pig dodged about so fast, that
although F----'s bullets lodged in the palm tree at his back, not one struck a vulnerable part,
and at last F----, casting his revolver behind him for me to pick up and reload, closed with
his foe, armed only with the shear-spear. Pincher considered this too dangerous, and rushed
in between them to distract the boar's attention. Just as F---- aimed a thrust at his chest,--for
it was of no use trying to penetrate his hide,--the boar lowered his head, caught poor faithful
Pincher's exposed flank, and tore it open with his razor-like tusk; but in the meantime the
spear had gone well home into his brawny chest, exactly beneath the left shoulder, and his
life-blood came gushing out. I was so infuriated at the sight of Pincher's frightful wound
that I felt none of my usual pity for the victim; and rushing up to F---- with the revolver,
of which only a couple of chambers were loaded, thrust it into his hand with an entreaty to
"kill him quickly." This F---- was quite willing to do for his own sake, as a wounded boar
is about the most dangerous beast on earth; and although the poor brute kept snapping at the
broken flax-stick sticking in his heart, he fired a steady shot which brought the pig on his
knees, only to roll over dead the next moment.

I cannot help pausing to say that I sewed up Pincher's wound then and there, with some of the
contents of my Cambusmore house-wife; which always accompanied me on my sporting expeditions,
and we carried him between us down to where the horses were fastened. There I mounted; and
F---- lifting the faithful creature on my lap, we rode slowly home, dipping our handkerchiefs
in cold water at every creek we crossed, and laying them on his poor flank. He was as patient
and brave as possible, and bore his sufferings and weakness for days afterwards in a way which
was a lesson to one, so grateful and gentle was he. His brave and sensible behaviour met its
due reward in a complete though slow recovery.

I have only left myself space for one little sketch more; but it comes so vividly before me
that I cannot shut it out. After a long day's walking, over the hills and vallies, so beautiful
beneath our azure winter-sky, walking which was delightful as an expedition, but unsuccessful
as to sport, we crossed the track of a large boar. We knew he was old by his being alone, and
it was therefore very certain that he would show fight if we came up with him. Patiently we
followed the track over a low saddle, through a clump of brushwood menuka, the broken twigs
of which showed how large an animal had just passed by. Here and there a freshly grubbed-up
Spaniard showed where he had paused for a snack; but at length we dropped down on the river
bed, with its wide expanse of shingle, and there we lost all clue to our game.

After a little hesitation, F---- decided on climbing a high cliff on the right bank of the
river, and trying to catch a glimpse of him. The opposite hill-side was gaunt and bare; a southern
aspect shut out the sun in winter, and for all its rich traces of copper ore, "Holkam's Head"
found no favour in the eyes of either shepherds or master. Grass would not grow there except
in summer, and its gray, shingly sides were an eye-sore to its owner. We sat down on the cliff,
and looked around carefully. Presently F---- said, in a breathless whisper of intense delight,
"I see him." In vain I looked and looked, but nothing could my stupid eyes discover. "Lie down,"
said F---- to me, just as if I had been a dog. I crouched as low as possible, whilst F----settled
himself comfortably flat on his stomach, and prepared to take a careful aim at the opposite
side of the hill.

After what seemed a long time, he pulled his rifle's trigger, and the flash and crack was followed
apparently by one of the gray boulders opposite leaping up, and then rolling heavily down the
hill. F---- jumped up in triumph crying, "Come along, and don't forget the revolver." When
we had crossed the river, reckless of getting wet to our waists in icy-cold water, F---- took
the revolver from me and went first; but, after an instant's examination, he called out, "Dead
as a door-nail! come and look at him." So I came, with great caution, and a more repulsive
and disgusting sight cannot be imagined than the huge carcass of our victim already stiffening
in death. The shot had been a fortunate one, for only an inch away from the hole the bullet
had made his shoulders were regularly plated with thick horny scales, off which a revolver
bullet would have glanced harmlessly, and he bore marks of having fought many and many a battle
with younger rivals. His huge tusks were notched and broken, and he had evidently been driven
out from among his fellows as a quarrelsome member of their society. Already the keen-eyed
hawks were hovering above the great monster, and we left him to his fate in the solitary river
gorge, where all was bleak and cold and gloomy,--a fitting death-place for the fierce old warrior.

Chapter IV: Skating in the back country.

I do not believe that even in Canada the skating can be better than that which was within our
reach in the Malvern Hills. Among our sheltered valleys an sunny slopes the hardest frost only
lasted a few hour after dawn; but twenty-five miles further back, on the border of the glacier
region, the mountain tarns could boast of ice several feet thick all the winter. We heard rumours
of far-inland lakes, across which heavily-laden bullock-teams could pass in perfect safety
for three months of the year, and we grumbled at the light film over our own large ponds, which
would not bear even my little terrier's weight after mid-day: and yet it was cold enough at
night, during our short bright winters, to satisfy the most icy-minded person. I think I have
mentioned before that the wooden houses in New Zealand, especially those roughly put together
up-country, are by no means weather-tight. Disagreeable as this may be, it is doubtless the
reason of the extraordinary immunity from colds and coughs which we hill-dwellers enjoyed.
Living between walls formed by inch-boards over-lapping each other, and which can only be made
to resemble English rooms by being canvassed and papered inside, the pure fresh air finds its
way in on all sides. A hot room in winter is an impossibility, in spite of drawn curtains and
blazing fires, therefore the risk of sudden changes of temperature is avoided.

Some such theory as this is absolutely necessary to account for the wonderfully good health
enjoyed by all, in the most capricious and trying climate I have ever come across. When a strong
nor'-wester was howling down the glen, I have seen the pictures on my drawing-room walls blowing
out to an angle of 45 degrees, although every door and window in the little low wooden structure
had been carefully closed for hours. It has happened to me more than once, on getting up in
the morning, to find my clothes, which had been laid on a chair beneath my bedroom window overnight,
completely covered by powdered snow, drifting in through the ill-fitting casement. This same
window was within a couple of feet of my bed, and between me and it was neither curtain nor
shelter of any sort. Of a winter's evening I have often been obliged to wrap myself up in a
big Scotch maud, as I sat, dressed in a high linsey gown, by a blazing fire, so hard was the
frost outside; but by ten o'clock next morning I would be loitering about the verandah, basking
in the sunshine, and watching the light flecks of cloud-wreaths and veils floating against
an Italian-blue sky. Yet such is the inherent discontent of the human heart, that instead of
rejoicing in this lovely mid-day sunshine, we actually mourned over the vanished ice which
at daylight had been found, by a much-envied early riser, strong enough to slide on for half
an hour. It seemed almost impossible to believe that any one had been sliding that morning
within a few feet of where I sat working in a blaze of sunshine, with my pretty grey and pink
Australian parrot pluming itself on the branch of a silver wattle close by, and "Joey," the
tiny monkey from Panama, sitting on the skirt of my gown, with a piece of its folds arranged
by himself shawl-wise over his glossy black shoulders. If either of these tropical pets had
been left out after four o'clock that sunny day, they, would have been frozen to death before
our supper time.

It was just on such a day as this, and in just such a bright mid-day hour, that a distant neighbour
of ours rode up to the garden gate, leading a pack horse. Outside the saddle-bags, with which
this animal was somewhat heavily laden, could be plainly seen a beautiful new pair of Oxford
skates, glinting in the sunshine; and it must have been the sight of these beloved implements
which called forth the half-envious remark from one of the gentlemen, "I suppose you have lots
of skating up at your place?"

"Well, not exactly at my station, but there is a capital lake ten miles from my house where
I am sure of a good day's skating any time between June and August," answered Mr. C. H----,
our newly arrived guest.

We all looked at each other. I believe I heaved a deep sigh, and dropped my thimble, which
"Joey" instantly seized, and with a low chirrup of intense delight, commenced to poke down
between the boards of the verandah. It was too bad of us to give such broad hints by looks
if not by words. Poor Mr. C. H---- was a bachelor in those days: he had not been at his little
out-of-the-way homestead for some weeks, and was ignorant of its resources in the way of firing
(always an important matter at a station), or even of tea and mutton. He had no woman-servant,
and was totally unprepared for an incursion of skaters; and yet,--New Zealand fashion,--no
sooner did he perceive that we were all longing and pining for some skating, than he invited
us all most cordially to go up to his back-country run the very next day, with him, and skate
as long as we liked. This was indeed a delightful prospect, the more especially as it happened
to be only Monday, which gave us plenty of time to be back again by Sunday, for our weekly
service. We made it a rule never to be away from home on that day, lest any of our distant
congregation should ride their twenty miles or so across country and find us absent.

When the host is willing and the guests eager, it does not take long to arrange a plan, so
the next morning found three of us, besides Mr. C. H---- mounted and ready to start directly
after breakfast. I have often been asked how I managed in those days about toilette arrangements,
when it was impossible to carry any luggage except a small "swag," closely packed in a waterproof
case and fastened on the same side as the saddle-pocket. First of all I must assure my lady
readers that I prided myself on turning out as neat and natty as possible at the end of the
journey, and yet I rode not only in my every-day linsey gown, which could be made long or short
at pleasure, but in my crinoline. This was artfully looped up on the right side and tied by
a ribbon, in such a way that when I came out ready dressed to mount, no one in the world could
have guessed that I had on any cage beneath my short riding habit with a loose tweed jacket
over the body of the dress. Within the "swag" was stowed a brush and comb, collar, cuffs and
handkerchiefs, a little necessary linen, a pair of shoes, and perhaps a ribbon for my hair
if I meant to be very smart. On this occasion we all found that our skates occupied a terribly
large proportion both of weight and space in our modest kits, but still we were much too happy
to grumble.

Where could you find a gayer quartette than started at an easy canter up the valley that fresh
bracing morning? From the very first our faces were turned to the south-west, and before us
rose the magnificent chain of the Southern Alps, with their bold snowy peaks standing out in
a glorious dazzle against the cobalt sky. A stranger, or colonially speaking, a "new chum,"
would have thought we must needs cross that barrier-range before we could penetrate any distance
into the back country, but we knew of long winding vallies and gullies running up between the
giant slopes, which would lead us, almost without our knowing how high we had climbed, up to
the elevated but sheltered plateau among the back country ranges where Mr. C. H----'s homestead
stood. There was only one steep saddle to be crossed, and that lay between us and Rockwood,
six miles off. It was the worst part of the journey for the horses, so we had easy consciences
in dismounting and waiting an hour when we reached that most charming and hospitable of houses.
I had just time for one turn round the beautiful garden, where the flowers and shrubs of old
England grew side by side with the wild and lovely blossoms of our new island home, when the
expected coo-e rang out shrill and clear from the rose-covered porch. It was but little past
mid-day when we made our second start, and set seriously to work over fifteen miles of fairly
good galloping ground. This distance brought us well up to the foot of a high range, and the
last six miles of the journey had to be accomplished in single file, and with great care and
discretion, for the track led through bleak desolate vallies, round the shoulder of abutting
spurs, through swamps, and up and down rocky staircases. Mr. C. H---- and his cob both knew
the way well however, and my bay mare Helen had the cleverest legs and the wisest as well as
prettiest head of her race. If left to herself she seldom made a mistake, and the few tumbles
she and I ever had together, took place only when she found herself obliged to go my way instead
of her own. We entered the gorges of the high mountains between us and the west, and soon lost
the sun; even the brief winter twilight faded away more swiftly than usual amid those dark
defiles; and it was pitch dark, though only five o'clock, when we heard a sudden and welcome
clamour of dog voices.

These deep-mouthed tones invariably constitute the first notes of a sheep-station's welcome;
and a delightful sound it is to the belated and bewildered traveller, for besides guiding his
horse to the right spot, the noise serves to bring out some one to see who the traveller may
be. On this occasion we heard one man say to the other, "It's the boss:" so almost before we
had time to dismount from our tired horses (remember they had each carried a heavy "swag" besides
their riders), lights gleamed from the windows of the little house, and a wood fire sparkled
and sputtered on the open hearth. Mr. C. H---- only just guided me to the door of the sitting-room,
making an apology and injunction together,--"Its very rough I am afraid: but you can do what
you like;"--before he hastened back to assist his guests in settling their horses comfortably
for the night. Labour used to be so dear and wages so high, especially in the back country
of New Zealand, that the couple of men,--one for indoor work, to saw wood, milk, cook, sweep,
wash, etc., and the other to act as gardener, groom, ploughman, and do all the numerous odd
jobs about a place a hundred miles and more from the nearest shop,--represented a wage-expenditure
of at least 200 pounds a year. Every gentleman therefore as a matter of course sees to his
own horse when he arrives unexpectedly at a station, and I knew I should have at least half
an hour to myself.

The first thing to do was to let down my crinoline, for I could only walk like a crab in it
when it was fastened up for riding, kilt up my linsey gown, take off my hat and jacket, and
set to work The curtains must be drawn close, and the chairs moved out from their symmetrical
positions against the wall; then I made an expedition into the kitchen, and won the heart of
the stalwart cook, who was already frying chops over the fire, by saying in my best German,
"I have come to help you with the tea." Poor man! it was very unfair, for Mr. C. H---- had
told me during our ride that his servitor was a German, and I had employed the last long hour
of the journey in rubbing up my exceedingly rusty knowledge of that language, and arranging
one or two effective sentences. Poor Karl's surprise and delight knew no bounds, and he burst
forth into a long monologue, to which I could find no readier answers than smiles and nods,
hiding my inability to follow up my brilliant beginning under the pretence of being very busy.
By the time the gentlemen had stabled and fed the horses and were ready, Karl and I between
us had arranged a bright cosy little apartment with a capital tea-dinner on the table. After
this meal there were pipes and toddy, and as I could not retire, like Mrs. Micawber at David
Copperfield's supper party, into the adjoining bedroom and sit by myself in the cold, I made
the best of the somewhat dense clouds of smoke with which I was soon surrounded, and listened
to the fragmentary plans for the next day. Then we all separated for the night, and in two
minutes I was fast asleep in a little room no bigger than the cabin of a ship, with an opossum
rug on a sofa for my bed and bedding.

It was cold enough the next morning, I assure you: so cold that it was difficult to believe
the statement that all the gentlemen had been down at daybreak to bathe in the great lake which
spread like an inland sea before the bay-window of the little sitting room. This lake, the
largest of the mountain chain, never freezes, on account partly of its great depth, and also
because of its sunny aspect. Our destination lay far inland, and if we meant to have a good
long day's skating we must start at once. Such a perfect day as it was! I felt half inclined
to beg off the first day on the ice, and to spend my morning wandering along the rata-fringed
shores of Lake Coleridge, with its glorious enclosing of hills which might fairly be called
mountains; but I feared to seem capricious or lazy, when really my only difficulty was in selecting
a pleasure. The sun had climbed well over the high barriers which lay eastwards, and was shining
brightly down through the quivering blue ether overhead; the frost sparkled on every broad
flax-blade or slender tussock-spine, as if the silver side of earth were turned outwards that
winter morning.

No sooner had we mounted (with no "swag" except our skates this time) than Mr. C. H---- set
spurs to his horse, and bounded over the slip-rail of the paddock before Karl could get it
down. We were too primitive for gates in those parts: they only belonged to the civilization
nearer Christchurch; and I had much ado to prevent my pony from following his lead, especially
as the other gentlemen were only too delighted to get rid of some of their high spirits by
a jump. However Karl got the top rail down for me, and "Mouse" hopped over the lower one gaily,
overtaking the leader of the expedition in a very few strides. We could not keep up our rapid
pace long; for the ground became terribly broken and cut up by swamps, quicksands, blind creeks,
and all sorts of snares and pit-falls. Every moment added to the desolate grandeur of the scene.
Bleak hills rose up on either hand, with still bleaker and higher peaks appearing beyond them
again. An awful silence, unbroken by the familiar cheerful sound of the sheep calling to each
other,--for even the hardy merino cannot live in these ranges during the winter months,--brooded
around us, and the dark mass of a splendid "bush," extending over many hundred acres, only
added to the lonely grandeur of the scene. We rode almost the whole time in a deep cold shade,
for between us and the warm sun-rays were such lofty mountains that it was only for a few brief
noontide moments he could peep over their steep sides.

After two hour's riding, at the best pace which we could keep up through these terrible gorges,
a sharp turn of the track brought us full in view of our destination. I can never forget that
first glimpse of Lake Ida. In the cleft of a huge, gaunt, bare hill, divided as if by a giant
hand, lay a large black sheet of ice. No ray of sunshine ever struck it from autumn until spring,
and it seemed impossible to imagine our venturing to skate merrily in such a sombre looking
spot. But New-Zealand sheep farmers are not sentimental I am afraid. Beyond a rapid thought
of self-congratulation that such "cold country" was not on their run, they did not feel affected
by its eternal silence and gloom. The ice would bear, and what more could skater's heart desire?
At the end of the dark tarn, nearest to the track by which we had approached it, stood a neat
little hut; and judge of my amazement when, as we rode up to it, a young gentleman, looking
as if he was just going out for a day's deer-stalking, opened the low door and came out to
greet us. Yes, here was one of those strange anomalies peculiar to the colonies. A young man,
fresh from his University, of refined tastes and cultivated intellect, was leading here the
life of a boor, without companionship or appreciation of any sort. His "mate" seemed to be
a rough West countryman, honest and well meaning enough, but utterly unsuited to Mr. K----.
It was the old story, of wild unpractical ideas hastily carried out. Mr. K---- had arrived
in New Zealand a couple of years before, with all his worldly wealth,--1,000 pounds. Finding
this would not go very far in the purchase of a good sheep-run, and hearing some calculations
about the profit to be derived from breeding cattle, based upon somebody's lucky speculation,
he eagerly caught at one of the many offers showered upon unfortunate "new chums," and bought
the worst and bleakest bit of one of the worst and bleakest runs in the province. The remainder
of his money was laid out in purchasing stock; and now he had sat down patiently to await,
in his little hut, until such time as his brilliant expectations would be realized. I may say
here they became fainter and fainter year by year, and at last faded away altogether; leaving
him at the end of three lonely, dreadful years with exactly half his capital, but double his
experience. However this has nothing to do with my story, except that I can never think of
our skating expedition to that lonely lake, far back among those terrible hills, without a
thrill of compassion for the only living human being, who dwelt among them.

It was too cold to dawdle about, however, that day. The frost lay white and hard upon the ground,
and we felt that we were cruel in leaving our poor horses standing to get chilled whilst we
amused ourselves. Although my beloved Helen was not there, having been exchanged for the day
in favour of Master Mouse, a shaggy pony, whose paces were as rough as its coat, I begged a
red blanket from Mr. K----, and covered up Helen's stable companion, whose sleek skin spoke
of a milder temperature than that on Lake Ida's "gloomy shore." Our simple arrangements were
soon made. Mr. K---- left directions to his mate to prepare a repast consisting of tea, bread,
and mutton for us, and, each carrying our skates, we made the best of our way across the frozen
tussocks to the lake. Mr. K---- proved an admirable guide over its surface, for he was in the
habit during the winter of getting all his firewood out of the opposite "bush," and bringing
it across the lake on sledges drawn by bullocks. We accused him of having cut up our ice dreadfully
by these means; but he took us to a part of the vast expanse where an unbroken field of at
least ten acres of ice stretched smoothly before us. Here were no boards marked "DANGEROUS,"
nor any intimation of the depth of water beneath. The most timid person could feel no apprehension
on ice which seemed more solid than the earth; so accordingly in a few moments we had buckled
and strapped on our skates, and were skimming and gliding--and I must add, falling--in all
directions. We were very much out of practice at first, except Mr. K----, who skated every
day, taking short cuts across the lake to track a stray heifer or explore a blind gully.

I despair of making my readers see the scene as I saw it, or of conveying any adequate idea
of the intense, the appalling loneliness of the spot. It really seemed to me as if our voices
and laughter, so far from breaking the deep eternal silence, only brought it out into stronger
relief. On either hand rose up, shear from the waters edge, a great, barren, shingly mountain;
before us loomed a dark pine forest, whose black shadows crept up until they merged in the
deep crevasses and fissures of the Snowy Range. Behind us stretched the winding gullies by
which we had climbed to this mountain tarn, and Mr. K----'s little hut and scrap of a garden
and paddock gave the one touch of life, or possibility of life, to this desolate region. In
spite of all scenic wet blankets we tried hard to be gay, and no one but myself would acknowledge
that we found the lonely grandeur of our "rink" too much for us. We skated away perseveringly
until we were both tired and hungry, when we returned to Mr. K----'s hut, took a hasty meal,
and mounted our chilled steeds. Mr. C. H---- insisted on bringing poor Mr. K---- back with
us, though he was somewhat reluctant to come, alleging that a few days spent in the society
of his kind made the solitude of his weather-board hut all the more dreary. The next day and
yet the next we returned to our gloomy skating ground, and when I turned round in my saddle
as we rode away on Friday evening, for a last look at Lake Ida lying behind us in her winter
black numbness, her aspect seemed more forbidding than ever, for only the bare steep hill-sides
could be seen; the pine forest and white distant mountains were all blotted and blurred out
of sight by a heavy pall of cloud creeping slowly up.

"Let us ride fast," cried Mr. K----, "or we shall have a sou'-wester upon us;" so we galloped
home as quickly as we could, over ground that I don't really believe I could summon courage
to walk across, ever so slowly, to-day,--but then one's nerves and courage are in very different
order out in New Zealand to the low standard which rules for ladies in England, who "live at
home in ease!" Long before we reached home the storm was pelting us: my little jacket was like
a white board when I took it off, for the sleet and snow had frozen as it fell. I was wet to
the skin, and so numb with cold I could hardly stand when we reached home at last in the dark
and down-pour. I could only get my things very imperfectly dried, and had to manage as best
I could, but yet no one even thought of making the inquiry next morning when I came out to
breakfast, "Have you caught cold?" It would have seemed a ridiculous question.

Chapter V: Toboggon-ing.

I cannot resist the temptation to touch upon one of the winter amusements which came to us
two years later. Yet the word "amusement" seems out of place, no one in the Province having
much heart to amuse themselves, for the great snow storm of August, 1867, had just taken place,
and we were in the first days of bewilderment at the calamity which had befallen us all. A
week's incessant snow-fall, accompanied by a fierce and freezing south-west wind, had not only
covered the whole of the mountains from base to brow with shining white, through which not
a single dark rock jutted, but had drifted on the plains for many feet deep. Gullies had been
filled up by the soft, driving flakes, creeks were bridged over, and for three weeks and more
all communication between the stations and the various townships was cut off. The full extent
of our losses was unknown to us, and dreary as were our forebodings of misfortune, none of
us guessed that snow to be the winding sheet of half a million of sheep. The magnificent semi-circle
of the Southern Alps stood out, for a hundred miles from north to south, in appalling white
distinctness, and no one in the whole Colony had ever seen the splendid range thus free from
fleck or flaw. We had done all we could within working distance, but what was, the use of digging
in drifts thirty feet deep? Amidst, and almost above, the terrible anxiety about our own individual
safety,--for the snow was over the roof of many of the station-houses,--came the pressing question,
"Where are the sheep?" A profound silence unbroken by bleat of lamb, or bark of dog, or any
sound of life, had reigned for many days, when a merciful north-westerly gale sprung, up, and
releasing the heavily-laden earth from its white bondage, freed the miserable remnant of our
flocks and herds. At least, I should say, it freed those sheep which had travelled down to
the vallies, driven before the first pitiless gusts, but we knew that many hundreds, if not
thousands, of wethers must have been surprised and imprisoned far back among the hills.

Such knowledge could not be acted upon, however, for no human being could hope to plunge through
the drifts around us. Old shepherds who had lived on the run for fifteen years, confessed that
they did not know their way fifty yards from the homestead. The vallies were filled up, so
that one gully looked precisely like its fellow; rocks, scrub, Ti-ti palms, all our local land-marks
had disappeared; not a fence or gate could be seen in all the country side. Here and there
a long wave-like line in the smooth mass would lead us to suppose that a wire fence lay buried
beneath its curves, but we had no means of knowing for certain. Near the house every shrub
and out-building, every hay-stack or wood-heap, had all been covered up, and no man might even
guess where they lay.

This had been the terrible state of things, and although the blessed warm wind had removed
our immediate and pressing fear of starvation, we could not hope to employ ourselves in searching
for our missing sheep for many days to come. None of us had been able to take any exercise
for more than a fortnight, and having done all that could possibly be done near at hand, F----
set to work to manufacture some sledges out of old packing-cases. Quite close to the house,
a hill sloped smoothly for about 300 yards, at an angle of 40 degrees; along its side lay a
perfectly level and deep drift, which did not show any signs of thawing for more than a month,
and we resolved to use this as a natural Montagne Russe. The construction of a suitable sledge
was the first difficulty to be surmounted, and many were the dismal failures and break-neck
catastrophes which preceded what we considered a safe and successful vehicle. Not only was
it immensely difficult to make, without either proper materials or tools, a sledge which could
hold two people (for F---- declared it was no fun sleighing alone), but his "patent brakes"
proved the most broken of reeds to lean upon when the sledge was dashing down the steep incline
at the rate of a thousand miles an hour.

We nearly broke our necks more than once, and I look back now with amazement to our fool-hardiness.
How well I remember one expedition, when F----, who had been hammering away in a shed all the
morning, came to find me sitting in the sun in the verandah, and to inform me that at last
he had perfected a conveyance which would combine speed with safety. Undaunted by previous
mishaps, I sallied forth, and in company with Mr. U---- and F----, climbed painfully up the
high hill I have mentioned, by some steps which they had cut in the frozen snow. Without some
such help we could not have kept our footing for a moment, and as long as I live I shall never
forget the sensation of leaving my friendly Alpenstock planted in the snow, and of seating
myself on that frail sledge. Perhaps I ought to describe it here. A board, about six feet long
by one foot broad, with sheet-iron nailed beneath it, and curved upwards in front; on its upper
surface a couple of battens were fixed, one quite at the foremost end, and one half-way. That
was F----'s new patent sledge, warranted to go faster down an incline than any other conveyance
on the surface of the earth. I was the wretched "passenger," as he called me, on more than
one occasion, and I will briefly describe my experiences. "Why did you go?" is a very natural
question to arise in my reader's mind; and sitting here at my writing-table, I feel as if I
must have been a lunatic to venture. But in those delicious wild days, no enterprise seemed
too rash or dangerous to engage in, from mounting a horse which had never seen or felt the
fluttering of a habit, to embarking on the conveyance I have described above, and starting
down a mountain-side at the risk of a broken neck.

Well, to return to that terrible moment. I see the whole scene now. The frail, rude sledge,
with its breaks made out of a couple of standards from a wire fence, connected by a strong
iron chain; F----seated at the back of the precious contrivance, firmly grasping a standard
in each hand; Mr. U---- clinging desperately to his Alpen-stock with one hand, whilst with
the other he helps me on to the board; and Nettle, my dear little terrier, standing shivering
on three legs, sniffing distrustfully at the sledge. It is extremely difficult even to take
one's place on a board a dozen inches wide. My petticoats have to be firmly wrapped around
me, and care taken that no fold projects beyond the sledge, or I should be soon dragged out
of my frail seat. I fix my feet firmly against the batten, and F---- cries, "Are you ready?"
"Oh, not yet!" I gasp, clinging to Mr. U----'s hand as if I never meant to let it go. "Hold
tight!" he shouts. Now what a mockery this injunction was. I had nothing to hold on to except
my own knees, and I clasped them convulsively. Mr. U---- says, "You're all right now," and
before I can realize that he has let go my hand, before my courage is half-way up to the necessary
height, we are off. The breaks are slightly depressed for the first few yards, in order to
regulate our pace, and because there is a tremendously steep pitch just at first. Once we have
safely passed that he tilts up the standards, and our sledge shoots like a meteor down the
perfectly smooth incline. I cannot draw my breath, we are going at such a pace through the
keen air; I give myself up for lost. We come to another steep pitch near the bottom of the
hill; F---- is laughing to such a degree at me that he does not put down his breaks soon enough,
and loses control of the sledge. We appear to leap down the dip, and then the sledge turns
first one way and then the other, its zinc prow being sometimes up-hill and some-times down.
It seems wonderful that we keep on the sledge, for we have no means of holding on except by
pressing our feet against the battens; yet in the grand and final upset at the bottom of the
hill, the sledge is there too, and we find we have never parted company from it.

Will any one believe that after such a perilous journey, I could actually be persuaded to try
again? But so it was. At first the fright (for I was really terrified) used to make me very
cross, and I declared that I was severely hurt, if not "kilt entirely;" but after I had shaken
the snow out of my linsey skirt, and discovered that beyond the damage to my nerves I was uninjured,
F---- was quite sure to try to persuade me to make another attempt, and I was equally sure
to yield to the temptation. As well as my memory serves me, we only made one really successful
journey, and that was on an occasion when we kept the breaks down the whole way. But I never
could insure similar precautions being taken again, and we consequently experienced every variety
of mishaps possible to sledge travellers. I persevered however for some days until the north-westerly
wind, which was blowing softly all the time, began to lay bare the sharpest points of the rocks,
and then I gave in at once, and would not be a "passenger" any more. It was rather too much
to strike one's head against a jagged fragment of rock, or to dislocate one's thumb against
a concealed stump of a palm tree. Then the sharp points of the Spaniards began to stick up
through the softening snow, and nothing would induce me to run the risk of touching their green
bayonets. Besides which, the fast-thawing snow made it very difficult to climb up to the top
of our hill, for the carefully-cut steps had disappeared long ago. So I gave up sledge journeys
on my own account, and used only to look at F---- and Mr. U---- taking them.

These two persevered so long as an inch of snow remained on the hill-side. Some of their adventures
were very alarming, and certainly rather dangerous. One afternoon I had been watching them
for more than an hour, and had seen them go through every variety of disaster, and capsize
with no further effect than increasing their desire for "one more" trial. On the blind-side
of the hill,--that is to say the side which gets scarcely any sun in winter,--a deep drift
of snow still lingered, filling up a furrow made in former years by a shingle-slip. Thither
the two adventurous climbers dragged their sledge, and down the steep incline they performed
their perilous descent many a time. I became tired of watching the board shoot swiftly over
the white streak; and I strolled round the shoulder of the hill, to see if there was any appearance
of the snow-fall lessening in the back country.

I must have been away about half an hour, and had made the circuit of the little knoll which
projected from the mountain side, returning to where I expected to find sleigh and sleighers
starting perhaps on just "one more" journey. But no one was there, and a dozen yards or so
from the usual starting-point, the snow was a good deal ploughed up and stained in large patches
by blood. Here was an alarming spectacle, though the only wonder was that a bad accident had
not occurred before. I saw the sledge, deserted and broken, near the end of the drift: of the
passengers there was neither sign nor token. I must say I was terribly frightened, but it is
useless in New Zealand to scream or faint; the only thing to do in an emergency is to coo-e;
and so, although my heart was thumping loudly in my ears, and at first I could not produce
a sound, I managed at last, after many attempts, to muster up a loud clear coo-e. There was
the usual pause, whilst the last sharp note rang back from the hill-sides, and vibrated through
the clear silent air; and then, oh, welcome sound! I heard a vigorous answer from our own flat
where the homestead stood. I set off down-hill as fast as I could, and had the joy, when I
turned the slope which had hidden our little house from my view, to see F---- and Mr. U----
walking about; but even from that distance I could see that poor Mr. U----'s head was bandaged
up, and as soon as I got near enough to hear, F----shouted "I have broken my neck!" adding,
"I am very hungry: let us go in to supper."

Under the circumstances these words were consolatory; and when I came to hear the story, this
was the way the accident happened. As I mentioned before, even this drift had thawed till it
was soft at the surface and worn away almost to the rocks. During a rapid descent the nose
of the sledge dipped through the snow, and stopped dead against a rock. Mr. U---- was instantly
buried in the snow, falling into a young but prickly Spaniard, which assaulted him grievously;
but F---- shot over his head some ten yards, turned a somersault, and alit on his feet. This
sounds a harmless performance enough, but it requires practice; and F---- declared that for
weeks afterwards his neck felt twisted. The accident must have looked very ridiculous: the
sledge one moment gliding smoothly along at the rate of forty miles an hour,--the next a dead
stop, and F----flying through the air over his passenger's head, finishing feet first plump
down in the soft snow.

Looking back on that time, I can remember how curiously soon the external traces of the great
snow-storm disappeared. For some weeks after the friendly nor-wester, the air of the whole
neighbourhood was tainted by dead and decaying sheep and lambs; and the wire fences, stock-yard
rails, and every "coign of vantage," had to be made useful but ghastly by a tapestry of sheep-skins.
The only wonder was that a single sheep had survived a storm severe enough to kill wild pigs.
Great boars, cased in hides an inch thick, had perished through sheer stress of weather; while
thin-skinned animals, with only a few months growth of fine merino wool on their backs, had
endured it all. It was well known that the actual destruction of sheep was mainly owing to
the two days of heavy rain which succeeded the snow. Out of a flock of 13,000 of all ages,
we lost, on the lowest calculation, 1,000 grown sheep and nearly 3,000 lambs; and yet our loss
was small by comparison with that of our neighbours, whose runs were further back among the
hill, and less sheltered than our own.

Long before midsummer our cloud-shadowed hills were green once more; and I think I see again
their beautiful outlines, their steep sides planted with semi-tropical palms and grasses, whilst
the more distant peaks are veiled in a sultry haze. During that peculiarly bright and lovely
summer we often ask each other, Could it have been true that no one knew one mountain from
the other, and that hills had been apparently levelled and vallies filled up by the heaviest
snow-fall ever known. But whilst the words were on our lips, we could see a group of palm-trees,
ten feet high, with their topmost leaves gnawed to the stump by starving sheep, that must have
been standing on at least seven feet of snow to reach them; and there was scarcely a creek
on the run whose banks were not strewn, for many a long day, by bare and bleaching bones.

Chapter VI: Buying a run.

Like many other people in the world, I have occasionally built castles in the air, and equally
of course they have invariably tumbled down in due time with a crash This particular castle
however, not only attained to a great elevation in the visionary builder's eyes, but it covered
so vast an area of land, that the story of its rise and fall deserves to be placed on record,
as a warning to aerial architects and also as a beacon-light to young colonists.

This was exactly the way it all happened. The new year of 186-found us living very quietly
and happily on a small compact sheep-farm, at the foot of the Malvern Hills, in the province
of Canterbury, New Zealand. As runs went, its dimensions were small indeed; for we only measured
it at 12,000 acres, all told. The great tidal wave of prosperity, which sets once in a while
towards the shores of all colonies, had that year swelled and risen to its full force; but
this we did not know. Borne aloft upon its unsubstantial crest we could not, from that giddy
height, discern any water-valleys of adversity or clouds of change and storm along the shining
horizon of the new world around us. All our calculations were based on the assumption that
the existing prices for sheep, wool, cattle, and all farm-produce, would rule for many a long
day; and the delightful part of this royal road to wealth was, that its travellers need not
exert themselves in any way: they had only to sit still with folded hands whilst their sheep
increased, and it was well known that a flock doubled itself in three short years. The obvious
deduction from this agreeable numerical fact was, that in an equally short period your agent's
payments to your bank account would also be doubled. In the meantime the drays were busy carting
the wool to the seaports as fast as they could be loaded, whilst speculative drovers rode all
about the country buying up the fat cattle and wethers from every run. These were wanted to
supply the West Coast Diggings which had just "broken out" (as the curious phrase goes there),
and so was every description of grain and dairy produce.

We squatters were not the only inhabitants of this fool's paradise. The local Government began
planning extensive works: railways were laid out in every direction, bridges planned across
rivers, which proved the despair of engineers; whilst a tunnel, the wonder of the Southern
Hemisphere, was commenced through a range of hills lying between Port Lyttleton and Christchurch.
All this work was undertaken on a scale of pay which made the poor immigrants who thronged
to the place by every ship, rub their eyes and believe they must be dreaming, and that they
would presently wake up and find themselves back again in the old country, at the old starvation
rate of wages. Small capitalists, with perhaps only one or two hundred pounds in the world,
bid against each other as purchasers of quarter-acre sections in the fast-springing townships,
or of fifty-acre lots of arable land in the projected suburbs. Subscriptions were raised for
building a Cathedral in Christchurch; but so dear was both labour and material, that 7,000
pounds barely sufficed to lay its foundations.

The paramount anxiety in men's minds seemed to be to secure land. Sheep-runs in sheltered accessible
parts of the country commanded enormous prices, and were bought in the most complicated way.
The first comers had taken up vast tracts of land in all directions from the Government, at
an almost nominal rental. This had happened quite in the dark and remote ages of the history
of the colony, at least ten or twelve years before the date of which I write. As speculators
with plenty of hard cash came down from Australia, these original tenants sold, as it were,
the good-will and stock of their run at enormous prices; but what always seemed to me so hard
was, that after you had paid any number of thousand pounds for your run, you might have to
buy it all, or at any rate, some portion of it, over again. Land could only be purchased freehold
from the Government, for 2 pounds an acre; and if a "cockatoo" (i.e., a small farmer), or a
speculator in mines, fancied any part of your property, he had only to go to the land office,
and challenge your pre-emptive rights. The officials gave you notice of the challenge, and
six weeks' grace in which to raise the money, and buy it freehold yourself; but few sheep-farmers
could afford to pay a good many hundred pounds unexpectedly to secure even their best "flats"
or vallies. Hence it often happened that large runs in the most favourable situations were
cut up by small investors, "free selectors" as they are called in Australia, and it used to
be rather absurd the way one grew to distrust any stranger who was descried riding about the
run. The poor man might be looking for a stray horse, or have lost his way, but we always fancied
he must be "prospecting" for either gold or coals, or else be a "cockatoo" disguised as a traveller.

Such was the state of things when my story opens. Shearing was just over, and we knew to a
lamb how rapidly our flocks and herds were increasing. A succession of mild winters and early
genial springs had got the flock into capital order. The wool had all been sent off to Christchurch
by drays, the sheep were turned out on the beautiful green hills for ten months of perfect
rest and peace; whilst the dogs, who had barked themselves quite hoarse, were enabled to desist
from their labours in mustering and watching the yet unshorn mobs on the vallies. Although
our run was as well grassed and watered as any in the province, still it could not possibly
carry more than a certain number of sheep, and to that total our returns showed that we were
rapidly approaching. The most careful calculations warned us that by next shearing we should
hardly know what to do with our sheep. It is always better to be under than overstocked, for
the merino gets out of condition immediately, and even the staple of the wool deteriorates
if its wearer be at all crowded on his feeding-grounds.

"You must take up more country directly," was the invariable formula of the advice we, comparatively
"new chums," received on all sides. This was easier to say than to do. Turn which ever way
we would, far back beyond our own lovely vallies and green hills, back up to the bleak region
of glaciers, where miles of bush and hundreds of acres of steep hill-side, formed the back-est
of "back country," every inch of land was taken up. No fear had those distant Squatters of
"cockatoos," or even of miners; for no one came their way who could possibly help it. Still
we should have been comparatively glad to buy such a run fifty or sixty miles further back,--at
the foot, in fact of the great Southern Alps,--just as a summer feeding-ground for the least
valuable portion of our flock. But no one was inclined to part with a single acre, and we were
forced to turn our eyes in a totally different direction.

If my readers will refer to the accompanying map of New Zealand, and look at the Middle or
South Island, they will notice a long seaboard on the eastern side of the island, stretching
SS.W. for many hundred leagues. It extends beyond the Province of Canterbury to that of Otago,
and embraces some of the most magnificent pastoral land in the settlement. Not only is the
soil rich and productive, but the climate is rather less windy than with us in the northern
portion of the island; and the capital of Otago (Dunedin) had risen into comparative position
and importance before Christchurch,--was in short an elder sister of that pretty little town.
Most of the settlers in Otago were Scotchmen, and as there are no better colonists anywhere,
its prosperity had attained to a very flourishing height. Gold-digging had also broken out
at the foot of the Dunstan range, so that Otago held her head quite as high, if not higher,
than her neighbour Canterbury. Of course all the first-class pasture-land "down south," as
it was called, had been taken up long before; but we heard rumours of splendid sheep country,
yet unappropriated, far back towards the west coast of Otago, just where its boundary joined
Canterbury.

With our minds in this state of desire for what poor Mazzini used to denounce as "territorial
aggrandisement," we paid our usual post-shearing visit to Christchurch. F---- had his agent's
accounts to examine, a nice little surplus of wool-money to receive, and many other squatting
interests to attend to; whilst I had to lay in chests of tea, barrels of sugar and rice, hundreds
of yards of candle-wick, flower-seeds, reels of cotton, and many other miscellaneous articles.
But through all our pleasant, happy little bustle ran the constant thought: "What shall we
do for more country?" A day or two before the expiration of the week's leave of absence which
we always gave ourselves, F---- came into my sitting-room at the hotel, flung down his hat
on the table with an air of triumph, and cried, "I've heard of such a splendid run! One hundred
thousand acres of beautiful sheep-country, and going for a mere song!" Now I had lived long
enough in the world to discover that one sometimes danced on the wrong foot to the tune of
these "mere songs," so I cautiously inquired, "Where is it?" F---- seemed a little dashed that
the only question which he could not answer favourably should be the first I asked, and he
replied vaguely, "Well, it is rather a long way off, but I am sure we can manage it." A little
more sifting elicited the fact that this "desirable investment" stretched along the shores
of Lake Wanaka, famous for its beautiful scenery, and was to be had for what certainly seemed
a ridiculously small sum;--only a few hundred pounds. "Of course it has no sheep on it," added
F----; "but that is all the better. I'll burn it this year, and then turn some cattle on it,
and after next shearing we'll have a good mob of sheep to draft out and stock it." He further
added, that he had invited his man of business and the individual who owned this magnificent
property to dine with us that evening, and that then I should hear all about it And I may truly
say that I did hear about it, for my brain reeled with figures and calculations. By bedtime
I was wondering if we could possibly spend the enormous fortune which would be quite certain
to accrue to us in a few years if only we could make up our minds to invest the modest balance
at our bankers in this tempting bargain. I remember well that I found myself wishing we were
not going to be quite so rich; half our promised income would have been ample, I thought. My
anxieties on that score turned out to have been, to say the least, premature.

Not to make my story too long, I may briefly say that after making due allowance for the natural
exaggeration of the owner, the run on Lake Wanaka's shores seemed certainly to offer many attractions.
Besides thousands of acres of beautiful sheltered sheep country, it was said to possess a magnificent
bush, in which sawyers were already hard at work. Of course all this timber would become our
own, and we were to make so much a year by selling it. "How about the carriage?" inquired F----
cautiously, having visions of costly bullock-drays, and teams and drivers at fabulous wages.
"Oh, the lake is your highway," replied the would-be seller, airily; "you have nothing to do
but lash your felled trees together, as they do in the mahogany-growing countries, and set
them afloat on the lake, they will thus form a natural raft, and cost you little or nothing
to get down to a good market. You know the Dunstan diggings are just at the foot of the lake,
and they haven't a stick there; timber is very badly wanted in those parts, not only for fuel
and building, but also for slabbing the shafts which the miners sink."

By the time the coffee was served F---- had made up his mind to buy the Lake Wanaka run; his
business agent urging him strongly not to hesitate for a moment in securing such a chance.
The negotiations reached thus far without the least hitch, but at this point F----said, "Well,
I'll tell you what I'll do: we will start in a day or two and go straight up to this run and
look round it, and if I find it anything like so good as you both make it out, I'll buy it
on the spot."

Never did that sociable little word "we" sound so delightful to my ears! "Then I am to come
too," I thought to myself, but I prudently concealed from the company that I had ever had any
misgivings on that point. However, the company did not concern themselves with my doubts and
fears, for our two guests seemed much taken aback at this very matter-of-fact proposal of F----'s.
"That won't do at all, my dear fellow," said the owner of the run; "I am going to England by
the next mail steamer, which you know sails next week, and the reason I am literally giving
away my property is that I don't want any suspense or bother. Take it or leave it, just as
you like. There's Wilkinson and Fairwright and a lot of others all clamouring for the refusal
of it, and I've only waited to see if you really wanted it before closing with Fairwright.
He is walking about with a cheque all ready filled up in his pocket, and only begging and praying
me to let him have the run on my own terms. Why you might be weather-bound or kept there for
a month, and what shall I do then? No, its all just as I've told you, and you can call it your
own to-morrow, but I can't possibly wait for you to go and look at it." No words of mine can
give any idea of the tone of scorn in which our guest pronounced these last three words; as
if looking at an intended purchase was at once the meanest and most absurd thing in-the world.
F---- seemed half ashamed of himself for his proposal, but still he urged that he never liked
to take a leap in the dark, backing up his opinion by several world-revered adages. "That's
all very fine," chimed in our precious business adviser," but this transaction can hardly be
said to be in the dark; here are the plans and the Government lease and the transfer deeds,
all regular and ready." With this he produced the plans, and then it was all up with us. Who
does not know the peculiar smell of tracing-paper, with its suggestions of ownership? When
these fresh and crackling drawings were opened before us they resembled nothing so much as
a veritable paradise. There shone the lake--a brilliant patch of cobalt blue, bordered by outlines
of vivid green pasture and belts of timber. Here and there, on the outskirts, we read the words,
"proposed township," "building lots," "probable gold fields," "saw mills." F---- laid his hand
down over a large wash of light green paint and asked," Now what sort of country is this; really
and truly, you know?" "First class sheep country, I give you my word," replied the owner eagerly,
"only wants to be stocked for a year or two."

Why need I go on? It was the old, old story of misplaced confidence. Neither F---- nor I could
believe that our friends would wilfully over-reach us, so it was settled that the first thing
next morning the money should be handed over and the Government lease transferred to us. We
decided that as we were so far on the way to our new property, we would go and look at it before
returning to the Malvern Hills, and the next few days were very busy ones, as we had to arrange
our small domestic affairs, send up the dray, etc., etc. I felt rather anxious at the postponement
of our return home, for I had left several "clutches" of eggs on the point of being hatched,
and I had grave misgivings as to the care my expected ducklings and chickens would receive
at the lands of my scatter-brained maid servants, to say nothing of the dangers besetting them
from hawks and rats. However, small interests must give way to great ones, and F---- and I
were already tasting the cares of proprietorship. Our friend, the former owner of our new property,
sailed for England in the mail steamer, in high spirits, saying cordially as he shook F----'s
hand at parting, "Well you have got your fortune cut out for you, and no mistake; I feel half
sorry already to think that I've parted with that run." About two days after his departure,
F---- who had registered his name at the land office as the present tenant of 100,000 acres
in the Lake Wanaka district, received a polite request from official quarters to pay up the
annual rent, just due, amounting to 100 pounds or so. We had effected our brilliant negotiations
about a week too soon it seemed, but that was our own fault, so we had nothing to do but pay
the money with as good a grace as possible. I am "free to confess" that this second cheque
ran our banker's account very fine indeed, but still in those palmy days of the past this was
no subject of uneasiness to a squatter. His credit was almost unlimited, and he could always
raise as much money as he liked on an hypothecation of next year's wool. But we had not come
to that yet. The weather was delightful; the customary week of heavy rain just after our midsummer
Christmas, had cooled the air and laid the dust, besides bringing out a fresh spring-like green
tint over the willows and poplars, and causing even the leaves of the gums to lose their leather-like
look for a few days.

After much consultation we decided to go by coach as far as Timaru, and then trust to circumstances
to decide our future means of transport. Not only were we obliged to pay a large sum for our
places but our luggage was charged for by the pound, so we found it necessary to reduce our
kit to the most modest dimensions, and only to take what was absolutely necessary. The journey
was a long and weary one, the only variety being caused by a strong spice of danger at each
river. At some streams we were transferred bodily to a large raft-like ferry boat, and so taken
across. At others the passengers and luggage only were put into the boat, the lumbering coach
with its leathern springs left behind, whilst the horses swam in our wake across the wide and
rushing river, to be re-harnessed to another coach on the opposite shore. The Rakaia, Ashburton,
and Rangitata had been crossed in this way, and we had reached the Otaio, a smaller river,
when we found a new mode of transport awaiting us. A large dray with a couple of powerful horses
was in readiness, and into this springless vehicle we were unceremoniously bundled. The empty
coach and horses was driven over at another part of the stream. I shall never forget the jolting:
the river must have been at least a quarter of a mile wide at that reach, and over its bed
of boulders and rocks we bumped In the middle stretched a long strip of shingle, which seemed
as smooth as turf by contrast with the first half of the river-bed. When we charged into the
water again our driver removed his pipe from his mouth, looked over his shoulder and remarked,
"River's come down since mornin'; best tuck up your feet, marms all." I can answer for this
"marm" tucking up her feet with great agility, and not a moment too soon either, for as a light
wind was blowing, a playful wave came rippling over and through the planked floor of the dray,
floating all the smaller parcels about. But no one could speak, we were so jolted: it literally
seemed as if our spines must come through the crown of our heads, and I expected all my teeth
to tumble out.

In the midst of my fright and suffering, a laugh was jolted out of me by the absurd behaviour
of one of our fellow-passengers. He was what is called a bush carpenter: i.e., a wandering
carpenter, who travels from station to station, doing any little odd rough jobs wanted. This
man had been working for us some time before, and had often amused me with his quaint ways.
On this occasion he was on his oppressively good behaviour, and sat quite silent and solemn
on the opposite ledge of the dray. But when for the second time the water came swirling through
our rude conveyance with a force which threatened to upset it altogether, Dale fumbled in his
pocket, as if he were seeking for a life-belt, produced an enormous pair of green goggle spectacles,
which might have made part of Moses Primrose's purchases at the fair, and adjusting them on
his nose as steadily as he could, said gravely, "This must be looked to!" He continued to stare
at the wash of water during the remainder of our perilous and rough transit without vouchsafing
any explanation of his meaning, but after we had safely landed he replaced his spectacles,
first in their huge shagreen case, and next in his pocket, with an air which seemed to say,
"The danger is now over: thanks to my precautions."

Timaru was reached very late, and the best accommodation at the inn placed at our disposal.
Still, in those distant days there was no such thing as a private sitting room, and we had
all to eat our supper in the same rough-boarded little apartment. But in all my varied wanderings
in different parts of the world, when the accidents of travel have thrown me for a time among
the class whom we foolishly speak of as the lower orders, I have never yet had to complain
of the slightest inconvenience or disagreeableness from my fellow-travellers. On the contrary,
I have always received the most chivalrous politeness at their hands, and have noticed how
ready they were to forego their usual tastes and habits lest they should cause me any annoyance.
I wonder whether fine gentlemen in their splendid clubs would be quite so willing to spoil
the pleasure of their evening if any accident were to throw an unwelcome lady amongst them?
At all events, they could not be more self-sacrificing than my friends in fustian jackets have
always proved themselves, and on this particular evening the landlord of the inn was so amazed
at the orders for tea and coffee instead of the usual "nips" of spirits, that he was constrained
to inquire the reason. A stalwart drover who was sitting opposite to me at the rude table,
murmured from the depths of his great beard, in an oracular whisper, "The smell of speerits
might'nt be agreeble like to the lady." In vain I protested that I did not mind it in the least;
tea and coffee was the order of the evening, and solemn silence and good behaviour. No smoking,
no songs, no conviviality of any sort. I would fain have shown my appreciation of their courtesy
by talking to them; but alas, I was one vast ache all over! Although the road had been a dead
level, sixteen hours of jolting and bumping had reduced me to a limp, black-and-blue creature,
with out a word or a smile. Of course I retired to what was literally a pallet, and a very
hard pallet too, as early as possible, but even after I had vanished behind the thin wooden
partition which formed my bedroom, the greatest silence and decorum continued to reign among
my fellow-travellers.

Chapter VII: "Buying a run."--continued.

Early the next morning we all breakfasted together, and then separated with most polite adieux.
We sallied forth to look for a couple of riding horses. There were none to be hired, so we
had to buy two good-looking nags for 45 pounds a-piece. Now-a-days the same horses would not
fetch more than 10 pounds and I have been told that in Australia you can buy a horse for a
shilling, but ours in New Zealand have never sunk lower than a couple of pounds, if they had
any legs at all. It seemed to the horse-dealer quite a superfluous question when I timidly
inquired if my horse had ever carried a lady. "No: I can't just say as he has, mum, as you
see there aint no ladies in these parts for him to carry. But," he added magnanimously, "I'll
try him with a blanket fust, if you're at all oneasy about him." We did not start until the
next day, as we had to hunt up side-saddles, and I had to sew a few yards of grey linsey into
a riding-skirt; but by the following day we were all ready, and our "swags" packed and strapped
to the saddles by nine o'clock. F----'s horse looked a very nice one in every respect; mine
was evidently uneasy in his mind at the strange shape of his saddle, and I was recommended
to mount outside the little enclosure, on a patch of open ground, where my steed would not
be able to brush me off. The moment I mounted, the "Hermit" as he was called, made for a dry
ditch and tried to lie down, but a sharp cut from a stock-whip brought him out of it, and then
he laid his ears well back and started for a good gallop, to endeavour to get rid of his strange
rider. However, his head was turned in the right direction; there were no obstacles in the
way, and before he got tired of his pace we had left Timaru a good many miles behind us. F----
looked complacently at the "Hermit," and observed, "He'll carry you very nicely, I think."
I could only breathe a sincere hope that he might.

It was a beautiful day, warm but not oppressive, and delightfully calm. Our road lay at first
along the sea-shore. Ever since we had left Christchurch the ground had been almost level,
and the road consisted merely of a track cleared from tussocks. On our left extended the vast
strip known as the Ninety-miles Beach, whilst far on our right, between us and the west coast,
the Southern Alps, rose in all their might and beauty, sometimes lightly veiled by a summer
haze, at others cutting our Italian-blue sky sharp and clear with their grand outlines. Our
horses were a trifle too fat for good condition, and we feared to hurry them the first day,
so we made an early halt at Mahiki, only a twenty miles stage; but the next day they took us
on to Waitaki Ferry, past a splendid bush, and so into the heart of the hill country.

Between the ranges, beautiful fertile valleys extended; when I say fertile, I mean that the
soil was excellent, and the land well-grassed. But there was no cultivation. Not a sod had
ever been turned there since the creation of the world, and the whole country wore the peculiar
yellow tinge caught from the tall waving tussocks, which is the prevailing feature of New Zealand
scenery au naturel. Every acre had been "taken up," but as yet the runs were rather understocked.
Our fourth day's ride was the longest,--fifty-five miles in all, though we halted for a couple
of hours at a miserable accommodation house. Our bivouac that night was close to Lake Wanaka,
at the Molyneux Ferry-house, and there I was kept awake all night by the attentions of a cat.
I never saw such a ridiculous animal. Prince, for that was his name, took the greatest fancy
to me, or rather to my woollen skirt I suppose, and found a linsey lap much more comfortable
than the corduroy knees on which he took his usual evening nap. At all events he followed me
into my room, which only boasted of a mattress, stuffed with tussock-grass by the way, on the
floor. Here I should have slept very well after my long journey, if Prince would have permitted
it. In vain I put him out of the window, not always very gently; he returned in five minutes,
bringing a palpitating, just-caught bird or mouse, which he softly dropped on my face, and
purred loudly with delight at his own gallantry. Twenty times did I strike a match that night
and try to restore the victims to life; only one recovered sufficiently to be released, and
Prince brought it in again, quite dead, five minutes later. I shut the little casement window,
but the room became so hot and stuffy, and suspicious fumes of stale beer and tobacco began
to assert their presence, so that I found myself obliged to open it again. Sometimes the victim's
bones were crunched close to my ear, and I found more than one feather in my hair in the morning.
Never was any one so persecuted by a cat as I was by Prince that weary night.

The next day we got to a station known as "Johnson's." It was just at the head of the lake,
and as we arrived tolerably early in the forenoon we embarked, after the usual station dinner
of mutton, tea, and damper, on Lake Wanaka. Alas for those treacherous blue waters! We had
only a little pair-oared boat, in which I took my place as coxwain, and after pulling for a
mile or two under a blazing sun, over short chopping waves, with a head-wind, we all became
so deadly sea-sick that we had to turn back! As soon as we had rested and recovered, a council
of war was held as to our movements, and we decided, in spite of our recent experiences, to
turn our horses, who had done quite enough for the present, out on the run, and so make our
way down the lake by boat. Already F---- was beginning to look anxious, for he perceived that,
even after the head of the lake had been reached, the wool would cost an enormous sum to cart
down to either Oamaru or Timaru, from whence alone it could be shipped.

The mile or two of the run which lay along the shore of the lake showed us frightfully rough
country. A dense jungle of tussocks and thorny bushes choked up the feed, and made it impossible
to drive any animals through it, even supposing that good pasturage lay beyond. Still we hoped
that we might be looking at the worst portion of our purchase, and deter mined to persevere
in the attempt to penetrate to the furthest end of our new property. Accordingly we hired a
safe old tub of a boat which, though too heavy to pull, was warranted to sail steadily, and
with a couple of men, some cold mutton, bread, tea, and sugar, started valiantly on our cruise.
But the "blue, unclouded weather," in which we had hitherto basked, was at an end for the present.
We had already enjoyed a longer succession of calm days than usually falls to the lot of the
travellers in that windy middle island, and it was now quite time for the imprisoned "nor'-wester"
to have his turn over the surface of the domain.

Accordingly the first day's sail was against a light, ominously warm head-wind, and we only
made any way at all by keeping up a complicated system of tacking. The start had not been an
early one, so darkness found us but little advanced on our voyage, and we passed the night
in a rough shanty, on beds of fern-leaves, wrapped in our red blankets. Tired as we were, none
of us could sleep much. The air was dry and parched; every now and then a sough of the rising
hot gale swept through our crazy shelter without cooling us, and warned us to prepare for what
was coming. Our only chance of getting on was to make an early start, for fortunately a true
"nor'-wester" is somewhat of a sluggard. The skies wore their peculiar chrysoprase green tint,
except towards the weather quarter, where heavy banks of lurid cloud showed that the enemy
was collecting in force. Even the hour of dawn, usually so crisp and cool, brought no sense
of refreshment to our languid limbs, and we embarked with the direst forebodings. A few miles
further up the lake we reached an out-station hut, built by our host Mr. Johnson when he first
"took up" his country and intended to push his boundary as far as this. He soon drew in his
lines however on account of the rough nature of the ground. The hut was in a most picturesque
spot, and although deserted, remained still in good repair. The little scrap of garden ground
was a tangle of gooseberry and currant bushes among which potatoes flourished at their own
sweet will.

We had only time to beach the boat, that is to say F---- and the two men did so, whilst I ran
backwards and forwards with the blankets and provisions, before the hurricane was upon us.
Henceforth there was no stirring out of doors until the gale had blown itself out. We dragged
in some driftwood, barricaded the door, and prepared to pass the time as well as we could.
Oh, the fleas in the hut! The ground was literally alive with them, and their audacity and
appetite was unparalleled. Our boatmen sat tranquilly by the tiny window and played cribbage
incessantly with very dirty cards and a board made out of a small bar of soap. As for me, I
turned an empty box up on its end, so as to get out of the way of the fleas, and perched myself
on it, finding ample occupation in defending my position from the attacks of the active little
wretches. Sometimes I felt as if I must rush out into the lake and drown myself and my tormentors
together. It was very bad for everybody. The poor boatmen doubtless wished to smoke, but were
too polite to do anything of the sort. F---- had nothing whatever to read, except a torn piece
of an old Times, at least two years old, which we had brought to wrap up some of our provisions;
whilst I was still more idle and wretched. Two weary interminable days dragged, or perhaps
I should say, blew, themselves along in this miserable fashion, but at sundown on the evening
of the third day the wind dropped suddenly, and we did not lose a moment in darting out of
our prison and embarking once more. For the first time since we started we could perceive the
grandeur of the surrounding country; but grand scenery is not necessary nor indeed desirable
in a sheep run. Splendid mountains ran down in steep spurs to the very shore of the enormous
lake. Behind them, piled in snowy steeps, rose the distant Alps of the Antipodes; great masses
of native bush made dark purple shadows among the clefts of the hills, whilst the lake rippled
in and out of many a graceful bay and quiet harbour. Not a fleck or film of cloud floated between
us and the serene and darkening sky; a profound, delightful calm brooded over land and water.
Although there was no moon, the stars served us as lights and compass until two o'clock in
the morning, by which time we had reached the head of the lake (which is thirty-five miles
in length), where we landed, extemporized a tent out of the boat sail, and turned in for a
refreshing flea-less sleep.

The next day was beautifully still, with a light air from the opposite point, just sufficient
to cool the parched atmosphere; and we made our way along the head of the lake to a place were
a couple of sawyers were at work. One of them had brought his wife with him, and her welcome
to me was the most touching thing in the world. She took me entirely under her care, and would
hardly let me out of her sight. I must say it was very nice to be waited on so faithfully,
and I gave myself up to the unaccustomed luxury. All she required of me in exchange for her
incessant toil on my behalf was "news." It did not matter of what kind, every scrap of intelligence
was welcome to her, and she refused to tell me to what date her "latest advices" extended.
During the three days of our stay in that clearing among the great pines of the Wanaka Bush,
I gave my hostess a complete abridgment of the history of England--political, social, and moral,
beginning from my earliest recollections. Then we ran over contemporary foreign affairs, dwelt
minutely on every scrap of colonial news, and finally wound up with a full, true, and particular
account of myself and all my relations and friends. When I paused for breath she would cease
her washing and cooking on my behalf, and say entreatingly, "Go on now, do!" until I felt quite
desperate.

All this time whilst I was being "interviewed" nearly to death, F----employed himself in making
excursions to different parts of the run. One of the sawyers lent him a miserable half-starved
little pony; and he penetrated to another sawyer's hut, seven miles distant up the Matukituki
river. But no matter whether he turned his steps to north or south, east or west, he met with
the same disheartening report. There was the ground indeed, but it was perfectly useless. Not
only was there was no pasturage, but if there had been, the nature of the country would have
rendered it valueless, on account of the way it was overgrown. It would be tedious to explain
more minutely why this was the case. Sufficient must it be to say that whilst F---- was only
too anxious to keep his eyes shut as to the ground he had alighted on after his leap in the
dark, and the sawyers were equally anxious to induce settlers to come there, and so bring a
market for their labour close to their hand nothing could make our purchase appear anything
except a dead loss. As for the plans, they were purely imaginary. The blue lake was about the
only part true to nature; and even that should have had a foot-note to state that it was generally
lashed into high, unnavigable waves, by a chronic nor'-wester.

No: there was nothing for it but to go home again to the little run which had seemed such a
mere paddock in our eyes, whilst we indulged in castle-building over 100,000 acres of country.
It was of no use lingering amid such disappointment and discomfort; besides which my listener,
the sawyer's wife, had turned her husband and herself out of their hut, and were sleeping under
a red blanket tent. Poor woman, she was most anxious to get away; and the lovely sylvan scene,
with the tall trees standing like sentinels over their prostrate brethren, the wealth of beauteous
greenery, springing through fronds of fern and ground creepers, the bright-winged flight of
paroquets and other bush birds, even the vast expanse of the lake which stretched almost from
their threshold for so many miles, all would have been gladly exchanged for a dusty high street
in any country town-ship. Her last words were, "Can't you send me a paper or hany thing printed,
mam?" I faithfully promised to do my best, and carried out my share of the bargain by despatching
to her a large packet of miscellaneous periodicals and newspapers; but whether she ever received
them is more than I can say.

We were afraid of lingering too long, lest another nor'-wester should become due; and we therefore
started as soon as F---- had decided that it was of no use exploring our wretched purchase
any further. We had a stiff breeze from the north-west all the way down the lake; but as it
was right a-stern it helped us along to such good purpose, that one day's sailing before it
brought us back to Mr. Johnson's homestead and comparative civilization. The little parlour
and the tiny bed-room beyond, into which I could only get access by climbing through a window
(for the architect had forgotten to put a door), appeared like apartments in a spacious palace,
so great was the contrast between their snug comfort and the desolate misery of our hut life.
Of course nothing else was talked of except our disappointment at our new run; and although
Mr. Johnson had indulged in forebodings, which were only too literally fulfilled, he had the
good taste never to remind us of his prophecies.

          "Of all the forms of human woe,
          Defend me from that dread, 'I told you so.'"

After a day's halt and rest we mounted our much refreshed horses, and set our faces straight
across country for Dunedin. This is very easy to write, but it was not quite so easy to do.
We could only ride for the first fifty-two miles, which we accomplished in two days. These
stages brought us to the foot of the Dunstan Range, and near the gold-diggings of that name.
I would fain have turned aside to see them, but we had not time. However, we felt the auriferous
influence of the locality; for a perfect stranger came up to us, whilst we were baiting at
another place, called the Kaiwarara diggings, and offered to buy our horses from us for 30
pounds each, and also to purchase our saddles and bridles at a fair price. This was exactly
what we wanted, as we had intended to sell them at Dunedin; and I was no ways disinclined to
part with the Hermit; who retained the sulky, misanthropical temper which had earned him his
name. He was now pronounced "fit to carry a lady," and purchased to be sold again at the diggings.
Whether there were any ladies there or not I cannot tell. Of course, before parting with our
nags we ascertained that the ubiquitous "Cobb's coach" started from our resting place for Dunedin
next day, and we made the rest of our journey in one of that well-known line. Its leathern
springs, whilst not so liable to break by sudden jolts, impart a swinging rocking motion to
the body of the vehicle, which is most disagreeable; but rough and rude as they are, they deserve
to be looked upon with respect as the pioneers of civilization. All over America, Australia,
and now New Zealand, the moment half-a-dozen passengers are forthcoming, that moment the enterprising
firm starts a coach, and the vehicle runs until it is ousted by a railway. All previous tracks
which I had journeyed over seemed smooth turnpike roads, compared to that terrible tussocky
track which led to Dunedin.

But that bright little town was reached at last, the hotel welcomed us, tired and bruised travellers
that we were, and next evening we started in the Geelong for Port Lyttleton. This little coasting
steamer seemed to touch at every hamlet along the coast, and after each pause I had to begin
afresh my agonies of sea-sickness. There was no such thing as getting one's sea-legs; for we
were seldom more than a few hours outside, and had no chance of getting used to the horrible
motion. Timaru was reached next day, but we had suffered so frightfully during the night from
a chopping sea and an open roadstead, that we went on shore, and entrusted ourselves once more
to the old coach. It seemed better to endure the miseries we knew of, than to make experiments
in wretchedness. So we went through the old jolting and jumbling until we were dropped at an
accommodation house, fifteen miles from Christchurch, where we slept that night, and at daylight
despatched a messenger to the next station for our own horses. He had only thirty-five miles
to ride, and about mid-day we started to meet him on hired horses, which we were very glad
to exchange for better nags a stage further on.

And so we rode quietly home in the gloaming, winding up the lovely, tranquil valley, at whose
head stood our own snug little homestead. At first we were so glad to be safely at hone again
that we scarcely gave a thought to our fruitless enterprise; but as our bruised bodies became
rested and restored, our hearts began to ache when we thought of the money we had so rashly
flung away in BUYING A RUN.

Chapter VIII: Looking for a congregation.

It is to be hoped and expected that such a good understanding has been established between
my readers and myself by this time, that they will not find the general title of these papers
unsuitable to the heading of this particular chapter. Indeed, I may truly say, that, looking
back upon the many happy memories of my three years life in that lovely and beloved Middle
Island, no pleasures stand out more vividly than my evening rides up winding gullies or across
low hill-ranges in search of a shepherd's hut, or a cockatoo's nest. A peculiar brightness
seems to rest on those sun-lit peaks of memory's landscape; and it is but fitting that it should
be so, for other excursions or expeditions used to be undertaken merely for business or pleasure,
but these delicious wanderings were in search of scattered dwellings whose lonely inhabitants--far
removed from Church privileges for many a long year past--might be bidden, nay, entreated,
to come to us on Sunday afternoons, and attend the Service we held at home weekly.

And here I feel constrained to say a word to those whose eyes may haply rest on my pages, and
who may find themselves in the coming years in perhaps the same position as I did a short time
ago. A new comer to a new country is sure to be discouraged if he or she (particularly she,
I fancy) should attempt to revive or introduce any custom which has been neglected or overlooked.
This is especially the case with religious observances. At every turn one is met by disheartening
warnings. "Oh, the people here are very different to those in the old country; they would look
upon it as impertinence if you suggested they should come to church." "You will find a few
may come just at first, and then when the novelty wears off and they have seen all the pretty
things in your drawing room, not a soul will ever come near the place."

"If even the men don't say something very free and easy to you when you invite them to your
house on Sunday afternoons, you may depend upon it that after two or three weeks you will not
know how to keep them in order."

Such, and many more, were the discouraging remarks made when I consulted my neighbours about
my plan for collecting the shepherds from the surrounding runs, and holding a Church of England
Service every Sunday afternoon at our own little homestead. To my mind, the distances seemed
the greatest obstacle, as many of the men I wanted to reach lived twenty-five or even thirty
miles away, with very rough country between. I had no fear of impertinence, for it is unknown
to me, and seldom comes, I fancy, unprovoked; whilst with regard to the novelty wearing off
and the men ceasing to attend, that must be left in God's hands. We could only endeavour to
plant the good seed, and trust to Him to give the increase. It was a great comfort to me in
those early days that F----, who had been many years in the colony, never joined in the disheartening
prophecies I have alluded to. Although as naturally averse to reading aloud before strangers
as a man who had lived a solitary life would be sure to be, he promised at once, with a good
grace, to read the Evening Service and a sermon afterwards, and thus smoothed one difficulty
over directly. His advice to me was precisely what I would fain repeat: "Try, by all means:
if you fail you will at least feel you have made the attempt." May all who try succeed, as
we did! I believe firmly they will, for it is an undertaking on which God's blessing is sure
to rest, and there are no such fertilizing dews as those which fall from heaven. The mists
arising from earth are only miasmic vapours after all!

But I fear to linger too long on the end, instead of telling you about the means.

It was May when we were fairly settled in our new home at the head of a hill-encircled valley.
With us that month answers to your November, but fogs are unknown in that breezy Middle Island,
and my first winter in Canterbury was a beautiful season, heralded in by an exquisite autumn.
How crisp the mornings and evenings were, with ever so light a film of hoar frost, making a
splendid sparkle on every blade of waving tussock-grass! Then in the middle of the day the
delicious warmth of the sun tempted one to linger all day in the open air, and I never wearied
of gazing at the strange purple shadows cast by a passing cloud; or up, beyond the floating
vapourous wreath, to the heaven of brilliant blue which smiled upon us. And yet, when I come
to think of it, I don't know that I had much time to spare for glancing at either hills or
skies, for we were just settling ourselves in a new place, and no one knows what that means
unless they have tried it, fifty miles away from the nearest shop. The yeast alone was a perpetual
anxiety to me,--it would not keep beyond a certain time, and had a tendency to explode its
confining bottles in the middle of the night, so it became necessary to make it in smaller
quantities every ten days or so. If by any chance I forgot to remind my scatter-brained damsels
to replenish the yeast bottles, they used up the last drop, and then would come smilingly to
me with the remark, "There aint not a drop o' yeast, about, anywhere, mum." This entailed flap-jacks,
or scones, or soda bread, or some indigestible compound for at least three days, as it was
of no use attempting to make proper bread until the yeast had worked. Then the well needed
to be deepened, a kitchen garden had to be made, shelter to be provided for the fowls and pigs;
a shed to be put up for coals; a thousand things which entailed thought and trouble, had to
be done.

It is true these rough jobs were not exactly in my line, but indoors I was just as busy trying
to make big things fit into little spaces and vice versa. We could not afford to take things
coolly and do a little every day, for at that time of year an hour's change in the wind might
have brought a heavy fall of snow, or a sharp frost, or a; deluge of rain down upon the uncovered
and defenceless heads of our live stock. The poor dear sheep, the source of our income, were
after all the least well-cared for creatures on the Station. A well grassed and watered run,
with sunny vallies for winter feeding, and green hills for summer pasturage, had been provided
by antipodean Nature for them, and to these advantages we only added some twenty or twenty-five
miles of wire fencing, and then they were left to themselves, with a couple of shepherds to
look after fifteen thousand sheep all the year round.

But yet, busy as we were, we found time to look up a congregation. The very first Sunday afternoon,
whilst we were still in the midst of a chaos of chips and big boxes and straw and empty china-barrels,
our own shepherds came over, by invitation, and the only very near neighbours we had--a Scotch
head-shepherd and his charming young wife,--and we held a Service in the half-furnished drawing
room. After it was ended we had a long talk with the men, and they confessed that they had
enjoyed it very much, and would like to come regularly. When questioned as to the feasibility
of inducing others to join, they said that it might be suggested to more than one distant,
lonely hill-shepherd, but his uncontrollable shyness would probably prevent his attendance.

"Jim Salter, and Joe Bennett, and a lot more on 'em, would be glad enow to come, if so be they
could feel as how they was truly wellcombe," said our shepherd, Pepper, who prided himself
on the elegance and correctness of his phraseology. He added, after a reflective pause, turning
bashfully away, "If so be as the lady would just look round and give 'em a call, they'd be
to be persuaded belike."

So the scheme was Pepper's after all, you see. But this "looking round," to which he alluded
so airily, meant scrambling rides, varying from ten to twenty-eight miles in length, over break-neck
country, and this on the slender chance of finding the men in-doors. Now a New Zealand shepherd
almost lives out on the hills, so the prospect of finding any of our congregation at home was
slight indeed. However, as I said before, F---- stood by me, and although we neither of us
could well spare the time, we agreed to devote two afternoons every week, so long as the fine
open autumn weather, lasted, to making excursions in search of back-country huts. There are
no roads or finger posts or guides of any sort in those distant places. When we inquired what
was the name of "Mills" shepherd (the masters are always plain Smith or Jones, and the shepherds
Mr.----, in the colonies) the answer was generally very vague. "Wiry Bill, we mostly calls
'im; but I think I've heerd say his rightful name was Mr. Pellet, mum. He's a little chap,
as strong as the 'ouse," explained Pepper, who was an incorrigible cockney, "and he lives over
there," pointing with his thumb to a mountain range behind us. "He's in one of them blind gullies.
You go along the gorge of the river till you come to a saddle all over fern, and you drop down
that, and follow the best o' three or four tracts till you come to a swamp."

Here Pepper paused, in consideration of my face of horror; for if there was one thing I dreaded
more than another in those early days, it was a swamp. Steep hill sides, wide creeks, honey-combed
flats, all came in, the day's ride,--but a swamp! Ugh! the horrible treacherous thing, so green
and innocent looking, with here and there a quicksand or a peaty morass, in which, without
a moment's warning, your horse sank up to his withers! It was dreadful, and when we came to
such a place Helen used to stop dead short, prick her pretty ears well forward, and, trembling
with fear and excitement, put her nose close to the ground, smelling every inch, before she
would place her fore foot down on it, jumping off it like a goat if it proved insecure. Generally
she crossed a swamp, by a series of bounds in and out of flax bushes; and hopeless indeed would
a morass be without those green cities of refuge!

Horrible as a large swamp is however to a timid horsewoman, it is dear to the heart of a cockatoo.
He gladly buys a freehold of fifty acres in the midst of one, burns it, makes a sod fence,
sown with gorse seed a-top, all round his section, drains it in a rough and ready fashion,
and then the splendid fertile soil which has been waiting for so many thousand years, "brings
forth fruit abundantly." Such enormous fields of wheat and oats and barley as you come upon
sometimes,--with, alas, never a market near enough to enable the plenteous crop to return sevenfold
into its master's bosom!

I shall not inflict upon you a description of all our rides in search of members for our congregation.
Two, in widely differing directions, will serve as specimens of such excursions. In consideration
of my new-chumishness, F---- selected a comparatively easy track for our first ride. And yet,
"bad was the best," might surely be said of that breakneck path. What would an English horse,
or an English lady say, to riding for miles over a slippery winding ledge on a rocky hill side,
where a wall of solid mountain rose up perpendicularly on the right hand, and on the left a
very respectable sized river hurried over its boulders far beneath the aerial path; yet this
was comparatively a safe track, and presented but one serious obstacle, over which I was ruthlessly
taken. It is perhaps needless to say we were riding in single file, and equally unnecessary
to state that I was the last; for certainly we should never have made much progress otherwise.
Helen, my bay mare, would follow her stable companion, on which F---- was mounted, so that
was the way we got on at all.

A sudden sharp turn showed me what appeared to be a low stone wall running own the spur of
the mountain, right across our track, and I had already begun to disquiet myself about the
possibility of turning back on such a narrow ledge, when I saw F----'s powerful black horse,
with his ears well forward, and his reins, lying loose on his neck, make a sort of rush at
the obstacle, climb up it as a cat would, stand for an instant, exactly like a performing goat,
with all four legs drawn closely together under him, and then with a spring disappear on the
other side. "This wall", I thought, "must be but loosely built, for Leo has displaced some
of the stones from its coping." Helen, pretty dear, hurried after her friend and leader; and
before I had time to realize what she was going to do, she was balancing herself on the crumbling
summit of this stone wall (which was only the freak of a landslip), and as it proved impossible
to remain there, perched like a bird on a very insecure branch, nothing remained except to
gather herself well together and jump off. But what a jump! the ground fell sheer away at the
foot of the wall, and left a chasm many feet wide, which the horse could not see until it had
climbed to the top of the wall, and as turning back was out of the question, the only alternative
was to give a vigorous bound on to the narrow ledge beyond. Terrified as I felt, I luckily
refrained from jerking Helen's head, or attempting to guide her in any way. The only chance
of safety over New Zealand tracks, or New Zealand creeks, is to leave your horse entirely to
itself. I have seen men who were reckoned good riders in England, get the most ignominious
tumbles from a disregard of this advice. An up-country horse knows perfectly well the only
sound spots in a swamp; or the only sound part of a creek's banks. If his rider persists in
taking him over the latter, where he himself thinks it narrowest and safest, he is pretty sure
to find the earth rotten and crumbling, and to pay for his obstinacy by a wetting; whilst in
the case of a swamp the consequences are even more serious, and the horse often gets badly
strained in floundering out of a quagmire.

But it was not all danger and difficulty, and the many varieties of scene in the course of
a long ride constituted some of its chief charms. At first, perhaps, after we had left our
own fair valley behind, the track would wind through the gorge of a river, with lofty mountains
rising sheer up from the water side. All here was sad and grey, and very solemn in its eternal
silence, only made more intense by the ceaseless monotonous roar of the ever-rushing water.
Then we would emerge on acres and acres of softly rolling downs, higher than the hillocks we
call by that name at home, but still marvellously beautiful in their swelling curves all folding
so softly into each other, and dotted with mobs of sheep, making pastoral music to a flock-owner's
ear. Over this sort of ground we could canter gaily along, with "Hector," F----'s pet colley,
keeping close to the heels of his master's horse,--for it is the worst of bad manners in a
colley to look at a neighbour's sheep. The etiquette in passing through a strange run is for
the dog to go on the off side of his master's horse, so that the sheep shall not even see him;
and this piece of courtly politeness Hector always practised of his own accord.

A wire fence always proved a very tiresome obstacle, for horses have a great dread of them,
and will not be induced to jump them on any account. If we could find out where the gate was,
well and good; but as it might be half a dozen miles off, on one side or the other, we seldom
lost time or patience in seeking it. When there was no help for it, and such a fence had to
be crossed, the proceedings were, always the same. F----dismounted, and unfastened one of his
stirrup leathers; with this he strapped the wires as firmly as possible together, but if the
fence had been lately fresh-strained, it was sometimes a difficult task. Still he generally
made one spot lower than the rest, and over this he proceeded to adjust his coat very carefully;
he then vaulted lightly over himself, and calling upon me to aid by sundry flicks on Leo's
flank, the horse would be induced to jump over it. This was always a work of time and trouble,
for Leo hated doing it, and would rather have leaped the widest winter creek, than jumped the
lowest coat-covered wire fence. The clerk's manner altered suddenly. He drew himself up, squared
his shoulders, and saluted.

The discovery that a stranger is a man of high rank often produces this kind of effect on men
of strong democratic principles, principles of the kind held by clerks in all business communities,
quite as firmly in Belfast as elsewhere.

But it would have been a mistake to suppose that Mr. McMunn's junior clerk was a mere worshipper
of title. His salute was not the tribute of a snob to the representative of an aristocratic class.
It was the respect due by a soldier, drilled and disciplined, to his superior officer. It was
also the expression of a young man's sincere hero-worship. The redhaired clerk was a Volunteer,
duly enrolled, one of the signatories of the famous Ulster Covenant Lord Dunseverick had made speeches
which moved his soul to actual rapture.

"Come inside, my lord," he said. "I'll inform Mr. McMunn at once."

Lord Dunseverick passed through a door which was held open for him. He entered a large office, very
grimy, which is the proper condition of a place where documents concerning coal are dealt with.
Six other clerks were at work there. When Lord Dunseverick entered, all six of them stood up
and saluted. They, too, so it appeared, were members of the Volunteer Force. The red-haired
junior clerk crossed the room towards a door marked "Private."

Then he paused, and turned to Lord Dunseverick.

"Might I be so bold as to ask a question?" he said.

"A dozen if you like," said Lord Dunseverick.

"What about the rifles? It's only them we're wanting now. We're drilled and we're ready, but
where's the rifles?"

"You shall have them," said Lord Dunseverick.

The clerks in Mr. McMunn's office were accustomed to behave with decorum. No more than a low
murmur of approval greeted Lord Dunseverick's words; but the men looked as if they wished to cheer
vehemently. The red-haired boy tapped at the door which was marked "Private." A minute later
he invited Lord Dunseverick to pass through it.

Andrew McMunn is a hard-faced, grizzled little man, with keen blue eyes. He can, when he chooses, talk
excellent English. He prefers, when dealing with strangers, to speak with a strong Belfast accent,
and to use, if possible, north of Ireland words and phrases.

This is his way of asserting independence of character. He admires independence.

His office is a singularly unattractive room. He writes at a large table, and has a fireproof safe
at his elbow. There are three wooden chairs ranged against the wall opposite the writing-table.
Four photographs of steamers, cheaply framed, hang above the chairs. They are The Andrew McMunn, The
Eliza McMunn, and, a tribute to the deceased Jimmy, The McMunn Brothers. These form the fleet owned
by the firm, and carry coal from one port to another, chiefly to Belfast. On the chimney-piece
under a glass shade, is a model of The McMunn Brothers, the latest built and largest of the ships.

"Good-morning
to you, my lord!" said McMunn, without rising from his seat.

He nodded towards one of the chairs which stood against the wall.

This was his way of inviting his visitor to sit down. His eyes were fixed, with strong disapproval,
on the cigarette, which still smoked feebly in Lord Dunseverick's hand.

"Your clerk gave me a hint," said Dunseverick, "that you object to tobacco."

"It's my opinion," said McMunn, "that the man who pays taxes that
he needn't pay--I'm alluding to the duty on tobacco, you'll understand--for
the sake of poisoning himself with a nasty stink, is little better
than a fool.

That's my opinion, and I'm of the same way of thinking about alcoholic drink."

Lord Dunseverick deposited the offending cigarette on the hearth and crushed it with his foot.

"Teetotaller?"
he said.

"I dare say you're right, though I take a whisky-and-soda myself when I get the chance."

"You'll no get it here," said McMunn; "and what's more, you'll no' get it on any ship owned by
me."

"Thank you. It's as well to understand before-hand."

"I'm a believer in speaking plain," said McMunn. "There's ay less chance of trouble afterwards if
a man speaks plain at the start. But I'm thinking that it wasn't
to hear my opinion on the Christian religion that your lordship came
here the day."

McMunn, besides being a teetotaller, and opposed to the smoking of tobacco, was the president of
a Young Men's Anti-Gambling League. He was, therefore, in a position to throw valuable light
on the Christian religion.

"I came to settle the details about this expedition to Hamburg," said Lord Dunseverick.

"Well," said McMunn, "there's no that much left to settle. The Brothers is ready."

"The Brothers?"

"The McMunn Brothers. Thon's the model of her on the chimneypiece."

Lord Dunseverick looked at the model attentively.

It represented a very unattractive ship.

Her bow was absurdly high, cocked up like the snout of a Yorkshire pig. Her long waist lay
low, promising little freeboard in a sea. Her engines and single funnel were aft. On a short,
high quarterdeck was her bridge and a squat deck-house. She was designed, like her owner, for purely
business purposes.

"You'll have the captain's cabin," said McMunn. "Him and me will sleep in the saloon."

"Oh, you're coming too?"

"I am. Have you any objection?"

"None whatever. I'm delighted. We'll have a jolly time."

"I'll have you remember," said McMunn, "that it's not pleasuring we're out for."

"It's serious business. Smuggling rifles in the teeth of a Royal Proclamation is----"

"When I understand," said McMunn, "and you understand, where's the use of saying what we're
going for? I'm taking risks enough anyway, without unnecessary talking. You never know who's
listening to you."

"About paying for the--er--the--er--our cargo? Is that all arranged?"

"They'll be paid in bills on a Hamburg bank," said McMunn.

"Won't they expect cash? I should have thought that in transactions of this kind----"

"You're not a business man, my lord; but I'd have you know that a bill with the name of McMunn
to it is the same as cash in any port in Europe."

"Well, that's your part of the affair. I am leaving that to you."

"You may leave it What I say I'll do. But there's one thing that I'm no quite easy in my mind about."

"If
you're thinking about the landing of the guns----"

"I'm no asking what arrangements you've made about that.

The fewer there is that knows what's being done in a business of this kind, the better for all
concerned. What's bothering me is this. There's a man called Edelstein."

"Who's he? I never heard of him before."

"He's the Baron von Edelstein, if that's any help to you."

"It isn't. He's not the man we're buying the stuff from."

"He is not. Nor he wasn't mentioned from first to last till the letter I got the day."

He turned to the safe beside him and drew out a bundle of papers held together by an elastic
band.

"That's the whole of the correspondence," he said, "and there's the last of it."

He handed a letter to Lord Dunseverick, who read it through carefully.

"This baron," he said, "whoever he is, intends to pay his respects to us before we leave Hamburg.
Very civil of him."

"It's a civility we could do without. When I'm doing business I'd rather do it with business men,
and a baron, you'll understand, is no just----"

"I'm a baron myself," said Lord Dunseverick.

"Ay, you are."

McMunn said no more.

He left it to be understood that his opinion of barons in general was not improved by his acquaintance
with Lord Dunseverick.

"I don't think we need bother about Von Eddstein, anyway," said Lord Dunseverick. "What harm can
he do us?"

"I'm no precisely bothering about him," said McMunn; "but I'd be easier in my mind if I knew what
he wanted with us."

"We sail to-night, anyway," said Lord Dunseverick.

"Ay, we do. I tell't Ginty. He's the captain of The McMunn Brothers, and a good man."

"I've met him. In fact----"

"If you've met Ginty you've met a man who knows his business, though I wish he'd give over drinking
whisky. However, he's a strong Protestant and a sound man, and you can't expect perfection."

"Capital!"
said Lord Dunseverick. "It's a great comfort to be sure of one's men."

"I wish I was as sure of every one as I am of Ginty," said McMunn. "I'm no saying that your
lordship's not sound. The speech you made last night at Ballymena was good enough, and I'm with
you in every word of it; but----"

"Oh, speeches!" said Lord Dunseverick.

He was uneasily conscious that he had allowed himself to be carried
away by the excitement of the occasion when speaking at Ballymena.

It was right and proper to threaten armed resistance to Home Rule. It was another thing to offer
a warm welcome to the German Emperor if he chose to land in Ulster. The cold emphasis with which
McMunn expressed agreement with every word of the speech made Lord Dunseverick vaguely uneasy.

"Ay,"
said McMunn; "your speeches are well enough, and I don't say, mind you, that you're not a
sound man; but I'd be better pleased if you were more serious. You're too fond of joking, in my
opinion."

"Good heavens!" said Lord Dunseverick. "I haven't ventured on the ghost of a joke since I came
into your office!" He looked round him as he spoke, and fixed his eyes at last on the fireproof
safe. "Nobody could."

"It's no what you've said, it's your lordship's appearance. But it's too late to alter that,
I'm thinking."

"Not at all," said Lord Dunseverick. "I'll join you
this evening in a suit of yellow oilskins, the stickiest kind, and
a blue fisherman's jersey, and a pair of sea-boots. I'll have----"

"You
will," said McMunn, "and you'll look like a play actor. It's just
what I'm complaining of."

II

The McMunn Brothers lay, with steam
up, at a single anchor a mile below the Hamburg quays. The yellow,
turbid waters of the Elbe swept past her sides. Below her stretched
the long waterway which leads to the North Sea. The lights of the
buoys which marked the channel twinkled dimly in the gloom of the
summer evening. Shafts of brighter light swept across and across the
water from occulting beacons set at long intervals among buoys. Above
the steamer lay a large Norwegian barque waiting for her pilot to
take her down on the ebb tide. Below The McMunn Brothers was an ocean-going
tramp steamer. One of her crew sat on the forecastle playing the "Swanee
River" on a melodeon.

McMunn, Ginty, and Lord Dunseverick were together
in the cabin of The McMunn Brothers. McMunn, dressed precisely as
he always dressed in his office, sat bolt upright on the cabin sofa.
In front of him on the table were some papers, which he turned over
and looked at from time to time.

Beside him was Ginty, in his shirt
sleeves, with his peaked cap pushed far back on his head. He sat with
his elbows on the table. His chin, thrust forward, rested on his knuckles.
He stared fixedly at the panelling on the opposite wall of the cabin.
Lord Dunseverick, who had a side of the table to himself, leaned far
back. His legs were stretched out straight in front of him. His hands
were in his pockets. He gazed wearily at the small lamp which swung
from the cabin roof.

For a long time no one spoke. It was Lord Dunseverick
who broke the silence in the end. He took his cigarette-case from
his pocket.

"You may say what you like about tobacco, McMunn," he
said, "but it's a comfort to a man when he has no company but a bear
with a sore head."

"Ay," said McMunn, "you'll smoke and you'll smoke,
but you'll no make me any easier in my mind by smoking."

Ginty drew
a plug of black tobacco from his pocket, and began cutting shreds
from it with a clasp knife. He was apparently of opinion that smoking
would relieve the strain on his mind.

"I'm no satisfied," said McMunn.

"I
don't see what you have to grumble about," said Lord Dunseverick.
"We've got what we came for, and we've got our clearance papers. What
more do you want? You expected trouble about those papers, and there
wasn't any. You ought to be pleased."

"There you have it," said McMunn.
"According to all the laws of nature there ought to have been trouble.
With a cargo like ours there ought to have been a lot of trouble.
Instead of that the papers are handed over to us without a question."

"It's
peculiar," said Ginty. "It's very peculiar, and that's a fact."

"Then
there's the matter of those extra cases," said McMunn. "How many cases
is there in the hold, Ginty?"

"A hundred, seventy-two."

"And the
contract was for one-fifty. What's in the odd twenty-two? Tell me
that."

"Pianos," said Lord Dunseverick. "Look at your clearance papers.
'Nature of Cargo--Pianos.'"

"You'd have your joke," said McMunn,
"if the flames of hell were scorching the soles of your boots."

"It's
peculiar," said Ginty.

"It's more than peculiar," said McMunn. "I've
been in business for thirty years, and it's the first time I ever
had goods given me that I didn't ask for."

"Well," said Lord Dunseverick,
"if we've got an extra five hundred rifles we can't complain. There's
plenty of men in Ulster ready to use them."

"Maybe you'll tell me,"
said McMunn, "why they wouldn't let me pay for the goods in the office
this afternoon. Did anyone ever hear the like of that--a man refusing
money that was due to him, and it offered?"

"It's out of the course
of nature," said Ginty.

"They told you," said Lord Dunseverick, "that
you could pay Von Edelstein, and he'd give you a receipt."

"Ay, Von
Edelstein. And where's Von Edelstein?"

"He's coming on board this
evening," said Lord Dunseverick. "But you needn't wait for him unless
you like. We've got steam up. Why not slip away?"

"Because it's no
my way of doing business," said McMunn, "to slip away, as you call
it, without paying for what I've got I'm a man of principle."

"Talking
of your principles," said Lord Dunseverick, "what did you bring on
board in that basket this afternoon? It looked to me like beer."

"It
was beer."

"I'm glad to hear it," said Lord Dunseverick. "Let's have
a couple of bottles."

Ginty took his pipe from his mouth and grinned
pleasantly. He wanted beer.

"You'll be thinking maybe," said McMunn,
"that I'm going back on my temperance principles?"

"We don't think
anything of the sort," said Lord Dunseverick. "We think that foreign
travel has widened your principles out a bit That's what we think,
isn't it, Ginty?"

"My principles are what they always were," said
McMunn, "but I've some small share of commonsense. I know there's
a foreigner coming on board the night, a baron and a dissipated man----"

"Come,
now,'" said Lord Dunseverick, "you can't be sure that Von Edelstein
is dissipated. You've never met him."

"He's a foreigner and a baron,"
said McMunn, "and that's enough for me, forbye that he's coming here
under very suspicious circumstances. If I can get the better of him
by means of strong drink and the snare of alcoholic liquors----"

"Good
Lord!" said Lord Dunseverick. "You don't expect to make a German drunk
with half a dozen bottles of lager beer, particularly as Ginty and
I mean to drink two each."

"There's a dozen in the basket. And, under
the circumstances, I consider myself justified I'm no man for tricks,
but if there's any tricks to be played, I'd rather play them myself
than have them played on me. Mind that now. It's the way I've always
acted, and it's no a bad way."

"Gosh," said Ginty, "there's somebody
coming aboard of us now. The look-out man's hailing him."

He left
the cabin as he spoke.

A few minutes later Ginty entered the cabin
again. He was followed by a tall man, so tall that he could not stand
quite upright in the little cabin.

"It's the baron," said Ginty.

"Guten
Abend," said McMunn.

He possessed some twenty more German words,
and knew that "beer" was represented by the same sound as in English.
The equipment seemed to him sufficient for the interview.

"I have
the good fortune to speak English easily," said Von Edelstein. "Am
I addressing myself to Mr. McMunn?"

"Ay," said McMunn, "you are.
And this is Lord Dunseverick, a baron like yourself."

Von Edelstein
bowed, and held out his hand.

"I prefer," he said, "my military title,
Captain von Edelstein. I believe that Lord Dunseverick also has a
military title. Should I say colonel?"

"As a matter of fact," said
Lord Dunseverick, "I'm not in the Army."

"I understand," said Von
Edelstein. "You are in the Volunteers, the Ulster Volunteers. But,
perhaps I should say general?"

"I don't call myself that," said Lord
Dunseverick.

"As a matter of fact, my rank is not officially recognized,
in England, I mean."

"Ah, but here--we recognize it I assure you,
general, we regard the Ulster Volunteers as a properly constituted
military force."

McMunn had been groping in a locker behind him. Well, ma'am, I was pouring a pannikin full o'
biling tallow into the mould, when poor old Spot he gives a sudden howl and yell, and runs
to the door. I paid no attention to him at the time, for I was so busy; but he went on leaping
up and howling as if he had gone mad. As soon as I could put down the pannikin out o' my hand,
I went to the door meaning to open it and,--sorry am I to say it,--kick the poor beast out
for making such a row about a drop o' hot grease. But the dog turned his face round on me,
and gave me a look as much as to say, 'Make haste, do; there's a good chap: I ought to be outside
there.' And what with the sense shinin' in his eyes, and a curious kind o' sound outside, I
takes down the bar (for the door wouldn't stay shut otherwise), and looks out. Never until
my dyin' day, and not even then, I expect, shall I forget what the dog and I saw lying on the
ground, which was all white and hard with frost, the sun not having got over the East range
yet. The dog he had more sense and a deal more pluck than I had, for he knows there aint a
moment to be lost; and he runs up to the flat, tumbled-down heap o' clothes, gets on its back
(for no face could I see), so as to be doing something, and not losing time, and begins licking.
Not very far off there was a lean horse standing, but he didn't seem to like to come through
the slip-rail o' the paddock fence.

"In coorse I couldn't stand gaping there all day, so I went and stooped down to the man, who
was lying flat on his face, with his arms straight out. He wasn't sensibleless (Palmer's favourite
word for senseless), for he opened his eyes, and said, "For God's sake, mate, take me in."
"So I will, mate," I makes reply "and welcome you are. Can you get on your legs, think you?"
With that he groans awful, and says, "My legs is friz." Well, I looks at his legs, and sees
he was dressed in what had been good moleskins, and high jack riding-boots, coming up to his
knees; but sure enough they was as hard as a board, and actially, if you'll believe me, ma'am,
there was a rim o' solid hice round the tops of his boots. As for standing, he couldn't do
it: his legs was no more use to him than they was to me, and he was a tall, high fellow besides.
Cold as it was, I felt hot enough by the time I had lugged that poor man inside my place, and
got him up on my bunk. He could speak, though his voice was weak as weak could be, and he helped
me as well as he could by catching hold with his arms, but his legs was stone dead. I had to
get the tommy (anglice-tomahawk), and chop his boots off, and that's the gospel truth, ma'am.
I broke my knife, first try, and the axe was too big. He told me, poor fellow, that two days
before, as he was returning from prospecting up towards the back ranges, his horse got away,
and he couldn't catch him. No: he tried with all his might and main, for in his swag, which
was strapped to the D's of his saddle, was not only his blanket, but his baccy, and tea, and
damper, and a glass o' grog. The curious thing, too, was that the horse didn't bolt right away,
as they generally do: he jest walked a-head, knowing his master was bound to follow wherever
he led, for in coorse he had hopes to catch him every moment. That ere brute, he never laid
down nor rested,--jest kep slowly moving on, as if he was a Lunnon street-boy, with a bobby
at his heels. Through creeks and rivers and swamps he led that poor fellow. His boots got chuck
full o' cold water, and when the sun went down it friz into solid hice; and that misfortnit
man he felt his legs--which was his life, you see, ma'am--gradially dyin' under him. Yet he
was a well-plucked one, if ever there was such a party on this airth. He told me he had took
five mortial hours to come the last mile, the horse walkin' slowly afore him, and guiding him
like. And how do you think he did it, with two pillars of hice for legs? Why he lifted up just
one leg and then the other with both his hands, and put them afore him, and took his steps
that way."

Here honest Ned, his eyes glistening, and his ugly little face glowing with emotion through
its coating of sunburn, paused, as if he did not like to go on.

I was more touched and interested than I could avoid showing, and cried, "Oh, do tell me, Palmer,
what became of the poor fellow! Did he die?"

Ned cleared his throat, and moved so as to get between me and the light from the door, as he
said huskily, "He came very nigh to it, ma'am. I never did set eyes on such a decent patient
chap as that man was. I did the very wust thing I could a' done, the town doctors told me,
for I brought him into the hut, instead o' keeping him outdoors and rubbing his poor black
legs with snow. 'Stead o' that, I wrapped him up warm in my own blankets, after I had chipped
his boots and the hice off of 'em, and I made up a roarin' fire. Good Lord, how the poor fellow
groaned when he begun to get warm! I gave him a pannikin full o' hot tea, with a drop o' grog
in it, and that seemed to make him awful bad. At last he said, with the sweat from sheer agony
pouring down his face, "Look here, matey: couldn't you hump me out in the snow again? for it
aint nigh so bad to bear it cold as it is to bear it hot." Not a bad word did he say, ma'am,
and he tried not to give in more nor he could help; but he was clean druv wild with the hanguish
in his legs.

"Presently I remembers, quite sudden like, that a bush doctor, name of Tomkins, was likely
to be round by Simmons, cos' o' his missus. So I got on my 'oss in a minnit, and I rides off
and fetches him, for sure enough he was there; and though Simmons' missis wasn't to say over
her troubles, she spoke up from behind the curtain of red blanket she had put up in her tidy
little hut, and bade old Tomkins go with me. May God bless her and hers for that same, say
I! Well, ma'am, when Tomkins come back with me and saw the poor fellow (he was fair shoutin'
with the pain in his legs by then), he said nothin' could be done. "They'll mortify by morrow
mornin'," says he, "and then he'll die easy." So with that he goes back with the first light
next day, to Simmons. Sure enough, the poor fellow did get a bit easier next day, and I felt
clear mad to think he was goin' to die before my very eyes. "Not if I can help it!" I cries,
quite savage like. But he only smiled a patient smile, and said, "God's will be done, mate.
He knows best, and I aint in any pain to speak of, now."

"By and bye I hears a rumbling and a creaking, and cracking of whips; and when I looks out,
what do I see but the bullock-dray from Simmons' coming up the flat. It was the only thing
on wheels within forty mile, and Simmons had brought it his own self to see if we couldn't
manage to get the poor fellow down to the nighest town. I won't make my yarn no longer than
I can help, ma'am, so I'll only mention that we made a lot o' the strongest mutton broth you
ever tasted; we slung a hammock of red blankets in the dray, and we got the poor fellow down
by evening to a gentleman's station. There they made us kindly welcome, did all they could
for him, and transhipped the hammock into a pair-horse dray, which went quicker and was easier.
We got on as fast as we could every step of the way, and by midnight that poor fellow was tucked
into a clean bed in the hospital at Christchurch, with both his legs neatly cut off just above
the knee, for there wasn't a minute to lose."

I was almost afraid to inquire how the sufferer fared, for Ned's eyes were fairly swimming
with unshed tears; but he smiled brightly, and said, "The ladies and gentlemen in the town,
they set up a subscribetion, and bought the poor chap a first-rate pair o' wooden legs, and
he could even manage to ride about after a bit; and instead o' wandering about looking for
country, or gold, or what not, he settled down as a carrier, and throve and did well. And I
was thinking, ma'am, as how I'd like to return thanks for that poor fellow's wonderful recovery,
for I've never had a chance of going to Church since, and its nigh upon two years ago that
it happened."

"So you shall, Ned: so you shall!" we said with one voice. And so at our first Church gathering
at our dear little antipodean home, F----, who acted as our minister, paused in the beautiful
Thanksgiving Service, after he had read solemnly and slowly the simple words, "Especially for
Thy late mercies vouchsafed to ----," and Ned Palmer chimed in with an "Amen,"--misplaced,
indeed, but none the less hearty, and delightful to hear.

Chapter X: Swaggers.

Dr. Johnson did not know the somewhat vulgar word which heads this paper. At least he did not
know it as a noun, but gives "swagger: v.n., to bluster, bully, brag;" but the Slang Dictionary
admits it as a word, springing indeed from the thieves' vocabulary: "one who carries a swag."
Neither of these books however give the least idea of the true meaning of the expression, which
is as fully recognised as an honest word in both Australia and New Zealand as any other combination
of letters in the English language. A swagger is the very antithesis then of a swaggerer, for,
whereas, the one is full of pretension and abounds in unjust claims on our notice, the swagger
is humility and civility itself. He knows, poor weary tramp, that on the favourable impression
he makes upon the "boss," depends his night's lodging and food, as well as a job of work in
the future. We will leave then the ideal swaggerer to some other biographer who may draw glowing
word-pictures of him in all his jay's splendour, and we will confine ourselves to describing
the real swagger, clad in flannel shirt, moleskin trowsers, and what were once thick boots,
but might now be used as sieves.

Nothing astonished me so much in my New Zealand Station Life as these visitors. Even Sir Roger
de Coverley himself would have looked with distrust upon most of our swagger-guests, and yet
I never heard of an instance in our part of the country where the unhesitating, ungrudging
hospitality extended by the rich squatters to their poorer compatriots was ever abused. It was
here that we had a taste of real war in all its horrors. It was a sort of a floating panorama that
passed before me, a hideous dream. There was a roaring and crashing of artillery, bursting of shells
and the rattle of muskets, with hissing and whistling of minie balls and battle-smoke lowering
down upon us. There were men dropping here and there and all the horrid experiences of war.
Still we kept on; there was a short turn to the right and in single file we commenced ascending
through a deep ravine. Wading through water, stumbling over and under fallen trees, we finally came
to a pit about six feet deep; when we had gotten out of that we were on the side of the hill where
we had to prepare to make a charge. It was a wicked place to charge. The nature of the ground
was such it was impossible to form in battle line, so to make the attack in three columns over
felled trees which were cris-crossed in every shape imaginable. We waited here for a few moments
with beating hearts, waiting for the forward charge.

The word came and with a terrifying yell we rose to our feet and rushed forward. It was a
terrible time, when bounding over the last tree and crashing through some brush we came out within
a short distance of the enemy's entrenchments, and it seemed as though a thousand rifles were cracking
our doom. This fire was too deadly for men to stand against. Our brave fellows, shot down
as fast as they could come up, were beaten back. Then occurred one of those heroic deeds we
sometimes read about. The colors of the One Hundred and Fifty-ninth were left on the hill, their
color sergeant having been killed. Corporal Buckley of our regiment calmly worked back in
that terrific fire, picked up the dear old flag and brought it in, turned to pick up his gun
and was killed. He was a noble fellow and much beloved in the regiment.

Resting here a short time, we made a second charge with the same deadly results. Our regiment and
the One Hundred and Fifty-ninth New York lost 80 men killed and wounded. It was a terrible position
we were in. Sharpshooters on the left picking us off; sharpshooters
on right giving it to us and the rifle pits in front. Here we had
to stay till after 10 o'clock that night when the order came to fall
back, which we did, bringing off our wounded.
Giant Alps clothed half up their steep sides with evergreen pines,--whose dark forms end abruptly
where snow and ice begin,--stand out against a pure sky of more than Italian blue, and only
when a cleared saddle is reached can the traveller look down over the wooded hills and vallies
rolling away inland before him, or turn his eyes sea-ward to the bold coast with its many rivers,
whose wide mouths foam right out to where the great Pacific waves are heaving under the bright
winter sun.

Such, and yet still more fair must have been the prospect on which Burgess, Kelly, Levy, and
Sullivan's eyes rested one June morning in the mid-winter of 1866. They were, one and all,
originally London thieves, and had been transported years before to the early penal settlements
of Australia. From thence they had managed, by fair means and foul, to work their way to other
places, and had latterly been living in the Middle Island, earning what they could by horse-breaking
and divers odd jobs. But your true convict hates work with a curiously deadly hatred, and these
four men agreed to go and look round them at the new West Coast diggings. They found, however,
that there, as elsewhere, it would be necessary to work hard, so in disgust at seeing the nuggets
and dust which rewarded the toil of more industrious men, they left Hokitika and reached Nelson
on their way to Picton, the chief town of the adjoining province of Marlborough. Most of the
gold found its way under a strongly armed escort to the banks in both these towns, but it was
well-known that fortunate diggers occasionally travelled together, unarmed, and laden with
"dust." So safe had been the roads hitherto, that the commonest precautions were not taken,
nor the least secrecy observed about travellers' movements.

It was therefore no mystery that four unarmed diggers, carrying a considerable number of ounces
of gold-dust with them, were going to start from the Canvas-town diggings for Nelson on a certain
day, and the men I have mentioned set out to meet them. One part of their long journey led
them over the Maungatapu range by a saddle, which in its lowest part is 2,700 feet above the
sea-level. The night before the murder, the victims and their assassins camped out with only
ten miles between them. So lonely and deserted was the rough mountain track, that the appearance
of a poor old man named Battle alarmed Burgess and his gang dreadfully, and they immediately
murdered him, in order that he should not report having passed them on the road. Between the
commission of this act of precaution and the arrival of the little band of travellers, no one
else was seen. Burgess appears to have shown some of the qualities of a good general; for he
selected a spot where the only path wound along a steep side-cutting, less than six feet wide,
with an unbroken forest on the upper, and a mass of tangled bush on the lower side. As the
doomed men approached the murderers sprang out, and each thrusting a revolver close to their
faces, called on them "to hold up their hands." This is an old bushranger challenge, and is
meant to ensure perfect quiescence on the part of the victim. The travellers mechanically complied,
and in this way were instantly separated, led to different spots, and ruthlessly shot dead.

It was all over in a moment: Burgess and his men flung the bodies down among the tangled bush,
and returned to Nelson rejoicing exceedingly over the simple and easy means by which they had
possessed themselves of several hundred pounds. Of course they calculated on the usual supine
indifference to other people's affairs, which prevails in busy gold-seeking communities; but
in this instance the public seemed to be suddenly seized by a violent and inconvenient curiosity
to find out what had become of the four men who were known to have started from Canvas-town
two or three days before. No one ever dreamed of a murder having been committed, not even when
another "swagger" reached Nelson and stated that he had followed the diggers on the road, only
a mile or so behind, had suddenly lost sight of them at the spot I have mentioned, and had
never been able to overtake them. Instead of leaving the now excited little town, or keeping
quiet, Burgess, Kelly, Levy, and Sullivan, may truly be said to have become "swaggerers;" for
they loitered about the place, ostentatiously displaying their bags of gold dust. Unsuspicious
as the Nelson people were, they acted upon a sort of instinct,--that instinct within us which
answers so mysteriously to the cry of blood from the earth,--and arrested these four men. Still,
the matter might have ended there for lack of a clue, if one of the party, Sullivan, had not
suddenly turned informer, and led the horrified town's-people to the jungle which concealed
the bodies. Here my dreadful story may end; for we need not follow the course of the trial,
which resulted in the complete conviction of the three other men. I have only dwelt on so horrible
a theme in order to make my readers understand how natural it was that I should feel nervous,
when it became apparent to my understanding that the custom of the country demanded that you
should ask no questions, but simply tell any travellers who claimed your hospitality where
they were to sleep, and send them in large supplies of mutton, flour, and tea.

On one occasion it chanced that F----, our stalwart cadet Mr. A----, and the man who did odd
jobs about the place, were all on the point of setting out upon some expedition, when a party
of four swaggers made their appearance just at sundown. No true swagger ever appears earlier,
lest he might be politely requested to "move on" to the next station; whereas if he times his
arrival exactly when "the shades of night are falling fast," no boss could be hard-hearted
enough to point to mist-covered hills and valleys, which are a net-work of deep creeks and
swamps, and desire the wayfarer to go on further. Once, and only once, did I know of such a
thing being done; but I will not say more about that unfortunate at this moment, for I want
to claim the pity of all my lady readers for the very unprotected position I am trying to depict.
F---- could not understand my nervousness, and did not reassure me by saying, as he mounted
his horse, "I've told them to sleep in the stable. I am pretty sure they are run-away sailors,
they seem so footsore. Good-bye! don't expect me until you see me!"

Now I was a very new chum in those days, and had just heard of the Maungatapu murders. These
guests of mine looked most disreputable, and were all powerful young men. I do not believe
there was a single lock or bolt or bar on any door in the whole of the little wooden house:
the large plate-chest stood outside in the verandah, and my dressing-case could have been carried
off through the ever-open bedroom window by an enterprising thief of ten years old. As for
my two maids,--the only human beings within reach,--they were as perfectly useless on any emergency
as if they had been wax dolls. One of them had the habit of fainting if anything happened,
and the other used to tend her until she revived, when they both sat still and shrieked. Their
nerves had once been tested by a carpenter, who was employed about the house, and cut his hand
badly; on another occasion by the kitchen chimney which took fire; and that was the way they
behaved each time. So it was useless to look upon their presence as any safeguard; indeed one
of them speedily detected a fancied likeness to Burgess in one of the poor swaggers, and shrieked
every time she saw him.

We were indeed three "lone, 'lorn women," all through that weary night. I could not close my
eyes; but laid awake listening to the weka's shrill call, or the melancholy cry of the bitterns
down in the swamp. With the morning light came hope and courage; and I must say I felt ashamed
of my suspicions when my cook came to announce that the "swaggers was just agoin' off, and
wishful to say good-bye. They've been and washed up the tin plates and pannikins and spoons
as clean as clean can be; and the one I thought favoured Burgess so much, mum, he's been and
draw'd water from the well, all that we shall want to-day; and they're very civil, well-spoken
chaps, if you please, mum!" F---- was right in his surmise, I fancy; for there were plenty
of tattooed pictures of anchors and ships on the brawny bare arms of my departing guests. They
seemed much disappointed to find there was no work to be had on our station; but departed,
with many thanks and blessings, "over the hills and far away."

Latterly, with increasing civilization and corresponding social economy, there have been many
attempts made by new-fangled managers of runs, more than by the run-holders themselves, to
induce these swaggers to work for their tucker,--to use pure colonial phraseology. Several
devices have been tried, such as taking away their swags (i.e., their red blankets rolled tightly
into a sort of pack, which they carry on their backs, and derive their name from), and locking
them up until they had chopped a small quantity of wood, or performed some other trifling domestic
duty. But the swagger will be led, though not driven, and what he often did of his own accord
for the sake of a nod or a smile of thanks from my pretty maid-servants, he would not do for
the hardest words which ever came out of a boss's mouth. There are also strict rules of honesty
observed among these men, and if one swagger were to purloin the smallest article from a station
which had fed and sheltered him, every other swagger in all the country side would immediately
become an amateur detective to make the thief give up his spoil. A pair of old boots was once
missing from a neighbouring station, and suspicion fell upon a swagger. Justice was perhaps
somewhat tardy in this instance, as it rested entirely in the hands of every tramp who passed
that way; but at the end of some months the boots were found at home, and the innocence of
the swaggers, individually and collectively, triumphantly established.

The only instance of harshness to a swagger which came under my notice during three years residence
in New Zealand, is the one I have alluded to above, and contains so much dramatic interest
in its details, that it may not be out of place here.

Although I have naturally dwelt in these papers more upon our bright sunny weather, our clear,
bracing winter days, and our balmy spring and autumn evenings, let no intending traveller think
that he will not meet with bad weather at the Antipodes! I can only repeat what I have said
with pen and voice a hundred times before. New Zealand possesses a very capricious and disagreeable
climate: disagreeable from its constant high winds: but it is perhaps the most singularly and
remarkably healthy place in the world. This must surely arise from the very gales which I found
so trying to my temper, for damp is a word without meaning; as for mildew or miasma, the generation
who are growing up there will not know the meaning of the words; and in spite of a warm, bright
day often turning at five minutes warning into a snowy or wet afternoon, colds and coughs are
almost unknown. People who go out there with delicate lungs recover in the most surprising
manner; surprising, because one expects the sudden changes of temperature, the unavoidable
exposure to rain and even snow, to kill instead of curing invalids. But the practice is very
unlike the theory in this case, and people thrive where they ought to die.

During my first winter in Canterbury we had only one week of really bad weather, but I felt
at that time as if I had never realized before what bad weather meant. A true "sou'-wester"
was blowing from the first to the second Monday in that July, without one moment's lull. The
bitter, furious blast swept down the mountain gorges, driving sheets of blinding rain in a
dense wall before it. Now and then the rain turned into large snow-flakes, or the wind rose
into such a hurricane that the falling water appeared to be flashing over the drenched earth
without actually touching it. Indoors we could hardly hear ourselves speak for the noise of
the wind and rain against the shingle roof. It became a service of danger, almost resembling
a forlorn hope, to go out and drag in logs of wet wood, or draw water from the well,--for,
alas, there were no convenient taps or snug coal-holes in our newly-erected little wooden house.
We husbanded every scrap of mutton, in very different fashion to our usual reckless consumption,
the consumption of a household which has no butcher's bill to pay; for we knew not when the
shepherd might be able to fight his way through the storm, with half a sheep packed before
him, on sturdy little "Judy's" back. The creeks rose and poured over their banks in angry yellow
floods. Every morning casualties in the poultry yard had to be reported, and that week cost
me almost as many fowls and ducks as my great christening party did. The first thing every
morning when I opened my eyes I used to jump up and look out of the different windows with
eager curiosity, to see if there were any signs of a break in the weather, for I was quite
unaccustomed to be pent up like a besieged prisoner for so many succeeding days. We did not
boast of shutters in those regions, and even blinds were a luxury which were not wasted in
the little hall. Consequently, when my unsatisfactory wanderings about the silent house--for
no one else was up--led me that dreadful stormy morning into the narrow passage called the
back-hall, I easily saw through its glass-door what seemed to me one of the most pathetic sights
my eyes had ever rested upon.

Just outside the verandah, which is the invariable addition to New Zealand houses, stood, bareheaded,
a tall, gaunt figure, whose rain-sodden garments clung closely to its tottering limbs. A more
dismal morning could not well be imagined: the early dawn struggling to make itself apparent
through a downpour of sleet and rain, the howling wind (which one could almost see as it drove
the vapour wall before it), and the profound solitude and silence of all except the raging storm.

At first I thought I must be dreaming, so silent and hopeless stood that weird figure. My next
impulse, without staying to consider my dishevelled hair and loose wrapper, was to open the
door and beckon the poor man within the shelter of the verandah. When once I had got him there
I did not exactly know what to do with my guest, for neither fire nor food could be procured
quite so early. He crouched like a stray dog down on the dripping mat outside the door, and
murmured some unintelligible words. In this dilemma I hastened to wake up poor F----, who found
it difficult to understand why I wanted him to get up at daylight during a "sou'-wester." But
I entreated him to go to the hall door, whilst I flew off to get my lazy maids out of their
warm beds. With all their faults, they did not need much rousing on that occasion. I suppose
I used very forcible words to convey the misery of the object standing outside, for I know
that Mary was in floods of tears, and had fastened her gown on over her night-gear, whilst
I was still speaking; and the cook had tumbled out of bed, and was kneeling before the kitchen
fire with her eyes shut, kindling a blaze, apparently, in her sleep.

As soon as things were in this forward state, I returned to the verandah, and found our swagger
guest drawing a very long breath after a good nip of pure whisky which F---- had promptly administered
to him. "I'm fair clemmed wi' cold and wet," the swagger said, still bundled up in his comparatively
sheltered corner. "I've been out on the hills the whole night, and I am deadbeat. Might I stop
here for a bit?" He asked this very doubtfully, for it is quite against swagger etiquette to
demand shelter in the morning. For all answer he was taken by the shoulder, and helped up.
I never shall forget the poor tramp's deprecating face, as he looked back at me, whilst he
was being led through the pretty little dining-room, with its bright carpet, on which his clay-clogged
boots and dripping garments left a muddy, as well as a watery track. "All right," I said, with
colonial brevity; and so we escorted our strange guest through the house into the kitchen,
where the ever-ready kettle and gridiron were busy preparing tea and chops over a blazing fire.
Of course the maids screamed when they saw us, and I do not wonder at their doing so, for neither
F---- nor I looked very respectable, with huddled on dressing-gowns and towzled hair; whilst
our foot-sore, drenched guest subsided into a chair by the door, covered his wretched pinched
face with two bony hands, and burst into tears. I certainly never expected to see a swagger
cry, and F---- declared the sight was quite as new to him as to me. However, the poor man's
tears and helplessness gave fresh energy to my maids' treacherous nerves, and they even suggested
dry clothes. Our good-natured cadet, who at this moment appeared on the scene, was only too
happy to find some outlet for his superfluous benevolence, and hastened off, to return in a
moment or two with an old flannel shirt, dry and whole, in spite of its faded stripes, a pair
of moleskin trousers, and a huge pair of canvas cricketing shoes. It was no time for ceremony,
so we women retreated for a few minutes into the store-room, whilst F---- and Mr. A---- made
the swagger's toilette, getting so interested in their task as even to part his dripping hair
out of his eyes. He had no swag, poor fellow, having lost his roll of red blankets in one of
the treacherous bog-holes across the range.

That man was exactly like a lost, starving dog. He ate an enormous breakfast, curled himself
upon some empty flour-sacks in a dry corner of the kitchen, and slept till dinner time; then
another sleep until the supper hour, and so on, the round of he clock. All this time he never
spoke, though we were dying to hear how he had come into such a plight. The "sou'-wester" still
raged furiously out of doors without a moment's cessation, and we were obliged to have recourse
to the tins of meat kept in the store-room for such an emergency. The shepherd told us afterwards
he had ventured out to look for some wethers, his own supply being exhausted, but the whole
mob had hidden themselves so cleverly that neither man nor dog could discover their place of
shelter. On the Monday night, exactly a week after the outbreak of bad weather; the skies showed
signs of having exhausted themselves, and nature began to wear a sulky air, as if her temper
were but slowly recovering herself. The learned in such matters, however, took a cheerful view
of affairs, and declared the worst to be over,--"for this bout,"--as they cautiously added.

Whether it was the three days of rest, warmth, and good food which unlocked the swagger's heart,
or not, I do not pretend to decide; but that evening, over a pipe in the kitchen, he confided
to Mr. A----that he had been working his way down to the sea-coast from a station where he
had been employed, very far back in the hill ranges. The "sou'-wester" had overtaken him about
twenty miles from us, but only five from another station, where he had applied towards the
evening for shelter, being even then drenched with rain, and worn out by struggling through
such a tremendous storm. There, for some reason which I confess did not seem very clear, he
had been refused the unvarying hospitality extended in New Zealand to all travellers, rich
or poor, squatter or swagger, and had been directed to take a short cut across the hills to
our station, which he was assured could easily be reached in an hour or two more. The track,
a difficult one enough to strike in summer weather, became, indeed, impossible to discover
amid rushing torrents and driving wind and rain; besides which, as the poor fellow repeated
more than once during his story, "I was fair done up when I set out, for I'd been travelling
all day." Mr. A---- told us what the man had been saying, before we all went to bed, adding,
"He seems an odd, surly kind of creature, for although he declares he is going away the first
thing to-morrow, if the rain be over, I noticed he never said a word approaching to thanks."

The rain was indeed over next morning, and a flood of brilliant sunshine awoke me "bright and
early," as the country people say. It seemed impossible to stop in bed, so I jumped up, thrust
my feet into slippers, and my arms into a warm dressing-gown, and sallied forth, opening window
after window, so as to let the sunshine into rooms which not even a week's steady down-pour
could render damp. What a morning it was, and for mid-winter too! No haze, or fog, or vapour
on all the green hills, whose well-washed sides were glistening in a bright glow of sunlight.
For the first time, too, since the bad weather had set in, was to be heard the incessant bleat
which is music to the ears of a New Zealand sheep-farmer. White, moving, calling patches on
the hillsides told that the sheep were returning to their favourite pastures, and a mob of
horses could be descried quietly feeding on the sunny flat.

But I had no eyes for beauties of mountain or sky. I could do nothing but gaze on the strange
figure of the silent swagger, who knelt yes, positively knelt, on the still wet and shining
shingle which formed an apology for a gravel path up to the back-door of the little wooden
homestead. His appearance was very different to what it had been three days before. Now his
clothes were dry and clean and mended,--my Irish maids doing; bless their warm hearts! He had
cobbled up his boots himself, and his felt hat, which had quite recovered from its drenching,
lay at his side. The perfect rest and warmth and good food had filled up his hollow cheeks,
but still his countenance was a curious one; and never, until my dying day, can I forget the
rapture of entreaty on that man's upturned face. I said I did."

"Of course."

Sam caught some note of sarcasm in my voice. He felt it necessary to modify his statement.

"Well, not policemen in particular. I haven't a special down on policemen. I like a scrap with
anyone. Then he said--Harlewood, that is--that he admired the way I drove that car down Grafton
Street. He said he liked a man who wasn't afraid to take risks; which was rot. There wasn't any
real risk."

"The police swore that you went at thirty miles an hour," I said. "And that street is simply crowded
in the middle of the day."

"I don't believe I was doing anything like thirty miles an hour," said Sam. "I should say twenty-seven
at the outside. And there was no risk because everybody cleared out of my way. I had the street
practically to myself. It was rather fun seeing all the other cars and carts and things piled
up upon the footpaths at either side and the people bolting into the shops like rabbits. But there
wasn't any risk. However, old Hazlewood evidently thought there was, and seemed frightfully pleased
about it He said he had a car of his own, a sixty h.p. Daimler, and
that he'd like to see me drive it.

I said I'd take him for a spin any time he liked. I gave him a hint that we might start immediately
after lunch and run up to Belfast in time for dinner. With a car like that I could have done it
easy. However, he wasn't on."

"Do you think he really had the car?"

"Oh, he had her all right I drove her afterwards. Great Scott, such a drive! The next thing he
said was that he believed I was a pretty good man in a boat. I said I knew something about boats, though
not much."

Modesty is one of Sam's virtues. He is, I believe, an excellent hand in a small yacht, and does
a good deal of racing.

"I asked him what put it into his head that I could sail a boat, and
he said O'Meara told him.

O'Meara is a man I sail with occasionally, and I thought it nice of him to mention my name to
this old boy. I can hoist a spinnaker all right and shift a jib, but I'm no good at navigation.
Always did hate sums and always will. I told him that, and he said he could do the navigation
himself. All he wanted was a good amateur crew for a thirty-ton yawl with a motor auxiliary.
He had four men, and he asked me to make a fifth.

I said I'd go like a shot. Strictly speaking, I ought to have been attending lectures; but
what good are lectures?" "Very little," I said. "In fact, hardly any." "I wasn't going to lose a cruise
for the sake of any amount of lectures," said Sam, "particularly with the chance of a tour
on that sixty h.p. car thrown in."

Sam paused at this point. It seemed to me that he wanted encouragement.

"You'd have been a fool if you had," I said.

"Up to that time," said Sam thoughtfully, "I hadn't tumbled to what he was at. I give you my
word of honour I hadn't the dimmest idea that he was after anything
in particular. I thought he was simply a good old sport with lots
of money, which he knew how to spend in sensible ways."

"The criminal
part of the business was mentioned later on, I suppose?"

"I don't
know that there's anything criminal about it," said Sam. "I'm jolly
well sure it wasn't wrong, under the circumstances. But it may have
been criminal. That's just what I want you to tell me.

"I'll give
you my opinion," I said, "when I hear what it was."

"Gun-running,"
said Sam.

Gun-running has for some time been a popular sport in Ireland,
and I find it very difficult to say whether it is against the law
or not. The Government goes in for trying to stop it, which looks
as if a gun-runner might be prosecuted when caught. On the other hand,
the Government never prosecutes gun-runners, even those who openly
boast of their exploits, and that looks as if it were quite a legal
amusement. I promised Sam that I would consider the point, and I asked
him to tell me exactly what he did.

"Well," he said, "when I heard
it was gunrunning I simply jumped at the chance. Any fellow would.
I said I'd start right away, if he liked As a matter of fact, we didn't
start for nearly a fortnight The boat turned out to be the Pegeen.
You know the Pegeen, don't you?"

I did not I am not a sailor, and
except that I cannot help seeing paragraphs about Shamrock IV. in
the daily papers I do not think I know the name of a single yacht.

"Well,"
said Sam, "she's O'Meara's boat I've sailed in her sometimes in cruiser
races. She's slow and never does any good, but she's a fine sea boat.

Exactly at midnight,--the proper hour for ghosts; burglars, and bushrangers, and such "small
deer" to be about, everybody was awakened simultaneously by a loud irregular knocking, which
sounded with hollow reverberations all through the wooden house. "Bushrangers!" we all thought,
every one of us; for although burglars may not usually knock at hall-doors in England, it is
by no means uncommon for their bolder brethren to do so at the other end of the world. It is
such a comfort to me now, looking back on that scene to remember that our stalwart cadet was
as frightened as anybody. He stood six feet one in his stockings, and was a match for any two
in the country side, and yet, I am happy to think, he was as bad as any one. As for me, to
say that my heart became like water and my knees like soft wax, is to express in mild words
my state of abject terror. There was no need to inquire what the maids thought, for smothered
shrieks, louder and louder as each peal of knocks vibrated through the little house, proclaimed
sufficiently their sentiments on the subject.

Dear me, how ridiculous it all must have been! In one corner of the ceiling of our bedroom
was a little trap-door which opened into an attic adjoining that where the big cadet slept.
Now whilst F---- was hurriedly taking down his double-barrelled gun from its bracket just below
this aperture, and I held the candlestick with so shaky a hand that the extinguisher clattered
like a castanet, this door was slowly lifted up, and a large white face, with dishevelled stubbly
hair and wide-open blue eyes, looked down through the cobwebs, saying in a husky whisper, "Could
you let me have a rifle, or any thing?" This was our gallant cadet, who had no idea of presenting
himself at a disadvantage before the foe. I had desperately seized a revolver, but F---- declared
that if I persisted in carrying it I certainly should go first, as he did not wish to be shot
in the back.

We held a hurried council of war,--Mr. A---- assisting through the trap door, and the maids
breathing suggestions through the partition-planks,--but the difficulty consisted in determining
at which door the knocking was going on. Some said one, and some another (for there were many
modes of egress from the tiny dwelling); but at last F---- cried decidedly, "We must try them
all in succession," and shouldering his gun, with the revolver sticking in the girdle of his
dressing-gown, sallied valiantly forth. I don't know what became of Mr. A----: I believe he
took up a position with the rifle pointing downwards; the maids retreated beneath their blankets,
and I (too frightened to stay behind) followed closely, armed with an Indian boar-spear. F----
flung the hall door wide open, and called out, "Who's there?" but no one answered. The silence
was intense, and so was the cold; therefore we returned speedily indoors to consult. "It must
be at the back door," I urged; adding, "that is the short cut down the valley, where bushrangers
would be most likely to come." "Bushrangers, you silly child!" laughed F----. "It's most likely
a belated swagger, or else somebody who is playing us a trick." However as he spoke a succession
of fierce and loud knocks resounded through the whole house. "It must be at the kitchen door,"
F---- said. "Come along, and stand well behind me when I open the door."

But we never opened the door; for on our way through the kitchen, with its high-pitched and
unceiled roof,--a very cavern for echoes,--we discovered the source of the noise, and of our
fright. Within a large wooden packing-case lay a poor little lamb, and its dying throes had
wakened us all up, as it kicked expiring kicks violently against the side of the box. It was
my doing bringing it indoors, for I never could find it in my heart to leave a lamb out on
the hills if we came across a dead ewe with her baby bleating desolately and running round
her body. F---- always said, "You cannot rear a merino lamb indoors; the poor little thing
will only die all the same in a day or two;" and then I am sorry to say he added in an unfeeling
manner, "They are not worth much now," as if that could make any difference! I had brought
this, as I had brought scores of others, home in my arms from a long distance off; fed it out
of a baby's bottle, rubbed it dry, and put it to sleep in a warm bed of hay at the bottom of
this very box. They had all died quietly, after a day or two, in spite of my devotion and nursing,
but this little foundling kicked herself out of the world with as much noise as would have
sufficed to summon a garrison to surrender. It is all very well to laugh at it now, but we
were, five valiant souls in all, as thoroughly frightened at the time as we could well be.

The only real harm a swagger did me was to carry off one of my best maidservants as his wife,
but as he had 300 pounds in the bank at Christchurch, and was only travelling about looking
for work, and they have lived in great peace and prosperity ever since, I suppose I ought not
to complain. This swagger was employed in deepening our well, and Mary was always going to
see how he was getting on, so he used to make love to her, looking up from the bottom of a
deep shaft, and shouting compliments to her from a depth of sixty feet. What really won her
Irish heart, though, was his calmly putting a rival, a shepherd, into a water-butt. She could
not resist that, so they were married, and are doing well.

Let no one despise swaggers. They are merely travelling workmen, and would pay for their lodging
if it was the custom to do so. I am told that even now they are fast becoming things of the
past; for one could not "swagger" by railroad, and most of our beautiful happy vallies will
soon have a line of rails laid down throughout its green and peaceful length.

Chapter X: Changing servants.

To the eyes of an English housewife the title of this chapter must appear a very bad joke indeed,
and the amusement what the immortal Mrs. Poyser would call "a poor tale." Far be it from me
to make light of the misery of a tolerably good servant coming to you after three months' service,
just as you were beginning to feel settled and comfortable, and announcing with a smile that
she was going to be married; or, with a flood of tears, that she found it "lonesome." Either
of these two contingencies was pretty sure to arise at least four times a year on a station.

At first I determined to do all I could to make their new home so attractive to my two handmaidens
that they would not wish to leave it directly. In one of Wilkie Collins' books an upholsterer
is represented as saying that if you want to domesticate a woman, you should surround her with
bird's-eye maple and chintz. That must have been exactly my idea, for the two rooms which I
prepared for my maidservants were small, indeed, yet exquisitely pretty. Of course I should
not have been so foolish as to buy any of the unnecessary and dainty fittings with which they
were decorated, but as all the furniture and belongings of an English house, a good deal larger
than our station home, had been taken out to it, there were sundry toilet tables, etc., whose
destination would have been a loft over the stable, if I had not used them for my maids.

I had seen and chosen two very respectable young women in Christchurch, one as a cook, and
the other as a housemaid. The cook, Euphemia by name, was a tall, fat, flabby woman, with a
pasty complexion, but a nice expression of face, and better manners than usual. She turned
out to be very good natured, perfectly ignorant though willing to learn, and was much admired
by the neighbouring cockatoos, or small farmers. Lois the housemaid, was the smallest and skimpiest
and most angular girl I ever beheld. At first I regarded her with deep compassion, imagining
that she was about fifteen years of age, and had been cruelly ill-treated and starved. How
she divined what was passing in my mind I cannot tell, but during our first interview she suddenly
fired up, and informed me that she was twenty-two years old, that she was the seventh child
of a seventh child, and therefore absolutely certain to achieve some wonderful piece of good
luck; and furthermore, that she had been much admired in her own part of the country, and was
universally allowed to be "the flower of the province." This statement, delivered with great
volubility and defiant jerkiness of manner, rather took my breath away; but it was a case of
"Hobson's choice" just then about servants, and as I was assured she was a respectable girl,
I closed with her terms (25 pounds a year and all found) on the spot. "You see," said Daintree,
"his leg was pretty stiff and he couldn't get about much, even if he'd wanted to. There was
nothing for him to do except sit in a deck-chair.

My wife felt it her duty to talk to him a good deal."

Daintree seemed to be making excuses for Mrs. Daintree and Simcox. They were unnecessary. Mrs.
Daintree would have got his story out of him if she thought he was really in need of sympathy,
whether he sat in a chair all day or was able to row races in the lake in the gardener's punt.

"Anyhow,"
said Daintree, "what he told her--he told it to me afterwards, so there's no secret about it--was
this: He got hit in the leg during an advance through one of those woods north of the Somme,
Mametz, I think. It was a beastly place. Our fellows had been in there two days before and had to
clear out again. Then Simcox's lot went in--you know the sort of thing it was?"

I nodded.

"Shell holes, and splintered tree trunks," I said. "Machine-guns enfilading you, and H.E. bursting
promiscuous. I know."

"Well, Sirmcox' fellows went in all right, and stayed there for a while. Simcox says he remembers
noticing that the ground was strewed with débris left by the Germans when they cleared out,
and by our fellows afterwards. Equipment, rifles and all the rest of it lying about, as well as
other things--pretty ghastly things."

"You needn't go into details," I said. "I can guess."

"I'm only telling you this," said Daintree, "because all the stuff
lying about seems to have interested Simcox.

It's odd the feelings men have at these times. Simcox says the thing he chiefly wanted to do was
to tidy up. He had a kind of strong desire to pick things up and put them away somewhere. Of course
he couldn't; but he did pick up one thing, a cigarette case. He showed it to me. It was one
of those long-shaped, flat white metal cases which fellows carry because they hold about thirty
cigarettes. Simcox says he doesn't know why he picked it up. He didn't want it in the least.
He just saw it lying there on the ground and stuffed it into his pocket Almost immediately after
that he was hit. Bit of shrapnel under the knee."

"I remember hearing about that business," I said. "We were driven out again, weren't we?"

"Exactly. And Simcox was left behind. He couldn't walk, of course. But he crawled into a shell hole,
and there he lay. Well, for the next two days that wood wasn't healthy for either side. The
Germans couldn't get back, because we were sprinkling the whole place with shrapnel. We couldn't
advance for similar reasons. Simcox just lay in his shell hole. He tied up his leg somehow.
He had some brandy in a flask as well as his iron rations. But he hadn't much tobacco. There were
only two cigarettes in his own case. However, he had the other case, the one he picked up.
There were nearly twenty in it Also there was--I say, at this point the story gets sloppy."

"Never mind," I said. "Go on. What else was in the cigarette case? A farewell letter to a loving
wife? Love to little Willie and a text of Scripture?"

"Not so bad as that. A photo of a girl. He showed it to me when he told me the story."

"Good looking girl?"

"Very. Large eyes--sort of tender, you know, and appealing; and a gentle, innocent face, and
a mouth----"

"I suppose," I said, "that these raptures are necessary if I'm to understand the story. Otherwise,
you may skip them."

"Can't possibly skip them," said Daintree. "The whole point of the story depends on your realizing
the sort of girl she was.

Pathetic--that's the word I want. Looked at you out of the photo as if she was a poor, lonely,
but uncommonly fetching little thing, who wanted a strong, true man to shelter her from the
evil world. She was got up in some sort of fancy dress which kind of heightened the effect.
I don't altogether profess to understand what happened, though my
wife says she does.

But Simcox in a sort of way fell in love with her. That's not the way he put it He didn't feel
that she was just an ordinary girl--the sort one falls in love with. She was--well, he didn't
think of her as flesh and blood--more a kind of vision--spiritual, you know."

"Angel?" I said.

"That sort of thing. You know. That was the idea that gripped Simcox while he lay there in
the shell hole. Stars came out at night and Simcox felt that she was looking down at him. In
the day he used to lie and gaze at her. When he thought it was all up with him and that he couldn't
live, he seemed to hear her voice--I say, you ought to hear my wife telling this part of the story.
Simcox wouldn't tell it to me, naturally; but he seems to have enlarged on it a good deal
to her. He says that only for that photo he'd have given in and just died. I daresay he wouldn't
really, but he thinks he would. Anyhow, he didn't He stuck it out and his leg didn't hurt
nearly as much as he expected. He attributes that to the influence of this--this----"

"Angel visitant?" I said.

"You can call her an angel if you like," said Daintree.

"This," I said, "seems to me a pure sob story. If there's any other part less harrowing, I wish
you'd hurry up and get to it."

"All right," said Daintree.

"I'll cut out the rest of his experiences in that shell hole, though, mind you, they're rather
interesting and frightfully poetic the way my wife tells them. After two days our fellows got
back into the wood and kept it. The stretcher-bearers found Simcox in his hole and they lugged
him down to a Casualty Clearing Station. From that he went to a hospital--the usual round,
He had a pretty bad time, first over there, and then, when they could move him, in London. By degrees
he got more sane about the photo. He stopped thinking she was any kind of spirit and took to
regarding her just as a girl, though a very exceptional kind of girl, of course. He was hopelessly
in love with her. Do you think a man really could fall in love with a photo?"

"Simcox did," I said, "so we needn't discuss that point."

"The chances were, of course," said Daintree, "that she was some other fellow's girl, possibly
some other fellow's wife. But Simcox didn't care.

He was too far gone to care for anything except to get that girl. Those morose, shy men are frightfully
hard hit in that sort of way, I'm told. That's what my wife says,
anyhow.

They get it much worse than we do when they do get it. Simcox would have dragged that girl
out of the arms of an archbishop if that was where he found her. Of course he couldn't go
hunting her over England while he was in hospital with a bad leg; but he made up his mind to
find out who she was and where she lived as soon as he was well enough to go about He'd very
little to go on--practically nothing. The photo had been cut down so as to fit into the cigarette
case, so that there wasn't even a photographer's name on it."

"He might have advertised," I said. "There are papers which go in for that sort of thing, publish
rows of reproductions of photographs 'Found on the battle-field,'with requests for identification."

"My
wife thought of that," said Daintree, "but Simcox didn't seem to take to the idea. He said
the photo was too sacred a thing to be reproduced in a paper. My own idea is that he was afraid
of any kind of publicity. You see, the other fellow might turn up--the fellow who really had a right
to the girl."

"How the deuce did he propose to find her?"

"I don't know. He told my wife some rotten yarn about instinct guiding him to her; said he felt
sure that the strength of his great love would somehow lead him to
her side.

He didn't say that to me, couldn't, you know. But it's wonderful what a fellow will say to a
woman, if she's sympathetic, and my wife is. Still, even so, he must be more or less mad to think
a thing like that. Mad about the girl. He's sane enough in every other way."

"He can't be so mad as that," I said.

"Just fancy going out into a field--I suppose that's the way you'd
do it--and hanging about until your great love set you strolling off
either to the right or to the left.

No man, however mad, could expect to come on a girl that way--no one particular girl, I mean.
Of course you'd meet several girls whichever way you went. Couldn't help it. The world's full
of girls."

"I don't know what he meant," said Daintree, "but my wife sympathized with him and seemed to think
he'd pull it off in the end. At first he was a bit shy of letting her see the photo; but when
he saw she was as sympathetic as all that he showed it to her.

Well, the moment she saw it, she felt that she knew the face."

"That was a stroke of luck for Simcox."

"No it wasn't," said Daintree, "for my wife couldn't put a name to the girl. She was sure she
had seen her somewhere, knew her quite well, in fact, but simply couldn't fix her. Funny thing,
but it was exactly the same when they showed me the photo. At the first glance I said right away
that I knew her. Then I found I couldn't say exactly who she was. The more I looked the more
certain I was that I'd seen her somewhere, her or someone very like her. And it wasn't a commonplace
face by any means. Poor Simcox kept begging us to think.

My wife went over our visitors' book--we've kept one of those silly
things for years--but there wasn't a name in it which we couldn't
account for.

I got out all the old albums of snapshots and amateur photos in the house. You know the way
those things accumulate; groups of all sorts. But we couldn't find the girl. And yet both
my wife and I were sure we'd met her. Then one morning Simcox burst into my wife's little sitting-room--a
place none of the convalescents have any right to go. He was in a fierce state of excitement.
Said that an officer who'd arrived the night before was exactly like the photo and that the girl
must be his sister or cousin, or something.

The only officer who came that night was--you'd never guess!--Pat Singleton."

"Pat," I said, "though a young devil, is cheerful, and I never saw him anything but self-confident
I can't imagine a girl such as you described bearing the faintest resemblance to that boy. You
said that she was a kind of die-away, pathetic, appealing angel. Now Pat----"

"I know," said Daintree. "All the same, the likeness was there. The moment I looked at the
photo with Pat in my mind I knew why I thought I recognized it My wife said the same thing."

"But
Pat Singleton hasn't any sisters," I said.

"No, he hasn't He hasn't even a first cousin anything like the age of the girl in the photo.
I knew all the Singletons well, have for years. But Simcox insisted his girl must be some relation
of Pat's, and in the end I promised to ask the boy. In the first place, if she was a relation,
it seemed an impudent sort of thing to do, and if she wasn't, Pat would be sure to make up some
infernal story about me and a girl and tell it all over the place. However, my wife egged me
on and poor Simcox was so frightfully keen that I promised.

"Well, I sent for Pat Singleton next morning. He was a little subdued at first, as much subdued as
I've ever seen him. He thought I was going to rag him about the spoof he'd played off on the
nurse. He did that before he was twelve hours in the house.

Remind me to tell you about it afterwards. I don't wonder he looked piano. She'd been going for
him herself and that woman is a real terror. However, he cheered up the moment I showed him the
photo of the girl. He asked me first of all where the devil I'd got it. Said he'd lost it
somewhere before he was wounded."

"Oh, it was his, then?" I said.

"Yes," said Daintree, grinning, "it was his. He was particularly anxious to know how I came by
it. I didn't tell him, of course. Couldn't give Simcox away, you know. Then Pat began to cheek
me. Asked if I'd fallen in love with the girl and what my wife would say when he told her.
Said he carried the photo about with him and showed it to fellows just to watch them falling in
love with her. It seems that nine men out of ten admired her greatly. He asked me if I didn't
think she was the prettiest girl I'd ever seen, and that I wasn't the first man by any means who
wanted her name and address. He grinned in a most offensive way and said that he never gave
away that girl's name to anyone; that I ought to know better than
to go running after a nice, innocent little thing like that who wouldn't
know how to take care of herself.

I wasn't going to stand much of that sort of talk from Pat Singleton. I told him straight that if he didn't
tell me that girl's name and where she lived I'd make things hot for him. I threatened to report
the little game he'd had with the nurse and that if I did he'd be court-martialled. I don't
know whether a man could be court-martialled for cheeking a nurse, but the threat had a good
effect on Pat He really was a bit afraid of that woman. I don't wonder, though it's the first time
I've ever known him afraid of anyone."
Daintree paused and chuckled horribly.

"Well," I said, "who was
the girl?"

"Haven't you tumbled to it yet?" said Daintree.

"No.
Do I know her?"

"I can't say you exactly know her," said Daintree.
"You know him. It was a photo of Pat himself dressed up as the Sleeping
Beauty, or Fatima, or some such person in a pantomime they did down
at the base last Christmas when he was there. The young devil carried
the thing about with him so as to play off his silly spoof on every
fellow he met I must say he made a damned pretty girl."

"Good Lord!"
I said. "And how did Simcox take it?"

"Simcox hasn't been told--yet,"
said Daintree. "That's just what my wife wants your advice about You
see it's an awkward situation."

"Very," I said.

"If we tell him,"
said Daintree, "he'll probably try to kill Pat Singleton, and that
would lead to a lot of trouble. On the other hand, if we don't tell
him he'll spend the rest of his life roaming about the world looking
for a girl who doesn't exist, and never did. It seems a pity to let
that happen."

"My idea," I said, "would be to get another girl, not
necessarily like the photo, but the same type, appealing and pathetic
and all that. He'd probably take to her after a time."

"I suggested
that," said Daintree, "but my wife simply won't hear of it. She says
the story as it stands is a great romance and that it would be utterly
spoiled if Simcox switched off after another girl. I can't see that,
can you?"

"In a case like this," I said, "when the original girl
wasn't a girl at all----"

"Exactly," said Daintree, "but when I say
that my wife brings up the Angel in the Shell Hole part of the story
and says that a great romance is its own reward."

"I don't know what
to advise," I said.

"I didn't think you would," said Daintree, "though
my wife insisted that you'd be able to suggest something. But you
can tell me what you think of the story. That's what I really want
to get out of you. Is it a Sob Story or just a rather unusual spoof?"

"That,"
I said, "depends entirely whether you look at it from Simcox' point
of view or Pat Singleton's."

VIII ~~ SIR GALAHAD

The order, long
expected and eagerly desired, came at last. The battalion moved out
from dusty and crowded barracks to a camp in the wilderness. Lieutenant
Dalton, a cheerful boy who had been taught Holy Scripture in his childhood,
wrote to his mother that the new camp was "Somewhere in the wilderness
beyond Jordan between the river of Egypt and the great sea." This
description of the situation was so entirely inaccurate that the Censor
allowed it to pass without complaint. Old Mrs. Dalton told her friends
that her son was living under the shadow of Mount Sinai. He was, in
fact, nowhere near either Jordan or Sinai. He was some miles east
of the Suez Canal. For a week or so officers and men rejoiced in their
new quarters. There was plenty of elbow room; no more of the overcrowding
they had suffered since they landed. They had, indeed, miles of totally
unoccupied desert at their disposal. Each tent might have stood in
its own private grounds, three acres or so in extent, if that had
not been felt by the colonel to be an inconvenient arrangement. There
was also--and this particularly pleased the battalion--the prospect
of a fight with the Turks. Everyone believed when the move was made
that a battle was imminent, and the battalion, which had no experience
of fighting, was most anxious to show what it could do.

After awhile
the enthusiasm for the new camp began to fade. The Turks did not put
in an appearance, and life was as peaceful as it had been in the English
camp where the battalion was trained. The situation of the camp, though
roomy, was not exciting. Both officers and men began to find existence
exceedingly dull. Lieutenant Dalton, who at this time wrote long letters
to his mother, told her that he understood at last why the Children
of Israel were so desperately anxious to get back to Egypt and were
inclined to rag Moses about the want of melons and cucumbers. At the
end of the month the whole battalion was bored to exasperation. Out of
consideration for that well-meaning emigrant's feelings, I abstain from publishing the list
of the killed and wounded, briefly stating that he might almost as well have fired a shot among
my poor plates. A perfect fountain of water and chips and bits of china flew up into the air,
and I really believe that hardly one plate remained uncracked. So much for one's friends. I
must candidly state that although the servants broke a good deal, we destroyed twice as much
amongst us during the week which must needs elapse between their departure and, the arrival
of the new ones.

Shall I ever forget the guilty pallor which overspread the bronzed and bearded countenance
of one of my guests, who particularly wished to dust the drawing-room ornaments, when on hearing
a slight crash I came into the room and found him picking up the remains of a china shepherdess?
Considering everything, I kept my temper remarkably well, merely observing that he had better
go into the verandah and sit down with a book and his pipe, and send Joey in to help me. Joey
was a little black monkey from Panama, who had to be provided with broken bits of delf or china
in order that he might amuse himself by breaking them ingeniously into smaller fragments.

But the real object of this chapter was to relate some of my own private misfortunes in the
cooking line. Once, when Alice S---- was staying with me and we had no servants, she and I
undertook to bake a very infantine and unweaned pig. It was all properly arranged for us, and,
making up a good fire, we proceeded to cook the little monster.

Hours passed by; all the rest of the dinner got itself properly cooked at the right time, but
the pig presented exactly the same appearance at dewy eve as it had done in the early morn.
We looked rather crest-fallen at its pale condition when one o'clock struck, but I said cheerfully,
"Oh, I daresay it will be ready by supper!" But it was not: not a bit of it. Of course we searched
in those delusive cookery books, but they only told us what sauces to serve with a roasted
pig, or how to garnish it, entering minutely into a disquisition upon whether a lemon or an
orange had better be stuck into its mouth. We wanted to know how to cook it, and why it would
not get itself baked. About an hour before supper-time I grew desperate at the anticipation
of the "chaff" Alice and I would certainly have to undergo if this detestable animal could
not be produced in a sufficiently cooked state by evening. We took it out of the oven and contemplated
it with silence and dismay. Fair as ever did that pig appear, and as if it had no present intention
of being cooked at all. A sudden idea came into our heads at the same moment, but it was Alice
who first whispered, "Let us cut off its head." "Yes," I cried; "I am sure that prevents its
roasting or baking, or whatever it is." So we got out the big carving knife and cut off the
piggy's head. Far be it from me to offer any solution of the theory why the head should have
interfered with the baking process, but all I know is, that, like the old woman in the nursery
song, everything began to go right, and we got our supper that night.

Has anybody ever reflected on how difficult it must be to get a chimney swept without ever
a sweep or even a brush? Luckily our chimneys were short and wide, and we used a good deal
of wood; so in three years the kitchen chimney only needed to be cleansed twice. The first
time it was cleared of soot by the simple process of being set on fire, but as a light nor'-wester
was blowing, the risk to the wooden roof became very great and could only be met by spreading
wet blankets over the shingles. We had a very narrow escape of losing our little wooden house,
and it was fortunate it happened just at the men's dinner hour when there was plenty of help
close at hand. However great my satisfaction at feeling that at last my chimney had been thoroughly
swept, there was evidently too much risk about the performance to admit of its being repeated,
so about a year afterwards I asked an "old chum" what I was to do with my chimney. "Sweep it
with a furze-bush, to be sure," she replied. I mentioned this primitive receipt at home, and
the idea was carried out a day or two later by one man mounting on the roof of the house whilst
another remained in the kitchen; the individual on the roof threw down a rope to the one below,
who fastened a large furze-bush in the middle, they each held an end of this rope, and so pulled
it up and down the chimney until the man below was as black as any veritable sweep, and had
to betake himself, clothes and all, to a neighbouring creek. As for the kitchen, its state
cannot be better described than in my Irish cook's words, who cried, "Did mortial man ever
see sich a ridiklous mess? Arrah, why couldn't ye let it be thin?" But for all that she set
bravely to work and got everything clean and nice once more, merely stipulating that the next
time we were going to sweep chimney we should let her know beforehand, that she might go somewhere
"right away."

I feel, however, that in all these reminiscences I am straying widely from the point which
was before my mind when I began this chapter, and that is the delusiveness of a cookery book.
No book which I have ever seen tells you, for instance, how to boil rice properly. They all
insist that the grains must be white and dry and separate, but they omit to describe the process
by which these results can be attained. They tell you what you are to do with your rice after
it is boiled, but not how to boil it. The fact is, I suppose, that the people who write such
books began so early to be cooks themselves, that they forget there ever was a time when such
simple things were unknown to them.

Even when I had, after many failures, mastered the art of boiling rice, and also of making
an excellent curry,--for which accomplishment I was indebted to the practical teaching of a
neighbour,--there used still to be misfortunes in store for me. One of these caused me such
a bitter disappointment that I have never quite forgotten it. This was the manner of it. We
were without servants. My readers must not suppose that such was our chronic condition, but
when you come to change your servants three or four times a year, and have to "do" for yourself
each time during the week which must elapse before the arrival of new ones, there is an ample
margin for every possible domestic misadventure. If any doubt me, let them try for themselves.

On this special occasion, which proved to be nearly the last, my mind was easy, for the simple
reason that I was now independent of cookery books. I had puzzled out all the elementary parts
of the science for myself, and had no misgivings on the subject of potatoes or even peas. So
confident was I, and vain, that I volunteered to make a curry for breakfast. Such a savoury
curry as it was, and it turned out to be all that the heart of a hungry man could desire; so
did the rice: I really felt proud of that rice; each grain kept itself duly apart from its
fellow, and was as soft and white and plump as possible. Everything went well, and I had plenty
of assistants to carry in the substantial breakfast as fast as it was ready: the coffee, toast,
all the other things had gone in; even the curry had been borne off amid many compliments,
and now it only remained for me to dish up the rice.

Imagine the scene. The bright pretty kitchen, with its large window through which you could
see the green hills around dotted with sheep; the creek chattering along just outside, whilst
close to the back door loitered a crowd of fowls and ducks on the chance of fate sending them
something extra to eat. Beneath the large window, and just in front of it, stood a large deal
table, and it used to be my custom to transfer the contents of the saucepans to the dishes
at that convenient place. Well, I emptied the rice into its dish, and gazed fondly at it for
a moment: any cook might have been proud of that beautiful heap of snow-white grains. I had
boiled a great quantity, more than necessary it seemed, for although the dish was piled up
almost as high as it would hold, some rice yet remained in the saucepan.

Oh, that I had been content to leave it there! But no: with a certain spasmodic frugality which
has often been my bane, I shook the saucepan vehemently, in order to dislodge some more of
its contents into my already full dish. As I did so, my treacherous wrist, strained by the
weight of the saucepan, gave way, and with the rapidity of a conjurer's trick I found the great
black saucepan seated,--yes, that is the only word for it,--seated in the midst of my heap
of rice, which was now covered by fine black powder from its sooty outside. All the rice was
utterly and completely spoiled. I don't believe that five clean grains were left in the dish
There was nothing for it but to leave it to get cold and then throw it all out for the fowls,
who don't mind riz au noir it seems. Although I feel more than half ashamed to confess it,
I am by no means sure I did not retire into the store-room and shed a tear over the fate of
that rice. Everybody else laughed, but I was dreadfully mortified and vexed.

Chapter XIII: Amateur Servants.

I flattered myself on a certain occasion that I had made some very artful arrangements to provide
the family with something to eat during the servants' absence. I had been lamenting the week
of experiments in food which would be sure to ensue so soon as the dray should leave, in the
hearing of a gallant young ex-dragoon, who had come out to New Zealand to try and see if one
could gratify tastes, requiring, say a thousand a year to provide for, on an income of 120
pounds. He was just finding out that it was quite as difficult to manage this in the Southern
as in the Northern Hemisphere, but his hearty cheery manner, and enormous stock of hope, kept
him up for some time.

"I'll come and cook for you," he cried. "I can cook like a bird. But I can't wash up. No, no:
it burns too much. If you can get somebody to wash up, I'll cook. And just look here: it would
be very nice if we could have some music after dinner. You've got a piano, haven't you? That's
right. Well, now, don't you ask that pretty Miss A----, who has just come out from England,
to come and stop with you, and then we could have some music?"

"Where did you learn to cook?" I inquired, suspiciously; for F----had also assured me he could
cook, and this had upset my confidence.

"On the west coast; to be sure! Ask Vere, and Williams and Taylor, and everybody, if they ever
tasted such pies as I used to make them." My countenance must have still looked rather doubtful,
because I well remember sundry verbal testimonials of capability being produced; and as I was
still very ignorant of the rudiments of the science of cookery, I shrank from assuming the
whole responsibility of the family meals. So the household was arranged in this way:--Captain
George, head cook; Mr. U----, scullery-maid; Miss A----, housemaid; myself, lady-superintendent;
Mr. Forsyth (a young naval officer), butler. On the principle of giving honour to whom honour
is due, this gallant lieutenant deserves special mention for the way he cleaned glass. He did
not pay much attention to his silver, but his glass would have passed muster at a club. The
only drawback was the immense time he took over each glass, and the way he followed either
Miss A---- or me all about the house, holding a tumbler in one hand, and a long, clean glass-cloth
in the other, calling upon us to admire the polish of the crystal. To clean two tumblers would
be a good day's work for him. From Monday to Saturday (when the dray returned), this state
of things went on. Of course I had taken the precaution of having a good supply of bread made
beforehand, besides cakes and biscuits, tarts and pies; everything to save trouble. But it
was not of much use, for, alleging that they were working so hard, the young men, F---- at
their head, though I was always telling him he was married and ought to know better, set to
work and ate up everything immediately, as completely as if they had been locusts. And then,
they were all so dreadfully wild and unmanageable! Mine was by far the hardest task of all,
the keeping them in any sort of order. For instance, Captain George declared one day, that
if there was one thing he did better than another, it was to make jam. Consequently a fatigue
party was ordered out to gather strawberries, and, after more than half had been eaten on the
way to the house, a stewpan was filled. I had to do most of the skimming, as Captain George
wanted to practice a duet with Miss A----. I may as well mention here that we never had any
opportunity of seeing how the jam kept, because the smell pervaded the whole house to such
an extent, that, declaring they felt like schoolboys again, the gentlemen fell on my half dozen
pots of preserves in a body, carried them off, and ate them all up then and there, announcing
afterwards, there had just been a pot a-piece.

It was really a dreadful time, although we got well cooked plats, for Captain George wasted
quite as much as he used. The pigs fed sumptuously that week on his failures, in sauces, minces;
puddings, and what not. He had insisted on our making him a paper cap and a linen apron, or
rather a dozen linen aprons, for he was perpetually blackening his apron and casting it aside.
Then, he used suddenly to cease to take any interest in his occupation, and, seating himself
sideways on the kitchen dresser, begin to whistle through a whole opera, or repeat pages of
poetry. I tried the experiment of banishing Miss A---- from the kitchen during cooking hours,
but a few bars played on the piano were quite enough to distract my cook from his work. My
only quiet time was the afternoon, when about four o'clock, my amateur servants all went out
for a ride, and left me in peace for a couple of hours. I had enough to do during that short
time to tidy up; to collect the scattered books and music, and prepare the tea-supper, for
which they came back in tearing spirits, and frantically hungry, between seven and eight o'clock.
After this meal had been cleared away, and Mr. U---- and I had washed up (the others declaring
they were too tired to stir), we all used to adjourn to the verandah. It happened to be an
exceptionally still week, no dry, hot nor'-westers, nor cold, wet sou'-westers, and it was
perfectly delicious to sit out in the verandah and rest, after the labours of the day, in our
cane easy-chairs. The balmy air was so soft and fresh, and the intense silence all around so
profound. Unfortunately there was a full moon. I say "unfortunately," because the flood of
pale light suggested to these dreadful young men the feasibility of having what they called
a "servant's ball." In vain I declared that the housekeeper was never expected to dance. "Oh,
yes!" laughed Captain George. "I've often danced with a housekeeper, and very jolly it was
too. Come along! F----, make her dance." And I was forced to gallopade up and down that verandah
till I felt half dead with fatigue. The boards had a tremendous spring, and the verandah (built
by F----, by the way), was very wide and roomy, so it made an excellent ball-room. As for the
trifling difficulty about music, that was supplied by Captain George and Mr. U---- whistling
in turn, time being kept by clapping the top and bottom of my silver butter dish together,
cymbal-wise. Oh, dear! It takes my breath away now even to think of those evenings! I see Alice
A---- flitting about in her white dress and fern-leaf wreath, dancing like the slender sylph
she really was, but never can I forget the odd effect of the gentlemen's feet! No one had their
dress boots up at the station, and as Alice and I firmly declined to dance with anybody who
wore "Cookham" boots (great heavy things with nails in the soles), they had no other course
open to them except to wear their smart slippers. There were slippers of purple velvet, embroidered
with gold; others of blue kid, delicately traced in crimson lines; foxes heads stared at us
in startling perspective from a scarlet ground; or black jim-crow figures disported themselves
on orange tent-stitch. Then these slippers were all more or less of an easy fit, and had a
way of flying out on the lawn suddenly, startling my dear dog Nettle out of his first sleep.

Ah, well! that may be an absurd bit of one's life to look back upon, but its days were bright
and innocent enough. Health was so perfect that the mere sensation of being alive became happiness,
and all the noise of the eager, bustling, pushing world, seemed shut away by those steep hills
which folded our quiet valley in their green arms. People have often said to me since, "Surely
you would not like to have lived there for ever?" Perhaps not. I can only say that three years
of that calm, idyllic life, held no weary hour for me, and I am quite sure that quiet time
was a great blessing to me in many ways. First of all, in health, for a person must be in a
very bad way indeed for New Zealand air not to do them a world of good; next, in teaching me,
amid a great deal of fun and laughter, sundry useful accomplishments, not easily learned in
our luxurious civilization; and, lastly, those few years of seclusion from the turmoil of life
brought leisure to think out one's own thoughts, and to sift them from other peoples' ideas.

One good effect of my sufferings with a house full of unruly volunteers, was that during the
brief stay (only two months), of my next cook, I set to work assiduously to learn as many kitchen
mysteries as she could teach me, and so became independent of Captain George or F----, or any
other amateur, good, bad, or indifferent.

Nothing could be more extraordinary than the way in which the two affectionate sisters, mentioned
[earlier] and who succeeded Euphemia and Lois, quarrelled. They were very unlike each other
in appearance, and one fruitful source of bickering arose from their respective styles of beauty.
Not only did they wrangle and rave at each other all the day long, during every moment of their
spare time, but after they had gone to bed, we could hear them quite plainly calling out to
each other from their different rooms. If I begged them to be quiet, there might be silence
for a moment, but it would shortly be broken by Maria, calling out, "I say, Dinah, don't you
go for to wear green, my girl. I only tell you friendly, but you're a deal too yellow for that.
It suits me, 'cause I'm so fresh and rosy, but you never will have my 'plexion, not if you
live to be eighty. Good night. I thought I'd just mention it while I remembered." This used
to aggravate Dinah dreadfully, and she would retaliate by repeating some complimentary speech
of Old Ben's, or Long Tom's, the stockman, and then there would be no peace for an hour.

Their successors were Clarissa and Eunice. Eunice wept sore for a whole month, over her sweeping
and cleaning. To this day I have not the dimmest idea why. She gave me warning, amid floods
of tears, directly she arrived, though I could not make out any other tangible complaint than
that "the dray had jolted as never was;" and to Clarissa, I gave warning the first day I came
into the kitchen.

She received me seated on the kitchen table, swinging her legs, which did not nearly touch
the floor. She had carefully arranged her position so as to turn her back towards me, and she
went on picking her teeth with a hair-pin. I stood aghast at this specimen of colonial manners,
which was the more astonishing as I knew the girl had lived in the service of a gentleman's
family in the North of England for some time before she sailed.

"Dear me, Clarissa," I cried, "is that the way you behaved at Colonel St. John's?"

Clarissa looked at me very coolly over her shoulder (I must mention she was a very pretty girl,
blue-eyed and rosy-cheeked, but with such a temper!) and, giving her plump shoulders a little
shrug, said, "No, in course not: they was gentlefolks, they was."

I confess I felt rather nettled at this, and yet it was difficult to be angry with a girl who
looked like a grown up and very pretty baby. I restrained my feelings and said, "Well, I should
like you to behave here as you did there. Suppose you get off the table and come and look what
we can find in the store room."

"I have looked round," she declared: "there 'aint much to be seen." My patience began to run
short, and I said very firmly, "You must get off the table directly, Clarissa, and stand and
speak properly; or I shall send you down to Christchurch again." I suppose that was exactly
what the damsel wished, for she made no movement; whereat I said in great wrath, "Very well,
then you shall leave at the end of a month." And so she did, having bullied everybody out of
their lives during that time.

Whilst we are on the subject of manners, it may not be out of place to relate a little episode
of my early days "up country." I think I have alluded [in "Station Life in New Zealand"] to
our book club; but I don't know that it has been explained that I used to change the books
on Sunday afternoon, after our little evening service. It would have been impossible to induce
the men to come from an immense distance twice a week, and it was therefore necessary that
they should be able to get a fresh book after service. Nothing could have been better than
the behaviour of my little congregation: they made it a point of giving no trouble whatever
with their horses or dogs, and they were so afraid of being supposed to come for what they
could get, that I had some difficulty in inducing those who travelled from a distance to have
a cup of tea in the kitchen before they mounted, to set off on their long solitary ride homewards.
They were also exceedingly quiet and well-behaved; for if even a dozen men or more were standing
outside in fine weather, or waiting within the kitchen if it were wet or windy, not a sound
could be heard. If they spoke to each other, it was in the lowest whisper, and they would no
more have thought of lighting their pipes anywhere near the house than they would of flying.

This innate tact and true gentlemanly feeling which struck me so much in the labouring man
as he appears in New Zealand, made the lapse of good manners, to which I am coming, all the
more remarkable. Of course they never touched their hats to me: they would make me a bow or
take their hats off, but they never touched them. I have often seen a hand raised involuntarily
to the soft felt hat, which every one wears there, but the mechanical action would be arrested
by the recollection of the first article of the old colonial creed, "Jack is as good as his
master." I never minded this in the least, and got so completely out of the habit of expecting
any salutations, that it seemed quite odd to me to receive them again on my return. No, what
I objected to was, that when I used to go into my kitchen, about ten minutes or so after the
service had been concluded, with the list of club books in my hand, not a single man rose from
his seat. They seemed to make it a point to sit down somewhere; on a table or window seat if
all the chairs were occupied, but at all events not to be found standing. They would bend their
heads and blush, and glance shyly at each other for encouragement as I came in, but no one
got up, or took his hat off. This went on for a few weeks, until I felt sure that this curious
behaviour did not spring from forgetfulness, or inattention. When I mentioned my grievance
in the drawing-room to the gentlemen, I only got laughed at for my pains, and I was asked what
else I expected? To this question used to be added sundry anecdotes of earlier colonial life,
intended to reconcile me to the manners of these later days. I remember particularly a legend
of a man cook, who was said to have walked into the sitting-room of the station where the master
was practising tunes on an accordion, and exclaimed, "Now, look here, boss, if you don't leave
off that there noise, which perwents me gettin' a wink o' sleep, I'll clear out o' this, sharp,
to-morrow mornin'. So now yer know," and with that remark he returned to his bunk.

At last I was goaded to declare I felt sure that the men only behaved in that way from crass
ignorance, and that if they knew how much my feelings were hurt, they would alter their manners
directly. This opinion was received with such incredulity that I felt roused to declare I should
try the experiment next Sunday afternoon. The only warning which at all daunted me was the
assurance that I should affront my congregation and scare them away. It was the dread of this
which made my heart beat so fast, and my hands turn so cold as I opened the kitchen-door the
next Sunday afternoon. There were exactly the same attitudes, every body perfectly civil and
respectful, but every body seated. Luckily my courage rose at the right moment, and I came
forward as usual with a smile, and said, "Look here, my men, there is one little thing I want
to ask you. Do you know that it is not the custom anywhere, in any civilized country, for gentlemen
to remain seated and covered when a lady comes into the room? If I were to go into a room in
England, where the Prince of Wales, or any of the finest gentlemen of the land were sitting,
just as you are now, they would all get up, the Prince first, most likely, and they would certainly
take off their hats! Now why can't you all do the same, here?"

The effect of my little speech was magical. Pepper glanced at McQuhair, Moffatt crimsoned and
nudged McKenzie, Wiry Ben slipped off the window-seat and shyed his hat across the kitchen,
whilst Long Tom, the bullock-driver, "thanked me kindly for mentioning of it;" and every body
got up directly and took their hats off. I felt immensely proud of my success, and hastened
the moment of my return to the drawing room, where I announced my triumph. I repeated my little
speech as concisely as possible; but, alas, it was not nearly so well received as it had been
in the kitchen! "Have you ever gone to see a London club?" one person inquired. "Ah: I thought
not! I don't know about the Prince, because he always does do the prettiest things at the right
moment, but I doubt very much about all the others. I fear you have made a very wild assertion
to get your own way." I need hardly say I sulked at that incredulous individual for many days
but he always stuck firmly to his own opinion. However, my men never required another hint.
They came just as regularly as usual to church, and we all lived happily ever after.

I feel that my chapter should end here; but any record of my New Zealand servants would be
incomplete without mention of my "bearded cook." Every body thinks, when I say this, that I
am going to tell them about a man, but it is nothing of the sort. Isabella Lyon, in spite of
her pronounced beard, was a very fine woman; exceedingly good-humoured looking and fresh-coloured,
with most amiable prepossessing manners. She had not long arrived, and had been at once snapped
up for an hotel, but she applied for my place, saying she wished for quiet and a country life.
Could any thing be more propitious? I thought, like Lois, that my luck, so long in turning,
was improving, and that at last I was to have a cook who knew her business. And so she did,
thoroughly and delightfully. For one brief fortnight we lived on dainties. Never could I have
believed that such a variety of dishes could have been produced out of mutton. In fact we seemed
to have everything at table except the staple dish. Unlike the cook who actually sent me in
a roast shoulder of mutton for breakfast one morning, Isabella prided herself on eliminating
the monotonous animal from her bills of fare. Certainly she was rather heavy on the sauces,
etc., and I was trying to pluck up courage to remonstrate, as it would not be easy or cheap
to replace them before a certain time of year. And then she was so clean, so smiling, and so
good-tempered. She seemed to treat us all as if we were a parcel of children for whom she was
never weary of preparing surprises. As for me, I felt miserable if any shepherd or well-to-do
handsome young bachelor cockatoo came near the place, dreading lest the wretch should have
designs on my cook's heart and hand. I rejoiced in her beard, and would not have had her without
it for worlds, as I selfishly hoped it might stand in her matrimonial path.

This Arcadian state of kitchen affairs went on for exactly a fortnight. One evening, at the
end of that time, we had been out riding, and returned as usual very hungry. "What are we going
to have for supper?" inquired F----. I told him what had been ordered; but when that meal made
its appearance, lo, there was not a single dish which I had named! The things were not exactly
nasty, but they were queer. For instance, pears are not usually stewed in gravy; but they were
by no means bad, and we took it for granted it was something quite new. The housemaid, Sarah,
looked very nervous and scared, and glanced at me from time to time with a very wistful look;
but I was so delightfully tired and sleepy--one never seemed to get beyond the pleasant stage
of those sensations--that I did not ask any questions.

Next morning, when we came out to breakfast, imagine my astonishment at seeing a tureen of
half cold soup on the table, and nothing else! I could hardly believe my eyes, and hastened
to the kitchen to explain that this was rather too much of a novelty in the gastronomic line.
If I live to be a hundred years old, I shall never forget the sight--at once terrible and absurd--which
met my eyes. Before the kitchen fire stood Isabella, having evidently slept in her clothes
all night. She looked wretched and bloated, and quite curiously dirty, as black as if she had
been up the chimney; and even I could see that, early as was the hour, she was hopelessly drunk.
Between both of her nerveless, black hands, she held a poker, with which she struck, from time
to time, a feeble blow on a piled-up heap of plates, which she persisted in considering a lump
of coal. The fire was nearly out, but she hastened to assure me that if she could only break
this lump of coal it would soon burn up. Need I say that I rescued my plates at once, and marched
the bearded one off to her own apartment.

Oh, how dimmed its dainty freshness had become since even yesterday! Sarah was summoned, and
confessed that she had known last night that "Hisabella" had gone on the "burst," having bought,
for some fabulous sum, a bottle of rum from a passing swagger. It was all very dreadful, and
worst of all was the scene of tears and penitence I had to endure when the rum was finished.
The dray, however, relieved me of the incubus of her presence; and that was the only instance
of drunkenness I came across among my domestic changes and chances.

Chapter XIV: Our pets.

One of the first things which struck me when I came to know a little more about the feelings
and ways of my neighbours in the Malvern Hills, was the good understanding which existed between
man and beast. I am afraid I must except the poor sheep, for I never heard them spoken of with
affection, nor do I consider that they were the objects of any special humanity even on their
owners' parts. This must surely arise from their enormous numbers. "How can you be fond of
thousands of anything?" said a shepherd once to me, in answer to some sentimental inquiry of
mine respecting his feelings towards his flock. That is the fact. There were too many sheep
in our "happy Arcadia" for any body to value or pet them. On a large scale they were looked
after carefully. Water, and sheltered feed, and undisturbed camping grounds, all these good
things were provided for them, and in return they were expected to yield a large percentage
of lambs and a good "clip." Even the touching patience of the poor animals beneath the shears,
or amid the dust and noise of the yards, was generally despised as stupidity.

Far different is the feeling of the New Zealander, whether he be squatter or cockatoo, towards
his horse and his dog. They are the faithful friends, and often the only companions of the
lonely man. Of course there will soon be no "lonely men" anywhere, but a few years ago there
were plenty of unwilling Robinson Crusoes in the Middle Island; and whenever I came upon one
of these pastoral hermits, I was sure to find a dog or a horse, a cat, or even a hen, established
as "mate" to some poor solitary, from whom all human companionship was shut out by mountain,
rock, or river.

"Are you not very lonely here?" was often my first instinctive question, as I have dismounted
at the door of a shepherd's hut in the back country, and listened to the eternal roar of the
river which formed his boundary, or the still more oppressive silence which seemed to have
reigned ever since the creation.

"Well, mum, it aint very lively; but I've got Topsy (producing a black kitten from his pocket),
and there's the dogs, and I shall have some fowls next year, p'raps."

But my object in beginning this chapter was not to enter into a disquisition on other people's
pets, with which after all one can have but a distant acquaintance, but to introduce some of
my own especial favourites to those kind and sympathetic readers who take pleasure in hearing
of my own somewhat solitary existence in that distant land. I am quite ready to acknowledge
that I never thoroughly comprehended the individuality of animals, even of fowls and ducks,
until I lived up at the Station. Perhaps, like their masters, they really get to possess more
independence of character under those free and easy skies; for where would you meet with such
a worldly and selfish cat as "Sandy," or so fastidious and intelligent a smooth terrier as
"Rose"? Sandy was an old bachelor of a sleek appearance, red in colour, but with a good deal
of white shirt-front and wristbands, as to the get-up of which he was most particular. It was
easy to imagine Sandy sitting in a club window; and I am sure he had a slight tendency to gout
and reading French novels. Sandy's selfishness was quite open and above-board. He liked you
very much until somebody else came whom he liked better, and then he would desert his oldest
friend without hesitation. I don't suppose the wildest young colley-pup ever dreamed of chasing
or worrying Sandy, who would not have stirred from his warm corner by the fire for Snarleyow
himself. Every now and then Sandy must have felt alarmed about his health or his figure, for
he ate less, and walked gravely and sulkily up and down the verandah for hours, but as soon
as he considered himself out of danger, he relapsed into all his self-indulgent ways. No one
ventured to offer Sandy anything but the choicest meats, and he was wont to sit up and beg
like a dog for a savoury tit-bit. But he would revenge himself on you afterwards for the humiliation,
you might be sure.

What always appeared to me so odd, was that in spite of his known and unblushing selfishness,
Sandy used to be a great favourite, and we all vied with each other for the honour of his notice.
Now why was this? If boundless time and space were at our disposal, we might go deeply into
the question and work it out, but as the dimensions of this volume are not elastic, the impending
social essay shall be postponed, and we will confine ourselves to a brief description of Sandy's
outer cat. He was of a pure breed, far removed from the long-legged, lanky race of ordinary
station-cats, who from time to time disappeared into the bush and contracted alliances with
the still more degraded specimens of their class who had long been wild among the scrub. No:
Sandy came of "pur sang," and held his small square head erect, with a haughty carriage as
beseemed his ancestry. His fur was really beautiful, a sort of tortoiseshell red, the lighter
stripes repeating exactly the different golden tints of a fashionable chignon. In early youth,
though it is difficult to imagine Sandy ever a playful kitten, his tail had been curtailed
to the length of three inches, and this short, flexible stump gave an air of great decision
to Sandy's movements. But his chief peculiarity, and I must add, attraction, in my opinion,
was the perfume of his sleek coat. When Sandy condescended to take his evening doze on my linsey
lap, I never smelt anything so strange and so agreeable as the odour of his fur, specially
that on the top of his head. It was like the most delicate musk, but without any of the sickly
smell common to that scent. I believe Sandy knew of this personal peculiarity, and felt proud
of it.

A far more unselfish and agreeable personage was Rose, the white terrier, whose name often
finds a loving place in these pages. She and Sandy dwelt together in peace and amity, although
the little doggie never could have felt any affection for her selfish companion. Rose's nerves
were of a delicate and high-strung order, and there was nothing she hated so much as uproarious
noise. Every now and then it chanced that during a few days of wet or windy weather, our little
house had been filled by passing guests: gentlemen who had called in to ask for supper and
a bed, intending to go on next day. In a country where inns or accommodation-houses are fifty
miles apart, this is a common incident, and it sometimes happens that the resources of station
hospitality are taxed to the utmost in this way. I have known our own little wooden box to
be so closely packed, that besides a guest on each sofa in the drawing-room, there would be
another on a sort of portable couch in the dining-room. This was after the spare room had been
filled to the utmost. A delicate "new chum," who required to be pampered, had retired to rest
on the hard kitchen sofa described elsewhere; whilst a couple of sturdy travellers were sleeping
soundly in the saddle room. After that, there could be nothing for the last comer except a
shake-down in red blankets.

It always happened I observed that everybody arrived together. For weeks we would be alone.
I lived once for eight months without seeing a lady; and then, some fine evening, half a dozen
acquaintances would "turn up,"--there really is no other word for it. Well, on these occasions,
when, instead of departing next morning, our impromptu guests have sometimes been forced to
wait until such time as the rain or the wind should cease; their pent-up animal spirits became
often too much for them, and they would feel an irresistible impulse to get rid of some of
their superfluous health and strength by violent exercise. I set my face at once against "athletic
sports" or "feats of strength" being performed in my little drawing-room, although they were
always very anxious to secure me for the solitary spectator; and I forget who hit upon the
happy thought of turning the empty wool-shed into a temporary gymnasium. There these wild boys--for,
in spite of stalwart frames and bushy beards, the Southern Colonist's heart keeps very fresh
and young--used to adjourn, and hop and leap, wrestle and box, fence and spar, to their active
young limbs' content. They seemed very happy, and loud were the joyous shouts and peals of
laughter over the failures; but after seeing the performance once or twice, I generally became
tired and bored, and used to slip away to the house and my quiet corner by the fire. Rose considered
it her duty to remain at her master's heels as long as possible, but after a time she too would
creep back to silence and warmth, though she never deserted her post until the noise grew altogether
too much for her nerves; and then, with a despairing whimper, sometimes swelling to a howl,
poor little Rose would tuck her tail between her legs, and dash out, through the storm, to
seek shelter and quiet with me.

Whenever Rose appeared thus suddenly in my quiet retreat, I felt sure some greater uproar than
usual was going on down at the wool-shed, and, more than once, on inquiry, I found Rose's nerves
must have been tried to the utmost before she turned and fled.

As for the intelligence of sheep-dogs, a volume could be written on the facts concerning them,
and a still more entertaining book on the fictions, for a New Zealand shepherd will always
consider it a point of honour to cap his neighbour's anecdote of his dog's sagacity, by a yet
stronger proof of canine intelligence. I shall only, briefly allude to one dog, whose history
will probably be placed in the colonial archives,--a colley, who knows his master's brand;
and who will, when the sheep get boxed, that is mixed together, pick out; with unfailing accuracy,
all the bleating members of his own flock from amid the confused, terrified mass. As for the
patience of a good dog in crossing sheep over a river, I have witnessed that myself, and been
forced to draw conclusions very much in favour of the dog over the human beings who were directing
the operation. Some dogs again, who are perfectly helpless with sheep, are unrivalled with
cattle, and I have stood on the edge of a swamp more than once, and seen a dog go after a couple
of milch cows, and fetch them out of a herd of bullocks, returning for the second "milky mother"
after the first had been brought right up within reach of the stockman's lash.

Then among my horse friends was a certain Suffolk "Punch," who had been christened the "Artful
Dodger," from his trick of counterfeiting lameness the moment he was put in the shafts of a
dray. That is to say if the dray was loaded; so long as it was empty, or the load was light,
the "Dodger" stepped out gaily, but if he found the dray at all heavy, he affected to fall
dead lame. The old strain of staunch blood was too strong in his veins to allow him to refuse
or jib, or stand still. Oh, no! The "Dodger" arranged a compromise with his conscience, and
though he pulled manfully, he resorted to this lazy subterfuge. More than once with a "new
chum" it had succeeded to perfection, and the "Dodger" found himself back again in his stable
with a rack of hay before him, whilst his deluded owner or driver was running all over the
place to find a substitute in the shafts. If I had not seen it myself, I could not have believed
it. In order to induce the "Dodger" to act his part thoroughly, a drayman was appointed whom
the horse had never seen, and therefore imagined could be easily imposed upon. The moment the
signal was given to start, the "Dodger," after a glance round, which plainly said, "I wonder
if I may try it upon you," took a step forward and almost fell down, so desperate was his lameness.
The driver, who was well instructed in his part, ran round, and lifted up one sturdy bay leg
after the other, with every appearance of the deepest concern. This encouraged the "Dodger,"
who uttered a groan, but still seemed determined to do his best, and limped and stumbled a
yard or two further on. I confess it seemed impossible to believe the horse to be quite sound,
and if it had depended on me, the "Dodger" would instantly have been unharnessed and put back
in his stable. But the moment had come to unmask him. His master stepped forward, and pulling
first one cunning ear, on the alert for every word, and then the other; cried, "It wont do,
sir! step out directly, and don't let us have any nonsense." The "Dodger" groaned again, this
time from his heart probably, shook himself, and, leaning well forward in his big collar, stepped
out without a murmur. The lameness had disappeared by magic, nor was there even the slightest
return of it until he saw a new driver, and considered it safe to try his oft-successful "dodge"
once more.

Very different was "Star," poor, wilful, beauty, whose name and fate will long be remembered
among the green hills, where her short life was passed. Born and bred on the station, she was
the pride and joy of her owner's heart. Slender without being weedy, compact without clumsiness,
her small head well set on her graceful neck, and her fine legs, with their sinews like steel,
she attracted the envy of all the neighbouring squatters. "What will you take for that little
grey filly when she is broken?" was a constant question. "She's not for sale," her owner used
to answer. "I'll break her myself, and make her as gentle as a dog, and she'll do for my wife
when I get one." But this proved a castle in the air, so far as Star was concerned. The wife
was not so mythical. In due time she appeared in that sheltered valley, and, standing at the
head of a mound marked by a stake whereon a star was rudely carved, heard the story of the
poor creature's fate. From the first week of her life, Star (so-called from a black, five-pointed
mark on her forehead), showed signs of possessing a strange wild nature. Unlike her sire or
dam, she evidently had a violent temper,--and not to put too fine a point on it,--was as vicious
a grey mare as ever flung up her heels in a New Zealand valley.

When her second birthday was passed, Star's education commenced. The process called "gentling,"
was a complete misnomer for the series of buck jumps, of bites and kicks, with which the young
lady received the slightest attempt to touch her. She had a horrible habit also of shrieking,
really almost like a human being in a frantic rage; she would rush at you with a wild scream
of fury, and after striking at you with her front hoofs, would wheel round like lightning,
and dash her hind legs in your face. The stoutest stockman declined to have anything whatever
to do with Star; the most experienced breaker "declined her, with thanks;" generally adding
a long bill for repairs of rack and manger, and breaking tackle, and not unfrequently a hospital
report of maimed and wounded stablemen. Amateur horsemen of celebrity arrived at the station
to look at the beautiful fiend, and departed, saying they would rather not have anything to
say to her. At last, she was given over in despair, to lead her own free life, never having
endured the indignity of bit or bridle for more than two minutes.

Months passed away, and Star and her tantrums had been nearly forgotten, when one mild winter
evening the stockman came in to report that,--wonder of wonders,--Star was standing meekly
outside, whinnying, and as "quiet as a dog." Her master went out to find the man's report exact:
Star walked straight up to him, and rubbed her soft nose confidingly against his sleeve. The
mystery explained itself at a glance: she was on the point of having her first foal, and, with
some strange and pathetic instinct, she bethought herself of the kind hands whose caresses
she had so often rejected, and came straight to them for help and succour. Her shy and touching
advances were warmly responded to, and in a few minutes the poor beast was safely housed in
the warm shed which then represented the present row of neat stables long since on that very
spot. A warm mash was eagerly swallowed, and the good-hearted stockman volunteered to remain
up until all should be happily over; but his courage failed him at the sight of her horrible
sufferings, and in the early dawn he came to rouse up his master, and beg him to come and see
if anything more could be done. There lay Star, all her fierce spirit quenched, with an appealing
look in her large black eyes, which seemed positively human in their capacity for expressing
suffering. It was many hours before a dead foal was born, and there is no doubt that if she
had been out on the bleak hills, the poor exhausted young mother must have perished from weakness.
She appeared to understand thoroughly the motive of all that was being done for her, and submitted
with patience to all the remedies. Gradually, but slowly, her strength returned; and, alas,
her evil nature, tamed by anguish, returned also! Day by day she became shyer of even the hand
which had fed and succoured her; and, as this is a true chronicle, it must be stated that the
very first use Mrs. Star made of her convalescence was, to kick her nurse on the leg, break
her halter into fragments, and gallop off to the hills with a loud neigh of defiance. Whenever
the topic of feminine ingratitude came on the carpet at that station, this, which Star had
done, used always to be told as an instance in point.

Two years later, exactly the same thing happened again. The dreaded hour of suffering found
the wayward beauty once more under the roof which had sheltered her in her former time of trial,
and once more she rested her head in penitence and appeal against her owner's shoulder. Who
could bear malice in the presence of such dreadful pain? Not Star's owner, certainly. Besides
the home resources, a man on horseback was sent off to fetch a famous veterinary who chanced
to be staying at a neighbouring station, and they both returned before Star's worst sufferings
began. All that skill and experience could do was done that night; but the morning light found
the poor little grey mare dying from exhaustion, with another dead foal lying by her side.
She only lived a few hours later, in spite of stimulants and the utmost care, and died gently
and peacefully, with those human hands whose lightest touch she had so flouted, ministering
tenderly to her great needs. The stockman had become so fond of the wayward beauty, in spite
of her ingratitude, that the only solace he could find for his regret at her early death, lay
in digging a deep grave for her, and carving the emblem of her pretty name on the rude stake
which still marks the spot.

No account of station pets would be complete without a brief allusion to my numerous and unsuccessful
attempts to rear merino lambs in the house. It never was of any use advising me to leave the
poor little creatures out on the bleak hill-side, if, in the course of my rambles after ferns
or creepers, I came upon a dead ewe with her half-starved baby running round and round her.
How could I turn my back on the little orphan, who, instead of bounding off up the steep hill,
used to run confidingly up to me, and poke its black muzzle into my hand, as if it would say,
"Here is a friend at last"? And then merino lambs are so much prettier than any I have seen
in England. Their snow-white wool is as tightly screwed up in small curls as any Astracan fleece,
and from being of so much more active a race, they are smaller and more compact than English
lambs, and not so awkward and leggy. A merino lamb of a couple of hours old is far better fitted
to take care of itself up a mountain than a civilized and helpless lamb of a month old, besides
these latter being so weak about the knees always. I only mention this, not out of any desire
to "blow" about our sheep, but because I want to account for my tender-heartedness on the subject
of desolate orphans. The ewes scarcely ever died of disease, unless by a rare chance it happened
to be a very old lady whose constitution gave way at last before a severe winter. We oftenest
found that the dead mother was a fine fat young ewe; who had slipped up on a hill-side and
could not recover herself, but had died of exhaustion and fatigue from her violent efforts
to kick herself up again. If we chanced to be in time to rescue her by the simple process of
setting her on her legs again, it would be all right, but sometimes the poor creature had been
cold and stiff for hours before we found her, and her lamb had bleated itself hoarse and hungry,
and was as tame as a pet dog. Now who could turn away from a little helpless thing like that,
who positively leaped into your arms and cuddled itself up in delight, sucking vigorously away
at your glove, or anything handy? Not I, for one,--though I might as well have left it alone,
so far as its ultimate fate was concerned; but I always hoped for better luck next time, and
carried it off in my arms.

The first thing to be do be on arrival at home, was to give the starving little creature a
good meal out of a tea-pot, and the next, to put it to sleep in a box of hay in a warm corner
of the kitchen. What always seemed to me so extraordinary, was that the lambs, one and all,
preserved the most cheerful demeanour, ate and drank and slept well,--and yet died within a
month. Some lingered until quite four weeks had passed, others succumbed to my treatment in
a week. I varied their food, mixing oatmeal with the milk; some I fed often, others seldom;
to some I gave sugar in the milk, others had new milk. There was abundance of grass just outside
the house for them to eat, if they could. Some did mumble feebly at it, I remember, but the
mortality continued uninterrupted. It must have been very ridiculous to a visitor, to see my
dear little snowy pets going down on their front knees before me, and wagging their long tails
furiously the moment the tea-pot was brought out. They were far too sensible to do this if
my hands were empty. Gentle, affectionate little creatures, they used to be wonderfully well-behaved,
though now and then they would wander through the verandah, and so into my bedroom, where the
drapery of my dressing-table afforded them endless amusement and occupation. They gnawed and
sucked all my "daisy" fringe, until the first thing that had to be done when a lamb arrived
at the house, was to take off muslins and fringes from that, the only trimmed table in the house.

Often and often, of a cold night (for we must remember that New Zealand lambing used always
to come off in winter), we would all become suddenly aware of a strong smell of burning pervading
the whole house; which, on being traced to its source, was often found to proceed from the
rosette of wool on the forehead of a chilly lamb. The creature drew nearer and nearer to the
genial warmth of the kitchen fire, until at last it used to lean its brow pensively against
the red hot bars. Hence arose the powerful odour gradually filling the whole of the little
wooden house. Of course I used to rush to the rescue, and draw my bewildered pet away from
the fatal warmth, but not until it had usually singed the wool off down to the bone, and there
was often a bad burn on its forehead as well. But still, in spite of stupidity and an insatiable
appetite, I always grieved very sincerely for each of my orphan lambs as it in turn sank into
its early grave. I used to be well laughed at for attaching any sentiment to an animal which
had sunk so disgracefully low in the money-market as a New Zealand lamb, but the abundant supply
of my little pets never made it easier for me to lose the particular one which I had set my
heart on rearing. It certainly did afford me some comfort to hear that merino lambs had always
been difficult, if not impossible to bring up, like so many "pups," by hand; and among all
the statistics I carefully collected, I could only find one well-authenticated instance of
a foundling having been reared indoors. My informant tried to comfort me by tales of the tyranny
that stout and tame sheep exercised over the household which had sheltered it, but I fear that
the stories of its delightful impudence only made me more anxious to succeed in my own baby-farming
experiments among the lambs.

Chapter XV: A feathered pet.

No record of those dear, distant days would be complete without a short memoir of "Kitty."
She was only a grey Dorking hen, but no heroine in fact or fiction, no Lady Rachel Russell
or Fleurange, ever exceeded Kitty in unswerving devotion to a beloved object, or rather objects.

To see Kitty was to admire her, at least as I saw her one beautiful spring evening in a grassy
paddock on the banks of the Horarata. We had ridden over there to visit our kind and friendly
neighbours, the C----'s; we had enjoyed a delicious cup of tea in the passion-flower-covered
verandah, which looked on the whole range, from East to West, of the glorious Southern Alps,
their shining white summits sharply cut against our own peculiarly beautiful sky; we had strolled
round the charming, unformal garden, on either sloping side of a wide creek, and had admired,
with just a tinge of envy, the fruits and flowers, the standard apple and rose trees, the tangle
of fern and creepers, the wealth of the old and new worlds heaped together in floral profusion;
we had done all this, I say, and very pleasant we had found it. Now we were trying to say goodbye:
not so easy a task, let me tell you, when there are so many temptations to linger, and when
you are greatly pressed to stay. The last device of our hospitable hostess to keep us consisted
in offering to show me her poultry-yard. Now I was a young beginner in that line myself, and
tormented my ducks and fowls to death by my incessant care: at least that is the conclusion
I have arrived at since; but at that time, I considered it as necessary to look after them
as if they had been so many children. The consequence was,--as I pathetically complained to
Mrs. C----, that my hens sat furiously for a week, and then took to lingering outside, where
perpetual feeding was going on, until their eggs grew cold; that my ducks neglected their offspring
and allowed the rats to decimate them, and that every variety of epidemic and misfortune assailed
in turns my unhappy poultry yard. Kind Mrs. C---- listened as gravely as she could, hinting
very gently, that perhaps I took too much trouble about them; then, fearing least she might
have wounded my feelings, she hastened to suggest that I should try the introduction of a different
breed.

As a preliminary step to this reformation, she offered to bestow upon me one of her best Dorking
hens. It was too tempting an offer to be refused, and I forthwith bestowed my affections on
a beautiful grey pullet, whose dignified carriage and speckled exterior bespoke her high lineage.
"That's Kitty," said Mrs. C----. "I am so glad you fancy her; she is one of my nicest young
hens. We'll catch her for you in a moment." I must pause to mention here, that it struck me
as being very odd in New Zealand the way in which every creature has a name, excepting always
the poor sheep. If one sees a cock strutting proudly outside a shepherd's door; you are sure
to hear it is either Nelson or Wellington; every hen has a pet name, and answers to it; so
have the ducks and geese,--at least, up-country; of course, dogs, horses, cows and bullocks,
each rejoice in the most inflated appellations, but I don't remember ever hearing ducks and
fowls answer to their names in any other country.

But this is only by the way. I gratefully and gladly accepted the transfer of the fair Kitty,
and only wondered how I was to convey her to her new home, fifteen miles away. Kitty was soon
caught, and carried off into the house to be packed up for her first ride. Accustomed as I
am to ridiculous things happening to me, still I never felt in so absurd a position as when,
having mounted "Helen," who seemed in a particularly playful mood after a good feed of oats,
Kitty was handed to me neatly tied up in a pillow-case with her tufted head protruding from
a hole in the seam at the side. Although very anxious to carry her home immediately, my heart
died within me at the prospect of a long gallop on a skittish mare with a plump Dorking hen
tied up in a bag on my lap.

There was no help for it, however, and I tried to put my bravest face on the matter. The difficulties
commenced at the very point of departure, for it is not easy to say farewell cordially with
your hands full of reins, whip, and poultry. But it proved comparatively easy going whilst
we only cantered over the plains. It was not until the first creek had been reached, that I
really perceived what lay before me. Helen distrusted the contents of the bag, and kept trying
to look round and see what it contained; and her fears of something uncanny might well have
been confirmed when she took off at her first flat jump. Kitty screamed, or shrieked, or whatever
name best expresses her discordant and piercing yells. I more than suspect I shrieked too,
partly at the difficulty of keeping both Kitty and Helen in any sort of order, and partly at
my own insecurity. No sooner had Helen landed on the other side, than she fled homewards as
if a tin kettle were tied to her tail. The speed at which we dashed through the fragrant summer
air completely took away Kitty's breath, and the poor creature appeared more dead than alive
by the time I dismounted, trembling myself in every limb for her safety as well as my own,
at the garden gate.

However, next morning brought a renewed delight in existence to both Kitty and me, and our
night's sleep had made us forget our agitation and peril. After breakfast I introduced her
to the poultry yard, and she adapted herself to her new home with a tact and good humour most
edifying to behold. Months passed away. Kitty had made herself a nest in a place, the selection
of which did equal honour to her head and heart, and she gladdened my eyes one fine morning
by appearing with a lovely brood of chicks around her. Who so proud as the young mother? She
exhibited them to me, and after I had duly admired them, used to carry them off to a nursery
of her own, which she had established among the tussocks just outside the stable door. Mrs.
C---- had impressed upon me that Kitty could be safely trusted to manage her own affairs. No
fear of her dragging her fluffy babies out among the wet grass too early in the morning, or
losing them among the flax bushes on the hill-side. No: Kitty came of a race who were model
mothers, and was to be left to take care of herself and her chickens.

About a week after Kitty had first shown me her large, small family, a friend of ours arrived
unexpectedly to stop the night. Next morning, when he was going away, he apologised for asking
leave to mount at the stables, saying his led horse was so vicious, and the one he was riding
so gay, that it was quite possible their legs might find themselves within the verandah, or
do some mischief to the young shrubs which were the pride and joy of my heart. This gentleman
rode beautifully, and I used to like to see the courage and patience with which he always conquered
the most unruly horse.

"We will come up to the stable and see you mount," I cried, seizing my hat. Of course every
one followed my lead, and it was to the sound of mingled jeers and compliments that poor Mr.
T---- mounted his fiery steed, and seized hold of the leading rein of his pack-horse. But this
animal had no intention of taking his departure with propriety or tranquillity: he pranced
and shied, flinging out his heels as he wildly danced round to every point of the compass,
in a circle. Gradually he drew Mr. T---- and his chestnut a dozen yards away from the stable,
and it was just then that I perceived poor Kitty sitting close under a tussock. It chanced
to be the hour for the chickens' siesta, and they were all folded away beneath her ample brooding
wings. Perhaps the danger had come too near to be avoided before I perceived it, but at all
events my loud shriek of warning was too late to save the pretty crouching head from the flourish
of the pack-horse's glancing heels. Swift indeed was the blow; for scarcely ten seconds could
have passed between my first glimpse of poor Kitty's bright black eye looking out, with such
mortal terror in its expression, from beneath the yellow tuft of grass, and my seeing the horse's
heel lay her head right open. The brave little mother never dreamed of saving herself at the
cost of her nestlings. She crouched as low as possible, and when the horse had jumped over
her I flew to see if she had escaped. No. There lay my pretty pet, with her wings still outspread
and her chickens unhurt. But she seemed dead: her head had been actually cut clean open, and
I never expected that she would have lived a moment. Yet she did. I took her at once to the
well hard by, and bound up her split head with my pocket handkerchief, keeping it well wetted
with cold water. Later on I put forth all the surgical art I possessed, and dressed the wound
in the most scientific manner, nursing poor Kitty tenderly in the kitchen, and feeding her
with my own hands every two hours. She was for a long time incapable of feeding herself and;
even when all danger was over, required most careful nursing. However, the end of the story
is that, she recovered entirely her bodily health, but her poor little brain remained clouded
for ever. She never took any more notice of her chickens, who had to be brought up by hand,
and she never mixed again with the society of the poultry-yard. At night she roosted apart
in the coalshed, and she never seemed to hear my voice or distinguish me from others, though
she was perfectly tame to everybody. Kitty's end was very tragical. She grew exceedingly fat,
and at last, one time when we were all snowed up and could not afford to be sentimental, my
cook laid hold of poor Kitty, who was moping in her usual corner, and converted her into a
savoury stew without telling me, until I had actually dined off her. I was very angry; but
Eliza only repeated by way of consolation, "She had no wits, only flesh, consequently she was
better in my stew-pot nor anywhere else, mum, if you'll only look at it calm like." But it
was very hard to be made to eat one's patient, especially when I was so proud of the way her
poor head had healed.

If anybody wanted to teaze me, they suggested that I had omitted to replace my dear Kitty's
brains before closing that cruel wound in her skull.

Chapter XVI: Doctoring without a diploma.

So many reminiscences come crowding into my mind,--some grave and others gay,--as I sit down
to write these final chapters, that I hardly know where to begin.

The most clamorous of the fast-thronging memories, the one which pushes its way most vividly
to the front, is of a little amateur doctoring of mine; and as my patient luckily did not die
of my remedies, I need not fear that I shall be asked for my diploma.

Shearing was just over; over only that very evening in fact. We had been leading a sort of
uncomfortable picnic life at the home station for more than ten days, and had returned to our
own pretty little home up the valley, late on Saturday night, in time for the supper-dinner
I have so often described. It was my doing, that fortnight's picnic at the home station, and
I may as well candidly confess it was a mistake; although, made, like most mistakes in life,
with good intentions. Our partner had gone to England, our manager had just left us to set
up sheep-farming on his own account, and all the responsibility of shearing a good many thousand
sheep devolved on F----. We were relieved at about 6 P.M., by the Twelfth Maine regiment, but
we were almost immediately ordered out to the support of Nim's battery which had just been
put into position. Here we lay five or six hours while the enemy's shells burst in most unpleasant
proximity. Then our regiment and the One Hundred and Fifty-ninth New York were ordered out
to the support of General Weitzel on our right. We marched on the double-quick down through the
woods, when we were ordered by General Grover to advance to the front
and carry the earthworks.

We were informed that there were hardly any Rebels there. Major Burt of the One Hundred and Fifty-ninth,
who was in command, was told that his regiment alone would be able to carry the works and to
send back our regiment if it wasn't needed. But we found out very soon that our assistance would
be necessary to carry the earthworks. We rushed on through the woods and down a hill, swept by
the enemy's artillery. Here we turned to the right and emerged on to a plain. I shall never forget
that sight. The valley was filled with felled trees, and heavy underbrush, while thick and
black rolled the battle-smoke. There was a hill on our left, strongly entrenched and from here
loomed up a big gun. Just below on a little bridge was planted a stand of the Stars and Stripes,
the glorious old banner, and gathered around it stood a handful of brave men firing a stream
of bullets upon that piece. For six long hours the gunners did not dare approach to load and
that wicked looking gun was kept silent.

 I would not hear of riding,
for it was only a short two miles walk; and as we did not start until after our last meal,
the sun had dipped behind Flag-pole's tall peak, and nearly the whole of our happy valley lay
in deep, cool shadow. Besides which, it looked more like the real thing to walk, and that was
half the battle with me. The "real thing" in this case, though I did not stop to explain it
to myself, must have meant emigrants, Mormons, soldiers on the march, what you will; any thing
which expresses all one's belongings being packed into a little cart, with a huge tin bath
secured on the top of all. Such a miscellaneous assortment of dry goods as that cart held!
A couple of mattresses (for my courage failed me at the idea of sleeping on chopped tussocks
for a fortnight), a couple of folding-up arm-chairs, though, as it turned out, one would have
been enough, for poor F---- never sat down from the time he got up until he went to bed again;
a large hamper of provisions, some books, our clothes, and various little matters which were
indispensable if one had to live in an empty house for a fortnight. I had sent my two maids
over one morning a few days before, with pails and mops and brushes, and they had given the
couple of rooms which we were to inhabit, a thorough good cleaning and scouring, so my mind
was easy on that point. It would not have answered, for many reasons, to have encumbered ourselves
with these damsels during our stay at the home station. In the first place, there was really
no accommodation for them; in the next, it would have entailed more luggage than the little
cart could hold; and, finally, we should have been obliged to leave them behind at the last
moment: for only the evening before we started, a couple of friends arrived, in true New Zealand
fashion, from Christchurch, to pay us a month's visit. It was too late to alter our plans then,
so we told them to, make themselves thoroughly at home, and took our departure next day in
the way I have alluded to.

We had plenty of escort as far as the first swamp. When that treacherous and well-known spot
had been reached, everybody suddenly remembered that they had forgotten something or the other
which obliged them to return directly, so our farewells had to be exchanged from the centre
of a flax bush. The cart meanwhile was nearly out of sight, so wide a detour had its driver
been forced to make in order to find a place sound enough to bear its weight. But we caught
it up again after we had happily crossed the quagmire which used always to be my bug-bear,
and in due time we made our appearance, in the gloaming, at the tiny house belonging to the
home station. Early as was the hour, not later than half-past eight, the place lay silent and
still under the balmy summer haze. All the shearers were fast asleep in the men's hut, whilst
every available nook and corner was filled with the spare hands; the musterers, branders, yard-keepers,
and many others, whose duties were less-defined. Far down the flat we could dimly discern a
white patch,--the fleecy outlines of the large mob destined to fill the skillions at day-break
to-morrow morning; and, although we could not see them distinctly, close by, watchful and vigilant
all through that and many subsequent summer nights, Pepper and his two beautiful colleys kept
watch and ward over the sheep.

Writing in the heavy atmosphere of this vast London world, I look back upon that, and such
evenings as that, with a desperate craving to breathe once more he delicious air unsoiled by
human lungs, and stirred into fresh fragrance by every summer sigh of those distant New Zealand
valleys. No wonder people were always well in such a pure, clear, light atmosphere. I try to
feel again in fancy the exquisite enjoyment of merely drawing a deep breath, the thrilling
sensation of health and strength it sent tingling down to your finger ends. No fleck or film
of vapour or miasma could be seen or smelt, though the day had been burning hot, and, as I
have said, there were plenty of creeks and swamps hard by. Damp is unknown in those valleys,
and we might have lingered bareheaded even after the heavy dew began to fall, without risk
of cold, or fever, or any other ailment. But we could not afford to linger a moment out of
doors that lovely tempting evening. F---- and the driver of the cart, who had some important
part to take in the morrow's proceedings (I forget exactly what), soon tossed out my little
stores, which looked very insignificant as they lay in a heap in the verandah, and departed
to see that all was in train for next day's work. I had no time to enjoy the evening's soft
beauty: the beds had to be made; clothes to be unpacked and hung up; stores must be arranged
on the shelves in the sitting-room,--for the house only consisted of two small rooms in front,
with a wide verandah, and a sort of lean-to at the back, which was divided into a small kitchen
and store-room. This last was empty. "There was eleven hatched out, but sure the rats got the rest of them."
"I'd be glad," said Joyce, "if you'd fatten them six, and you needn't spare the yellow meal.
It'll be worth your while to have them as good as you can."

A month later the case of Joyce v. Flanagan came on in the County Court. Mr. Madden had hammered
the original story of the wall, the heifer, the pigs and the potatoes, into shape. It sounded
almost plausible as Mr. Madden told it in his opening remarks. Certainly
it looked uncomfortable enough to satisfy any one, but I would not have complained of it for
the world, lest I might have been ordered home directly.

Hard as was my bed that night, I slept soundly, and it appeared only five minutes before I
heard a tremendous noise outside the verandah. The bleating of hundreds of sheep announced
that the mob were slowly advancing, before a perfect army of men and dogs, up to the sheep
yards. What a din they all made! F---- was wide awake, and up in a moment. I, anxious to show
why I had insisted on coming over, got up too, and made my way into the little kitchen, where
I found a charming surprise awaiting me in the shape of some faggots of neatly-stacked wood,
cut into exactly, the right lengths for the American stove; and also a heap of dry Menuka bushes,
which make the best touchwood for lighting fires in the whole world. The tiny kitchen and stove
were both scrupulously clean, and so were my three saucepans and kettle. This had been, of
course, my maids' doing, but the fuel was a delicate little attention on Pepper's part. How
he blushed and grinned with delight when I thanked him before all his mates! This was indeed
station-life made easy! It did not take two minutes to light my fire, and in five more I had
a delicious cup of tea and some bread-and-butter all ready for F----. It was nearly cold, however,
by the time I could catch him and make him drink it. Of course, being a man, instead of saying,
"Thank you," or anything of that sort, he merely remarked, "What nonsense!" but equally of
course, he was very glad to get it, and ate and drank it all up, returning instantly to his shed.

After this little episode, I set to work to unpack a little, and make the sitting-room look
the least bit more home-like; then I laid the cloth for breakfast, put out the pie and potted
meat, etc. (no words can say how heartily tired of pies we both were before the week was over),
and arranged everything for breakfast. Then I waylaid one of the numerous stray "hands" which
hang about a station at shearing time, and got him to fetch me a couple of buckets of water
as far as the verandah. These I conveyed myself into the little sleeping-room, and finished
my toilette at my leisure: tidying it all up afterwards. I wonder if any one has any idea what
hot work it is making a bed? So hot, in fact, that I resolved in future to be wise enough to
finish all these domestic occupations before I had my bath. The worst of getting up so early
proved to be that by nine o'clock I was very tired, and had nothing else to do for the remainder
of the long, noisy day. As for the meals, they were wretchedly unsociable; for F---- only came
in to snatch a mouthful or two, standing, and it was of little use trying to make things comfortable
for him. I must confess here, what I would not acknowledge at the time, that I found it a very
long and dull visit. My husband never had time to speak to me, and when he did, it was only
about sheep. I grew weary of living on cold meat, for it was really too hot to cook; and my
servants used to send me over, every second day, cold fowls or pies; besides, one seemed to
live in a whirl and confusion of dust, and bleating, and barking. After the day's work was
fairly over, F---- used to rush in, seize a big bath-towel, cry "I am off for a bathe in the
creek," and only return in time for supper and bed. The weather was all that a sheep-farmer
could desire. Bright, sunny, and clear, one lovely summer day followed another; hot, almost
to tropical warmth, without any risk or fear of sun-stroke or head-ache, and a delicious lightness
in the atmosphere all the time, which merged into a cool bracing air the moment the sun had
slowly travelled behind the high hills to the westward.

But all these details, though necessary to make you understand what I had been doing, are not
the story itself, so to that we will hurry on. The shearing was over; Saturday evening had
come, as welcome to poor imprisoned me as to any one, and the great work of the New Zealand
year had been most successfully accomplished. F---- was in such good humour that he even deigned
to admit that his own comfort had been somewhat increased by my living at the home station,
so I felt quite rewarded for my many dreary hours. The shearers had been paid, and were even
then picking their way over the hills in little groups of two and three; some, I grieve to
say, bound for the nearest accommodation-house or wayside inn, and others for the next station,
across the river, where the skillions were full, and waiting for them to begin on Monday morning.
Only half-a-dozen people, instead of thirty, were left at our place, and there would not even
have been so many if it had not been thought well to keep a few there until the bale-loft was
empty. Generally it was arranged for the wool-drays to follow each other every two days with
a load down to Christchurch; for the greatest risk a sheep-farmer runs is from his shed taking
fire whilst it is full of bales of wool. This had happened often enough in the colony, and
even in our neighbourhood, to make us more and more careful every year; and, as I have said,
amongst our precautions, was that of keeping as little wool as possible in the shed. Most flock-owners
waited until the shearing should be quite over before they carted the wool away; but in that
case, a spark from a pipe, a match carelessly dropped in a tussock outside, when a nor'-wester
was blowing,--and the slight wooden building would be blazing like a torch, and your year's
income vanishing in the smoke!

Even at the last moment, when the cart had already started homewards, with the tin bath balanced
once more on the top of the mattresses and boxes; when the house was empty, and I was waiting,
my hat and jacket on, and flax-stick in hand, eager to set out, a doubt arose about the expediency
of our return home. Some accidental delay had prevented the dray from arriving in time to start
for Christchurch with the last load, and between two and three hundred pounds worth of wool
still remained in the shed,--packed and labelled indeed, but neither insured nor protected
from the risk of fire in any way. F---- was very loath to leave them there; but, yielding to
my entreaties, he called Pepper, the head shepherd, and solemnly gave the wool-shed and its
contents over into his charge, with many and many a caution about fire. Pepper was as trustworthy
and steady a shepherd as any in the colony, and promised to "keep his weather-eye open," as
he phrased it, in nautical slang picked up from some run-away sailor.

All the way home F---- said from time to time, anxiously, "I wish the shed was empty;" but
I cheered him up, and told him he was over-tired and unreasonably nervous, and so forth, but
with a great longing myself for Monday morning to come, and for the dray to take its load and
start. I need not dwell on how delicious it was to return home, where everything seemed so
comfortable and nice, and the bed felt especially soft and welcome to tired limbs. Early were
our hours, you may be sure, and we slept the sleep of the hard-worked until between two and
three o'clock the next morning. Then we were roused up by some one knocking loudly against
our wide-open latticed window.

I was the first to hear the noise, and cried, "Who's there? what is it?" all in a breath.

"The wool-shed on fire," murmured F----, in a tone of agonized conviction.

"It's you that's wanted, please mum, this moment, over at the home station!" I heard Pepper
say, in impatient tones.

"It's the wool-shed," repeated F----, more than half asleep, and with only room for that one
idea in his dreamy mind.

"Nonsense!" I cried, jumping out of bed. "I should not be wanted if the wool-shed were on fire.
Don't you hear Pepper say he wants me?"

"All right, then," said F----, actually turning over and proposing to go to sleep again. But
there was no more sleep for either of us that night. Whilst I hastily put on my riding-habit,
Pepper told me, through the window; an incoherent tale of some one being at the point of death,
and wanting me to cure him, and the master to bring over pen and ink, to make a will, and dying
speeches and cold shivers, all mixed up together in a tangle of words. F---- took some minutes
to understand that it was Fenwick, a gigantic Yorkshireman, who had been seized with what Pepper
would call the "choleraics," and who, in spite of having swallowed all the mustard and rum
and "pain-killer" left on the premises, grew worse and worse every moment. "He's dying, safe
enough," concluded Pepper, "but he's main anxious to see you, mum, and the master; and he wants
a Bible brought to swear him, and he's powerful uneasy to make his will." I knew quite as little
of medicine as my husband did of law, but of course we decided instantly that we ought both
to go and see what could be done in any way to relieve either the body or mind of the sufferer.

We said to each other while we were hastily dressing, "How shall we ever catch the horses?
They have all been turned out, of course, as no one thought they would be wanted until Monday;
and who knows where they have gone to?--miles away, perhaps; and it's pitch dark." Judge, then,
of our delighted surprise, when, on going out into the verandah, preparatory to starting off
to look for our steeds, we found them standing at the gate, ready saddled and bridled. It seemed
like magic, but the good fairies in this case had been the two guests to whom I have alluded
as having arrived just as we were starting for our picnic life. They were both "old chums,"
and understood the situation instantly. Whilst we were questioning Pepper (you can hear every
word all over a New Zealand house), they had jumped up, huddled on their clothes, and gone
over the brow of the hill to look for the horses. By great good fortune the whole mob was found
quietly camping in the sheltered valley full of sweet grass, on its further side. To walk up
to my pretty bay mare Helen, and lay hold of her mane, and then, vaulting on her back, ride
the rest of the mob back into the stockyard, was, even in the deep darkness of a midsummer
night, no difficult task for eyes so practised to catching horses under all circumstances.
So here was one obstacle suddenly smoothed, and as I hastily collected my few simple remedies,
consisting chiefly of flannel, chlorodyne, and brandy, I could only trust and pray that poor
Fenwick's case might not be so desperate as Pepper represented it.

To our impatience, the difficult track, with its swamps and holes, its creeks to be jumped,
and morasses to be avoided, seemed long indeed; but to judge from the continued profound darkness,--that
inky blackness of the sky which is the immediate forerunner of daylight,--the dawn could not
be far off. How well I remember the whole scene! F---- tied his white handkerchief on his arm,
that Helen and I might have a faint speck of light by which to guide ourselves. Pepper rode
close to me, pouring into my ears dismal predictions of Fenwick's end; whilst I, amid all my
anxiety, could only think of the dangers of the track, and whether, in the pitchy darkness,
we should ever get to the home station. The dew fell so heavily that more than once I thought
it must be raining, but those were only wind-clouds brooding in the great dark vault above
us. More welcome than ever sounded the bark of the dogs, which told us we had reached the end
of our stumbling ride; and the moment their tongues woke up the silence, a lantern showed a
ray of light to guide us to the hut door.

I jumped off my horse instantly, and went in. At first I thought my patient was dead, for he
lay, rigid and grey, in his bunk. At a glance I perceived that nothing could really be done
to help him whilst he was lying on a high shelf, almost out of my reach, in a small hut filled
with bewildered men, who kept offering him from time to time a "pull" at a particularly good
pipe, having previously poured all the grog they could muster down his throat, or rather over
his pillow (his saddle performed that duty by night), for he had been unable to swallow for
some hours. I remembered that there were the bedsteads we had used at the house, and also some
firewood still left in the kitchen. Explaining to Pepper how he was to wrap poor Fenwick in
every available blanket in the place, and carry him across the open space into the parlour,
I hastily ran on before, got some one to help me to drag one of the light frames into the sitting-room,
laced it before the fireplace, and then made up a good blazing fire on the open hearth. By
the time the dry wood was crackling and sparkling out its cheery welcome, my patient arrived,
and was laid down, blankets and all, on the rude little bedstead, before the blaze. By its
fitful and uncertain light I proceeded to examine the enormous frame stretched so helplessly
before me, feeling half afraid to touch him at all. F---- was very trying as an assistant,
for he looked on without making any suggestions, and only said from time to time, "Take care:
the man is dead." To my inexperienced eyes he indeed seemed past all human help. His skin was
icy cold, and as wet as if he had been lying out in the dew. No flutter of pulse, nor sign
of breath, could my trembling efforts discover; but I fancied there was the least little sign
of pulsation about his heart. Of course I had not the vaguest notion of what was the matter
with the man, for all Pepper could tell me was that "Fenwick's been powerful bad, you bet."
This does not sound a minute diagnosis to go on, and the only remedies which presented themselves
to my mind were those I had studied as being useful for the recovery of drowned persons. So
to work I set, as if the poor fellow had just been fished out of the creek; and whenever any
one wanted to teaze me afterwards they would declare I had insisted on Fenwick's being held
up by his heels. But of course that was all nonsense. What I did really do was this, and a
doctor in Christchurch, whom I afterwards consulted as to my treatment, assured me, laughingly,
that it was "capital."

I made Pepper and another man both rub the cold clammy body, as hard as they could with mustard
and hot flannel. I got some bottles filled with hot water (for it did not take five minutes
to boil the kettle) and placed to his icy-cold feet and under his arms, then I mixed a little
very strong and hot brandy and water, to which I added a few drops of chlorodyne, and gave
him a teaspoonful every five minutes. For the first half-hour there was no sign of life to
be detected, and the same horrible bluish pallor made poor Fenwick's really handsome face look
ghastly in the flickering light. My two assistants were getting exhausted, and Pepper had more
than once murmured, with the recollection of the past fortnight's work strong upon him, "Spell,
oh!" or else "Shears!" [Note: the shearer's demand for a few minutes rest] whilst his companion
inquired pathetically, "What was the use of flaying a dead man?" To these hints I paid no attention,
though my damp riding habit was steaming from the heat of the fire and I felt dreadfully tired;
for certainly there seemed to my eyes a healthier tinge stealing over the rigid features, and
it could not be my fancy which detected a stronger effort to swallow the last spoonful of brandy.

I need not go into the details of my jumbled-up remedies; probably I should bring upon myself
serious remonstrances from the Royal Humane Society, if my treatment of that unhappy man were
made public. They fastened white ties round their collars. They encased their stomachs in stiff
white waistcoats. They struggled into silk-lined, silk-faced, long-tailed coats. They wrapped their
necks in white silk scarves. They even put high silk hats on their heads. Their overcoats were becomingly
open, for the day was warm. They took their seats in the motor. Every policeman in the village
saluted them as they passed. They sped up the long, tree-lined avenue which led to Sir Timothy's
house. They reached the lofty doorway, over which crouched lions upheld a shield, bearing a coat
of arms.

On the lawn opposite the door Sir Timothy, his two daughters and a young man whom Mr. Courtney
recognized as the police inspector, were playing tennis. It was a bright and agreeable scene.
The sun shone pleasantly. Sir Timothy and the police inspector were in white flannels. The girls
wore pretty cotton frocks.

Sir Archibald looked at Mr. Courtney.

"We've come the wrong day," he said, "or the wrong hour, or something."

"It

is Tuesday," said Mr. Courtney, "and he certainly said 7.30."

"It's infernally awkward," said Sir Archibald, glancing at his clothes.

Sir Timothy crossed the lawn, swinging his tennis racket and smiling.

"Delighted to see you," he said. "I'd have asked you to come up for a game of tennis if I'd thought
you'd have cared for it. Had an idea you'd be busy all day, and would rather dress at your
own place. Hullo, you are dressed! A bit early, isn't it? But I'm delighted to see you."

Sir Archibald stepped slowly from the car. Men who undertake the task of governing Ireland must
expect to find themselves looking like fools occasionally. But it is doubtful whether any turn of
the political or administrative machine can make a man look as foolish as he feels when, elaborately
dressed in evening clothes, he is suddenly set down on a sunny lawn in the middle of a group
of people suitably attired for tennis. Sir Archibald, puzzled and annoyed, turned to Mr. Courtney
with a frown.

"He said half-past seven," said Mr. Courtney.

"I'm delighted to see you now or at any time, but, as a matter of fact, it's only half-past five,"
said Sir Timothy.

Sir Archibald looked at his watch.

"It's--surely my watch can't have gained two hours?"
"It's half-past seven," said Mr. Courtney, firmly.

"Oh, no it isn't,"
said Sir Timothy. "I don't dine by Act of Parliament."

Sir Archibald
frowned angrily.

"We'd better go home again," he said. "We mustn't
interrupt the tennis."

He climbed stiffly into the motor.

"I suppose,"
he said to Mr. Courtney a few minutes later, "that this is some kind
of Irish joke."

Mr. Courtney explained, elaborately and fully, Sir
Timothy's peculiar views about time.

"If I'd known," said Sir Archibald,
"that you were taking me to dine with a lunatic, I should not have
agreed to go."

Mr. Courtney recognized that his chances of promotion
to a pleasant post in Dublin had vanished. The Irish Government had
no use for men who place their superiors in embarrassing positions.

XII
~~ UNITED IRELAND

"I'll say this for old MacManaway, an honester
man never lived nor what he was; and I'm sorry he's gone, so I am."

The
speaker was Dan Gallaher. The occasion was the morning of the auction
of old MacManaway's property. The place was the yard behind the farmhouse
in which MacManaway had lived, a solitary man, without wife or child,
for fifty years. Dan Gallaher held the hames of a set of harness in
his hand as he spoke and critically examined the leather of the traces.
It was good leather, sound and well preserved. Old MacManaway while
alive liked sound things and took good care of his property.

"An
honester man never lived," Dan repeated "And I'm not saying that because
the old man and me agreed together, for we didn't." Thus urged,
F---- opened a casement on the sheltered side,--if any side could be said to be sheltered in
such weather,--and cautiously put his head out. I peered over his shoulder, and never can I
forget the ridiculous sight which met our eyes. There, dripping and forlorn, huddled together
under the wide roof of our summer parlour, as the verandah used to be often called, the whole
mob of horses had gathered themselves. The garden gate chanced to have been left open, and,
evidently under old Jack's' guidance, they had all walked into the verandah, wandered disconsolately
up and down its boarded floor, and after partaking of a slight refreshment in the shape of
my best creepers, had proceeded to make themselves at home by rubbing their wet sides against
the pillars and the wooden sides of the house itself.

No wonder the noise had aroused us all. Ironshod hoofs clattering up and down a boarded verandah
is riot a silent performance; and Jack was so cool and impudent about it, positively refusing
to stir from the sheltered corner by the silver-pheasants' aviary, which he had chosen for
himself. The other horses evidently felt they were intruders, and were glad enough, on the
flapping of a handkerchief, to hurry out of their impromptu stables, making the best of their
way through the narrow garden gate, and so out upon the bleak hills again. But Jack's conduct
was very trying; he found himself perfectly comfortable, and evidently intended to remain so;
neither for wishing nor coaxing, for fair words nor foul, would he stir. It seemed so horrid
to have to dress and go out in such a downpour of rain, that we weakly deliberated on the expediency
of letting the cunning old stock-horse remain; but fortunately, at that moment he began to
scratch his ear with his hind foot, waking up a thousand echoes against the side of the house
as he did so, and making the pictures dance again on the canvas and paper walls. "This will
never do," cried we all, desperately: "he sure must be taken to the stable or he'll come back
again." But there was a general sense of relief that the period of training--a long, tiresome, very dull
business--was over at last over or almost over.

For the Colonel and certain remote authorities behind the Colonel believed in working the battalion
hard up to the last moment. Therefore day after day there were "stunts" and "shows," field exercises
of every conceivable kind. The weather was hot, as hot as weather ought to be in the first
week of August Long marches became dusty horrors to the men. Manouvres meant hours of desperate
toil. Officers thought longingly of bygone summers, of the cool shade of trees, of tennis played
in white flannels, of luscious plates of strawberries and cream. The Colonel, an old soldier,
went on inventing new "stunts" and more of them. He had laboured at the training of his battalion,
hammering raw boys into disciplined men, inspiring subalterns with something of his own spirit.

On
the whole he had been successful. The men sweated, but grumbled very little. The officers kept
up a gallant pretence at keenness. Slackness was regarded as bad form, and only one member of
the mess made no secret of his opinion that the Colonel was overdoing the "spit and polish"
business.

This was McMahon, the medical officer; and he did not, properly speaking, belong to the battalion
at all. Men and officers alike were drawn for the most part from the English midlands. McMahon
was an Irishman. They were born with a sense of discipline and the Colonel worked on material
responsive to his methods. I had wearied of sowing grass seed
at, a guinea a bag, long before those extremely rude zephyrs got tired of blowing it all out
of the ground. There was my beautiful set of croquet, fresh from Jacques, lying idle in its
box in the verandah, and there was my charming friend, Alice S----, longing for a game of croquet.
When pretty young ladies wish for anything very much, and the house is full of gentlemen, it
goes hard, but that they get the desire of their innocent hearts. So it was in this case. One
fine afternoon Alice wandered into the verandah and peeped for the hundredth time into the
box. "What beautiful things," she sighed, "and how hard it is we can't have a game." "I know
a patch of self-sown grass," sang one of the party, "whereon we might play a game." "Where:
oh, where?" we asked, in eager chorus. "About two miles from this, near a deserted shepherd's
hut; it is as thick and soft as green velvet, and the sheep keep it quite short." "Is the ground
level?" we inquired. "As flat as this table," was the satisfactory answer.

Of course we wanted to start immediately, but how were we to get the croquet things there,
to say nothing of the delightful excuse for tea out of doors which immediately presented itself
to my ever-thirsty mind. A dray was suggested (carriages we had none; there being no roads
for them if we had possessed such vehicles); but alas, and alas! the proper dray and driver
and horse were all away, on an expedition up a distant gulley getting out some brush-wood for
fires. "There's Jack," some one said, doubtfully. He had never even drawn a dray in his life,
so far as we knew, but at the same time we felt sure that when once Jack understood what was
required of him, he would do his best to help us to get to our croquet ground. So we flew off
to our different duties. Alice to see that the balls, hoops, and mallets were all right in
numbers and colours, &c.; I to pack a large open basket with the materials for my favourite
form of dissipation--an out-door tea; and the gentlemen to catch Jack and harness him into
the cart.

Peals of laughter announced the setting forth of the expedition; and no wonder! Inside the
dray, which was a very light and crazy old affair, was seated Alice on an empty flour-sack;
by her side I crouched on an old sugar bag, one of my arms keeping tight hold of my beloved
tea-basket with its jingling contents, whilst the other was desperately clutching at the side
of the dray. On a board across the front three gentlemen were perched, each wanting to drive,
exactly like so many small children in a goat carriage, and like them, one holding the reins,
the other the whip, and the third giving good advice. In the shafts stood poor shaggy old Jack,
looking over his blinkers as much as to say, "What do you want me to do now?" Our good humoured
and stalwart cadet Mr. U----, walked backwards, holding out a carrot and calling Jack to come
and eat it.

In this extraordinary fashion we proceeded down the flat for two or three hundred yards, one
carrot succeeding the other in Jack's jaws rapidly. Mr. U---- was just beginning to say "Look
here: don't you think we ought to take turns at this?" when Jack caught sight of a creek right
before him. He only knew of one way of crossing such obstacles, and that was to jump them.
No one calculated on the sudden rush and high bound into the air with which he triumphantly
cleared the water; knocking Mr. U---- over, and scattering his three drivers like summer leaves
on the track. As for Alice and me, the inside passengers, we found the sensation of jumping
a creek in a dray most unpleasant. All the croquet balls leapt wildly up into the air to fall
like a wooden hailstorm around us. The mallets and hoops bruised us from our head to our feet;
and the contents of my basket were utterly ruined. Not only had my tea-cups and saucers come
together in one grand smash, but the kettle broke the bottle of cream, which in its turn absorbed
all the sugar. Jack looked coolly round at us with an air of mild satisfaction, as if he thought
he had done something very clever, whilst our shrieks were rending the air.

What a merry, light-hearted time of one's life was that! We all had to work hard, and our amusements
were so simple and Arcadian that I often wonder if they really did amuse us so much as we thought
they did at the moment. Let all New Zealanders who doubt this, look into those perhaps closed
chapters of their lives, and as memory turns over the leaves one by one, and pictures like
the sketches I try to reproduce in pen and ink, grow into distinctness out of the dim past,
it will indeed "surprise me very much," if they do not say, as I do,--my pleasant task ended,--"Ah,
those were happy days indeed!"

