He smiled again, but with an evident effort, and Ruth, peeping at his averted profile, felt
a pang of real personal suffering at the sight of his pain.  It seemed dreadful that she should
have such power to affect this strong man; to take the light out of his face and make it old
and worn and grey!

The carriage was nearing home; in a few minutes' time the drive would be over, and she would
have no chance of continuing the conversation.  With a sudden swelling of the heart she realised
that she could not part without another expression of regret.

"I am so sorry, so dreadfully sorry to have grieved you!  But you would not like me to marry
you just for what you could give me; you would not have been satisfied with that, would you,
Dr Maclure?"

His eyes met hers with a flash of determination.

"No," he cried--unhesitatingly--"never!  I want a wife who loves me, or no wife at all!  One
never knows what lies ahead in this world, and if dark days come I should like to feel that
she cared for me more, rather than less.  It would be hard for us both if she valued only my
possessions, and they took to themselves wings and fled.  And there is your own future to consider.
Love will come to you some day, and you must be free to welcome him.  Don't distress yourself
about me, Ruth; I have my work for consolation.  Before I get home to-night I shall have seen
so much suffering that I shall be ashamed to nurse my own trouble."

"Yes," said Ruth faintly.

His words seemed to place her at an immense distance, as if already he had accepted his burden
and put it resolutely out of sight.  She felt chilled and humiliated, for in the depths of
her heart she knew that if Dr Maclure had been persistent in his request, and had condescended
to "tempt" her, to use her own expressive phrase, she would very probably have succumbed to
the temptation, however much she might have regretted her decision later on.  But Donald would
have none of her; he wanted a wife who cared for himself, and not for his possessions.  Ruth
felt almost as if it were she herself who had been refused.  It was not an agreeable sensation
to experience after a first proposal.

CHAPTER FOUR.

A MEETING.

One bright spring afternoon about a week after Ruth's visit to Miss Maclure, Mollie went out
to execute some shopping commissions, and on her way home took a short cut through the park,
which was the great summer resort of the northern town in which her lot was cast.

She was an ardent lover of Nature, and it was a joy to see the tiny green buds bursting into
life on trees and hedges, and to realise that the long winter was at an end.

"Nasty, shivery, chilblainey thing,--I hate it!" said Mollie to herself, with a shiver of disgust. In part they wanted to
Steadfastness of the knight check, she found some concerns that the Bisamapfel the last wish be
necessary, for as a bride she said, befitting her a new suit, and her godmother had recommended,
advisable to deal with their wishes. However, it was a day of feasting at all hurt your heart,
she sat in a corner and wept bitterly. The disease of the Knight they worried even more, and as
she heard the danger in which he was, she was inconsolable.

The seventh day should be decided after the verdict of the doctors life or death. Mathilde went
according to their custom in early morning to the housekeeper to her about the bill of fare Council
to hold, but Gertrude was so out of the version that it relates to the meanest things not reflect,
nor the choice could arrange the food, great tears as the drop of a Eaves rolled down the leather
cheek: "Ah Mathilde" she sobbed, "we are here soon have been, the farmer our good Lord will not
survive the day. "This was a Dreadful news! the girl thought to fall down in terror, but they
soon took courage, and said, "not dismayed at the life of our Lord, he will not die, but be
healthy, I have tonight had a good dream, "The old man was a living. Dream-book, made the hunting
of any dream house servants, and where one could find, they put him out more so that the meeting
stood with her, for the most delightful dreams targeted with her to strife, quarrels and invectives.
"Tell me your dream," she said, "that I construe it." "I was" talking to Matilda, "as I was still
at home with my dear mother, took me aside and taught me the Süpplein of Neunerlei cooking herbs, which
helps for all disease so someone just three spoonfuls of it enjoys.


"I'm sorry," she replied; "I thought you had lost your way, and that I might be able to direct
you.  Please forgive me for seeming to interfere."

She took a step forward, but the old man's eyes seemed to hold her back. He was looking at
her fixedly beneath his heavy brows; such bushy, black eyebrows they were, and she fancied
that the grim expression softened for a moment as he replied--

"You are right.  I have lost my way!  My cabman brought me to the park gates, and as he said
there was a direct path across, I thought I should like the walk.  As a result, I find myself
completely out of my reckoning.  It is a stretch of imagination to call this a direct path."

"Oh, it's direct enough when you know it," said Mollie easily, "ever so much nicer than going
round by the streets.  It is a beautiful park, and we are very proud of it.  When the trees
are in blossom, it is like fairyland--you can't imagine how beautiful it is."

"Possibly not," returned the stranger curtly.  "In the meantime, however, there is nothing
particularly alluring in the scene, and you will excuse my reminding you that we are standing
in a direct draught. I should be obliged if you could direct me to Langton Terrace without
further delay."

Mollie laughed merrily.

"That is just what I have been waiting to do, but you would not tell me where you were bound.
I am walking in that direction myself, and if you will allow me I will show you the shortest
cut.  I know the park so well that I can dodge about from one path to another, and cut off
some of the corners.  It is cold just here, but the cross-roads are sheltered even now."

The stranger shrugged his shoulders, and said "Humph" in an incredulous manner, and that was
his sole reply in words.  He turned, however, and walked by Mollie's side, leaning heavily
on his stick, and taking such short, laboured steps, that it was evident that the exercise
was almost too much for his strength.  Mollie longed to offer him the support of her strong
arm, but even her audacity failed at the sight of the grim face.  She looked inquiringly at
his feet, for the symptoms of temper all hinted to the explanation of gout.  But no! there
were no cloth shoes to be seen, only the trimmest of well-polished boots.

"Perhaps he is just recovering from an attack, or sickening for another," said Mollie to herself.
"Anyway, he is ill, poor old fellow, for his face looks quite grey, just like that poor Mr
Burgess before he died.  I expect he can't help being cross.  I should be horrid myself if
I were always in pain.  I remember that day I had on those new boots that hurt my feet, I quarrelled
with Ruth all the way home...  The question is, shall I talk, or let him alone?  If it were
me, I'd like to be amused, to make the time pass.  I'll try anyway, and see how he responds."

They had entered one of the smaller paths by this time, and to the right lay the wide, grey
surface of a lake dotted over by little islands, the largest of which was connected with the
shore by an ornamental bridge. Mollie felt a kind of possessive pride in the scene, and pointed
out the beauties thereof as eagerly as though she were the owner of all she surveyed.

"It's the largest lake in any of the parks in the north; some people say it is nearly as big
as the Serpentine.  I don't know, for I have never been in London.  In summer-time hundreds
of men come and sail boats-- quite great big boats--from side to side.  It looks so pretty
to see all the white sails floating about in the sunshine."

"Indeed!"

("Doesn't care for boats.  I'll try something else.") "Do you see that big island, the biggest
of all?" pursued the indefatigable Mollie aloud. "It is full of peacocks.  There are dozens
and dozens of peacocks!  You can see them sometimes strutting about with their tails spread
out, and roosting right up in the trees.  People say that peacocks are the laziest birds in
existence.  They go to rest earlier, and get up later than anything else."

"Indeed!"

Still grimmer silence; still slower and more halting footsteps. Presently the stranger stopped
short and asked abruptly--

"How far are we still from Langton Terrace?  Five minutes' walk--ten minutes?  We are more
than half-way, I suppose?"

"Not quite, I am afraid.  If you are tired, would you not rest on this seat for a few minutes?
It is really quite sheltered behind the trees. If you can tell me which end of the terrace
you want to reach, it will make a little difference in the way we ought to take.  There are
three blocks of houses, which are all known by the same name.  You wanted to go to--"

"Number 7," said the stranger; and sat down heavily upon the seat.  He leant both hands on
his stick and rested his chin upon them, as though thankful for the support; and Mollie stood
before him staring fixedly at his face.

Aquiline features, sharpened by suffering into yet finer lines, closely- set lips drooping
out into lines of fretful impatience, sunken eyes beneath overhanging brows.  She studied them
one by one, until, struck by her silence, the old man looked up in surprise.

"Number 7, I said.  If you live in the neighbourhood, you may know the house, and possibly
its inmates?"

"Yes, I know them all; they are nice people and very kind to me.  I've known them quite a number
of years."

"Mr and Mrs Connor have a large family, I believe--a number of young children."

"Oh, dozens!" replied Mollie easily.  She was enjoying herself intensely, but trying to preserve
an appearance of innocent calm.  "What an adventure," she was saying to herself--"oh, what
an adventure.  What fun to tell it all to Ruth and the girls!  I must remember every word,
so as to repeat it in style!"  Aloud, she added carelessly, "There are two girls, and lots
of little boys.  It seems as if there were boys, boys everywhere, wherever you turn all over
the house; but they are ubiquitous creatures, so perhaps there are not quite so many as it
seems.  They are handsome little fellows, and I believe clever too. Mrs Connor is a very pretty
woman, and always kind and gentle. Everybody likes her.  Mr Connor is nice too.  I don't think
he is at all strong, and he has to work very hard for that big family."

"Indeed!"  The strange old man did not display the slightest sign of sympathy for Mr Connor's
anxieties.  He relaxed his hold of the stick, and sank wearily against the back of the seat.
"There are two step- daughters, I believe--the two Miss Farrells?"

"Ah!" exclaimed Mollie deeply.  It was quite a tragic note, as who should say, "Now we are
beginning to talk!  Now, at last, we reach the real point of the discussion!  Just that deep
`Ah,' and no more, until perforce another question must be asked.

"You know the Miss Farrells also?"

"I do!"

"And find them as attractive as the rest of the family?"

"Oh, more--much more!  They are darlings!" cried Mollie, with unction, "especially the younger.
Her name is Mary, but they call her Mollie, because it suits her better.  Don't you always
imagine a Mollie very sweet, and charming, and attractive?"

"I can't say that I have devoted any attention to the subject.  So Mary is the younger of the
two, is she?  And the elder?"

"Ruth! she's pretty and serious, and very, very nice; but Mollie is nicer, all the same.  When
you get to know them, you must promise to like Mollie best, for my sake!  I'm so fond of her,
that I want everybody to be the same.  I like her better than anyone I ever knew!"

The old man smiled grimly.

"You appear to be of an enthusiastic temperament; I fancy I shall prefer to judge for myself
when I make the young lady's acquaintance.  We had better be getting on now.  I am sorry to
hinder your progress, but it is not possible for me to move more quickly at present.  I should
not have attempted the walk if I had known that it was so long; but the cab jolted insufferably,
and the sunshine was tempting.  Well,--there is nothing for it but to make another effort!"

He pressed his hands on the seat to lighten the effort of rising, but before he had got any
further, Mollie stepped forward eagerly, and laid a hand on his shoulder.  Her cheeks were
flushed with colour, her eyes a-sparkle with excitement.

"Unless you will let me help you! ...  I'm very strong; I could support you easily, if you
would take my arm and lean on me.  I'd love to do it. Do let me?  Won't you,--Uncle Bernard?"

CHAPTER FIVE.

AN INVITATION.

The old man fell backward on the seat with an exclamation of keenest surprise.  His sunken
eyes stared into Mollie's face as she bent over him; at the golden hair curling beneath the
dark toque, the grey eyes, the curving lips.  Each feature in turn was scrutinised as if he
were searching for something familiar which had so far escaped notice. Apparently it was not
discovered, for the expression of amazement deepened upon his face, and he asked sharply--

"What did you say?  What did you call me?  I don't understand what you can mean!"

Mollie sat down on the bench, and smiled brightly into his face.

"Uncle Bernard!  You are Uncle Bernard Farrell!  I knew you the moment you said that you were
going to Number 7, and asked if I knew the Connors.  Of course I know them, because I am--"
She hesitated, and Mr Farrell finished the sentence for her.

"You are one of Mr Connor's daughters.  The eldest, I presume.  I have not the pleasure of
knowing your name."

"No-o!  I am not Trix.  She is a child, only fifteen.  I was nineteen on my last birthday.
I am,"--for once in her life Mollie had the grace to blush, and looked a trifle discomposed--"I'm
Mollie Farrell."

The glance which the old man cast upon her was the reverse of flattering.

"You are Mollie Farrell, are you?" he repeated coldly.  "Evidently modesty is not one of your
failings, young lady.  It might have been wiser if you had allowed me to discover your attractions
for myself.  Do you consider it quite honest--we will not discuss the question of good taste--to
play a double part, and criticise your relations to any stranger whom you may meet in your walks?"

"You asked me; you began it!  I should not have mentioned them if you had not asked that question.
Then I recognised you, and thought it would be fun.  You were not a stranger, you see; you
were Uncle Bernard."

"That may be my name, but as I have never seen you before, I can hardly rank as a friend. 
May I ask how you came to recognise me at all?"

"Oh yes!  We have your portraits at home, and mother often talks of you, and the happy times
she had when she used to visit you with father when they were engaged.  When we were children
it was a favourite game for one of us to be Uncle Bernard, and the other guests staying at
the Court, and we used to go through all the adventures which father had as a boy,--fall into
the mill-stream and be rescued by the dog, and be chased by the bull in the long meadow, and
ride on the top of the waggons at the harvest home. Meanwhile prepared Mathilde did
a wonderful soup is into all sorts of delicious herbs and spices, and when she had been inflicting,
she placed the diamond ring, which the Knights to their pledge of loyalty, in the shell and apply
said the servant.  She has not much fun in her life
now, poor dear, and that makes her think all the more of her youth.  We envy her, Ruth and
Trix and I, because we have a very quiet time at home.  We are poor, you see.  You can't have
much fun if you are poor."

"You think that riches are the one thing needful; that if you had enough money your happiness
would be assured?"

"Ah!" sighed Mollie rapturously.  "How happy I should be!  I've never had enough money for
my wants in all my life, so I can't even imagine the bliss of it.  I should not know how to
be happy enough."

The old man looked at her silently.  She saw that he was about to speak, but the words were
long in coming.  A cloud had drifted across the sun, and the stretch of park looked suddenly
grey and bare.  Mollie drew her shoulders together with an involuntary shiver.  Something had
suddenly damped her ardour of enthusiasm; but it was not so much the bleak wind as the sight
of the face gazing into her own, with its set lips, and bleached, joyless expression.  For
years to come Mollie could recall that moment, and feel again the chill in her veins with which
she listened to his reply.

"All my life long," said Bernard Farrell slowly, "all my life everything that I have touched
has turned to gold, and everyone I have loved,"--he paused, lingering on the word, and again
Mollie shivered in sympathetic understanding--"everyone whom I have loved has died!"  The wind
seemed to take up the word, and repeat it in melancholy echo.  "Died! died! died!" wailed the
trees, tossing drearily to and fro.  "Died!" shivered the ripple over the cold grey lake. 
The clouds gathered in a pall overhead.

"I'm sorry!" gasped Mollie faintly--"I'm so sorry!"  But Mr Farrell stopped her with a hasty
gesture.

"Please spare me protestations of sympathy.  They were the last thing I wished to evoke.  I
merely wished to impress upon you that I am in a unique position for judging the worth of riches.--Is
it your pleasure that we continue our journey?  The afternoon is growing chill."

Mollie rose in confusion, but she did not reply, nor make any further offer of support.  There
was something in the old man's voice which forbade familiarities.  He was no longer merely
cross and unamiable; she had caught a glimpse into the secret of a desolate heart, and the
sight sobered her youthful spirits.

"First his wife," she said to herself, as she led the way onward--"pretty Aunt Edna, whom mother
loved so much.  He adored her, and they were never parted for a day till she took typhoid,
and died. The banquet began, our friendly host flew
to meet his coming, and when the door-keeper rang, he always believed, the unknown Bride was
at the door, but it was opened, was a prelate, a solemn matron or a venerable face official
start.

"She says the real Uncle Bernard died with Ned.  He seemed to disappear from that day, and
an entirely different person appeared in his place. He had been kind and hospitable, fond of
having people around him and making them happy; but after that he shut himself up and became
a regular hermit.  Then he went abroad, and since he came back four years ago and reopened
the Court, he has written to nobody, and nobody has seen him.  But he has come to see us to-day
of his own free will.  I wonder why?  Something has happened to make him break the silence.
What can it have been?"

