Caerdaff was a place difficult of access by land, the nearest railroad stations being fifteen
or twenty miles away; but on the day after the arrival of the Syndicate's fleet in the offing,
thousands of people made their way to this part of the country, anxious to see--if perchance
they might find an opportunity to safely see--what might happen at ten o'clock the next morning.
Officers of the army and navy, Government officials, press correspondents, in great numbers,
and curious and anxious observers of all classes, hastened to the Welsh coast.

The little towns where the visitors left the trains were crowded to overflowing, and every
possible conveyance, by which the mountains lying back of Caerdaff could be reached, was eagerly
secured, many persons, however, being obliged to depend upon their own legs.  Soon after sunrise
of the appointed day the forts, the village, and the surrounding lower country were entirely
deserted, and every point of vantage on the mountains lying some miles back from the coast
was occupied by excited spectators, nearly every one armed with a field-glass.

A few of the guns from the fortifications were transported to an overlooking height, in order
that they might be brought into action in case the repeller, instead of bombarding, should
send men in boats to take possession of the evacuated fortifications, or should attempt any
mining operations.  The gunners for this battery were stationed at a safe place to the rear,
whence they could readily reach their guns if necessary.

The next day was one of supreme importance to the Syndicate.  On this day it must make plain
to the world, not only what the motor-bomb could do, but that the motor-bomb did what was done.
Before leaving the English Channel the director of Repeller No. 11 had received telegraphic
advices from both Europe and America, indicating the general drift of public opinion in regard
to the recent sea-fight; and, besides these, many English and continental papers had been brought
to him from the French coast.

From all these the director perceived that the cause of the Syndicate had in a certain way
suffered from the manner in which the battle in the channel had been conducted.  Every newspaper
urged that if the repeller carried guns capable of throwing the bombs which the Syndicate professed
to use, there was no reason why every ship in the British fleet should not have been destroyed.
But as the repeller had not fired a single shot at the fleet, and as the battle had been fought
entirely by the crabs, there was every reason to believe that if there were such things as
motor-guns, their range was very short, not as great as that of the ordinary dynamite cannon.
The great risk run by one of the crabs in order to disable a dynamite gun-boat seemed an additional
proof of this.

It was urged that the explosions in the water might have been produced by torpedoes; that the
torpedo-boat which had been destroyed was so near the repeller that an ordinary shell was sufficient
to accomplish the damage that had been done.

To gainsay these assumptions was imperative on the Syndicate's forces. To firmly establish
the prestige of the instantaneous motor was the object of the war.  Crabs were of but temporary
service.  Any nation could build vessels like them, and there were many means of destroying
them.  The spring armour was a complete defence against ordinary artillery, but it was not
a defence against submarine torpedoes.  The claims of the Syndicate could be firmly based on
nothing but the powers of absolute annihilation possessed by the instantaneous motor-bomb.

About nine o'clock on the appointed morning, Repeller No. 11, much to the surprise of the spectators
on the high grounds with field-glasses and telescopes, steamed away from Caerdaff.  What this
meant nobody knew, but the naval military observers immediately suspected that the Syndicate's
vessel had concentrated attention upon Caerdaff in order to go over to Ireland to do some sort
of mischief there.  It was presumed that the crabs accompanied her, but as they were now at
their fighting depth it was impossible to see them at so great a distance.

But it was soon perceived that Repeller No. 11 had no intention of running away, nor of going
over to Ireland.  From slowly cruising about four or five miles off shore, she had steamed
westward until she had reached a point which, according to the calculations of her scientific
corps, was nine marine miles from Caerdaff.  There she lay to against a strong breeze from
the east.

It was not yet ten o'clock when the officer in charge of the starboard gun remarked to the
director that he suppose that it would not be necessary to give the smoke signals, as had been
done in the channel, as now all the crabs were lying near them.  The director reflected a moment,
and then ordered that the signals should be given at every discharge of the gun, and that the
columns of black smoke should be shot up to their greatest height.

At precisely ten o'clock, up rose from Repeller No.  11 two tall jets of black smoke.  Up rose
from the promontory of Caerdaff, a heavy gray cloud, like an immense balloon, and then the
people on the hill-tops and highlands felt a sharp shock of the ground and rocks beneath them,
and heard the sound of a terrible but momentary grinding crush.

As the cloud began to settle, it was borne out to sea by the wind, and then it was revealed
that the fortifications of Caerdaff had disappeared.

In ten minutes there was another smoke signal, and a great cloud over the castellated structure
on the other side of the bay.  The cloud passed away, leaving a vacant space on the other side
of the bay.

The second shock sent a panic through the crowd of spectators.  The next earthquake bomb might
strike among them.  Down the eastern slopes ran hundreds of them, leaving only a few of the
bravest civilians, the reporters of the press, and the naval and military men.

The next motor-bomb descended into the fishing village, the comminuted particles of which,
being mostly of light material, floated far out to sea.

The detachment of artillerists who had been deputed to man the guns on the heights which commanded
the bay had been ordered to fall back to the mountains as soon as it had been seen that it
was not the intention of the repeller to send boats on shore.  The most courageous of the spectators
trembled a little when the fourth bomb was discharged, for it came farther inland, and struck
the height on which the battery had been placed, removing all vestiges of the guns, caissons,
and the ledge of rock on which they had stood.

The motor-bombs which the repeller was now discharging were of the largest size and greatest
power, and a dozen more of them were discharged at intervals of a few minutes.  The promontory
on which the fortifications had stood was annihilated, and the waters of the bay swept over
its foundations.  Soon afterward the head of the bay seemed madly rushing out to sea, but quickly
surged back to fill the chasm which yawned at the spot where the village had been.

The dense clouds were now upheaved at such short intervals that the scene of devastation was
completely shut out from the observers on the hills; but every few minutes they felt a sickening
shock, and heard a momentary and horrible crash and hiss which seemed to fill all the air.
The instantaneous motor-bombs were tearing up the sea-board, and grinding it to atoms.

It was not yet noon when the bombardment ceased.  No more puffs of black smoke came up from
the distant repeller, and the vast spreading mass of clouds moved seaward, dropping down upon
St. George's Channel in a rain of stone dust.  Then the repeller steamed shoreward, and when
she was within three or four miles of the coast she ran up a large white flag in token that
her task was ended.

This sign that the bombardment had ceased was accepted in good faith; and as some of the military
and naval men had carefully noted that each puff from the repeller was accompanied by a shock,
it was considered certain that all the bombs which had been discharged had acted, and that,
consequently, no further danger was to be apprehended from them. In spite of this announcement
many of the spectators would not leave their position on the hills, but a hundred or more of
curious and courageous men ventured down into the plain.

That part of the sea-coast where Caerdaff had been was a new country, about which men wandered
slowly and cautiously with sudden exclamations, of amazement and awe.  There were no longer
promontories jutting out into the sea; there were no hillocks and rocky terraces rising inland.
In a vast plain, shaven and shorn down to a common level of scarred and pallid rock, there
lay an immense chasm two miles and a half long, half a mile wide, and so deep that shuddering
men could stand and look down upon the rent and riven rocks upon which had rested that portion
of the Welsh coast which had now blown out to sea.

An officer of the Royal Engineers stood on the seaward edge of this yawning abyss; then he
walked over to the almost circular body of water which occupied the place where the fishing
village had been, and into which the waters of the bay had flowed.  When this officer returned
to London he wrote a report to the effect that a ship canal, less than an eighth of a mile
long, leading from the newly formed lake at the head of the bay, would make of this chasm,
when filled by the sea, the finest and most thoroughly protected inland basin for ships of
all sizes on the British coast.  But before this report received due official consideration
the idea had been suggested and elaborated in a dozen newspapers.

Accounts and reports of all kinds describing the destruction of Caerdaff, and of the place
in which it had stood, filled the newspapers of the world.  Photographs and pictures of Caerdaff
as it had been and as it then was were produced with marvellous rapidity, and the earthquake
bomb of the American War Syndicate was the subject of excited conversation in every civilized
country.

The British Ministry was now the calmest body of men in Europe.  The great opposition storm
had died away, the great war storm had ceased, and the wisest British statesmen saw the unmistakable
path of national policy lying plain and open before them.  There was no longer time for arguments
and struggles with opponents or enemies, internal or external.  There was even no longer time
for the discussion of measures.  It was the time for the adoption of a measure which indicated
itself, and which did not need discussion.

On the afternoon of the day of the bombardment of Caerdaff, Repeller No. 11, accompanied by
her crabs, steamed for the English Channel.  Two days afterward there lay off the coast at
Brighton, with a white flag floating high above her, the old Tallapoosa, now naval mistress
of the world.

Near by lay a cable boat, and constant communication by way of France was kept up between the
officers of the American Syndicate and the repeller.  In a very short time communications were
opened between the repeller and London.

When this last step became known to the public of America, almost as much excited by the recent
events as the public of England, a great disturbance arose in certain political circles.  It
was argued that the Syndicate had no right to negotiate in any way with the Government of England;
that it had been empowered to carry on a war; and that, if its duties in this regard had been
satisfactorily executed, it must now retire, and allow the United States Government to attend
to its foreign relations.

But the Syndicate was firm.  It had contracted to bring the war to a satisfactory conclusion.
When it considered that this had been done, it would retire and allow the American Government,
with whom the contract had been made, to decide whether or not it had been properly performed.

The unmistakable path of national policy which had shown itself to the wisest British statesmen
appeared broader and plainer when the overtures of the American War Syndicate had been received
by the British Government.  The Ministry now perceived that the Syndicate had not waged war;
it had been simply exhibiting the uselessness of war as at present waged.  Who now could deny
that it would be folly to oppose the resources of ordinary warfare to those of what might be
called prohibitive warfare.

Another idea arose in the minds of the wisest British statesmen.  If prohibitive warfare were
a good thing for America, it would be an equally good thing for England.  More than that, it
would be a better thing if only these two countries possessed the power of waging prohibitive
warfare.

In three days a convention of peace was concluded between Great Britain and the American Syndicate
acting for the United States, its provisions being made subject to such future treaties and
alliances as the governments of the two nations might make with each other.  In six days after
the affair at Caerdaff, a committee of the American War Syndicate was in London, making arrangements,
under the favourable auspices of the British Government, for the formation of an Anglo-American
Syndicate of War.

The Atlantic Ocean now sprang into new life.  It seemed impossible to imagine whence had come
the multitude of vessels which now steamed and sailed upon its surface.  Among these, going
westward, were six crabs, and the spring-armoured vessel, once the Tallapoosa, going home to
a triumphant reception, such as had never before been accorded to any vessel, whether of war
or peace.

The blockade of the Canadian port, which had been effectively maintained without incident,
was now raised, and the Syndicate's vessels proceeded to an American port.

The British ironclad, Adamant, at the conclusion of peace was still in tow of Crab C, and off
the coast of Florida.  A vessel was sent down the coast by the Syndicate to notify Crab C of
what had occurred, and to order it to tow the Adamant to the Bermudas, and there deliver her
to the British authorities.  The vessel sent by the Syndicate, which was a fast coast-steamer,
had scarcely hove in sight of the objects of her search when she was saluted by a ten-inch
shell from the Adamant, followed almost immediately by two others.  The commander of the Adamant
had no idea that the war was at an end, and had never failed, during his involuntary cruise,
to fire at anything which bore the American flag, or looked like an American craft.

Fortunately the coast steamer was not struck, and at the top of her speed retired to a greater
distance, whence the Syndicate officer on board communicated with the crab by smoke signals.

During the time in which Crab C had had charge of the Adamant no communication had taken place
between the two vessels.  Whenever an air-pipe had been elevated for the purpose of using therein
a speaking-tube, a volley from a machine-gun on the Adamant was poured upon it, and after several
pipes had been shot away the director of the crab ceased his efforts to confer with those on
the ironclad.  It had been necessary to place the outlets of the ventilating apparatus of the
crab under the forward ends of some of the upper roof-plates.

When Crab C had received her orders, she put about the prow of the great warship, and proceeded
to tow her north-eastward, the commander of the Adamant taking a parting crack with his heaviest
stern-gun at the vessel which had brought the order for his release.

All the way from the American coast to the Bermuda Islands, the great Adamant blazed, thundered,
and roared, not only because her commander saw, or fancied he saw, an American vessel, but
to notify all crabs, repellers, and any other vile invention of the enemy that may have been
recently put forth to blemish the sacred surface of the sea, that the Adamant still floated,
with the heaviest coat of mail and the finest and most complete armament in the world, ready
to sink anything hostile which came near enough--but not too near.

When the commander found that he was bound for the Bermudas, he did not understand it, unless,
indeed, those islands had been captured by the enemy.  But he did not stop firing.  Indeed,
should he find the Bermudas under the American flag, he would fire at that flag and whatever
carried it, as long as a shot or a shell or a charge of powder remained to him.

But when he reached British waters, and slowly entering St. George's harbour, saw around him
the British flag floating as proudly as it floated above his own great ship, he confessed himself
utterly bewildered; but he ordered the men at every gun to stand by their piece until he was
boarded by a boat from the fort, and informed of the true state of affairs.

But even then, when weary Crab C raised herself from her fighting depth, and steamed to a dock,
the commander of the Adamant could scarcely refrain from sending a couple of tons of iron into
the beastly sea-devil which had had the impertinence to tow him about against his will.

No time was lost by the respective Governments of Great Britain and the United States in ratifying
the peace made through the Syndicate, and in concluding a military and naval alliance, the
basis of which should be the use by these two nations, and by no other nations, of the instantaneous
motor.  The treaty was made and adopted with much more despatch than generally accompanies
such agreements between nations, for both Governments felt the importance of placing themselves,
without delay, in that position from which, by means of their united control of paramount methods
of warfare, they might become the arbiters of peace.

The desire to evolve that power which should render opposition useless had long led men from
one warlike invention to another.  Every one who had constructed a new kind of gun, a new kind
of armour, or a new explosive, thought that he had solved the problem, or was on his way to
do so.  The inventor of the instantaneous motor had done it.

The treaty provided that all subjects concerning hostilities between either or both of the
contracting powers and other nations should be referred to a Joint High Commission, appointed
by the two powers; and if war should be considered necessary, it should be prosecuted and conducted
by the Anglo-American War Syndicate, within limitations prescribed by the High Commission.

The contract made with the new Syndicate was of the most stringent order, and contained every
provision that ingenuity or foresight of man could invent or suggest to make it impossible
for the Syndicate to transfer to any other nation the use of the instantaneous motor.

Throughout all classes in sympathy with the Administrative parties of Great Britain and the
United States there was a feeling of jubilant elation on account of the alliance and the adoption
by the two nations of the means of prohibitive warfare.  This public sentiment acted even upon
the opposition; and the majority of army and navy officers in the two countries felt bound
to admit that the arts of war in which they had been educated were things of the past.  Of
course there were members of the army and navy in both countries who deprecated the new state
of things.  But there were also men, still living, who deprecated the abolition of the old
wooden seventy-four gun ship.

