INTRODUCTION

I was not more than ten years old when I first heard mention of the Quakers. The grown-ups
of my family were talking among themselves, speaking of an uncle of mine who lived in Philadelphia
and operated a pharmacy near the university. I had never seen this uncle and was curious about
him, so my ears were open. Presently a reference to the Quakers caught my attention. I wanted
to know who the Quakers were. What was told me then I have remembered ever since. The Quakers,
I was told, are people who wait for the spirit to move them.

A picture formed in my mind. Many a time I had seen my grandmother sitting quietly, an aura
of peace around her as she sewed or crocheted or did her beautiful embroidery work. So I pictured
older people, most of them with white hair like my grandparents, all with kindly faces, gathered
in silent assembly, heads bent slightly forward, waiting to be moved. It never occurred to
me that young people, boys and girls of my age and even younger, might be present and participating.

As the word "spirit" meant nothing definite to me, I could have no idea of just what would
move the Quakers, but I had a sense that it would be something within them, perhaps like the
stirrings that sometimes moved me, and I may have had a vague notion that this something within
them was somehow related to what people called God. I never thought to ask what the Quakers
might do after they were moved.

Had I been invited in those days to attend a Friends meeting for worship I would have gladly
gone. I would have gone because my picturings had given me good feelings about the Quakers.
I would have gone because, young though I was, I liked to be silent now and again. For he had
a good sum in the hands of Lombard merchants; having made over to them spoils of war, ransoms,
and arrears when he obtained them; and having at times earned something by exercising his craft,
which he said had been most valuable to him. Indeed he thought he could show Stephen and Tibble
a few fresh arts he had picked up at Milan.

Meantime his first desire was to see Aldonza.

She was still at Chelsea with her mistress, and Ambrose, to his brother's regret, went thither every
day, partly because he could not keep away, and partly to try to be of use to the family. Giles
might accompany him, though he still looked so absorbed in his trouble
that it was doubtful whether he had really understood what was passing,
or that he was wanted to bring about an interview between his companion
and Aldonza. Such religion as I had was life-centered, not book-centered, not church-centered.
It arose from the well of life within me, and within my friends and parents. It arose from
the well of life within nature and the human world. It consisted in my response to flowers,
trees, birds, snow, the smell of the earth after a spring rain, sunsets and the starry sky.
It consisted in my devotion to pet rabbits and dogs, and to some interest or project that caught
my imagination.

I had been taught several formal prayers. One of these I said every night, regularly, before
getting into bed. But I am thinking of the unformed prayers that welled up in me whenever I
had need of them. I had been read some stories from the Bible and some of the psalms, and from
these I had doubtless gained attitudes of reverence. But I am thinking of the worship that
spontaneously arose as I beheld the wonders of the world which God created. Young eyes are
new eyes, and to new eyes all things are fresh, vivid, original.

It is sometimes asked if children and young people are capable of the religious life. Certainly
they are not capable of sustained effort towards an unswerving aim. Certainly they cannot hold
themselves to a consistent discipline. They cannot engage in the religious life as a conscious
way of living. These abilities come only as we grow up and subject ourselves to training. But,
just as certainly, young people do have religious experiences, and these often are more vivid
and glowing than those of the elders. That is it--children can glow. They can light up. This
capacity to glow is at the very heart of what we are talking about.

To be sure, people young and old need instruction. We need instruction in the Bible, in poetry,
in all literature that contains truth and beauty. We need to be helped to struggle against
our faults, to overcome our imperfections. And we need to be curbed on occasion, as the only
way in which we may eventually become able to curb ourselves. But it should not be forgotten
that all people, especially young people, have poetry in them. And, more than that, according
to the faith of the Friends all people have within them something of the very spirit that created
the scriptures.

Religious education, it seems to me, is on the wrong track if it assumes that religion is something
that must be drilled into people. Giles, who had been horrified rather than hardened by the experiences
of Rome, was found trustworthy and rose in command. The troop was sent to take charge of the
Pope at Orvieto, and thus it was that he had fallen in with the Englishmen of Gardiner's suite,
and had been able to send his letter to Ambrose. Since he had found the means of rising out
of the slough, he had made up his mind to continue to serve till he had won some honour, and
had obtained enough to prevent his return as a hungry beggar.

Had a Friend approached me in those days with some such understanding and assurance, and had
I been able to understand what he said, I would have had still another reason, and this a compelling
one, for attending a meeting for worship. And so I would have gone. I'd have sat there with
the others, feeling much at home, perhaps feeling I was in a holy place. I'd have sat as quietly
as any for the first ten or fifteen minutes. I would not have worshiped in any formal sense,
for I had not been taught any form. But I would have practiced my kind of inwardness, thinking
my own thoughts as I did when alone, dreaming wonderful dreams, feeling a life stir within
me. Had there been a spoken message or two, I would have listened attentively, tried to understand,
and honestly responded.

Presently, however, I would have begun to fidget. Not knowing what I should try to do in a
meeting for worship, I would have had nothing to fall back on when my thoughts ran out, no
purpose for curbing my increasing restlessness. Through the windows my eyes would have caught
sight of the world outdoors, and I'd have wished I were out there having fun with the boys.
Time would have dragged. "For the future," he said, "it depended on how he found things." If Aldonza
would none of him, he should return to the Emperor's service.

If she would go with him, he held such a position that he could provide
for her honourably. Or he could settle in England. Why
is silence desirable? What is the main idea behind the Friends manner of worship? It is true
that Quakers wait for the spirit to move them. Why wait? Wouldn't it be better just to go ahead?
Besides waiting, what more is to be done? Can we not pray and worship when we are alone, or
as we go about our daily affairs? Why is it necessary to meet together? What is worship?

These are not questions that you answer once and for all. You continue to think about them
and continue to increase your understanding. But it helps us to think if we put our thoughts
in order and study the thoughts of others. So I am going to write down some of the thoughts
that have come to me. We shall think about worship and the central faith of the Friends, and
let the answers come as they may.

WORSHIP AND LOVE

