About Peggy Saville, by Mrs George de Horne Vaizey.

I have used part of the same introduction for this book, as I did for one of the books about
Pixie O'Shaughnessy, not because the books are anything like the same, but because the observations
are equally valid.

Some older children are being educated at a Vicarage near Brighton, along with the vicar's
own three. Peggy Saville is a "new girl", having previously lived in India, where her parents
still are. She has great talent in some directions, but still has to add up by counting on
her fingers! She certainly gets up to some tricks, though.

There is a fire at a dance given by the titled family of one of the pupils, from which Peggy
rescues the daughter of the house. Both girls are injured, Peggy the more severely, but eventually
they are both on the way to recovery.

ABOUT PEGGY SAVILLE, BY MRS GEORGE DE HORNE VAIZEY.

CHAPTER ONE.

A NEW INMATE.

The afternoon post had come in, and the Vicar of Renton stood in the bay window of his library
reading his budget of letters.  He was a tall, thin man, with a close-shaven face, which had
no beauty of feature, but which was wonderfully attractive all the same.  It was not an old
face, but it was deeply lined, and those who knew and loved him best could tell the meaning
of each of those eloquent tracings.  The deep vertical mark running up the forehead meant sorrow.
It had been stamped there for ever on the night when Hubert, his first-born, had been brought
back, cold and lifeless, from the river to which he had hurried forth but an hour before, a
picture of happy boyhood.  The vicar's brow had been smooth enough before that day.  The furrow
was graven to the memory of Teddy, the golden-haired lad who had first taught him the joys
of fatherhood.  The network of lines about the eyes were caused by the hundred and one little
worries of everyday life, and the strain of working a delicate body to its fullest pitch; and
the two long, deep streaks down the cheeks bore testimony to that happy sense of humour which
showed the bright side of a question, and helped him out of many a slough of despair.  This
afternoon, as he stood reading his letters one by one, the different lines deepened, or smoothed
out, according to the nature of the missive.  Now he smiled, now he sighed, anon he crumpled
up his face in puzzled thought, until the last letter of all was reached, when he did all three
in succession, ending up with a low whistle of surprise--

"Edith!  This is from Mrs Saville.  Just look at this!"

Instantly there came a sound of hurried rising from the other end of the room; a work-basket
swayed to and fro on a rickety gipsy-table, and the vicar's wife walked towards him, rolling
half a dozen reels of thread in her wake with an air of fine indifference.

"Mrs Saville!" she exclaimed eagerly.  "How is my boy?" and without waiting for an answer she
seized the letter, and began to devour its contents, while her husband went stooping about
over the floor picking up the contents of the scattered basket and putting them carefully back
in their places.  He smiled to himself as he did so, and kept turning amused, tender glances
at his wife as she stood in the uncarpeted space in the window, with the sunshine pouring in
on her eager face.  Mrs Asplin had been married for twenty years, and was the mother of three
big children; but such was the buoyancy of her Irish nature and the irrepressible cheeriness
of her heart, that she was in good truth the youngest person in the house, so that her own
daughters were sometimes quite shocked at her levity of behaviour, and treated her with gentle,
motherly restraint.  She was tall and thin, like her husband, and he, at least, considered
her every whit as beautiful as she had been a score of years before.  Her hair was dark and
curly; she had deep-set grey eyes, and a pretty fresh complexion.  When she was well, and rushing
about in her usual breathless fashion, she looked like the sister of her own tall girls; and
when she was ill, and the dark lines showed under her eyes, she looked like a tired, wearied
girl, but never for a moment as if she deserved such a title as an old, or elderly, woman.
Now, as she read, her eyes glowed, and she uttered ecstatic little exclamations of triumph
from time to time; for Arthur Saville, the son of the lady who was the writer of the letter,
had been the first pupil whom her husband had taken into his house to coach, and as such had
a special claim on her affection.  For the first dozen years of their marriage all had gone
smoothly with Mr and Mrs Asplin, and the vicar had had more work than he could manage in his
busy city parish; then, alas, lung trouble had threatened; he had been obliged to take a year's
rest, and to exchange his living for a sleepy little parish, where he could breathe fresh air,
and take life at a slower pace.  Illness, the doctor's bills, the year's holiday, ran away
with a large sum of money; the stipend of the country church was by no means generous, and
the vicar was lamenting the fact that he was shortest of money just when his children were
growing up and he needed it most, when an old college friend requested, as a favour, that he
would undertake the education of his only son, for a year at least, so that the boy might be
well grounded in his studies before going on to the military tutor who was to prepare him for
Sandhurst. Handsome terms were quoted, the vicar looked upon the offer as a leading of Providence,
and Arthur Saville's stay at the vicarage proved a success in every sense of the word.  He
was a clever boy who was not afraid of work, and the vicar discovered in himself an unsuspected
genius for teaching.  Arthur's progress not only filled him with delight, but brought the offer
of other pupils, so that he was but the forerunner of a succession of bright, handsome boys,
who came from far and wide to be prepared for college, and to make their home at the vicarage.
They were honest, healthy-minded lads, and Mrs Asplin loved them all, but no one had ever taken
Arthur Saville's place. 1807-25. His notes reprinted separately. Leipsic. 1824.

MEMOIR OF SÆVIUS NICANOR

Saevius Nicanor Marci libertus negabit

"She went to the tailor's To buy him a coat; When she came back He was riding the goat."

Sævius Nicanor, one of the earliest of the Grammarians, says Suetonius,
first acquired fame and reputation by his teaching; and, besides,
made commentaries, the greater part of which, however, were said to
have been borrowed.

He also wrote a satire, in which he informs us that he was a free man, and had a double cognomen.

It
is reported that in consequence of some aspersion attached to the character of his writing, he
retired into Sardinia, and, says Oriphyles, devoted the remainder of his days to the composition
of sardonic[1] literature.

[Footnote 1: Ackermann reads "Sardinian." It is not certain whether the adjective employed
is [Greek: sardanios] or [Greek: sardanikos]. I suspect that Oriphyles here makes an intentional
play upon the words.]

He is quoted by Macrobius, whereas divers references to Nicanor in La Haulte Histoire de Jurgen
would seem to show that this writer was viewed with considerable esteem in mediæval times. Latterly
his work has been virtually unknown.

PROLEGOMENA
Nec caput habentia, nec caudam

"I had a little husband, no bigger
than my thumb, I put him in my pint-pot, and there I bid him drum."

Pre-eminently
the most engaging feature of a topic which pure chance and impure
idiocy have of late conspired to pull about in the public prints,--I
mean the question of "indecency" in writing,--is the patent ease with
which this topic may be disposed of. Since time's beginning, every
age has had its literary taboos, selecting certain things--more or
less arbitrarily, but usually some natural function--as the things
which must not be written about.  I know her heart is large
enough to mother my dear girl during my absence; and if strength and time will allow her to
undertake this fresh charge, I think she will be glad to help another mother by doing so. 
Peggy is bright and clever, like her brother, and strong on the whole, though her throat needs
care.  She is nearly fifteen--the age, I think, of your youngest girl--and we should be pleased
to pay the same terms as we did for Arthur.  Now, please, dear Mr Asplin, talk the matter over
with your wife, and let me know your decision as soon as possible."

Mrs Asplin dropped the letter on the floor, and turned to confront her husband.

"Well!"

"Well?"

"It is your affair, dear, not mine.  You would have the trouble.  Could you do with an extra
child in the house?"

"Yes, yes, so far as that goes.  The more the merrier.  I should like to help Arthur's mother,
but,"--Mrs Asplin leant her head on one side, and put on what her children described as her
"Ways and Means" expression. She was saying to herself,--"Clear out the box-room over the study.
Spare chest-of-drawers from dressing-room--cover a box with one of the old chintz curtains
for an ottoman--enamel the old blue furniture--new carpet and bedstead, say five or six pounds
outlay--yes!  I think I could make it pretty for five pounds!..."  The calculations lasted
for about two minutes, at the end of which time her brow cleared, she nodded brightly, and
said in a crisp, decisive tone, "Yes, we will take her! Arthur's throat was delicate too. 
She must use my gargle."

The vicar laughed softly.

"Ah!  I thought that would decide it.  I knew your soft heart would not be able to resist the
thought of the delicate throat!  Well, dear, if you are willing, so am I.  I am glad to make
hay while the sun shines, and lay by a little provision for the children.  How will they take
it, do you think?  They are accustomed to strange boys, but a girl will be a new experience.
She will come at once, I suppose, and settle down to work for the autumn.  Dear me! dear me!
It is the unexpected that happens.  I hope she is a nice child."

"Of course she is.  She is Arthur's sister.  Come! the young folks are in the study.  Let us
go and tell them the news.  I have always said it was my ambition to have half a dozen children,
and now, at last, it is going to be gratified."

Mrs Asplin thrust her hand through her husband's arm, and led him down the wide, flagged hall,
towards the room whence the sound of merry young voices fell pleasantly upon the ear.

CHAPTER TWO.

MELLICENT'S PROPHECY.

The schoolroom was a long, bare apartment running along one side of the house, and boasting
three tall windows, through which the sun poured in on a shabby carpet and ink-stained tables.
Everything looked well worn and, to a certain extent, dilapidated, yet there was an air of
cheerful comfort about the whole which is not often found in rooms of the kind. Mrs Asplin
revelled in beautiful colours, and would tolerate no drab and saffron papers in her house;
so the walls were covered with a rich soft blue; the cushions on the wicker chairs rang the
changes from rose to yellow; a brilliant Japanese screen stood in one corner, and a wire stand
before the open grate held a number of flowering plants.  A young fellow of seventeen or eighteen
was seated at one end of the table employed in arranging a selection of foreign stamps.  This
was Maxwell, the vicar's eldest surviving son, who was to go up to Oxford at the beginning
of the year, and was at present reading under his father's supervision.  His sister Mellicent
was perched on the table itself, watching his movements, and vouchsafing scraps of advice.
Her suggestions were received with sniffs of scornful superiority, but Mellicent prattled on
unperturbed, being a plump, placid person, with flaxen hair, blue eyes, and somewhat obtuse
sensibilities.  The elder girl was sitting reading by the window, leaning her head on her hand,
and showing a long, thin face, comically like her father's, with the same deep lines running
down her cheeks. "Then you of Philistia have very foolish laws."

To which John the Scavenger sagely replied: "Ah, but if laws exist they ought to fairly and impartially
and without favoritism be enforced until amended or repealed.

Much of the unsettled condition prevailing in the country at the present time can be traced
directly to a lack of law enforcement in many directions during past years."

"Now I misdoubt if I understand you, Messire John, for your infinitives are split beyond comprehension.
And when you talk about the non-enforcement of anything in many directions,
even though these directions were during past years, I find it so
confusing that the one thing of which I can be quite certain is that
it was never you whom the law selected to pass upon and to amend all
books."  He had fair hair, curling over his forehead; bold blue eyes,
an aquiline nose, and an air of being very well satisfied with the world in general and himself
in particular.  This was Oswald Elliston, the son of a country squire, who had heard of the
successes of Mr Asplin's pupils, and was storing up disappointment for himself in expecting
similar exploits from his own handsome, but by no means over-brilliant, son.  The second pupil
had a small microscope in his hand, and was poring over a collection of "specimens," with his
shoulders hitched up to his ears, in a position the reverse of elegant.  Every now and then
he would bend his head to write down a few notes on the paper beside him, showing a square-chinned
face, with heavy eyebrows and strong roughly-marked features.  His clothes were worn, his cuffs
invisible, and his hair ruffled into wild confusion by the unconscious rubbings of his hands;
and this was the Honourable Robert Darcy, third son of Lord Darcy, a member of the Cabinet,
and a politician of world-wide reputation.

The servants at the vicarage were fond of remarking, apropos of the Honourable Robert, that
he "didn't look it"; which remark would have been a subject of sincere gratification to the
lad himself, had it been overheard; for there was no surer way of annoying him than by referring
to his position, or giving him the prefix to which he was entitled.

The young folks looked up inquiringly as Mr and Mrs Asplin entered the room, for the hour after
tea was set apart for recreation, and the elders were usually only too glad to remain in their
own quiet little sanctum.  Oswald, the gallant, sprang to his feet and brought forward a chair
for Mrs Asplin, but she waved him aside, and broke impetuously into words.

"Children! we have news for you.  You are going to have a new companion. Father has had a letter
this afternoon about another pupil--"

Mellicent yawned, and Esther looked calmly uninterested, but the three lads were full of interest.
Their faces turned towards the vicar with expressions of eager curiosity.

"A new fellow!  This term!  From what school, sir?"

"A ladies' boarding-school at Brighton!"  Mrs Asplin spoke rapidly, so as to be beforehand
with her husband, and her eyes danced with mischievous enjoyment, as she saw the dismay depicted
on the three watching faces.  A ladies' school!  Maxwell, Oswald, and Robert, had a vision
of a pampered pet in curls, and round jacket, and their backs stiffened in horrified indignation
at the idea that grown men of seventeen and eighteen should be expected to associate with a
"kid" from a ladies' school!

The vicar could not restrain a smile, but he hastened to correct the mistake.  "It's not a
`fellow' at all, this time.  It's a girl!  We have had a letter from Arthur Saville's mother,
asking us to look after her daughter while she is in India.  She will come to us very soon,
and stay, I suppose, for three or four years, sharing your lessons, my dears, and studying
with you--"

"A girl!  Good gracious!  Where will she sleep?" cried Mellicent, with characteristic matter-of-fact
curiosity, while Esther chimed in with further inquiries.

"What is her name?  How old is she?  What is she like?  When will she come?  Why is she leaving
school?"

"Not very happy.  Peggy.  In the little box-room over the study.  About fifteen, I believe.
Haven't the least idea.  In a few weeks from now," said Mrs Asplin, answering all the questions
at once in her impulsive fashion, the while she walked round the table, stroked Maxwell's curls,
bent an interested glance at Robert's collection, and laid a hand on Esther's back, to straighten
bowed shoulders.  "She is Arthur's sister, so she is sure to be nice, and both her parents
will be in India, so you must all be kind to the poor little soul, and give her a hearty welcome."

Silence!  Nobody had a word to say in response to this remark; but the eyes of the young people
met furtively across the table, and Mr Asplin felt that they were only waiting until their
seniors should withdraw before bursting into eager conversation.

"Better leave them to have it out by themselves," he whispered significantly to his wife; then
added aloud, "Well, we won't interrupt you any longer.  Don't turn the play-hour into work,
Rob!  You will study all the better for a little relaxation.  You have proved the truth of
that axiom, Oswald--eh?" and he went laughing out of the room, while Oswald held the door open
for his wife, smiling assent in lazy fashion.

"Another girl!" he exclaimed, as he reseated himself on his chair, and looked with satisfaction
at his well-shod feet.  "This is an unexpected blow!  A sister of the redoubtable Saville!
From all I have heard of him, I should imagine a female edition would be rather a terror in
a quiet household.  I never saw Saville,--what sort of a fellow was he to look at, don't you know?"

Mellicent reflected.

"He had a nose!" she said solemnly.  Then, as the others burst into hilarious laughter, "Oh,
it's no use shrieking at me; I mean what I say," she insisted.  "A big nose--like Wellington's!
When people are very clever, they always have big noses.  I imagine Peggy small, with a little
thin face, because she was born in India, and lived there until she was six years old, and
a great big nose in the middle--"

"Sounds appetising," said Maxwell shortly.  "I don't!  I imagine Peggy like her mother, with
blue eyes and brown hair.  Mrs Saville is awfully pretty.  I have seen her often, and if her
daughter is like her--"

"I don't care in the least how she looks," said Esther severely.  "It's her character that
matters.  Indian children are generally spoiled, and if she has been to a boarding-school she
may give herself airs.  Then we shall quarrel.  I am not going to be patronised by a girl of
fourteen. I expect she will be Mellicent's friend, not mine."

"I wonder what sums she is in!" said Mellicent dreamily.  "Rob! what do you think about it?
Are you glad or sorry?  You haven't said anything yet."

Robert raised his eyes from his microscope, and looked her up and down, very much as a big
Newfoundland dog looks at the terrier which disturbs its slumber.

"It's nothing to me," he said loftily.  "She may come if she likes." Then, with sudden recollection,
"Does she learn the violin?  Because we have already one girl in this house who is learning
the violin, and life won't be worth living if there is a second."

He tucked his big notebook under his chin as he spoke, and began sawing across it with a pencil,
wagging his head and rolling his eyes, in imitation of Mellicent's own manner of practising,
producing at the same time such long-drawn, catlike wails from between his closed lips as made
the listeners shriek with laughter.  Mellicent, however, felt bound to expostulate.

"It's not the tune at all," she cried loudly.  "Not like any of my pieces; and if I do roll
my eyes, I don't rumple up my hair and pull faces at the ceiling, as some people do, and I
know who they are, but I am too polite to say so!  I hope Peggy will be my friend, because
then there will be two of us, and you won't dare to tease me any more.  When Arthur was here,
a boy pulled my hair, and he carried him upstairs and held his head underneath the shower-bath."

"I'll pull it again, and see if Peggy will do the same," said Rob pleasantly; and poor Mellicent
stared from one smiling face to another, conscious that she was being laughed at, but unable
to see the point of the joke.

"When Peggy comes," she said, in an injured tone, "I hope she will be sympathetic.  I'm the
youngest, and I think you ought all to do what I want; instead of which you make fun, and laugh
among yourselves, and send me messages.  For instance, when Max wanted his stamps brought down--"

Maxwell passed his big hand over her hair and face, then, reversing the direction, rubbed up
the point of the little snub nose.

"Never mind, chubby, your day is over! Rat!!! The object of the writer is no less than to alarm
the whole nation by showing what we lose every year by the animals against whom he has made
such a dead set.

Not content with dilating on this fact in the body of his work, he puts what he calls "a startling
fact," upon the blue wrapper. "One pair of rats," he says, "with their progeny, will produce
in three years no less a number than six hundred and forty-six thousand
eight hundred and eight rats! which will consume, day by day, as much
food as sixty-four thousand six hundred and eighty men; leaving eight
rats to starve."

This, it must be admitted, is startling enough, but any one who has a cellar, or a corn-bin,
will be inclined to believe almost any tale, however strong, or to applaud any abuse, however
severe, which may be heaped upon that convicted thief, Rat.

Midnight burglaries, undetected by the new police, sink into insignificance
compared with the ravages of rats of the London sewers, which steal
and destroy more in one week, than the value of all the robberies
of plate that blaze away in the newspapers from year's end to year's
end.

And yet the plunderers go on almost unmolested. They are too knowing for traps, and arsenic seems
to be more fatal to human, than to quadrupedal victims. The French journals, the other day,
described a grand battue in the sewers of Paris, when thousands of
rats were captured and killed, and we heard of large sums cleared
by the sale of their skins--for these thieves go about like swell
mobsmen--very well clad.

But the example of our French brethren was not imitated in the modern
Babylon.

We neither spill blood on barricades above ground, nor in sewers
beneath it.

  Esther rearranged the scattered tea-things; Oswald
felt to see if his necktie was in position, and Robert hunched his shoulders and rolled his
eyes at Mellicent in distracting fashion.  Each one sat with head cocked on one side, in an
attitude of eager attention.  The front door banged, footsteps approached, and Mrs Asplin's
high, cheerful tones were heard drawing nearer and nearer.

"This way, dear," she was saying.  "They are longing to see you!"

The listeners gave a simultaneous gulp of excitement, the door opened, and--Peggy entered!

She was not in the least what they had expected!  This was neither the blonde beauty of Maxwell's
foretelling, nor the black-haired elf described by Mellicent.  The first glance was unmitigated
disappointment.

"She is not a bit pretty," was the mental comment of the two girls. "What a funny little soul!"
that of the three big boys, who had risen on Mrs Asplin's entrance, and now stood staring at
the new-comer with curious eyes.

Peggy was slight and pale, and at the first sight her face gave a comical impression of being
made up of a succession of peaks.  Her hair hung in a pigtail down her back, and grew in a
deep point on her forehead; her finely-marked eyebrows were shaped like eaves, and her chin
was for all the world like that of a playful kitten.  Even the velvet trimming on her dress
accentuated this peculiarity, as it zigzagged round the sleeves and neck.  The hazel eyes were
light and bright, and flitted from one figure to another with a suspicious twinkling; but nothing
could have been more composed, more demure, or patronisingly grown-up than the manner in which
this strange girl bore the scrutiny which was bent upon her.

"Here are your new friends, Peggy," cried Mrs Asplin cheerily.  "They always have tea by themselves
in the schoolroom, and do what they please from four to five o'clock.  Now just sit down, dear,
and take your place among them at once.  Esther will make room for you by her side, and introduce
you to the others.  I will leave you to make friends.  I know young people get on better when
they are left alone."

She whisked out of the room in her impetuous fashion, and Peggy Saville seated herself in the
midst of a ghastly silence.  The young people had been prepared to cheer and encourage a bashful
stranger, but the self-possession of this thin, pale-faced girl took them by surprise, so that
they sat round the table playing uncomfortably with teaspoons and knives, and irritably conscious
that they, and not the new-comer, were the ones to be overcome with confusion.  The silence
lasted for a good two minutes, and was broken at last by Miss Peggy herself.

"Cream and sugar!" she said, in a tone of sweet insinuation.  "Two lumps, if you please.  Not
very strong, and as hot as possible.  Thank you!  So sorry to be a trouble."

Esther fairly jumped with surprise, and seizing the teapot, filled the empty cup in haste.
Then she remembered the dreaded airs of the boarding-school miss, and her own vows of independence,
and made a gallant effort to regain composure.

"No trouble at all.  I hope that will be right.  Please help yourself. Bread--and--butter--scones--cake!
I must introduce you to the rest, and then you will feel more at home! To which the man of law replied,
still with a bewildering effect of talking very wisely and patiently: "Ah, but it does not matter
at all whether or not the function of eating is practised and is inevitable to the nature and
laws of our being. The law merely considers that any mention of eating is apt to inflame an improper
and lewd appetite, particularly in the young, who are always ready to eat: and therefore any
such mention is an obscene libel."
  She was not without hope that the imposing sound of the latter name would shake
the self-possession of the stranger, but Peggy inclined her head with the air of a queen, drawled
out a languid, "Pleased to see you!" and dropped her eyes with an air of indifference, which
seemed to imply that an "Honourable" was an object of no interest whatever, and that she was
really bored by the number of her titled acquaintances.  The boys looked at each other with
furtive glances of astonishment.  Mellicent spread jam all over her plate, and Esther unconsciously
turned on the handle of the urn and deluged the tray with water, but no one ventured a second
remark, and once again it was Peggy's voice that opened the conversation.

"And is this the room in which you pursue your avocations?  It has a warm and cheerful exposure."

"Er--yes!  This is the schoolroom.  Mellicent and I have lessons here in the morning from our
German governess, while the boys are in the study with father.  In the afternoon, from two
to four, they use it for preparation, and we go out to classes.  We have music lessons on Monday,
painting on Tuesday, calisthenics and wood-carving on Thursday and Friday.  Wednesday and Saturday
are half-holidays.  Then from four to six the room is common property, and we have tea together
and amuse ourselves as we choose."

"A most desirable arrangement.  Thank you!  Yes,--I will take a scone, as you are so kind!"
said Peggy blandly; a remark which covered the five young people with confusion, since none
of them had noticed that her plate was empty.  Each one made a grab in the direction of the
plate of scones; the girls failed to reach it, while Oswald, twitching it from Robert's hands,
jerked half the contents on the table, and had to pick them up, while Miss Saville looked on
with a smile of indulgent superiority.

"Accidents will happen, will they not?" she said sweetly, as she lifted a scone from the plate,
with her little finger cocked well in the air, and nibbled it daintily between her small white
teeth.  "A most delicious cake!  Home-made, I presume?  Perhaps of your own concoction?"

Esther muttered an inarticulate assent, and once more the conversation languished.  She looked
appealingly at Maxwell.  As the son of the house, the eldest of the boys, it was his place
to take the lead, but Maxwell looked the picture of embarrassment.  He did not suffer from
bashfulness as a rule, but since Peggy Saville had come into the room he had been seized with
an appalling self-consciousness.  His feet felt in the way, his arms seemed too long for practical
purposes, his elbows had a way of invading other people's precincts, and his hands looked red
and clammy.  It occurred to him dimly that he was not a man after all, but only a big overgrown
schoolboy, and that little Miss Saville knew as much, and was mildly pitiful of his shortcomings.
He was not at all anxious to attract the attention of the sharp little tongue, so he passed
on the signal to Mellicent, kicking her foot under the table, and frowning vigorously in the
direction of the stranger.

"Er,"--began Mellicent, anxious to respond to the signal, but lamentably short of ideas,--"Er,--Peggy!
Are you fond of sums? So he shrugged, and he made the book of his journeying, and of the things
which he had seen and heard and loved and hated and had put by in the course of his passage among
ageless and unfathomed mysteries.

And in the book there was nowhere any word of eating.

2--How the Garbage Man Came with Forks

Now to the book which Horvendile
had made comes presently a garbage-man, newly returned from foreign
travel for his health's sake, whose name was John.  What a little white
face she had! what a great thick plait of hair!  How erect she held herself!  Fraulein would
never have to rebuke her new pupil for stooping shoulders.  It was kind of her to promise help
with those troublesome decimals!  Quite too good an offer to refuse.

"Thank you very much," she said heartily, "I'll show you some after tea. Perhaps you may be
able to make me understand better than Fraulein. It's very good of you, P--" A quick change
of expression warned her that something was wrong, and she checked herself to add hastily,
"You want to be called `Peggy,' don't you?  No?  Then what must we call you?  What is your
real name?"

"Mariquita!" sighed the damsel pensively, "after my grandmother-- Spanish.  A beautiful and
unscrupulous woman at the court of Philip the Second."  She said "unscrupulous" with an air
of pride, as though it had been "virtuous," or some other word of a similar meaning, and pronounced
the name of the king with a confidence that made Robert gasp.

"Philip the Second?  Surely not?  He was the husband of our Mary in 1572.  That would make
it just a trifle too far back for your grandmother, wouldn't it?" he inquired sceptically;
but Mariquita remained absolutely unperturbed.

"It must have been someone else, then, I suppose.  How clever of you to remember! The difficulty
had been that we did not know how to reach these widely scattered, congenial readers. But
you--like Sir James Barrie's hero--"found a way."
I cannot say, in candor, that your method of exegetical criticism
has always and in every respect appealed to me.

Maxwell put his handkerchief to his mouth to stifle a laugh, and kicked out vigorously beneath
the table, with the intention of sharing his amusement with his friend Oswald.  It seemed,
however, that he had aimed amiss, for Mariquita fell back in her chair, and laid her hand on
her heart.

"I think there must be some slight misunderstanding.  That's my foot that you are kicking!
I cut it very badly on the ice last winter, and the least touch causes acute suffering.  Please
don't apologise; it doesn't matter in the least," and she rolled her eyes to the ceiling, like
one in mortal agony.

It was the last straw.  Maxwell's embarrassment had reached such a pitch that he could bear
no more.  He murmured some unintelligible words, and bolted from the room, and the other two
boys lost no time in following his example.

In subsequent conversations, Mellicent always referred to this occasion as "the night when
Robert had one cup," it being, in truth, the only occasion since this young gentleman entered
the vicarage when he had neglected to patronise the teapot three or four times in succession.

CHAPTER FOUR.

GOOD-BYE, MARIQUITA! 

Ackermann, following Bülg's probably spurious text, disputes that this is the exact meaning
of the noun.]
Horvendile considered this a curious enactment, but it seemed only
one among the innumerable mad customs of Philistia.  She talked like a book; she behaved like a well-conducted
old lady of seventy, and she sat with folded hands gazing around, with a curious, dancing light
in her hazel eyes, which seemed to imply that there was some tremendous joke on hand, the secret
of which was known only to herself.  Esther and Mellicent had confided their impressions to
their mother; but in Mrs Asplin's presence Peggy was just a quiet, modest girl, a trifle shy,
as was natural under the circumstances, but with no marked peculiarity of any kind.  She answered
to the name of "Peggy," to which address she was at other times persistently deaf, and sat
with neat little feet crossed before her, the picture of a demure, well-behaved young schoolgirl.
The sisters assured their mother that Mariquita was a very different person in the schoolroom,
but when she inquired as to the nature of the difference, it was not easy to explain.

