A PORTRAITURE OF QUAKERISM.

VOL. III.

CONTENTS OF THE THIRD VOLUME.

       *       *       *       *       *

GREAT TENETS.

CHAPTER I.

Civil government--Governors have no right to interfere in matters of religion--Nor are the
governed bound to obey, where their consciences are oppressed by doing it--but they are to
be willing to suffer the penalties annexed to their disobedience--and they are on no account
to resist them by force of arms,

CHAPTER II.

Oaths--Christians are not to take civil oaths--Reasons of the Quakers for their disuse of them,

CHAPTER III.

SECT. I. War--Unlawful for Christians to fight--Scriptural passages in support of this tenet--Answers
to these and replies,

SECT. II. These passages supported by the opinions and practice of the early Christians,

SECT. III. Objection to the motive assigned for this practice--Reply to this objection--Motive
confirmed,

SECT. IV. Conduct of the early Christians further examined--While Christianity continued pure,
they held it unlawful to fight--As it became less pure, their scruples against it declined--As
it became corrupt, they ceased,

SECT. V. Reflections of the author on the foregoing subject--Supposed conversation with a superior
being in another region--New arguments from thence,

SECT. VI. Subject further considered--Erroneous conceptions of those who argue in favor of
the necessity of war--This necessary only where the policy of the world is pursued--Nature
of this policy--But not necessary where men act on the policy of the Gospel,

SECT. VII. This doctrine confirmed by historical cases,

SECT. VIII. Final examination of the subject,

CHAPTER IV.

SECT. I. Maintenance of a Gospel ministry--Quakers hold it unlawful to pay their own ministers,
or those of any other denomination, for their Gospel labours--Scriptural passages and historical
facts relative to this doctrine,

SECT. II. Additional reasons against the payment of those of another denomination, as collected
from a history of tithes,

SECT. III. A more particular statement of these reasons,

       *       *       *       *       *

CHARACTER.

CHAPTER I.

Character of the Quakers--Difficulties in the proper estimation of character--These removable
in the present case,

CHAPTER II. Character general or particular--General is that of a moral people,

CHAPTER III.

SECT. I. Character particular--First of the particular traits is benevolence to man in his
temporal capacity,

SECT. II. Second is benevolence to man in his religious capacity,

SECT. III. Third is benevolence, or a tender feeling for the brute creation,

CHAPTER IV.

Fourth is complacency of mind and manners,

CHAPTER V.

Fifth is, that they do not sacrifice their consciences, as a body of Christians, where they
believe a compliance with any law or custom to be wrong,

CHAPTER VI.

Sixth is, that in political affairs they reason upon principle, and not upon consequences,

CHAPTER VII.

Seventh is independence of mind,

CHAPTER VIII.

SECT. I. Eighth is courage in life,

SECT. II. Ninth is courage in death,

CHAPTER IX.

Tenth is punctuality to words and engagements,

CHAPTER X.

Imperfect traits--These are either intellectually or morally defective--First of these is a
deficiency in literature and science, when compared with other people,

CHAPTER XI.

Second is superstition--Distinctions on this subject,

CHAPTER XII.

Third is obstinacy--No foundation for this trait,

CHAPTER XIII.

SECT. I. Fourth is a money-getting spirit--This spirit seldom chargeable with avarice,

SECT. II. Practicable methods suggested for the extirpation of it,

CHAPTER XIV.

Fifth is a want of animation or affection--This an appearance only.

CHAPTER XV.

Sixth is evasiveness in speech--No foundation for this trait.

CHAPTER XVI. Seventh is shyness--This an appearance only.

CHAPTER XVII.

Eighth is a disregard of truth--Inconsistency of the imputation of this trait.

CHAPTER XVIII.

SECT. I. Character of the Quaker women--Women share in the virtues of the men, but do not partake
of all their reputed imperfections.

SECT. II. Quaker women have a public character--Influence of this upon their minds.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS PARTICULARS.

CHAPTER I.

Quakers a happy people--Subordinate causes of this happiness.

CHAPTER II.

Good, which the Quakers have done as a society upon earth.

CHAPTER III.

Quakers in England on the decline in point of numbers, as a religious society--Certain causes
of this decline.

CHAPTER IV.

Supposed remedies for the diminution of some of these causes--These of various kinds--One of
these a superior education--Supposed effect of this education.

CHAPTER V.

Component parts of this education--Favourable state of the society for the admission of it,

CHAPTER VI.

Various arguments against it--These examined,

CHAPTER VII.

Conclusory remarks, as they relate to those who may have had thoughts of leaving the society,

CHAPTER VIII.

Conclusory remarks, as they relate to those who may be called the world,

GREAT TENETS OF THE QUAKERS.

CHAP. I.

Civil government--First tenet is, that governors have no right to interfere with the governed
on the subject of Religion--and that if they interfere, and insist upon things which the conscience
disapproves, the governed ought to refuse a compliance with them, and to bear patiently all
the penalties annexed to such a refusal, but never to resist the governors by violence on this
or any other account.

The Quakers hold four principles, which I shall distinguish by the name of Great Tenets. These
are considered as arising out of the implied or positive injunctions of Christianity, and were
insisted upon as essentials on the formation of the society. The first of these is on the subject
of Civil Government.

Civil Government had existed long before the appearance of Christianity in the world. Legislators
since that era, as they have imbibed its spirit, so they have introduced this spirit more or
less into their respective codes. But, no nation has ever professed to change its system of
jurisprudence, or to model it anew, in consequence of the new light which Christianity has
afforded: neither have the alterations been so numerous in any nation, however high its profession
of Christianity, with respect to laws, as to enable us to say, that there is any government
in the known world, of Christian origin, or any government wholly upon the principles of the
gospel.

If all men were to become real Christians, civil government would become less necessary. As
there would be then no offences, there would be no need of magistracy or of punishment. As
men would then settle any differences between them amicably, there would be no necessity for
courts of law. As they would then never fight, there would be no need of armies. As they would
then consider their fellow-creatures as brethren, they would relieve them as such, and there
would be no occasion of laws for the poor. As men would then have more solicitude for the public
good, and more large and liberal notions, than at any former time, they would of themselves
conceive and raise all necessary public institutions and works. Government then is not so necessary
for real Christians. It is necessary principally, as the apostle says, for evil-doers. But
if it be chiefly necessary for evil-doers, then governors ought to be careful how they make
laws, which may vex, harrass, and embarrass Christians, whom they will always find to be the
best part of their communities, or, in other words, how they make laws, which Christians, on
account of their religious scruples, cannot conscientiously obey.

It is a tenet of the Quakers, on the subject of government, that the civil magistrate has no
right to interfere in religious matters, so as either to force any particular doctrines upon
men, or to hinder them from worshipping God in their own way, provided that, by their creeds
and worship, they do no detriment to others. The Quakers believe, however, that Christian churches
may admonish such members as fall into error, and may even cut them off from membership, but
this must be done not by the temporal, but by the spiritual sword.

This tenet the Quakers support, first, by reason. Religion, they say, is a matter solely, between
God and man, that is, between God and that man who worships him. This must be obvious, they
conceive, because man is not accountable to man for his religious opinions, except he binds
himself to the discipline of any religious society, but to God alone. It must be obvious again,
they say, because no man can be a judge over the conscience of another. He can know nothing
of the sincerity or hypocrisy of his heart. He can be neither an infallible judge, nor an infallible
correcter of his religious errors. "The conscience of man, says Barclay, is the seat and throne
of God in him, of which he alone is the proper and infallible judge, who, by his power and
spirit, can rectify its mistakes." It must be obvious again, they say, from the consideration
that, if it were even possible for one man to discern the conscience of another, it is impossible
for him to bend or controul it. But conscience is placed both out of his sight and of his reach.
It is neither visible nor tangible. It is inaccessible by stripes or torments. Thus, while
the body is in bondage, on account of the religion of the soul, the soul itself is free, and,
while it suffers under torture, it enjoys the divinity, and feels felicity in his presence.
But if all these things are so, it cannot be within the province either of individual magistrates
or of governments, consisting of fallible men, to fetter the consciences of those who may live
under them. And any attempt to this end is considered by the Quakers as a direct usurpation
of the prerogative of God.

This tenet the Quakers adopt again on a contemplation of the conduct and doctrines of Jesus
Christ and of his apostles. They find nothing in these, which can give the least handle to
any man to use force in the religious concerns of another. During the life of Jesus Christ
upon earth, it is no where recorded of him, that he censured any man for his religion. It is
true that he reproved the Scribes and Pharisees, but this was on account of their hypocrisy,
because they pretended to be what they were not. But he no where condemned the devout Jew,
who was sincere in his faith. But if he be found no where to have censured another for a difference
in religious opinions, much less was it ever said of him, that he forced him to the adoption
of his own. In the memorable instance, where James and John were willing to have called fire
from Heaven, to burn those who refused to receive him, he rebuked them by an assurance, that
"they knew not what spirit they were of." And, with respect to his doctrines, nothing can be
more full to the point than his saying, that "his kingdom was not of this world," by which
he meant that his dominion was wholly of a spiritual nature, and that men must cast off all
worldly imaginations, and become spiritually minded, before, they could belong to him. But
no application of outward force, in the opinion of the Quakers, can thus alter the internal
man. Nor can even the creeds and doctrines of others produce this effect, except they become
sanctioned by the divine influence on the heart.

Neither is it recorded of any of the apostles, that they used any other weapons than those
of persuasion and the power of God in the propagation of their doctrines, leaving such as did
not choose to follow them to their own way. They were explicit also in stating the spiritual
nature of Christ's kingdom, from whence an inference similar to the former is deducible, namely,
that no compulsory interference can be effectual in matters of religion. And St. Paul, in particular,
tells the Corinthians, that, in his spiritual services to them, he does not consider himself
[1]"as having any dominion over their faith, but as helpers of their joy."

[Footnote 1: 2 Cor. i. 24.]

But if neither Jesus Christ, who was the author of that religion, which many civil governments
have established, nor the apostles, who afterwards propagated it, forced their doctrines upon
other men, or hindered them by force from worshipping in their own way, even though the former
could have called legions of angels to his support, it certainly does not become weak, ignorant,
and fallible men, because they are placed in the situation of governors, to set up their own
creeds as supreme, and to throw penalties and restrictions in the way of the religious exercise
of others.

But if governors, contrary to the example of Jesus Christ and of his apostles, should interfere
in religious matters, and impose laws upon the governed, of which, as Christians, they cannot
but disapprove, then the Quakers are of opinion, that the governed ought always to obey the
laws of Jesus Christ, rather than the laws of any governors, who are only men. Thus when Peter
and John were commanded by the rulers of the Jews to speak no more in the name of Jesus, they
dared not yield obedience to their commands, reasoning thus,[2] "Whether it be right in the
sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye."

[Footnote 2: Acts iv. 19.]

And as the governed in such case ought, in obedience to God, the Supreme Ruler of the Universe,
and the King of Kings, to refuse a compliance with the laws of their own governors, so they
ought to be prepared patiently to submit to the penalties which are annexed to such refusal,
and on no account, if just representations made in the meek and quiet spirit of their religion,
are not likely to be effectual, to take up arms or resist them by force. And this doctrine
they ground, first, on the principle, that it is not only more noble, but more consistent with
their duty as Christians, to suffer, than to give growth to the passions of revenge, or by
open resistance to become the occasion of loss of life to others. And, secondly, on the example
of Jesus Christ, and of the apostles and primitive Christians, all of whom patiently submitted
to the pains and penalties inflicted upon them by the governments of their respective times
for the exercise of their religion.

CHAP. II.

Oaths--Quakers conceive it unlawful for Christians to take an oath--their sufferings on this
account--Consider oaths as unnecessary--as having an immoral tendency, which even the Heathens
allowed--and as having been forbidden by Jesus Christ--Explanation of the scriptural passages
cited on this occasion--Christianity not so perfect with the lawfulness of oaths as without
it--Other reasons taken from considerations relative to the ancient oath "by the name of God"

A second tenet, which the Quakers hold, is, that it is unlawful for Christians to take a civil
oath.

Many and grievous were the sufferings of the Quakers, in the early part of their history, on
account of their refusing to swear before the civil magistrate. They were insulted, fined,
and imprisoned. Some of the judges too indulged a rancour against them on this account, unworthy
of their high office, which prescribed justice impartially to all. For when they could not
convict them of the offences laid to their charge, they administered to them the oath of allegiance,
knowing that they would not take it, and that confiscation of property and imprisonment would
ensue. But neither ill usage, nor imprisonment, nor loss of property, ever made any impression
upon the Quakers, so as to induce them to swear in judicial cases, and they continued to suffer,
till the legislature, tired out with the cries of their oppression, decreed, that their affirmation
should in all cases except criminal, or in that of serving upon juries, or in that of qualifications
for posts of honour or emolument under government, be received as equivalent to their oath.
And this indulgence towards them is continued to them by law to the present day.

The Quakers have an objection to oaths, as solemn appeals to God, because they are unnecessary.

It is an old saying among the Quaker writers, that "truth was before all oaths." By this they
mean, there was a time, when men's words were received as truths, without the intervention
of an oath. Ancient fable, indeed, tells us, that there were no oaths in the golden age, but
that, when men departed from their primitive simplicity, and began to quarrel with one another,
they had recourse to falsehood to substantiate their own case, after which it became necessary,
that some expedient should be devised, in the case of disputes, for the ascertaining the truth.
Hence Hesiod makes the god of oaths the son of Esis or of contention. This, account differs
but little from that of Polybuis, who says, that the use of oaths in judgment was rare among
the ancients, but that, as perfidy grew, oaths increased.

And as it is a saying of the Quakers, that "truth was before all oaths," so they believe, that
truth would be spoken, if oaths were done away. Thus, that which is called honour by the world,
will bind men to the truth, who perhaps know but little of religion. But if so, then he, who
makes Christianity his guide, will not be found knowingly in a falsehood, though he be deprived
of the opportunity of swearing.

But if it be true, that truth existed before the invention of oaths, and that truth would still
be spoken, even if all oaths were abolished, then the Quakers say, that oaths are not so necessary
as some have imagined, because they have but a secondary effect in the production of the truth.
This conclusion they consider also as the result of reason. For good men will speak truth without
an oath, and bad men will hardly be influenced by one. And where oaths are regarded, it is
probable that truth is forced out of men, not so much, because they consider them as solemn
appeals to God, as that they consider the penalties, which will follow their violation; so
that a simple affirmation, under the same pains and penalties, would be equally productive
of the truth.

The Quakers consider oaths again as very injurious to morality. For first, they conceive it
to be great presumption in men to summon God as a witness in their trilling and earthly concerns.

They believe, secondly, that, if men accustom themselves to call upon God on civil occasions,
they render his name so familiar to them, that they are likely to lose the reverence due to
it, or so to blend religious with secular considerations, that they become in danger of losing
sight of the dignity, solemnity, and awfulness of devotion. And it is not an unusual remark,
that persons, most accustomed to oaths, are the most likely to perjury. A custom-house oath
has become proverbial in our own country. I do not mean by this to accuse mercantile men in
particular, but to state it as a received opinion, that, where men make solemn things familiar,
there is a danger of their moral degradation. Hence the Quakers consider the common administration
of oaths to have a tendency that is injurious to the moral interests of men.

This notion relative to the bad tendency of oaths, the Quakers state to have prevailed even
in the Gentile world. As Heathen philosophy became pure, it branded the system of swearing
as pernicious to morals. It was the practice of the Persians to give each other their right
hand as a token of their speaking the truth. He, who gave his hand deceitfully, was accounted
more detestable than if he had sworn the Scythians, in their conference with Alexander the
Great, addressed him thus: "Think not that the Scythians confirm their friendship by an oath.
They swear by keeping their word." The Phrygians were wholly against oaths. They neither took
them themselves, nor required them of others. Among the proverbs of the Arabs, this was a celebrated
one, "Never swear, but let thy word be yes or no." So religious was Hercules, says Plutarch,
that he never swore but once. Clinias, a Greek philosopher, and a scholar of Pythagoras, is
said to have dreaded an oath so much, that, when by swearing he could have escaped a fine of
three talents, he chose rather to pay the money than do it, though he was to have sworn nothing
but the truth. Indeed, throughout all Greece, the system of swearing was considered as of the
most immoral tendency, the very word, which signified "perjured," in the Greek language, meaning,
when analysed, "he that adds oath to oath," or "the taker of many oaths."

But, above all, the Quakers consider oaths as unlawful for Christians, having been positively
forbidden by Jesus Christ.

The words, in which they conceived this prohibition to have been contained, they take from
the sermon on the Mount.

It is said by those, who oppose the Quakers on this subject, that these words relate, not to
civil oaths, but to such as are used by profane persons in the course of their conversation.
But the Quakers deny this, because the disciples, as Jews, must have known that profane swearing
had been unlawful long before this prohibition of Jesus Christ. They must relate, therefore,
to something else, and to something, which had not before been forbidden.

They deny it also on account of the construction of the sentences, and of the meaning of the
several words in these. For the words, "Swear not at all," in the second of the verses, which
have been quoted, have an immediate reference to the words in the first. Thus they relate to
the word "forswear," in the first. But if they relate to the word "forswear," they must relate
to perjury, and if to perjury, then to a civil oath, or to an oath, where an appeal is made
to God by man, as to something relating to himself. The word oath also is explicitly mentioned
in the first of these verses, and mentioned as an oath which had been allowed. Now there was
one oath, which had been allowed in ancient time. The Jews had been permitted, in matters of
judgment, to swear by the name of God. This permission was given them, for one, among other
reasons, that they might be prevented from swearing by the name of those idols by which their
neighbours swore; for a solemn appeal to any Heathen god necessarily includes an acknowledgment
of the omnipresence of the same.

That they related to this oath in particular, the Quakers conceive to be obvious from the prohibition
in the verses which have been cited, of swearing by heaven, by earth, and by other things.
The Jews, knowing the sacredness of the name of God, had an awful notion of the consequences
of perjury, if committed after an appeal to it, and therefore had recourse to the names of
the creatures, in case they should swear falsely. But even the oaths, thus substituted by them,
are forbidden by Jesus Christ; and they are forbidden upon this principle, as we find by a
subsequent explanation given by St. Matthew, that whosoever swore by these creatures, really
and positively swore by the name of God. But if they are forbidden, because swearing by these
creatures is the same thing as swearing by God who made them, then the oath "by the name of
God," which had been permitted to the Jews of old, was intended by Jesus Christ to be discontinued,
or to have no place in his new religion.

The Quakers then, considering the words in question to have the meaning now annexed to them,
give the following larger explanation of what was the intention of our Saviour upon this occasion.

In his sermon on the Mount, of which these words on the subject of oaths are a part, he inculcated
into his disciples a system of morality, far exceeding that of the Jews, and therefore in the
verses which precede those upon this subject, he tells them, that whereas it was said of old,
"thou shall not kill," he expected of them, that they should not even entertain the passion
of revenge. And whereas it was said of old, "thou shalt not commit adultery," he expected,
that they should not even lust after others, if they were married, or after those in a married
state. Thus he brings both murder and adultery from act to thought. He attaches a criminality
to unlawful feelings if not suppressed, or aims at the subjugation of the passions, as the
springs of the evil actions of men. Going on to shew the farther superiority of his system
of morality over that of the Jews, he says again, whereas it was said of old, "thou shall not
forswear thyself," he expects that they should not swear at all, not even by the name of God,
which had been formerly allowed, for that he came to abrogate the ancient law, and perjury
with it. It was his object to make the word of his true disciples equal to the ancient oath.
Thus he substituted truth for oaths. And he made this essential difference between a Jew and
a Christian, that, whereas the one swore in order that he might be believed; the other was
to speak truth in order that he might not swear. Such was the intended advance from Jew to
Christian, or from Moses to Christ.

The Quakers are farther confirmed in their ideas upon this subject, by believing, that Christianity
would not have been as perfect as they apprehend it to have been intended to be, without this
restriction upon oaths. Is it possible, they say, that Jesus Christ would have left it to Christians
to imagine, that their words were to be doubted on any occasion? Would he have left it to them
to think so dishonourably of one another, or of their new vocation, that their words were to
be tried by the touchstone of oaths, when his religion was to have a greater effect than any
former system of morality ever known, in the production of truth? Is it possible, when oaths
sprung out of fraud and falsehood, as he himself witnesses, (for whatever is more than yea
and nay, cometh of evil) that he would have left this remnant of antiquity standing, as if
his religion was not intended to extirpate the very ground-work of it?

Finally, the Quakers are confirmed in their ideas upon this subject from a belief that oaths
were to cease, either at the coming of Jesus Christ, or as men became Christians. For, in the
first place, the oath "by the name of God," is considered by some, as I have before noticed,
to have been permitted to the Jews during their weak state, that they might not swear by the
idols of their cotemporary neighbours, and thus lose sight of the only and true God. But what
Christian stands in need of any preservative against idolatry, or of any commemorative of the
existence and superintendence of an almighty, wise, beneficent, and moral Governor of the world?
Some again have imagined, that, as the different purifications among the Jews, denoting the
holiness of God, signified that it became men to endeavour to be holy, so the oath "by the
name of God," denoting the verity of God, signified, that it became men to devote themselves
to the truth. But no true Christian stands in need of such symbols, to make him consider his
word as equivalent to his oath. Others again have imagined, that the oath "by the name of God,"
typified the truth, or the eternal word. But as the type ceases when the antitype appears,
so the coming of Jesus Christ, who in the gospel language is called both the truth and the
eternal word, may be considered as putting an end to this, as to other types and shadows, of
the Jewish church.

CHAP. III.

SECT. I.

War--Tenet on war--Quakers hold it unlawful for Christians to fight--Scriptural passages, which
they produce in support of this tenet--Arguments which others produce from scriptural authority
against it--Reply of the Quakers to these arguments.

The next of the great tenets which the Quakers hold, is on the subject of war. They believe
it unlawful for Christians to engage in the profession of arms, or indeed to bear arms under
any circumstances of hostility whatever. Hence there is no such character as that of a Quaker
soldier. A Quaker is always able to avoid the regular army, because the circumstance of entering
into it is a matter of choice. But where he has no such choice, as is the case in the militia,
he either submits, if he has property, to distraints upon it, or, if he has not, to prison.[4]

[Footnote 4: The Quakers have been charged with inconsistency in refusing military service,
and yet in paying those taxes, which are expressly for the support of wars. To this charge
they reply, that they believe it to be their duty to render to Caesar the things which are
Caesar's, and to leave the application of them to Caesar himself, as he judges best for the
support of government. This duty they collect from the example of Jesus Christ, who paid the
tribute money himself, and ordered his disciples to do it, and this to a government, not only
professedly military, but distinguished for its idolatry and despotism. Personal service, however,
they conceive to militate against a positive command by our Saviour, as will be explained in
this chapter.]

The Quakers ground the illicitness of war on several passages, which are to be found in the
New Testament. I shall not quote all the texts they bring forward, but shall make a selection
of them on this occasion.

Jesus Christ, in the famous sermon, which he preached upon the Mount, took occasion to mention
specifically some of the precepts of the Jewish law, and to inform his hearers, that he expected
of those, who were to be his true disciples, that they would carry these to a much higher extent
in their practice under the new dispensation, which he was then affording them. Christianity
required a greater perfection of the human character than under the law. Be ye therefore perfect,
even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." Now the Quakers are of opinion, that no
man can receive this doctrine his heart, and assist either offensively or defensively in the
operations of war.

[Footnote 5: Matt. v. 38.]

[Footnote 6: The Heathen nations, on account of their idolatry, were called enemies by the Jews.]

Other passages, quoted by the Quakers, in favour of their tenet on war, are taken from the
apostles Paul and James conjointly. From hence the Quakers argue, that the warfare of Christianity,
or that which Christianity recognises, is not carnal, but spiritual, and that it consists in
the destruction of the evil imaginations, or of the evil lusts and passions of men. That is,
no man can be a true soldier of Christ, unless his lusts are subdued, or unless the carnal
be done away by the spiritual mind. Now this position having been laid down by St. Paul, or
the position having been established in Christian morals, that a state of subjugated passions
is one of the great characteristic marks of a true Christian, the Quakers draw a conclusion
from it by the help of the words of St. James. This apostle, in his letter to the dispersed
tribes, which were often at war with each other, as well as with the Romans, says,[8] "From
whence come wars and fightings among you? Come they not hence even of your lusts that war in
your members?" But if wars come from the lusts of men, then the Quakers say, that those who
have subdued their lusts, can no longer engage in them, or, in other words, that true Christians,
being persons of this description, or being such, according to St. Paul, as are redeemed out
of what St. James calls the very grounds and occasions of wars, can no longer fight. And as
this proposition is true in itself, so the Quakers conceive the converse of it to be true also:
For if there are persons, on the other hand, who deliberately engage in the wars and fightings
of the world, it is a proof, that their lusts are not yet subjugated, or that, though they
may be nominal, they are not yet arrived at the stature of true or of full-grown Christians.

[Footnote 7: 2 Cor. x. 3, 4, 5.]

[Footnote 8: James iv. I.]

A third quotation, made by the Quakers, is taken from St. Paul exclusively.[9] "Now if any
man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his." That is, if men have not the same disposition
which Jesus Christ manifested in the different situations of his life, the same spirit of humility
and of forbearance, and of love, and of forgiveness of injuries, or if they do not follow him
as a pattern, or if they do not act as he would have done on any similar occasion, they are
not Christians. Now they conceive, knowing what the spirit of Jesus was by those things which
have been recorded of him, that he could never have been induced or compelled, by any earthly
consideration or power, to have engaged in the wars of the world. They are aware that his mission,
which it became him to fulfil, and which engrossed all his time, would not have allowed him
the opportunity of a military life. But they believe, independently of this, that the spirit
which he manifested upon earth, would have been of itself a sufficient bar to such an employment.
This they judge from his opinions and his precepts. For how could he have taken up arms to
fight, who enjoined in the new dispensation, that men were not to resist evil; that they were
to love their enemies; that they were to bless those who cursed them, and to do good to those
who hated them? This they judge also from his practice. For how could he have lifted up his
arm against another, who, "when he was reviled, reviled not again;" and who, in his very agony
upon the Cross, prayed for his persecutors, saying, "Father, forgive them, for they know not
what they do." But if Jesus Christ could not have been induced or compelled to have engaged
in a profession, which would have subjected him to take away the life of another, so neither
can any Christian; "for if a man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his."

[Footnote 9: Rom. viii. 9.]

Three arguments are usually brought against the Quakers on this subject.

The first is, that John the Baptist,[10] when the soldiers demanded of him what they should
do, did not desire them to leave the service in which they were engaged, but, on the other
hand, to be content with their wages. To this the Quakers reply, that John told them also,
"to do violence to no man." But even if he had not said this, they apprehend that nothing could
be deduced from his expressions, which could become binding upon Christians. For John was the
last prophet of the old dispensation, but was never admitted into the new. He belonged to the
system which required an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, but not to that which required
no resistance to evil, and which insisted upon the love of enemies as well as of friends. Hence
Jesus Christ said of him, that "he who was least in the kingdom of heaven, was greater than he."

[Footnote 10: Luke iii. 14.]

The second argument brought against the Quakers on this occasion, is of a similar nature with
the former. It is said that, if war had been unlawful, our Saviour, when the centurion[11]
came to him at Capernaum, would have found fault with his profession; but he did not do this,
but on the other hand he highly commended him for his religion. In answer to this the Quakers
observe, first, that no solid argument can be drawn from silence on any occasion. Secondly,
that Jesus Christ seems, for wise purposes, to have abstained from meddling with many of the
civil institutions of his time, though in themselves wicked, thinking probably, that it was
sufficient to have left behind him such general precepts, as, when applied properly, would
be subversive of them all. And, thirdly, that he never commended the centurion on account of
his military situation, but on account of his profession of his faith.

[Footnote 11: Matt. viii. 5.]

They say farther, that they can bring an argument of a much more positive nature than that
just mentioned, from an incident which took place, and where Jesus was again concerned. When
Peter cut off the ear of one of the servants of the high priest, who was concerned in the apprehension
of his Lord, he was not applauded, but reprimanded for the part which he thus took in his defence
in the following words:[12] "Put up again thy sword in its place, for all they that take the
sword, shall perish by the sword." Now the Quakers conceive, that much more is to be inferred
against the use of the sword from this instance, than from the former in favour of it.

[Footnote 12: Matt. xxvi, 52.]

The last argument, which is usually adduced against the Quakers on this subject, is, that they
have mistaken the meaning of the words of the famous sermon upon the Mount. These words teach
us the noble lesson, that it is more consistent with the character of a Christian to forgive,
than to resist an injury. They are, it is said, wholly of private import, and relate solely
to private occurrences in life. But the Quakers have extended the meaning of them beyond private
to public injuries or wars.

The Quakers, in answer to this observe, that they dare not give to the words in question a
less extensive meaning. They relate to every one who reads them. They relate to the poor. They
relate to the rich. They relate to, every potentate who may be the ruler of a land. They relate
to every individual of his council. There is no exception, or dispensation to any one, in favour
of any case.

That they relate to public as well as private wars, or that they extend themselves naturally
to those which are public, the Quakers conceive it reasonable to suppose from the following
consideration. No man, they apprehend, can possess practically the divine principle of loving
an individual enemy at home, or of doing good to the man who hates him, but he must of necessity
love his enemy in any and every other place. He must have gone so for forward on the road to
Christian perfection, as to be unable to bear arms against any other person whatsoever, and
particularly when, according to the doctrines of the New Testament, no geographical boundaries
fix the limits of love and enmity between man and man, but the whole human race are considered
as the children of the same parent, and therefore as brothers to one another. But who can truly
love an enemy and kill him? And where is the difference, under the Gospel dispensation, between
Jew and Gentile, Greek and Barbarian, bond and free?

That these words were meant to extend to public as well as to private ware, the Quakers believe
again from the views which they entertain relative to the completion of prophecy. Now other
Christians, who differ from them in the interpretation of the words in question, believe equally
with them, that the times thus predicted will come to pass. The question then is, whether the
more enlarged interpretation of these words, as insisted upon by the Quakers, or of the less
enlarged as insisted upon by others, be the most consistent with the belief of the future accomplishment
of the prophecy just mentioned. And in this case the Quakers are of opinion, that if wars were
ever to cease, one ought to expect that some foundation would have been previously laid in
Christianity for this great and important end. The subjugation of the passions, which it is
the direct tendency of Christianity to effect, would produce this end. And so far such a foundation
has already been laid in this system. But as the admission of moral precepts into the education
of man, so as to form habits of moral opinion, is another, way of influencing conduct in life,
the Quakers think it likely that some such maxim as "that Christians should not fight," would
have been introduced also, because the adoption of such a maxim would have had a similar tendency
with the subjugation of the passions in producing the same end. For it seems absurd, they conceive,
to suppose that wars should cease, and that no precept should have been held out that they
were wrong. But the more enlarged interpretation of the words in question furnishes such a
precept, and therefore another foundation seems to have been laid in Christianity for the same
end. They admit, therefore, the larger interpretation as included in the less, because it comports
more with the design of Providence, who, by the mouth of his prophets wills universal peace,
that the prohibition of public as well as of private wars should be understood as a Christian
doctrine, than that the words in question should be confined to private injuries alone.

The last reason, which the Quakers give for adopting the larger interpretation of the words
in the sermon upon the Mount, as well as the less, is the following. They are of opinion, that,
as Christians, they ought not to lessen the number of the moral obligations of the Gospel.
They ought not to abridge its dignity, nor to put limits to its benevolence. If it was the
desire of Jesus Christ, that men should love their enemies, it is their duty to believe, that
his wish could not have been otherwise than universal. If it was an object with him to cure
moral evil, it is their duty to suppose, that it was his desire to destroy it, not partially,
but to the utmost possible extent. If it was his design to give happiness to man, it is their
duty to determine, that he intended to give it not in a limited proportion, but in the largest
measure. But when they consider the nature of wars, that they militate against the law of preservation,
that they include the commission of a multitude of crimes, that they produce a complication
of misery and suffering to man, they conceive they would not be doing their duty as Christians,
or giving to Christianity its due honour, if they were not to admit the larger meaning of the
words in question as well as the less. Reason too, pleads for the one as well as for the other.
Consistency of moral doctrine again demands both. But if we admit the restricted interpretation,
and exclude the larger, we offend reason. All consistency is at an end. Individual responsibility
for moral turpitude will be taken from man. Crimes, clearly marked and defined in the page
of Christianity, will cease to be crimes at the will of princes. One contradiction will rush
in after another; and men will have two different standards of morality, as they adhere to
the commands of the Gospel, or to the customs of governments or of the world.

SECT. II.

Meaning of the scriptural passages advanced by the Quakers, supported by the opinions and practice
of the early Christians--Early Christian writers held it unlawful for Christians to fight,
as appears from Justin--Tatian--Clemens--and others--Christians would not enter into the armies
for more than two centuries, as appears from Ireneus--Tertullian --Celsus--Origen and others--and
generally left the military service, if they happened to be converted in it.

It may be presumed to be difficult for Christians, who have been in the habit of seeing wars
entered into and carried on by their own and other Christian governments, and without any other
censure than that they might be politically wrong, to see the scriptural passages of "non-resistance
to evil and love of enemies," but through a vitiated medium. The prejudices of some, the interests
of others, and custom with all, will induce a belief among them, that these have no relation
to public wars. At least they will be glad to screen themselves under such a notion. But the
question is, what a Heathen would have said to these passages, who, on his conversion to Christianity,
believed that the New Testament was of divine origin, that it was the book of life, and that
the precepts, which it contained, were not to be dispensed with, to suit particular cases,
without the imputation of evil. Now such a trial, the Quakers say, has been made. It was made
by the first Christians, and they affirm, that these interpreted the passages, which have been
mentioned, differently from those of most of the Christians of the present age; for that both
their opinions and their practice spoke loudly against the lawfulness of war.

Upon this new subject I shall enter next. And I confess I shall enter upon it willingly. First,
because I know of none that is more important. Secondly, because, though controversy may have
thrown some light upon it, much remains to be added. And, thirdly, because the assertions of
the Quakers on this point are disputed by many at the present day. With respect to the opinions
of the early Quakers, which I shall notice first, it must be premised, that such of them as
have written books, have not all of them entered on this subject. Some of them have not had
even occasion to mention it. But where they have, and where they have expressed an opinion,
I believe that this will be found unfavourable to the continuance of war.

Justin the Martyr, one of the earliest writers in the second century, considers war as unlawful.
He makes also the devil "the author of all war." No severer sentence could have been passed
upon it than this, when we consider it as coming from the lips of an early Christian. The sentiment
too was contrary to the prevailing sentiments of the times, when, of all professions, that
of war was most honourable, and was the only one that was considered to lead to glory. It resulted,
therefore, in all probablity, from the new views, which Justin had acquired by a perusal of
such of the scriptures, as had then fallen into his hands.

Tatian, who was the disciple of Justin, in his oration to the Greeks, speaks precisely in the
same terms on the same subject.

From the different expressions of Clemens of Alexandria, a contemporary of the latter, we collect
his opinion to be decisive against the lawfulness of war.

Tertullian, who may be mentioned next in order of time, strongly condemned the practice of
bearing arms, as it related to Christians. I shall give one or two extracts from him on this
subject. In his dissertation on the worship of idols, he says, "Though the soldiers came to
John, and received a certain form to be observed, and though the centurion believed, yet Jesus
Christ, by disarming Peter, disarmed every soldier afterwards: for custom never sanctions an
illicit act." And in his "Soldier's Garland," he says, "Can a soldier's life be lawful, when
Christ has pronounced, that he who lives by the sword shall perish by the sword? Can one, who
professes the peaceable doctrines of the Gospel, be a soldier, when it is his duty not so much
as to go to law? and shall he, who is not to revenge his own wrongs, be instrumental in bringing
others into chains, imprisonment, torment, death?"

Cyprian, in his Epistle to Donatus, takes a view of such customs in his own times, as he conceived
to be repugnant to the spirit or the letter of the Gospel. In looking at war, which was one
of them, he speaks thus: "Suppose thyself, says he, with me on the top of some very exalted
eminence, and from thence looking down upon the appearances of things beneath thee. Let our
prospect take in the whole horizon, and let us view, with the indifference of persons not concerned
in them, the various motions and agitations of human life. Thou wilt then, I dare say, have
a real compassion for the circumstances of mankind, and for the posture in which this view
will represent them. And when thou reflectest upon thy condition, thy thoughts will rise in
transports of gratitude and praise to God for having made thy escape from the pollutions of
the world. The things thou wilt principally observe, will be the highways beset with robbers,
the seas with pirates, encampments, marches, and all the terrible forms of war and, bloodshed.
When a single murder is committed, it shall be deemed perhaps a crime; but that crime shall
commence a virtue, when committed under the shelter of public authority, so that punishment
is not rated by the measure of guilt, but the more enormous the size of the wickedness is,
so much the greater is the chance for impunity." These are the sentiments of Cyprian, and that
they were the result of his views of Christianity, as taken from the divine writings, there
can be little doubt. If he had stood upon the same eminence, and beheld the same sights previously
to his conversion, he might, like others, have neither thought piracy dishonourable, nor war
inglorious. 

The Celts drove around mining, were possessed excellent metallurgists, probably also capable
mineralogical knowledge, and their output can Tellurerze the then Mineralogists be so remarkable
was that this is done the current ones.

Here the bold conjecture that (not artificially combined) and electrum
for Tellurerz to keep its product, seems to me more natural than to
speak for Platina.

       

* * * * *

# §. 7. Copper #.

A. The metallic copper.

Maintenance, tong, lou in Chinese, - lay-tse-tong, of course, is the peculiar, the Cheng-tung Blister copper,
Hong-tung, the pure red copper; - tong in Siam, - Maintenance, Thoung, dsi to Korea; - zansa,
zadasa also kharva, horwa in Tibetan, - awo, aka the Japanese-gane,
- acute Ganni on the Japanese and Lieukieu Islands.

tamra, tamraka
in Sanskrit, even rata (the red), culwa, ambaka, kantjasa, kanijasa,
udumbura, audumbura, dwjashta, warishtha, lahitajas, markatasja and
other, more poetic terms; - Tamra tama, Tamba in Bengal, - Tamba,
tambaja in the Hindu (where is Tombak), - tambaja, tombaja in the
Malay, - chembou in Tamil (India).

kie on Awa, - kiuen the Manchu-Tartar,
- djäss, Djeser, djet in Mongolian, - dseddjunah, Tschütscher-gnnan
[or: tschütschgnnan] tscherikda, tschiret, trikokta in the Tungus
languages, - goli in Kalmyk.

kangusak in Greenland, - huräh-gahmah
(Roth iron) in Kamchatka, - huräh-gahnäh also furikane in the Kuril;
- tähro polgonton-bey the Koryak (Samoyed) - padaroch in Ostyak.

Bakyr, MIRS, küssülmischi in Tatar, sirin is the red copper; - Bakir,
bökyr, Bagir in Turkish, and Piringer, which means mostly brass, -
Bagir, even million in Afghanistan; - bagyr on Jenisey; - Bagir Samoyed
in the languages, even nerowo, njarane kidde, ürrü, tula, paterge;
- pakur even safer, sitel in Kurdish, - pkhyr in the Chuvash of the
Volga, - Paker in Albania (from Turkish) - bakar in Illyrian (and
after) - pach in the Caucasian Languages, including Bach, hir, Hiroz,
dupsi zast;-goaptleh in Circassian, - spilendsi, spil, lindje in Georgia,
- pghints also ARWIS in Armenian, coppery pghndsi is, - in archwi
Ossetian.

Vaski what, Kasari in Finland (hence probably wask the copper ore in the Old Swedish), - wask
in Livonian, and Esthnischen; - Waski, waskoi in Finnish, - wosh in Wotjak; - Wesker urgor in
the Permian, - forgotten in the Czech Republic draw tables, - the men's and Arren Voguls (Finnish)
- air in Lapland, also kuoppar; - irgon, argon in Wotjak (Finnish) - wara Warche, in Latvian; -
waras in Litthauischen, -; is the classy rez rez termes, rezedeny in Magyar Copper, rez banya
the copper mine.

mis in Persian, also berintsch (actually, maybe bronze), a very widespread
in the East Nomination, suffar the copper smelter, iron "is kaskan,
cheese is boiler; - mis in an Aryan.

medi, mjed also krasnaja in
Russian, medical samorodnaja is the self-produced, solid Copper; -
mjed also svakka in Bosnia; - mido in Dalmatia, and bakar (from Turkish)
- Miedz in Polish (kotlarz the copper boiler and Schmidt), - in the
Czech med Snatchers (medenj dol is the copper mine, cernomed black
copper, the copper surowa med stone from the first melting, doprawena
med the refined copper), - med in Krainschen and Slovak; - Medz also
khopar, kuppor Sorbian, - kotlowina in Windisch and Illyrian (what
is needed to boilers, Basin is boiler), also Kufer, kotlovinast is
coppery, kotlovinskaposoda is copper utensils, kotlovinar Kupferschmidt.

NHases,

Nahas, also suffar, Soffar nahhasyn in Arabic, el-Nahhas and the copper smelter, - nhhaas in
Malta, is nhhaasa copper utensils, - nahassy the Tigris and Nahas in Darfur and Dongola (North Africa)
- Onna, also tonghul in Berber (and after) - gurgemeh in Burnu (And after).

mfr in the Egyptian hieroglyphic language, according to Champollion, - homnt in Coptic, referhomnt,
Copper is also basnit, sanhomnt the copper Schmidt, joi and Chalin
(probably with [Greek: chalkos] connected) is copper dishes, bronze
and in general, - talekalame, kajehe-gnahese in Amharic.

nechasch,
nechoscheth is in the Chaldean (as nahas in Arabic), nechuschtan coppery,
nechoscheth the copper rust, tusigim also karkoma (such as [Greek:
chalkôma] in Greek, copper utensil) the copper Schmidt, - nechuscha
coppery, nechoscheth in Hebrew, is nachusch, brazen, - kalkitis in
Syriac, seruch is pure copper, molscho, magschotho is copper utensils.

[Greek: chalkos, chalkeion] in Greek (as in Syriac, Coptic, as in chalikin, Bronze, brazen dishes),
[Greek: chalkosmelas] is our black copper, also [Greek: chyton] and [Greek: trochion] (because the
round shape of the discs),: is [Greek chalkos Kyprios] the Cyprian, purified copper, also
[Greek: elaton] (stretched, hammered) was said (very related to it is the Arabic Alaton, brass,
whether it originates from the Greek, or vice versa, I leave undecided ing), [Greek: chalkrês,
chalkourgos] of copper Schmidt, - [Greek: chalkos, chalkôma, mpariki] in Modern Greek.

arene, alambrea, even in the Basque cobra is actually ore, as Arain,
Airan in Breton and air in Gaelic, - coppery arama in Wallachian,
and Aram, Amal, de arama is mesceru de arama the copper Schmidt, caldare
the boiler, ([Greek: rhama] aeramentum in the Middle Ages aeramen
the bronze, copper utensils); - rame in Italian, is Ramini copper
utensils, calderaio the copper Schmidt, Caldara of the boiler.

Copar, umha in Gälschen (Copur in Irish) is umhach coppery, umhadaireachd is copper plant Ceard
umha Kupferschmidt, coire the boiler, - efydd in Waelsch, efyddaid
is coppery, efyddwaith the copper plant effyddyn, the boiler, - Kober
in Cornish, - coeufr coeur cuefr in Breton.

[: Chalkos Greek] and ore generally, the common aes in Latin, as does Expression for copper was
cyprium (Cypriot ore), special species were aes salustium, livianum,
marianum, cordubense etc aes caldarium was black or coarse copper,
Regular or aes ductile, the purified, which also was called panis
aerei (because the round shape), aeneus, ahenius, aenus is copper,
aeneum, ahenum (sc vas) is copper implements.

Cuper, cuprum in medieval Latin (probably not cyprium but by Copar) - cobre, cobrea in Spanish, also
arambre alambre (from Basque), cobre blister copper is brutal, Cobre
dirosetta the cleaned, - in Portuguese cobre, cobre vermelho pure
copper; ereo is copper, of brass, bronze arame is, - in French cuivre,
cuivre noir, the black copper, cuivre de rosettes pure copper; - coper
in Anglo-Saxon, - the English copper, black copper is black or coarse
copper, red copper, the purified, copper work, copper work, - Kobber
in Danish and Norwegian, - koppar in Swedish, rokoppar, black koppar
the raw and Black copper in copper ores were called the Old Swedish
wask (from Finnish) - Kopar in Iceland, - copher in Alemannic, - kuphar
in Althochteutschen (the word copper its modifications in the various
idioms seems to be of Celtic origin).

venus bey the alchemical, even
brachium, calcocos, Halimar, michach, meliboeum, murpur, thebayco,
silipit etc

B. bronze.

The bronze, including bell metal, metal, etc is bestehet cannon, made of an alloy of copper
with tin, and depending on the diversity of purpose, you change the ratio these metals against
each other. The bronze is not strict and harsh liquid is, preferably to metal casting plants,
but is soft, covered with gray by the time, grünspanartigem Grids. In ancient times, particularly in Egypt
and the Celtic peoples were understood bey a to prepare fine bronze,
which was allowed to cure, was used to cutting tools, with the noble
malachitartigen, glossy-covered grids, which beautified the objects
rather as disfigured.

Such bronze is often found in Celtic graves. The Greeks and Romans seem, without the addition
of antique bronze, that noble bronze manufacture not have to be able to which is also the more
recent period has not yet succeeded. The hardened bronze was to be cut Instruments such as our
steel are used, but had the great advantage over it, that they rusted a lot harder, the iron
was therefore probably less than now in use, although It is well
known, so it probably referred to in many ancient languages ​​as the
bronze the ore in general.

Kansas, also pitala (yellow of pita) and Aja (di ore) in Sanskrit,
- pitala also wingapitala in Bengal.

hkro, hakhro, hakhara in Tibetan,
- goli, bacholi, tschara-Goolies nogon, in Mongolian, - teichoun the
Tartar-Manchu.

jes in Afghanistan, - ges, djies in the Caucasian
languages.

bghints in Armenian, - berintsch, pirindsh, pirink in
Persian, - pirintch, tutch in Turkish, also ejar Tues ore, - Berac
gnahese, in Amharic, - tug, TiBr in Arabic, is ajar ore, - opheret
in Hebrew.

karkoma in Chaldean, [Greek: chalkôma, chalkos kekrymmenos]
(by: conceal [Greek pryptein]) in Greek.

Prais, rate each in Gaelic, the latter word also means kettle, pot, copper is praisiche Schmidt,
- bresych in Waelsch (but I think this word is not bey Owen) - Arain in Breton, actually Ore;
- arama in Walachsichen [Wallachian] - Kipre in Albanian.

aes, aeramen the Romans.

[Greek: mprontzo] in Modern Greek, - [Greek: mprounzo, emproutzo, pronzines] in the Middle Ages, also
[Greek: rhama] aerimen, bronzinum also aerimea.

bronze, bronc in Polish, also spiza, Spiz (how well Beyme old Saxon mining man the Word food for
bronzed brass, as cobalt dish, bell-etc) - bronze in the Czech tables, zwonowina bell metal;
- bronze in Windisch, - bron in Krain, - bronze in English, actually brass (probably by Praise
in Gaelic), which means also any copper alloy, - bronze in Portuguese,
also arame, ce (probably from the Basque arene copper, or the Breton
Arain ore) - Bronzo in Italian, also rame, - bronze in French, also
airin, di ore, - bronze in Spanish, - bronse in Danish.

(What language the word comes from bronze, it seems to me very dark, almost one would think, that
it was of Slavic origin, but should remain Diess made quite there.)

C.
Brass.

The brass is an alloy of zinc, copper, known by the golden yellow color. The copper this is usually
Galmey (zinc oxide) dwindled, as the zinc and reguline the sphalerite (zinc sulphide) are difficult
to apply this. At the very similar compositions (But where both metals are connected in different
proportions, are Tombak, Semilor, pinsbek, prinz metal Tutenag, carbide or potin the French.

hoang
facility or uong-tong in Chinese, - status, tudsch in Tartar, - goli in Mongolian.

kansya in Bengal, - kansasthi in Sanscrit (actually the Tutenag is), even here include: Pitan (yellow),
pitalaka, pittala, pitaloha, pitakawera, sulchaka, Rawana, - kuning in Malay, is how the English
brass, and each copper alloy.

Laparoscopy in the Caucasian languages, also borsam, dukni, Macch, - ges, djies in Circassian, -
titberi, , Titbern TUTB in Georgia.

Zyad in Afghanistan, - bur, bor in Ossetic; - tsirokta, geginma in Tungus, - kangusak kakkokton
in Greenland, - Weike in Lapland.

aruir also pghints phailum (shiny
copper) in the Armenian, even phints dsachial (smoked Copper), oskiepghints
(copper gold), - pirindsch, and Tombak, ejur in Turkish, - pirinos
in Slovak.

Homat enbarot in Coptic, - bagogesa in Amharic, - temisse in Burnu
(North Africa) - Kajen duggigh in Dungalischen (and after) - schebeh,
mes in Persian, also talicum (ie mixed Metal), - schebbo Schiber,
in Kurdish.

gistron, Palisa in Chaldean.

Alaton in Arabic, also zifs, zofr (yellow metal), bettru, rüwis, ajar,
the brass workers is nachchas (NHases of the copper) - alato, lato
in the Middle Ages, so our latum, ie thin Brass plate, Latunhämmer,
Latunhütte, Latunschläger etc, even the word in the most Modern languages
​​passed.

Orchal, alcan in Breton, so archal in Old French, nor is jetzo fild'archal the wire, which is not of gold and
silver, - orikalk in Albanian, is also metal in general .-- In Gaelic I find no name, as umha
(copper), Prais (bronze and each copper alloy) Waelsch in me is also
not a name known.

[Greek: orichalkon, oreichalkon] in Greek (which does not certainly
Bergerz );--[ Greek: orichalkos] in Modern Greek, also [Greek: kiternos
chalkos, mpaphtos] and [Greek: laiton] (From the Arabic );--[ Greek:
Leko's chalkos] in the Middle Ages, - the Roman aurichalcum (Festus,
de verborum signification says: cadmea terra (zinc oxide), quae in
aes conjicitur, ut fiat Orichalcum) - oricalco in Italian, also ottone,
Latton (from Arabic); - oricalco in Spanish, also azofar, Plato, Allaton
(from Arabic; - Orchal, Orchal, orcholi the brass is Althochteutschen,
which is probably due: arco in Germans and Swedish, Arcot in French,
as the impure brass is, the melting Beyme remains.

If the names are not mentioned here come from the Celtic, so they might be-ing taken from the
Basque language.

Alcon, accatum Azog, the alchemist.

Plato in Spanish, Latton in Italian (from Arabic) next oricalco; - latao, Cobre Amarello in Portuguese; - laiton
in French, Arcot is the impure brass, Beyme the melting remains, the Messingwaaren dinanderie
were called, from the town of Dinant, where they are verfertiget
excellent; - battens in English, usually yellow brass and copper.

zlatonedo
in Croatia, - mjed xuuti in Ragusa.

mosiads in Polish, - mossas in
Wendisch, - mosadsz in Slovak; - nossacz in Sorbian, - MOSAZ in the
Czech Snatchers (contiguous with mosec, Mesce, ie mixing), so probably
the teutsche Moesch Mosler brass, which is not derived from or misc
mix, like Adele said, - Mösch in Altteutschen; - Mosler, maestlen
in Anglo-Saxon, - missin in Latvian, even seltans Papier (di yellow
copper); - Moesch Meisch, brass in Platt Germans, - Moeschinger, missing
in Swedish, arco is the impure brass; - brass in Danish and Germans.

sararez
in Magyar, even velentzel-rez (di Venetian Copper) - Aram galennz
in Wallachian, even arama galbina (yellow copper).

D. tinsel, tinsel.

Thus the words quite thin, beaten into fine leaves brass.

auripellum in medieval Latin (probably arose from the following words)
- Oropel in Spanish (if perhaps from Basque ?);-- oripeau, auripeau
clinquant and in French, - orpello in Italian (hence orpellare gild
spurious) - Alcan (such as brass) in Breton, - tinsel in English (even
tinsel is), - bladgull in Swedish, - gold leaf in the Dutch, - skahrdeles,
wissoule in Latvian, - zarklett in Illyrian, - [Greek: malamato Phylla]
in Modern Greek.

E. Weiss copper, nickel silver pakfong.

It is this, an alloy of copper with nickel, a very white silver-like
metal gives that the Chinese had always known.

In Europe they have only in recent this metal fabric Irishman learn, or at least is the method
known Fabrications, And now its use is very common.

pak-tong in Chinese, - pe-tung in the Madarinensprache (Being from which emerged is Tombak) pakfong
not how to read normally, and he is prct from 40th Copper, prct 35th
Nickel and prct 25th Zinc; - Changui teichoun-in Tatar-Manchu.

In the Roman and Greek antiquity were known a white copper, but was
probably it is the white Tombak.

F. White Tombak, white copper.

It is this, the alloy of copper with arsenic, which also forms a white,
the silver like metal, but it is hard, sometimes tarnish can use Beyme
harmful to humans stands are in the application of the pakfong for
great, was always known as this was fabricirt by the Chinese.

kansya
in Sanskrit, including Kansas, kansjaka (of sanchya of arsenic).

[Greek: chalkos mossinoikos] of the Greeks may perhaps belong here. Indian vessels of white copper
appear to be-ing well known to the Greeks was, as it is said of them:
[Greek: chalkeon argyreeô paneikelon, indikon ergon].

cuprum album,
Orichalcum album of the Romans, even well-aes candidum in part to
the Romans is here belong.

G. Kanchan.

India is in 8 parts copper and 2 parts of tin, a white, silver-like metal to Dining utensils
are made, the Kanchan, wongolan means also that we in this kind are not fabric Irishmen understand.

H. With copper alloy of gold and silver, the carat.

Carat (carat Character, in English, in French carat) refers partly
a small weight for gold and precious stones, some the Löthigkeit or
fineness of gold and silver, which usually bey especially the coins
are alloyed with copper.

The alloy of silver and copper - the white Karatirung - is very common at all times bey and applied
to all peoples, especially bey the coins, the name carats from the
East are called, in Arabic alkerat, caracta midrange Latin Carato
in Italian, Quilate in Spanish.

The alloy of bronze with silver, the musical's for certain purposes, such instruments bey is well
used, was among the Greeks and Romans, probably in use in the East, here is the aes candidum have
heard with, perhaps the aes corinthium to the man but taken also ancient (Celtic) bronze seems
to have.

The alloy of gold with copper - the red Karatirung - was always well bey all peoples known,
especially bey the coins in use (although the Celtic coins from the
purest Gold there), also gives the alloy the Goldschlageloth, for
Löther of gold and silver.

pyropus the Romans belong here, so probably
[Greek: pyropos] in Giiechischen, - the chasmal Hebrews, perhaps,
- persons in Japan.

I. copper rust, copper, in general, hammered copper, copper ash.

The red copper oxide is covered with slightly from gray-green color, so the bronze, only the elegant,
antique bronze has the peculiarity that they have a green, even brilliant, malachitartigen Covering of receive
- the fine grid, patine in French - which is a carbonate of copper,
the object rather than embellished deteriorated.

Tsing-tong in China; - tai-tambaja in Malay, - riti, Ritika, retja in Sanskrit, maybe push
para, çenhara; - Zangarian in Hindu, - cenjar, genkar (as in the Hindu), Jenks, between the Persian,
- Cengar, sindchar, azzengar also zeralnhas, touban anarin, in Arabic,
- Zenk, Zienken in Kurdish, - cavil, shang, tzjetz in Armenian, -
anarin in Turkish, - sodid in Maltese, - kime in Lapland; - Schiber,
scheibi in Coptic.

nechoscheth, sakkaah also chaledutha, chalduta
in Chaldean, - ithus-katki (of kalkitis Copper) and zedgo in Syriac,
- [Greek: ios chalkos] in Greek (as ithus-kalki in Syriac), also [Greek:
ion] at all was the copper, natural or artificial, [Greek: chalkos
anthos] and [Greek: lepis chalcone] was the copper hammer.

[Greek: iarin] iarin, mean age (probably from anarim in Arabic), [Greek:
rhasouchthê] (Probably from the Slavic), also [Greek: mpatityra] batitura
the copper hammer.

zingar the alchemist, even zynser, altingar, Altimar,
elizimar, afragar, alselat auxanthi, aycupher, arcos, eliz.

rdza,
rdza Miedziana in Polish, - rez, in the Czech rezna medical tables,
- rozda in Magyar; - ruoste in Finland, - ruos in Lapland.

rhwd,
rhydni in Waelsch, - meirg in Galisch; - Rugina in Wallachian.

aerugo,
rubigo, robigo of the Romans (probably from the Celtic), the rust
is featuring flos, squama, lepisaeris the copper hammer, Favilla aeris
the oxide obtained by firing the green chip was obtained, - Ruggine
Verderame, in Italian, - rouille de cuivre, Verdet in French, airin
in ancient times also, the noble patine rust, batiture de cuivre the
hammer is, - rust, copper rust in English, - ragu, rust, corrosion
cyper in Anglo-Saxon, - kobberrust in Danish, - koperroest in Dutch,
- copper corrosion in old High Germans, kuperasch, copper shock is
hammered, - rust, chloride in Iceland, - eirrid, eirrost kopparergen,
in Swedish.

Verdet in Spanish, also Cardenillo (whether from the Basque ?);--
cardenilho also azenhavre In Portuguese.

K. verdigris green chip.

A charcoal and green copper acetate, which since ancient times as
a color material used, usually by means of vinegar or wine pomace
and copper is prepared artificially.

Tung-zing-zang or tong (ie the copper green) in Chinese, also touglou;
- tounglou in Tartar-Manchu, - zandasa - gayaha in Tibetan.

pitala,
çekhara in Sanscrit, - pitrac, Zangarian in the Hindu; - Cengar, zenigar
in Arabic, althecheregi is the finest kind, - the Persian jengar;
- schenkiar in Turkish.

schuchto, schechuto in Syriac, - [Greek:
ion xyston] in Greek (certainly Semitic Origin), also [Greek: ion
scolex] (probably Semitic );--[ Greek: chalkos kouria] in Modern Greek,
- [Greek: berderamê] in the Middle Ages (green is copper, from the
Wallachian arama), also [Greek: berdermon, skoulikê, giarin].

asingar
bey the alchemical, even almizadir, almechafule, asugar, asigi, yo,
Yoma.

aeruca, aerugo, scoletia the Romans.

meirg praise in Gaelic,
- ferdigres in Breton (?) - vert de gris in French (gris can hardly
mean gray here, is be-ing foreign origin); earning grease, in verdigris
English (grease can not mean fat); - verdegris in Spanish.

grinspan
in Wallachian, - green span the Germans (in this case stands not chip
well in his usual Value), - spansgröna kopp argon, in Swedish, - spansgrönt
koppergrönt, Danish, - spansgrön in Dutch (which is perhaps gryszpan
Spanish-green ?);--, Snieders, rdzamiedziana in Polish, - grynsspan,
rez zelena in the Czech tables, - grienspet also selenina is bronza
in Windisch (ie the green of copper).

fior di rame in Italian, -
azinhavre in Portuguese.

L. Berg green, copper green.

A green, earthy copper oxide, often argillaceous, is found in the
corridors, as sales of bearings Waters will also be made artificially,
serves as the color of the painter (slate green, mountain green),
also to Löther of gold, is the verdigris, the green earth, the oxide
of copper and malachite used (See these).

lou-tsing-chi in Chinese,
- zadasa-gayaha in Tibetan, - zenegar are sharp, even lezach oldeb
in Arabic, zilchu 'lzaghati, is translated as chrysocolla, commonly
known as borax, is well here too.

 According to these they were plain and neat in their
apparel, and frugal in their furniture. They were temperate in their eating and drinking. They
relinquished all the diversions of the times, in which they saw any tendency to evil. They
were chaste in their conversation, tempering mirth with gravity. They were modest and chaste
in their deportment and manners. They were punctual to their words and engagements. They were
such lovers of the truth, that, on being asked, if they were Christians, they never denied
it, though death was the consequence of such a religious profession. They loved each other
as brethren, and called one another by that name. They were kind, and courteous, and charitable,
beyond all example, to others. They abstained from all manner of violence. They prayed for
those who persecuted them. They were patterns of humility and patience. They made no sacrifice
of their consciences, but would persevere in that which was right, never refusing to die for
their religion. This is the character, which is uniformly given of them by the Christian writers
of those times.

That their conduct was greatly altered in the third century, where we are now to view it, we
may collect from indisputable authority. I stated in the former section, that a Christian soldier
was punished for refusing to wear a garland, like the rest of his comrades, on a public occasion.
This man, it appears, had been converted in the army, and objected to the ceremony on that
account. Now Tertullian tells us, that this soldier was blamed for his unseasonable zeal, as
it was called, by some of the Christians at that time, though all Christians before considered
the wearing of such a garland as unlawful and profane. In this century there is no question
but the Christian discipline began to relax. To the long peace the church enjoyed from the
death of Antoninus to the tenth year of Severus, is to be ascribed the corruption that ensued.
This corruption we find to have spread rapidly; for the same Tertullian was enabled to furnish
us with the extraordinary instance of manufacturers of idols being admitted into the ecclesiastical
order. Many corruptions are also noticed in this century by other writers. Cyprian complained
of them, as they existed in the middle, and Eusebius, as they existed at the end of it, and
both attributed it to the peace, or to the ease and plenty, which the Christians had enjoyed.
The latter gives us a melancholy account of their change. They had begun to live in fine houses,
and to indulge in luxuries. But, above all, they had begun to be envious, and quarrelsome,
and to dissemble, and to cheat, and to falsify their word, so that they lost the character,
which Pliny, an adversary to their religion, had been obliged to give of them, and which they
had retained for more than a century, as appears by their own writers.

That there were Christian soldiers in this more corrupt century of the church, it is impossible
to deny. For such frequent mention is made of them in the histories, which relate to this period,
that we cannot refuse our assent to one or other of the propositions, either that there were
men in the armies, who called themselves Christians, or that there were men in them, who had
that name given them by others. That they were Christians, however, is another question. They
were probably such Christians, as Dion mentioned to have been among the life-guards of Dioclesian
and Maximian, and of Constantius and Maximus, of whom Maximilian observed, "These men may know
what it is expedient for them to do, but I am a Christian, and therefore I cannot fight." Indeed,
that real Christians could have been found in the army in this century is impossible, for the
military oath, which was full of idolatry, and the adoration of the standards, and the performance
of sacrifice, still continued as services[14] not to be dispensed with by the soldiery. No
one, therefore, can believe, that men in the full practice of Pagan idolatry, as every legionary
soldier must then have been, were real Christians, merely because it is recorded in history,
that men, calling themselves Christians, were found in the army in those times. On the other
hand, if any soldiers professed Christianity at this period, or are related by authors to have
professed it, and yet to have remained soldiers, it may be directly pronounced, that they could
only have been nominal or corrupted Christians.

[Footnote 14: The military oath was not altered for Christians till the next century, when
they were allowed to swear "by God, by Christ, and by the Holy Spirit, and by the majesty of
the emperor, which, next to God, is to be loved and honoured by mankind."]

That Christianity was more degenerate in the fourth than in the third century (which is the
next position) we have indubitable proof. One of the first facts, that strikes us, is an extraordinary
one related by Lactantius, in his "Death of the persecuted," that there were Christians at
this time, who, having probably a superstitious belief, that the sign of the Cross would be
a preventive of pollution, were present, and even assisted at some of the Heathen sacrifices.
But it is not necessary to detail these or other particulars. Almost every body knows, that
more evils sprang up to the church in this century, than in any other, some of which remain
at the present day. Indeed, the corruption of Christianity was fixed as it were by law in the
age now mentioned. Constantine, on his conversion, introduced many of the Pagan ceremonies
and, superstitions, in which he had been brought up, into the Christian religion. The Christians,
rejoiced at seeing an emperor of their own persuasion, under whom they had hopes of restoration
to equal privileges with others, and of freedom from persecution, submitted, in order to please
or flatter him, to his idolatrous customs and opinions, thus sacrificing their consciences
to their ease and safety. Many, on the other hand, who had always been Heathens, professed
themselves Christians at once out of compliment to their emperor, and without any real conversion
of the heart. Thus there was a mixture of Christianity and Paganism in the church, which had
never been known before. Constantine too did not dispense with the blasphemous titles of Eternity,
Divinity, and Pontifex Maximus, as they had been given to his predecessors. After his death,
he was considered also as a god. And if Philostorgius is to be believed, the Christians, for
so he calls them, prayed to and worshipped him as such.

Now in this century, when the corruption of the church may be considered to have been fixed,
we scarcely find any mention of Christian soldiers, or we find the distinction between them
and others gradually passing away. The truth is, that, when the Christians of this age had
submitted to certain innovations upon their religion, they were in a fit state to go greater
lengths; and so it happened, for as Heathens, who professed to be Christians out of compliment
to their emperor, had no objection to the military service, so Christians, who had submitted
to Heathenism on the same principle, relaxed, in their scruples concerning it. The latter too
were influenced by the example of the former. Hence the unlawfulness of fighting began to be
given up. We find, however, that here and there an ancient father still retained it as a religious
tenet, but these dropping off one after another, it ceased at length to be a doctrine of the
church.

Having now traced the practice of the Christians down to the fourth century, as far as the
profession of arms is concerned, I shall state in few words the manner in which the Quakers
make this practice support the meaning of the scriptural passages, which they produce in favour
of their tenet on war.

The Quakers then lay it down as a position, that the Christians of the first and second centuries,
as we had already observed, gave the same interpretation, as they themselves give, of the passages
in question.

Now they say first, that if there were any words or expressions in the original manuscripts
of the Evangelists or Apostles, which might throw light upon the meaning of these or other
passages on the same subject, but which words and expressions were not in the copies which
came after, then many of those who lived in the first and second centuries, had advantages
with respect to knowledge on this subject, which their successors had not, inasmuch as the
former were soon afterwards lost.

They say secondly, that if there was any thing in tradition which might help to explain these
passages more satisfactorily, those of the first and second centuries had advantages again,
because they lived nearer to these traditions, or to the time when they were more pure, than
those Christians did, who succeeded them.

They say thirdly, that, if primitive practice be to be considered as the best interpreter of
the passages in question, then those of the first and second centuries had their advantages
again, because many of them lived in the times of the Evangelists and the Apostles, and all
of them nearer to those who succeeded the Evangelists and Apostles, than those in the subsequent
ages of the Christian era.

But in direct inference, they conceive, is to be drawn from these premises, namely, that the
opinions of those who lived in the first and second centuries, relative to the meaning of the
passages in question, are likely to be more correct on these several accounts, than those of
Christians in any of the ages that followed.

And as in the first and second centuries of the church, when Christianity was purest, there
were no Christian soldiers, but as in the fourth century, when it became corrupt, Christians
had lost their objections to a military life, they conceive the opinions of the former to be
more correct than those of the latter, because the opinions of real Christians, willing to
make any sacrifice for their religion, must be always less biassed and more pure, than those
of persons calling themselves Christians, but yet submitting to the idolatrous and other corrupt
practices of the world.

And as they conceive this to be true of the opinions of the second century, when compared with
those of the fourth, so they conceive it to be true of the opinions of the second, when compared
with those of the moderns upon this subject, because, whatever our progress in Christianity
may be, seeing that it is not equal to that of the first Christians, it is certain, besides
the distance of time, that we have prejudices arising from the practice of fourteen centuries,
during all which time it has been held out, except by a few individuals, as lawful for Christians
to fight.

SECT.V.

Reflections of the author on the foregoing subject--Case of a superior being supposed, who
should reside in the planet nearest to us, and see war carried on by men no larger than the
race of ants--His enquiry as to the origin of these wars--their duration--and other circumstances--supposed
answers to these questions--New arguments, from this supposed conversation, against war.

I have now stated the principal arguments, by which the Quakers are induced to believe it to
be a doctrine of Christianity, that men should abstain from war, and I intended to close the
subject in the last section. But when I consider the frequency of modern wars; when I consider
that they are scarcely over, before others rise up in their place; when I consider again, that
they come like the common diseases, which belong to our infirm nature, and that they are considered
by men nearly in a similar light, I should feel myself criminal, if I were not to avail myself
of the privilege of an author, to add a few observations of my own upon this subject.

Living as we do in an almost inaccessible island, and having therefore more than ordinary means
of security to our property and our persons from hostile invasion, we do not seem to be sufficiently
grateful to the Divine Being for the blessings we enjoy. We do not seem to make a right use
of our benefits by contemplating the situation, and by feeling a tender anxiety for the happiness
of others. We seem to make no proper estimates of the miseries of war. The latter we feel principally
in abridgments of a pecuniary nature. But if we were to feel them in the conflagration of our
towns and villages, or in personal wounds, or in the personal sufferings of fugitive misery
and want, we should be apt to put a greater value than we do, upon the blessings of peace.
And we should be apt to consider the connexion between war and misery, and between war and
moral evil, in a light so much stronger than we do at present, that we might even suppose the
precepts of Jesus Christ to be deficient, unless they were made to extend to wars, as well
as to private injuries.

I wonder what a superior being, living in the nearest planet to our earth, and seeing us of
the size of ants, would say, if he were enabled to get any insight into the nature of modern wars.

It must certainly strike him, if he were to see a number of such diminutive persons chasing
one another in bodies over different parts of the hills and vallies of the earth, and following
each other in little nut-shells, as it were upon the ocean, as a very extraordinary sight,
and as mysterious, and hard to be explained. He might, at first, consider them as occupied
in a game of play, or as emigrating for more food, or for a better climate. But when he saw
them stop and fight, and destroy one another, and was assured that they were actually engaged
in the solemn game of death, and this at such a distance from their own homes, he would wonder
at the causes of these movements, and the reason of this destruction, and, not knowing that
they possessed rational faculties, he would probably consider them as animals, destined by
nature to live upon one another.

I think the first question he would ask would be, And from whence do these fightings come?
It would be replied of course, that they came from their lusts; that these beings, though diminutive
in their appearance, were men; that they had pride, and ambition; that they had envy and jealousy;
that they indulged also hatred, and malice, and avarice, and anger; and that, on account of
some or other of these causes, they quarrelled and fought with one another.

Well, but the superior being would say, is there no one on the earth, which I see below me,
to advise them to conduct themselves better, or are the passions you speak of eternally uppermost,
and never to be subdued? The reply would of course be, that in these little beings, called
men, there had been implanted the faculty of reason, by the use of which they must know that
their conduct was exceptionable, but that, in these cases, they seldom minded it. It would
also be added in reply, that they had a religion, which was not only designed by a spirit from
heaven, who had once lived among them, but had been pronounced by him as efficacious to the
end proposed; that one of the great objects of this religion was a due subjugation of their
passions; and this was so much insisted upon, that no one of them was considered to have received
this religion truly, unless his passions were subdued. But here the superior being would enquire,
whether they acknowledged the religion spoken of, and the authority from whence it came? To
which it would of course be replied, that they were so tenacious of it, notwithstanding their
indulgence of their passions, and their destruction of one another, that you could; not offend
them more grievously than by telling them, that they did not belong to the religion they professed.

It is not difficult to foresee what other questions the superior being would ask, and probably
the first of these would be, the duration of the lives of these little beings, and the length
and frequency of their wars? It would be replied to this, that their lives were but as a vapour,
which appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away, and that a quarter, and sometimes
half of their time on earth, was spent in those destructive pursuits. The superior being would
unquestionably be grieved at this account, because he would feel, that they really frustrated
their own happiness, or that they lost by their own fault a considerable portion of the enjoyment
of their lives.

In this impatience and anxiety for their future comfort, he would probably ask again, if they
had any notion of any generous end for which they were born, for it is impossible they could
suppose, that they came into the world to destroy one another. It would be replied, that they
could not be ignorant of the true object or end; for the same religion, in which they believed,
and which was said before to have been given them by a spirit sent from heaven, inculcated
that they were sent there on a life of trial, and that in a future existence they were to give
an account of their conduct, and were to be rewarded or punished accordingly. The same religion,
it would be replied, also inculcated, notwithstanding their fightings, the utmost benevolence
from one towards another. It wished so much every one of them to live peaceably, that it enjoined
it as a duty rather to put up with an injury than to resent it, and it carried its benevolence
so far, that it made no distinction between others of the same species, who spoke a different
language, or lived in other districts or parts of the same world.

But here the superior being would interrupt.--What, he would say! Are they not to resent injuries,
and yet do they go to war? And are they not afraid of fighting in this manner, when they are
to give an account of their conduct in a future state? It would be replied, No: they have their
philosophers among them, and most of these have determined, that, in this particular case,
responsibility lies at the door of those who employ them. But, notwithstanding this, there
are others living among them, who think otherwise. These are of opinion, that those who employ
them cannot take the responsibility upon themselves without taking it from those whom they
thus employ. But the religion of the Great Spirit no where says, that any constituted authorities
among them can take away the responsibility of individual creatures, but, on the other hand,
in the most positive terms, that every individual creature is responsible wholly for himself.
And this religion does not give any creature an exemption on account of any force which may
be used against him; because no one, according to its precepts, is to do evil, not even that
good may come. But if he be persecuted, he is to adhere to that which is right, and to expect
his reward in the other state. The impossibility, therefore, of breaking or dissolving individual
responsibility, in the case of immoral action, is an argument to many, of the unlawfulness
of these wars. And those who reason in this manner, think they have reasoned right, when they
consider besides, that, if any of the beings in question were to kill one of his usually reputed
enemies in the time of peace, he would suffer death for it, and be considered as accountable
also for his crime in a future state. They cannot see, therefore, how any constituted authorities
among them can alter the nature of things, or how these beings can kill others in time of war,
without the imputation of a crime, whom they could not kill without such an imputation in time
of peace. They see in the book of the Great Spirit no dispensation given to societies to after
the nature of actions, which are pronounced to be crimes.

But the superior being would say, is it really defined, and is it defined clearly in the great
book of the Spirit, that if one of them should kill another, he is guilty of a crime! It would
be replied, not only of a crime, but of the greatest of all crimes, and that no dispensation
is given to any of them to commit it in any case. And it would be observed farther, that there
are other crimes, which these fightings generally include, which are equally specified and
forbidden in the great book, but which they think it proper to sanction in the present case.
Thus, all kinds of treachery and deceit are considered to be allowable, for a very ancient
philosopher among them has left a maxim upon record, and it has not yet been beaten out of
their heads, notwithstanding the precepts of the great book, in nearly the following words:
"Who thinks of requiring open courage of an enemy, or that treachery is not equally allowable
in war?"[15]

[Footnote 15: Dolus an virtus quis in hoste requirat?]

Strange! the superior being would reply. They seem to me to be reversing the order of their
nature, and the end of their existence. But how do they justify themselves on these occasions?
It would be answered, that they not only justify themselves, but they even go so far as to
call these fightings honourable. The greater the treachery, if it succeeds, and the greater
the number of these beings killed, the more glorious is the action esteemed.

Still more strange! the superior being would reply. And is it possible, he would add, that
they enter into this profession With a belief, that they are entering into an honourable employ?
Some of them, it would be replied, consider it as a genteel employ. And hence they engage in
it. Others, of a lazy disposition, prefer it to any other. Others are decoyed into it by treachery
in various ways. There are also strong drinks, which they are fond of, and if they are prevailed
upon to take these to excess, they lose their reason, and then they are obliged to submit to
it. It must be owned too, that when these wars begin, the trades of many of these little beings
are stopped, so that, to get a temporary livelihood, they go out and fight. Nor must it be
concealed, that many are forced to go, both against their judgment and against their will.

The superior being, hurt at these various accounts, would probably ask, and what then does
the community get by these wars, as a counterbalance for the loss of so much happiness, and
the production of so much evil? It would be replied, nothing. The community is generally worse
off at the end of these wars, than when it began to contend. But here the superior being would
wish to hear no more of the system. He would suddenly turn away his face, and retire into one
of the deep valleys of his planet, either with exclamations against the folly, or with emotions
of pity for the situation, or with expressions of disgust at the wickedness, of these little
creatures.

   "O for a lodge in some vast wilderness,
   Some boundless contiguity of shade,
   Where tumour of oppression and deceit,
   Of unsuccessful or successful war,
   Might never reach me more!

COWPER

SECT. VI.

Subject farther considered--Sad conceptions of those relative to the Divine Being, and the
nature of the Gospel, who plead for the necessity of war--War necessary, where statesmen pursue
the policy of the world--Nature and tendency of this policy--but not necessary where they pursue
the policy of the Gospel--Nature and tendency of this policy--This tendency farther confirmed
by a supposed case of a few Quakers becoming the governors of the world.

It is now an old maxim, and time with all its improvements has not worn it away, that wars
are necessary in the present constitution of the world. It has not even been obliterated, that
they are necessary, in order to sweep off mankind on account of the narrow boundaries of the
earth. But they, who make use of this argument, must be aware, that, in espousing it, they
declare no less, than that God, in the formation of his system, had only half calculated or
half provided for its continuance, and that they charge him with a worse cruelty than is recorded
of the worst of men: because, if he told men to increase and multiply, and gave them passions
accordingly, it would appear as if he had created them only to enjoy an eternal feast in the
sight of their destruction. Nor do they make him a moral governor of the world, if he allows
men to butcher one another without an individual provocation or offence.

Neither do persons, arguing for the necessity of wars, do less than set themselves above the
prophecies or oracles of God, which declare, that such warfare shall some time or other cease.

Neither do they, when they consider wars as necessary, and as never to be done away on account
of the wicked passions of men, do less than speak blasphemy against the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
because they proclaim it to be inadequate to the end proposed. For the proper subjugation of
these, among other purposes, it was that the Gospel was promulgated. If it be thought a miracle,
that the passions of men should be subdued, it is still a miracle, which Christianity professes
to work; which it has worked since the hour of its institution; which it has worked in men,
who have placed their highest reputation in martial glory; and which it continues to work,
at the present day. Those, therefore, who promote wars, and excite the passions of men for
this purpose, attempt to undo what it is the object of Christianity to do, and to stop the
benign influence of the Gospel in the hearts of men.

That wars are necessary, or rather that they will be begun and continued, I do not mean to
deny, while statesmen pursue the wisdom or policy of the world.

What this wisdom or policy is, it will not be difficult to trace. And first, when any matter
is in dispute among the rulers of nations, is it not a maxim, that a high tone is desirable
in the settlement of it, in order that the parties may seem to betray neither fear nor weakness,
and that they may not be thought to lose any of their dignity or their spirit? Now as the human
passions are constituted, except they have previously been brought under due regulation by
Christianity, what is more likely than that a high tone of language on one side should beget
a similar tone on the other, or that spirit, once manifested, should, produce spirit in return,
and that each should fly off, as it were, at a greater distance from accommodation than before,
and that, when once exasperation has begun, it should increase. Now what is the chance, if
such policy be resorted to on such occasions, of the preservation of peace between them?

And, secondly, is it not also a received maxim, that, in controversies of this sort, a nation,
even during the discussion, should arm itself, in order that it may shew itself prepared? But
if any one nation arms during the discussion; if it fits out armies or fleets of observation
with a view of deterring, or of being ready in case of necessity of striking, as it is called,
the first blow; what is more probable, than that the other will arm also, and that it will
fit out its own armies and fleets likewise? But when both are thus armed, pride and spirit
will scarcely suffer them to relax, and what is then more probable, than that they will begin
to fight?

And, thirdly, is it not a maxim also, that, even during the attempt to terminate the dispute,
the public mind should be prepared? Are not the public papers let loose to excite and propagate
a flame? And are not the deeds of our ancestors ushered into our ears to produce a martial
spirit? But if the national temper is roused on both sides, and if preparations are carrying
on at the same time with the utmost vigour, where again is the hope of the prevention of war
between them?

And, fourthly, after hostilities are commenced, is it not a maxim also to perpetuate the enmity,
which has been thus begun, and to give it a deeper root, and even to make it eternal by connecting
it with religion? Thus flag-staffs are exhibited upon steeples, bells are rung to announce
victories, and sermons are preached as occasions arise, as if the places allotted for Christian
worship, were the most proper from whence to issue the news of human suffering, or to excite
the passions of men for the destruction of one another. Nor is this all. The very colours of
the armies are consecrated. I do not mean to say, that like the banners in the Praetorian tents,
they are actually worshipped, but that an attempt is made to render them holy in the eyes of
those who are present. An attempt is made, wonderful to relate, to incorporate war into the
religion of Jesus Christ, and to perpetuate enmity on the foundation of the Gospel!

Now this is the policy of the world, and can it be seriously imagined, that such a system as
this can ever lead to peace? For while discussions relative to matters of national dispute
are carried on in a high tone, because a more humble tone would betray weakness or fear; while
again, during this discussion, preparations for war are going on, because the appearance of
being prepared would convey the idea of determined resolution, and of more than ordinary strength;
while again, during the same discussion, the national spirit is awakened and inflamed; and
while again, when hostilities have commenced, measures are resorted to, to perpetuate a national
enmity, so that the parties consider themselves as natural enemies even in the succeeding peace,
what hope is there of the extermination of war on earth?

But let us now look at the opposite policy, which is that of the Gospel. Now this policy would
consist in the practice of meekness, moderation, love, patience, and forbearance, with a strict
regard to justice, so that no advantages might be taken on either side. But if these principles,
all of which are preventive of irritation, were to be displayed in our negotiations abroad,
in the case of any matter in dispute, would they not annihilate the necessity of wars? For
what is the natural tendency of such principles? What is their tendency, for instance, in private
life? And who are the negotiators on these occasions but men? Which kind of conduct is most
likely to disarm an opponent, that of him who holds up his arm to strike, if his opponent should
not comply with his terms, or of him who argues justly, who manifests a temper of love and
forbearance, and who professes that he will rather suffer than resist, and that he will do
every thing sooner than that the affair shall not be amicably settled? The Apostle Paul, who
knew well the human heart, says, "If thine enemy hunger, feed him, for in so doing thou shalt
heap coals of fire on his head." That is, thou shall cause him, by thy amiable conduct, to
experience burning feelings within himself, which, while they torment him with the wickedness
of his own conduct, shall make him esteem thee, and bring him over to thy side. Thus thou shalt
overcome his evil by thy good. Or, in other words, as fire melts the hardest metals, so thy
kindness shall melt his anger. Thus Parnell--

   "So artists melt the sullen ore of lead,
   By heaping coals of fire upon its head.
   Touch'd by the warmth, the metal teams to glow,
   And pure from dress, the silver tang below."

This policy again would consist of the practical duty of attempting to tranquillize the minds
of the people, while the discussion was going on, of exhorting them to await the event with
composure, of declaring against the folly and wickedness of wars, as if peace only could be
the result, of abstaining from all hostile preparations, and indeed from all appearance of
violence. Now what influence would such conduct have again, but particularly when known to
the opposite party? If the opposite party were to see those alluded to keeping down the passions
of their people, would they inflame the passions of their own? If they were to be convinced,
that these were making no preparations for war, would they put themselves to the expence of
arming? Can we see any other termination of such a contest than the continuance of peace?

That the policy of the Gospel, if acted upon by statesmen, would render wars unnecessary, we
may infer from supposed cases. And, first, I would ask this simple question, whether, if all
the world were Quakers, there would be any more wars? I am sure the reply would be, no. But
why not? Because nations of Quakers, it would be replied, would discuss matters in dispute
between them with moderation, with temper, and with forbearance. They would never make any
threats. They would never arm, and consequently they would never fight. It would be owing then
to these principles, or, in other words, to the adoption of the policy of the Gospel in preference
of the policy of the world, that, if the globe were to be peopled by Quakers, there would be
no wars. Now I would ask, what are Quakers but men, and might not all, if they would suffer
themselves to be cast in the same mould as the Quakers, come out of it of the same form and
character?

But I will go still farther. I will suppose that any one of the four continents, having been
previously divided into three parts, was governed only by three Quakers, and that these had
the same authority over their subjects, as their respective sovereigns have at present. And
I win maintain, that there would never be, upon this continent, during their respective administrations,
another war. For, first, many of the causes of war would be cut off. Thus, for instance, there
would be no disputes about insults offered to flags. There would be none again about the balance
of power. In short, it would be laid down as a position, that no one was to do evil, that good
might come. But as, notwithstanding, there might still be disputes from other causes, these
would be amicably settled. For first, the same Christian disposition would be manifest in the
discussion as in the former case. And, secondly, if the matter should be of an intricate nature,
so that one Quaker government could not settle it with another, these would refer it, according
to their constitution, to a third. This would be the "ne plus ultra" of the business. Both
the discussion and the dispute would end here. What a folly then to talk of the necessity of
wars, when, if but three Quakers were to rule a continent, they would cease there? There can
be no plea for such language, but the impossibility of taming the human passions. But the subjugation
of these is the immediate object of our religion. To confess, therefore, that wars must be,
is either to utter a libel against Christianity, or to confess that we have not yet arrived
at the stature of real Christians.

SECT. VII.

Subject farther examined--Case allowed, that if a cabinet of good men had to negotiate with
a cabinet of good men, there might be no wars--but what would be the issue if good had to deal
with bad--Case of American settlers, who adopted the policy of the world, and were always at
war--and of other American settlers, who adopted the policy of the Gospel, and were always
at peace--No case stronger, than where civilized men had to deal with savage American tribes.

I believe it will be allowed, that the Quaker instances, mentioned in the last section, are
in point. But I am aware also, it will be said that, though different cabinets, all having
the same Christian disposition, would settle their disputes in a friendly manner, how would
a cabinet, consisting of spiritually minded men, settle with a cabinet of other men, who had
not brought their passions under due regulation, and who, besides, had no notion of the unlawfulness
of war.

I apprehend that it will not be denied, that men, as ferocious as any recorded in history,
were those, who were found in America, when that continent was discovered. We hear nothing
of Africans, or of Asiatics, which would induce us to suppose, that they were as wild and as
barbarous as these. And nothing is more true of these, than they, were frequently concerned
in wars. I shall therefore take these for an example, and I shall shew by the opposite conduct
of two different communities towards them, that it rests with men to live peaceably or not,
as they cultivate the disposition to do it, or as they follow the policy of the Gospel in preference
of the policy of the world.

When the English, Dutch, and others, began to people America, they purchased land of the natives.
But when they went to that continent, notwithstanding there were amiable persons among them,
and friends to civil and religious liberty, they went with the notions of worldly policy, and
they did not take with them the Christian wisdom of the unlawfulness of war. They acted on
the system of preparation, because there might be danger. They never settled without palisadoes
and a fort. They kept their nightly watches, though unmolested. They were, in short, in the
midst of war, though no injury had been offered them by the natives, and though professedly
in the midst of peace.

In the peopling of Connecticut, for I must begin with some one state, it was ordered at an
English court,[16] "holden at Dorchester, on the seventh day of June, 1736, that every town
should keep a watch, and be well supplied with ammunition. The constables were directed to
warn the watches in their turns, and to make it their care, that they should be kept according
to the direction of the court. They were required also to take care that the inhabitants were
well furnished with arms and ammunition, and kept in a constant state of defence." As these
infant settlements, the author observes, "were filled and surrounded with numerous savages,
the people conceived themselves in danger, when they lay down, and when they rose up, when
they went out, and when they came in. Their circumstances were such, that it was judged necessary
for every man to be a soldier."

[Footnote 16: Trumbull's History of Connecticut, p. 56.]

I find from this author, looking farther into his history, that previously to the order of
the court at Dorchester, which did nothing more than enjoin a more strict execution of the
original plan, which was that of military preparation and defence, some of the settlers had
been killed by the natives. The provocation which the natives received, is not mentioned. But
it was probably provocation enough to savage Indians, to see people settle in their country
with all the signs and symptoms of war. Was such a system likely to have any other effect than
that of exciting their jealousy? They could see that these settlers had at least no objection
to the use of arms. They could see that these arms could never be intended but against other
persons, and there were no other persons there but themselves. Judging therefore by outward
circumstances, they could draw no inference of a peaceable disposition in their new neighbours.
War soon followed. The Pequots were attacked. Prisoners were made on both sides. The Indians
treated those settlers barbarously, who fell into their hands, for they did not see, on the
capture of their own countrymen, any better usage on the part of the settlers themselves; for
these settlers, again, had not the wisdom to use the policy of the Gospel, but preferred the
policy of the world.[17] "Though the first planters of New-England and Connecticut, says the
same author, were men of eminent piety and strict morals, yet, like other good men, they were
subject to misconception, and the influence of passion. Their beheading sachems whom they took
in war, killing the male captives, and enslaving the women and children, was treating them
with a severity, which, on the benevolent principles of Christianity, it will be difficult
to justify."

[Footnote 17: P. 112.]

After this treatment, war followed war. And as other settlements were made by others in other
states on the same principles, war fell to their portion likewise. And the whole history of
the settlement of America, where these principles were followed, or where the policy of the
world was adopted, is full of the wars between the settlers and the Indians, which have continued
more or less, and this nearly up to the present day.

But widely different was the situation of the settlers under William Penn. When he and his
fellow Quakers went to this continent, they went with the principles of Christian wisdom, or
they adopted the policy of the Gospel instead of the policy of the world. They had to deal
with the same savage Indians as the other settlers. They had the same fury to guard against,
and were in a situation much more exposed to attack, and of course much more creative of alarm;
for they had neither sword nor musket, nor pallisadoe, nor fort. They judged it neither necessary
to watch, nor to be provided with ammunition, nor to become soldiers. They spoke the language
of peace to the natives, and they proved the sincerity of their language by their continuance
in a defenceless condition. They held out also, that all wars were unlawful, and that, whatever
injuries were offered them, they would sooner bear them, than gratify the principle of revenge.
It is quite needless to go farther into the system of this venerable founder of Pennsylvania.
But it may be observed, that no Quaker settlers, when known to be such,[18] were killed, and,
whatever attacks were made upon the possessors of land in their neighbourhood, none were ever
made upon those who settled on the lands purchased by William Penn.

[Footnote 18: "The Indians shot him who had the gun, says Storey in his Journal, and when they
knew the young man they killed was a Quaker, they seemed sorry for it, but blamed him for carrying
a gun. For they knew the Quakers would not fight, or do them any harm, and therefore, by carrying
a gun, they took him for an enemy." This instance, which was in after times, confirms still
more strongly all that has been said on this subject. Quakers at this time occasionally armed
themselves against the wild beasts of the country.]

It may not be improper to observe farther, that the harmonious intercourse between the Quakers
and the Indians continues uninterrupted to the present day. In matters of great and public
concern, of which I could mention instances, it has been usual with the Indians to send deputies
to the Quakers for advice, and the former have even been prevailed upon by the latter to relinquish
wars, which they had it in contemplation to undertake. It is usual also for some of these to
send their children to the Quakers for education. And so great is the influence of the Quakers
over some of these tribes, that many individuals belonging to them, and now living together,
have been reclaimed from a savage life. These have laid aside the toilsome occupations of the
chase. They raise horses, cattle, and sheep. They cultivate wheat and flax. They weave and
spin. They have houses, barns, and saw-mills among them. They have schools also, and civilization
is taking place of the grossest barbarism.

These facts, when contrasted, speak for themselves. A cabinet of Quaker ministers, acting upon
the policy of the Gospel, has been seated in the heart of a savage and warlike nation, and
peace has been kept with them for ever. A cabinet of other settlers, acting on the policy of
the world, has been seated in the heart of nations of a similar description, and they have
almost constantly, been embroiled in wars. If Christian policy has had its influence on Barbarians,
it would be libellous to say, that it would not have its influence upon those who profess to
be Christians. Let us then again, from the instances which have been now recited, deprecate
the necessity of wars. Let us not think so meanly of the Christian religion, as that it does
not forbid, nor so meanly of its power, as that it is not ante to prevent, their continuance.
Let us not think, to the disgrace of our religion, that the human heart, under its influence,
should be so retrogade, that the expected blessing of universal peace should be thought no
improvement in our moral condition, or that our feelings under its influence should continue
so impure, that, when it arrives, we should regard it not so much a blessing, as a cures. But
let us, on the other hand, hope and believe, that, as an opposite and purer policy is acted
upon, it will do good to our own natures, good to the peace and happiness of the world, and
honour to the religion of the Gospel.

SECT. VIII

Subject finally considered--Authors of wars generally justify their own as defensive--and state
that, if any nation were to give up the practice of war, or to act on the policy of the Gospel,
it would be overrun by others, which acted upon the policy of the world--Reason to believe,
that such a nation would be held in veneration by others, and applied to by them for the settlement
of their disputes--Sentiments of Bishop Butler in a supposed case--Case of Antoninus Pius--Conclusion.

Having now said all that I intended to say on the supposed necessity of wars, I shall for a
short time direct the attention of the reader to two points, the only two, that I purpose to
notice on this subject.

It is usually said, first, that the different powers, who go to war, give it out that their
wars are defensive, or that they justify themselves on this principle.

I shall observe in reply to this, that it is frequently difficult to determine, where actual
aggression begins. Even old aggressions, of long standing, have their bearings in these disputes.
Not shall we find often any clue to a solution of the difficulty in the manifestoes of either
party, for each makes his own case good in these; and if we were to decide on the merits of
the question by the contents of these, we should often come to the conclusion, that both the
parties were wrong. Thus, for instance, a notion may have been guilty of an offence to another.
So far the cause of the other is a just one. But if the other should arm first, and this during
an attempt at accommodation, it will be a question, whether it does not forfeit its pretensions
to a just case, and whether both are not then to be considered as aggressors on the occasion?

When a nation avows its object in a war, and changes its object in the course of it, the presumption
is, that such a nation has been the aggressor. And where any nation goes to war upon no other
avowed principle, than that of the balance of power, such a nation, however right according
to the policy of the world, is an aggressor according to the policy of the Gospel, because
it proceeds upon the principle, that it is lawful to do evil, that good may come.

If a nation hires or employs the troops of another to fight for it, though it is not the aggressor
in any war, yet it has the crime upon its head of making those aggressors, whom it employs.

But, generally speaking, few modern wars can be called defensive. A war, purely defensive,
is that in which the inhabitants of a nation remain wholly at home to repel the attacks of
another, and content themselves with sending protection to the settlements which belong to
it. But few instance are recorded of such wars.

But if there be often a difficulty in discerning between aggressive and defensive wars, and
if, moreover, there is reason to suppose, that most of the modern wars are aggressive, or that
both patties become aggressors in the course of the dispute, it becomes the rulers of nations
to pause, and to examine their own consciences with fear and trembling, before they allow the
Sword to bedrawn, lest a dreadful responsibility should fall upon their heads for all the destruction
of happiness, all the havoc of life, and all the slaughter of morals that may ensue.

It is said, secondly, that if any nation were publicly to determine to relinquish the practice
if war, or to act on the policy of the Gospel, it would be overrun by other nations which might
act on the policy of the world.

This argument is neither more nor less than that of the Pagan Celsus, who said in the second
century, that, if the rest of the Roman empire were Christians, it would be overrun by the
Barbarians.

Independently of the protection, which such a nation might count upon from the moral Governor
of the world, let us enquire, upon rational principles, what would be likely to be its fate.

Armies, we know, are kept up by one nation, principally because they are kept up by another.

And in proportion as one rival nation adds to its standing armies, it is thought by the other
to be consistent with the policy of the world to do the same. But if one nation were to decline
keeping any armies at all, where would be the violence, to reason to suppose, that the other
would follow the example? Who would not be glad to get rid of the expence of keeping them,
if they could do it with safety? Nor is it likely, that any powerful nation, professing to
relinquish war, would experience the calamities of it. Its care to avoid provocation would
be so great, and its language would be so temperate, and reasonable, and just, and conciliatory,
in the case of any dispute which might arise, that it could hardly fail of obtaining an accommodation.
And the probability is, that such a nation would grow so high in esteem with other nations,
that they would have recourse to it in their disputes with one another, and would abide by
its decision. "Add the general influence, says the great Bishop Butler in his Analogy, which
each a kingdom would have over the face of the earth, by way of example particularly, and the
reverence which would be paid to it. It would plainly be superior to all others, and the world
must gradually come under its empire, not by means of lawless violence, but partly by what
must be allowed to be just conquest, and partly by other kingdoms submitting themselves voluntarily
to it, throughout a course of ages, and claiming its protection one after another in successive
exigencies. The head of it would be an universal monarch in another sense than any other mortal
has yet been, and the eastern style would be literally applicable to him, "that all people,
nations, and languages, should serve him." Now Bishop Butler supposes this would be the effect,
where the individuals of a nation were perfectly virtuous. But I ask much less for my hypothesis.
I only ask that the ruling members of the cabinet of any great nation (and perhaps these would
only amount to three or four) should consist of real Christians, or of such men as would implicitly
follow the policy of the Gospel, and I believe the result would be as I have described it.

Nor indeed are we without instances of the kind. The goodness of the emperor Antoninus Pius
was so great, that he was said to have outdone all example. He had no war in the course of
a long reign of twenty-four years, so that he was compared to Numa. And nothing is more true,
than that princes referred their controversies to his decision.

Nor most I forget again to bring to the notice of the reader the instance, though on a smaller
scale, of the colonists and descendants of William Penn. The Quakers have uniformly conducted
themselves towards the Indians in such a manner, as to have given them from their earliest
intercourse, an exulted idea of their character. And the consequence is, as I stated in a former
section, that the former, in affairs of importance, are consulted by the latter at the present
day. But why, if the cabinet of any one powerful nation were to act upon the noble principle
of relinquishing war, should we think the other cabinets so lost to good feelings, as not to
respect its virtue? Let us instantly abandon this thought; for the supposition of a contrary
sentiment would make them worse than the savages I have mentioned.

Let us then cherish the fond hope, that human animosities are not to be eternal, and that man
is not always to be made a tiger to man. Let us hope that the government of some one nation
(and when we consider the vast power of the British empire, the nature of its constitution
and religion, and the general humanity of its inhabitants, none would be better qualified than
our own) will set the example of the total dereliction of wars. And let us, in all our respective
situations, precede the anticipated blessing, by holding out the necessity of the subjugation
of the passions, and by inculcating the doctrine of universal benevolence to man, so that when
we look upon the beautiful islands, which lie scattered as so many ornaments of the ocean,
we may wish their several inhabitants no greater injury than the violence of their own waves;
or that, when we view continents at a distance from us, we may consider them as inhabited by
our brothers; or that when we contemplate the ocean itself, which may separate them from our
sight, we may consider it, not as separating our love, but as intended by Providence to be
the means of a quicker intercourse for the exchange of reciprocal blessings.

CHAP. IV.

SECT. 1.

The fourth and last tenet of the Quakers is on the subject of the unlawfulness of a pecuniary
maintenance of a Gospel ministry.

In explaining this tenet, I am aware that I am treading upon delicate ground. The great majority
of Christians have determined, that the spiritual labourer is worthy of his hire; that if men
relinquish the usual occupations by which a livelihood is obtained, in order that they may
devote themselves to the service of religion, they are entitled to a pecuniary maintenance;
and that, if they produce a rich harvest from what they sow, they are of all men, considering
their usefulness to man to be greater in this than in any other service they can render him,
the most worthy of encouragement and support. I am aware also of the possibility of giving
offence to some in the course of the explanation of this tenet. To these I can only say, that
I have no intention of hurting the feelings of any; that in the church there are those whom
I esteem and love, and whom of all others I should be sorry to offend. But it must be obvious
to these, and indeed to all, that it is impossible for me, in writing a history of the manners
and opinions of the Quakers, to pass over in silence the tenet that is now before me; and if
I notice it, they must be sensible, that it becomes me to state fully and fairly all the arguments
which the Quakers give for the difference of opinion, which they manifest from the rest of
their fellow-citizens, on this subject.

It does not appear then, the Quakers say, by any records that can be produced, that Jesus Christ
ever received any payment for the doctrines which he taught, neither does it appear, as far
as his own instructions, which are recorded by the Evangelists, can be collected on this subject,
that he considered any pecuniary stipend as necessary or proper for those who were to assist
in the promotion of his religion.

Jesus Christ, on the erection of his Gospel ministry, gave rules to his disciples, how they
were to conduct themselves in the case before us. He enjoined the twelve, before he sent them
on this errand, as we collect from St. Matthew and St. Luke, that,[19] "as they had received
freely, so they were to give freely; that they were to provide neither gold, nor silver, nor
brass in their purses, nor scrip, nor other things for their journey; for that the workman
was worthy of his meat." And, on their return from their mission, he asked them,[20] "When
I sent you without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said, nothing.
Then said he unto them, but now he that hath a purse let him take it, and likewise his scrip."

[Footnote 19: Matt x. 8. Luke ix. 1.]

[Footnote 20: Luke xxii. 35.]

In a little time afterwards, Jesus Christ sent out other seventy as disciples, to whom he gave
instructions similar to the former, that they should not take scrip, clothes, and money with
them. But to these he said additionally, that[21] "wheresoever they were received, they were
to eat such things as were given them; but where they were not received, they were to go their
way, and say, even the dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you."
And as on that occasion he compared the ministers of his Gospel to the labourers, whom a man
sends to the harvest, he told them they were at liberty to eat what was set before them, because
the labourer was worthy of his hire.

[Footnote 21: Luke x.]

This the Quakers conceive to be the substance of all that Jesus Christ taught upon this subject.
They go therefore next to St. Paul for a farther elucidation of it.

They are of opinion, that St. Paul, in his Epistle to[22] Timothy, and to the Corinthians,
and Galatians, acknowledges the position, that the spiritual labourer is worthy of his hire.

[Footnote 22: 1 Cor. ix.--1 Tim. v.--Gal. vi.]

The same Apostle, however, says, "that[23] if any would not work, neither should he eat." From
this text the Quakers draw two conclusions, first, that when ministers of the Gospel are idle,
they are not entitled to bodily sustenance; and, secondly, that those only, who receive them,
are expected to support them. The same Apostle says also,[24] "Let him that is taught in the
word, communicate unto him that teacheth in all good things," but he nowhere says, "to him
that teacheth not."

[Footnote 23: 2 Thes. iii. 10.]

[Footnote 24: Gal. vi. 6.]

But though men, who faithfully spend their time in preaching the Gospel, are entitled to bodily
maintenance from those who receive them, yet St. Paul, the Quakers say, as far as his own practice
was concerned thought it more consistent with the spirit of Christianity, and less detrimental
to its interests, to support himself by the labour of his own hands, than to be supported by
that of others. And he advises others to do the same, and not to make their preaching chargeable,[25]
"not because, says he we have not power, but to make ourselves an ensample to you to follow us."

[Footnote 25: 2 Thes. iii. Thus the Apostle, they conceive, looks up to God and not to men
for the reward of his spiritual labours. And the same Apostle makes it a characteristic of
the false teachers, that they make merchandize of their hearers.[27]

[Footnote 26: 1 Cor. ix. 18.]

[Footnote 27: 2 Pet. ii. 3.]

It is objected to the Quakers, on this occasion, that St. Paul received relief from the brethren
at Philippi, as well as from others, when he did not preach. But their reply is, that this
relief consisted of voluntary and affectionate presents sent to him in circumstances of distress.
In this case the Apostle states, that he never desired these gifts, but that it was pleasant
to him to see his religious instruction produce a benevolence of disposition that would abound
to their account.[28]

[Footnote 28: Philip. iv. 17.]

St. Peter is the only other person, who is mentioned in the New Testament as speaking on this
subject. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth
not away." Upon these words the Quakers make three observations; that ministers should not
make a gain of the Gospel; that they should look to God for their reward, and not to men; and
that Peter himself must have preached, like St. Paul, without fee or reward, or he could not
consistently have recommended such a practice to others.

[Footnote 29: 1 Pet. v. 2.]

The Quakers, therefore, from the example and precepts of Jesus Christ, and of the Apostles
Paul and Peter, come to the following conclusions on this subject. First, that God raises up
his own ministers. Secondly, that these are to dispense his Gospel freely. Thirdly, that they
are to take, whereever they are received, such things as are given them, which things they
deserve while in the exercise of their calling, as much as the labourer his hire, but that
no bargains are to be made about religion; that they are not to compel men to give, neither
are they to take away any thing from those who are unwilling to receive them, but, in this
case, to go their ways, and shake the dust from their feet against them, or, in other words,
to declare that they have done their own duty in going to them with the word of God, and that
the fault lies with them in refusing to hear it. Neither, when they return from their, missions,
or are idle at home, are they to receive any thing, but to use their own scrips and purses,
and clothes. And fourthly, that though it be lawful for them to receive such sustenance, under
such limitations, during the exercise of their ministry, it would be more consistent with the
spirit of Christianity, if they would give their spiritual labours freely, and look up to God
for their reward, thus avoiding the character of false teachers, and the imputation of an abuse
of their power in the Gospel.

Now these conclusions, the Quakers say, seem to have been sanctioned, in a great measure, by
the primitive practice for the three first centuries of the church, or till the darkness of
apostacy began to overwhelm the religious world.

In the very early times of the Gospel, many Christians, both at Jerusalem and Alexandria in
Egypt, sold their possessions, and lived together on the produce of their common stock. Others
in Antioch, Galatia, and Pontus, retained their estates in their possession, but established
a fund, consisting of weekly or monthly offerings, for the support of the church. This fund
continued in after times. But it was principally for the relief of poor and distressed saints,
in which the ministers of the Gospel, if in that situation, might also share. Tertullian, in
speaking of such funds, gives the following account: "Whatsoever we have, says he, in the treasury
of our churches, is not raised by taxation, as though we put men to ransom their religion,
but every man once a month, or when it pleaseth him, bestoweth what he thinks proper, but not
except he be willing. For no man is compelled, but left free to his own discretion. And that,
which is thus given, is not bestowed in vanity, but in relieving the poor, and upon children
destitute of parents, and in the maintenance of aged and feeble persons, and of men wrecked
by sea, and of such as have been condemned to metallic mines, or have been banished to islands,
or have been cast into prison, professing the Christian faith."

In process of time, towards the close of the third century, some lands began to be given to
the church. The revenue from these was thrown into the general treasury or fund, and was distributed,
as other offerings were, by the deacons and elders, but neither bishops nor ministers of the
Gospel were allowed to have any concern with it. It appears from Origen, Cyprian, Urban, Prosper,
and others, that if in those times such ministers were able to support themselves, they were
to have nothing from this fund. The fund was not for the benefit of any particular person.
But if such ministers stood in need of sustenance, they might receive from it; but they were
to be satisfied with simple diet, and necessary apparel. And so sacred was this fund held to
the purposes of its institution, that the first Christian emperors, who did as the bishops
advised them, had no recourse to it, but supplied the wants of ministers of the Gospel from
their own revenues, as Eusebius, Theodoret, and Sozomen relate.

The council of Antioch, in the year 340, finding fault with the deacons relative to the management
of the funds of the churches, ordained that the bishops might distribute them, but that they
should take no part of them to themselves, or for the use of the priests and brethren who lived
with them, unless necessity required it, using the words of the Apostle, "Having food and raiment,
be therewith content."

In looking at other instances, cited by the Quakers, I shall mention one, which throws light
for a few years farther upon this subject. In the year 359, Constantine, the emperor, having
summoned a general council of bishops to Arminium in Italy, and provided for their subsistence
there, the British and French bishops, judging it not fit to live on the public, chose rather
to live at their own expence. Three only out of Britain, compelled by want, but yet refusing
assistance offered to them by the rest, accepted the emperor's provision, judging it more proper
to subsist by public than by private support. This delicate conduct of the bishops is brought
to shew, that, where ministers of the Gospel had the power of maintaining themselves, they
had no notion of looking to the public. In short, in those early times, ministers were maintained
only where their necessities required it, and this out of the fund for the poor. Those, who
took from the fund, had the particular application given them of "sportularii," or basket-clerks,
because, according to Origen, Tertullian, Cyprian, and others, they had their portion of sustenance,
given them in baskets. These portions consisted but of a small pittance, sufficient only for
their livelihood, and were given them on the principle laid down by St. Matthew, that the ministers
of Jesus Christ were to eat and drink only such things as were set before them.

In process of time new doctrines were advanced relative to the maintenance of the ministry,
which will be hereafter explained. But as these were the inventions of men, and introduced
during the apostacy, the Quakers see no reason, why they should look up to these in preference
to those of Jesus Christ, and of the Apostles, and of the practice of Christians in the purest
periods of the church. They believe, on the other hand, that the latter only are to be relied
upon as the true doctrines. These were founded in divine wisdom on the erection of the Gospel
ministry, and were unmixed with the inventions of men. They were founded on the genius and
spirit of Christianity, and not on the genius or spirit of the world. The Quakers therefore,
looking up to these as to the surer foundation, have adopted the following tenets on this subject.

They believe, first, that it would be inconsistent in them as Christians, to make a pecuniary
payment to their own ministers for their Gospel labours. And they regulate their practice accordingly
upon this principle. No one is ever paid by the Quakers for the performance of any office in
the church. If a minister lives at home, and attends the meeting to which he belongs, he supports
himself, as St. Paul did, by his own trade. If he goes on the ministry to other meetings, he
is received by the Quakers as he travels along, and he finds meat and drink at the houses of
these. His travelling expenses also are generally defrayed in this particular case. But he
receives no reward, or fixed or permanent stipend, for his services on these or on any other
such occasions.

And as the Quakers cannot pay their own ministers, so it is a tenet with them, that they cannot
pay those of other denominations for their Gospel labours upon the same principle; that is,
they believe, that all ministers of every description ought to follow the example, which St.
Paul gave and enjoined them, of maintaining themselves by their own hands; they ought to look
up to God and not to men for their reward; they ought to avoid the character of false teachers,
and the imputation of abusing their power in the Gospel. And to these they add a particular
reason, drawn from the texts quoted, which is not applicable in the former case, namely, that
ministers are not authorised to take meat and drink from those who are not willing to receive them.

SECT. II.

Other reasons why Quakers cannot pay ministers of the Gospel of a different denomination from
themselves--These arise out of the nature of the payments made to them, or out of the nature
of tithes--History of tithes from the fourth century to the reign of Henry the eighth, when
they were definitively consolidated into the laws of the land.

But the Quakers have other reasons, besides the general reasons, and the particular one which
has been given, why as Christians they cannot pay ministers of a different denomination from
themselves for their Gospel labours, or why they cannot pay ministers of the established church.
These arise out of the nature of the payments which are made to them, or out of the nature
of tithes. But to see these in their proper light, some notion should be given of the origin
of this mode of their maintenance. I shall therefore give a very concise history of tithes
from the fourth century, to which period I have already brought the reader, to the reign of
Henry the eighth, when they took a station in the laws of the land, from which they have never
yet been displaced.

It has already appeared that, between the middle and the close of the fourth century, such
ministers of the Gospel as were able, supported themselves, but that those who were not able,
were supported out of the fund for the poor. The latter, however, had no fixed or determined
proportion of this fund allotted them, but had only a bare livelihood from it, consisting of
victuals served out to them in baskets, as before explained. This fund too consisted of voluntary
offerings, or of revenues from land voluntarily bequeathed. And the principle, on which these
gifts or voluntary offerings were made, was the duty of charity to the poor. With a Thraenengusse He threw
himself on the chest of the father, and his left arm umkrampfte [64] him a second, then he let
go of him and pushed him against the silent heath. The mother called him yet once, and said
he may be blessed but also the little sister, [65] the one in their Little bed had completely
forgotten. Three crosses he made about the sleeping angel, then walked He also quickly and defiantly
went forward from the heath.

So enjoy with God, the innocent man, and bring only the jewel again,
what are you so careless forttraegst!

When he came to Ross Mountain, the sun rose, and looked in two true-hearted,
confident, But interest turned red eyes.

At home she heath was reflected in the windows, and the Sense the
father, who was mowing.

III.

The village heath.

The first evening it was desolate and abandoned, and the two parents that hurt the heart, as they
in the twilight of the summer went to bed, and looked at his empty
bunk.

By the same People who may just now walked on the barren high road, and noticed by no one,
so despised by the majority, was almost two natural raw heart broke in the remote Heath home that
she from now on, perhaps to spare should always, but they expressed
the pain in itself, and each bore him alone, because it was too bashful
and awkward to to express.

But there was a second day, and a third and a fourth, each stressed the same shiny sky arch over
the heath, down and glared at the window and the hoary Roof of the
house just so kind and sweet, as when he was there before.

And then came days and again.

The work and joy of the farmer, monotonously through thousands and thousands of years still unexhausted,
moved here silently and magically a piece of their ancient chain by the cabin, and at each of their
members hung a drop of oblivion.

The Grandmother was still their wooden stool on the lawn, and prayed
on it, and they and small Marthe asked every day, because when Felix
came.

The father maehete rye and barley - the Mother made cheese and tied sheaves - and the strange Ziegenbube
operating daily on the heath. Felix knew nothing about.

The sun rose, and went down, the heath was white, and was green, the Hollunderbaum and the apple
tree bloomed many times - small Marthe was grown up, and went to make hay at [66] and to harvest,
but they are no longer asked - and the Grandmother, eternal, and incomprehensible out alive from the
dead like a forgotten man, did not ask anymore, because it accounts for its was, or had joined
her secret fantasy figures.

The fields of the heath farmer improved and think of as if the heavens bless his loneliness
and wanted to repay him and he felt so good [67] that he had some cereal bag charge, and was
able to continue functioning with beautiful oxen, which he then a few dollars of money and brought
home news of the outside world.

Once there was also a journeyman carpenter with his hiking pack [68], father Nicholas, the heath
farmer, and brought a greeting and a Letter from Felix, and said that the same in the large,
distant capital, a handsome, diligent student, is that all love him and that he did one day a
chaplain in the great Cathedral could be. The carpenter apprentice was kept overnight in home heath
well vain and let joy [69] back when he the next day in the opposite direction went away. [70] Thus
it came about that every year once or twice a traveling man the detour
made over the heath, the beautiful, friendly, hand joint youth to
love, love wanted to send a greeting to his mother or not. One was
even a time, paced, and conterfeite the small houses of the well and
lilac and apple trees, together with. 

Other changes began late Vera
on the heath. Once there were many men and Vermassen a piece of heath
land that had been in living memory no master property, and it was
an old peasant man, and carpentered with many sons and people a house
on it, and began to make the measured spot cultivated. He had brought
foreign corn, the soil on the heath well struck, [71] and next year
surged a green Aehrenwald first if father Niklas Possessions, where
even the last spring only sloes and Lady shoe had flourished. The latter, however, not having numerous
ecclesiastics to support, laid out more of their funds than the former were enabled to do,
towards the entertainment of strangers, and towards the maintenance of the poor. Now it must
be observed, that, when these two kinds of monasteries existed, the people were at liberty
to pay their tithes to either of them as they pleased, and that, having this permission, they
generally favoured the latter. To these they not only paid their tithes, but gave their donations
by legacy. This preference of the lay abbies to the ecclesiastical arose from a knowledge that
the poor, for whose benefit tithes had been originally preached up, would be more materially
served. Other circumstances too occurred, which induced the people to continue the same preference.
For the bishops in many places began to abuse their trust, as the deacons had done before,
by attaching the bequeathed lands to their sees, so that the inferior clergy, and the poor
became in a manner dependent upon them for their daily bread. In other places the clergy had
seized all to their own use. The people therefore so thoroughly favoured the lay abbies in
preference to those of the church, that the former became daily richer, while the, latter did
little more than maintain their ground.

This preference, however, which made such a difference in the funds of the ecclesiastical,
and of the lay monasteries, was viewed with a jealous eye by the clergy of those times, and
measures were at length taken to remove it. In a council under Pope Alexander the third, in
the year 1180, it was determined, that the liberty of the people should be restrained with
respect to their tithes. They were accordingly forbidden to make appropriations to religious
houses without the consent of the bishop, in whose diocese they lived. But even this prohibition
did not succeed. The people still favoured the lay abbies, paying their tithes there, till
Pope Innocent the third, in the year 1200, ordained, and he enforced it by ecclesiastical censures,
that every one should pay his tithes to those who administered to him spiritual things in his
own parish. In a general council also held at Lyons, in the year 1274, it was decreed, that
it was no longer lawful for men to pay their tithes where they pleased, as before, but that
they should pay them to mother church. And the principle, on which they had now been long demanded,
was confirmed by the council of Trent under Pope Pius the fourth, in the year 1560, which was,
that they were due by divine right. In the course of forty years after the payment of tithes
had been forced by ecclesiastical censures and excommunications, prescription was set up. Thus
the very principle, in which tithes had originated, was changed. Thus free will-offerings became
dues, to be exacted by compulsion. And thus the fund of the poor was converted almost wholly
into a fund for the maintenance of the church.

Having now traced the origin of tithes, as far as a part of the continent of Europe is concerned,
I shall trace it as far as they have reference to our own country. And here I may instantly
observe, and in a few words, that the same system and the same changes are conspicuous. "And so it happened," concluded the narrator her report - "the rule came to an ancestor Your husband,
what is the next after the blood was. The old caretaker is a long time after his arrival down
there lived in the gatehouse, have a faithful guardian of the Tomb of his beloved government.
"

"This is a terrible story!" said the countess, was silent as the nurse.

"But you you not heard how the first husband of that unfortunate woman has been called? "

"Certainly," replied the old woman, her widow's name is on the frame
of the picture.

" And then called it one of the first noble families.

"Weird!" said the countess, "it is my ancestor!"

The old woman shook her head. "Impossible," she said, "You, my lady, from the blood of those
evil woman? "

"It is completely certain, nurse, daughter of those who stayed behind
in Vienna, was the wife of a my ancestors.

"- The conversation was interrupted by the entrance of the doctor, the boy. was still in deathlike
slumber and woke up not as the doctor's hand research at its little limbs after the trail of
life.
"Not true, he will recover?" said the countess, by anxiously closed
in the Face of the doctor looked up.

"The question is too much for
one person," he replied; sleep "but women have to countess; . That
is quite necessary, "And when she made remonstrances, he continued:"
It will to happen tomorrow with the patient nothing, I am responsible
for it, the nurse, the hospital guard . Hold " Pope Innocent, however,
by sending out his famous decree before mentioned to king John, which was to be observed in
England as well as in other places under his jurisdiction, and by which it was enacted, that
every man was to pay his tithes to those only, who administered spiritual help to him in his
own parish, settled the affair; for he set up ecclesiastical courts, thundered out his interdicts,
and frightened both king and people.[31]

[Footnote 31: To shew the principles, upon which princes acted with respect to tithes in these
times, the following translation of a preamble to a grant of king Stephen may be produced:
"Because, through the providence of Divine Mercy, we know it to be so ordered, and by the churches
publishing it far and near, every body has heard, that, by the distribution of alms, persons
may be absolved from the bonds of sin, and acquire the rewards of heavenly joys, I, Stephen,
by the grace of God, king of England, being willing to have a share with those, who by a happy
kind of commerce exchange heavenly things for earthly, and smitten with the love of God, and
for the salvation of my own soul, and the souls of my father and mother, and all my forefathers
and ancestors," &c.]

Richard the second confirmed these tithes to the parishes, as thus settled by this pope, but
it was directed by an act, that, in all appropriations of churches, the bishop of the diocese
should ordain a convenient sum of money to be distributed out of the fruits and profits of
every living among the poor parishioners annually, in aid of their living and sustenance. "Thus
it seems, says Judge Blackstone, the people were frequently sufferers by the withholding of
those alms, for which, among other purposes, the payment of tithes was originally imposed."
At length tithes were finally confirmed, and, in a more explicit manner, by the famous act
of Henry the eighth on this subject. And here I must just observe, that, whereas from the eighth
century to this reign, tithes were said to be due, whenever the reason of them was expressed,
by divine right as under the Levitical law, so, in the preamble to the act of Henry the eighth,
they are founded on the same principle, being described therein, "as due to God and the church."
Thus, both on the continent of Europe, as well as in our own country, were these changes brought
about, which have been described. And they were brought about also by the same means, for they
were made partly by the exhortations and sermons of monks, partly by the decrees of popes,
partly by the edicts of popish kings, and partly by the determinations of popish councils.

It is not necessary, that I should trace this subject farther, or that I should make distinctions
relative to tithes, whether they may be rectorial, or vicarial, or whether they may belong
to lay persons, I have already developed enough of their history for my purpose. I shall therefore
hasten to state those other reasons, which the Quakers have to give, why they cannot pay other
ministers of the Gospel for their spiritual labours, or rather, why they cannot consent to
the payment of tithes, as the particular species of payment demanded by the church.

SECT. III

The other reasons then, as deducible from the history of tithes, are the following--First,
that they are not in equity dues of the church--Secondly, that the payment of them being compulsory,
it would, if acceded to, be an acknowledgment that the civil magistrate has a right to use
force in matters of religion--And thirdly, that being claimed upon an act which holds them
forth as of divine right, any payment of them would be an acknowledgment of the Jewish religion,
and that Christ had not yet actually come.

The other reasons then, which the Quakers have to give for refusing to support other ministers
of the Gospel, may be now deduced from the nature of tithes, as explained in the former section.

The early Quakers rejected the payment of tithes for three reasons; and, first, because they
were demanded of them as dues of the church.

Against this doctrine, they set their faces as a religious body. They contended that, if they
were due at all, they were due to the poor, from whom they had been forcibly taken, and to
whom in equity they still belonged; that no prince could alter the nature of right and wrong
that tithes were not justly due to the church, because Offa wished them to be so, to expiate
his own crimes; or because Ethelwolf wished them to be so, from a superstitious notion, that
he might thus prevent the incursions of the Danes; or because Stephen wished them to be so,
as his own grant expresses, on the principle, that "the bonds of sin might be dissolved, and
that he might have a part with those, who by a happy kind of commerce exchanged heavenly things
for earthly;" or because the popes of Rome wished them to be so, from whose jurisdiction all
the subjects of England were discharged by law.

They resisted the payment of them, because, secondly, tithes had become of a compulsory nature,
or because they were compelled to pay them.

They contended on this head, that tithes had been originally free will-offerings, but that
by violence they had been changed into dues, to be collected by force; that nothing could be
more clear, than that ministers of the Gospel, if the instructions of Jesus to his disciples
were to be regarded, were not authorized even to demand, much less to force, a maintenance
from others; and that any constrained payment of these, while it was contrary to his intention,
would be an infringement of their great tenet, by which they hold, that, Christ's kingdom being
of a spiritual nature, the civil magistrate had no right to dictate a religion to any one,
nor to enforce payment from individuals for the same, and that any interference in those matters,
which were solely between God and man, was neither more nor less than an usurpation of the
prerogative of God.

They resisted the payment of them, because, thirdly, they were demanded on the principle, as
appeared by the preamble of the act of Henry the eighth, that they were due as under the Levitical
law by divine right.

Against this they urged, first, that, if they were due as the Levitical tithes were, they must
have been subject to the same conditions. They contended that, if the Levites had a right to
tithes, they had previously given up to the community their own right to a share of the land,
but that the clergy claimed a tenth of the produce of the lands of others, but had given up
none of their own. They contended also, that tithes by the Levitical law were for the strangers,
the fatherless, and the widows, as well as for the Levites, but that the clergy, by taking
tithes, had taken that which had been for the maintenance of the poor, and had appropriated
it solely to their own use, leaving them thus to become a second burthen upon the land.

But they contended, that the principle itself was false. They maintained, that the Levitical
priesthood and tithes with it, had ceased on the coming of Jesus Christ, as appeared by his
own example and that of his Apostles; that it became them, therefore, as Christians, to make
a stand against this principle, for that, by acquiescing in the notion that the Jewish law
extended to them, they conceived they would be acknowledging that the priesthood of Aaron still
existed, and that Christ had not actually come.

This latter argument, by which it was insisted upon, that tithes ceased with the Jewish dispensation,
and that those who acknowledged them, acknowledged the Jewish religion for Christians, was
not confined to the early Quakers, but admitted among many other serious Christians of those
times. The great John Milton himself, in a treatise which he wrote against tithes, did not
disdain to use it. "Although, says he, hire to the labourer be of moral and perpetual right,
yet that special kind of hire, the tenth, can be of no right or necessity but to that special
labour for which God ordained it. That special labour was the Levitical and ceremonial service
of the tabernacle, which is now abolished. The right, therefore, of that special hire, must
needs be withal abolished, as being also ceremonial. That tithes were ceremonial is plain,
not being given to the Levites till they had been first offered an heave offering to the Lord.
He then, who by that law brings tithes into the Gospel, of necessity brings in withal a sacrifice
and an altar, without which tithes by that law were unsanctified and polluted, and therefore
never thought of in the first Christian times, nor till ceremonies, altars, and oblations had
been brought back. And yet the Jews, ever since their temple was destroyed, though they have
rabbies and teachers of their law, yet pay no tithes, as having no Levites to whom, no temple
where, to pay them, nor altar whereon to hallow them; which argues, that the Jews themselves
never thought tithes moral, but ceremonial only. That Christians therefore should take them
up, when Jews have laid them down, must needs be very absurd and preposterous."

Having now stated the three great reasons, which the early Quakers gave, in addition to those
mentioned in a former section, why they could not contribute towards the maintenance of an
alien ministry, or why they could not submit to the payment of tithes, as the peculiar payment
demanded by the established church, I shall only observe, that these are still insisted upon
by their descendants, but more particularly the latter, because all the more, modern acts upon
this subject take the act of Henry the eighth as the great ground-work or legal foundation
of tithes, in the preamble of which it is inserted, that "they are due to God and the church."
Now this preamble, the Quakers assert, has never been done away, nor has any other principle
been acknowledged instead of that in this preamble, why tithes have been established by law.
The Quakers therefore conceive, that tithes are still collected on the foundation of divine
right, and therefore that it is impossible for them as Christians to pay them, for that by
every such payment, they would not only be acknowledging the Jewish religion for themselves,
but would be agreeing in sentiment with the modern Jews, that Jesus Christ has not yet made
his appearance upon earth.

CHARACTER OF THE QUAKERS

CHAP. I.

Character of the Quakers--Character of great importance in life--yet often improperly estimated--This
the case with that of the Quakers--Attempt to appreciate it duly--Many outward circumstances
in the constitution of the Quakers, which may be referred to as certain helps in the promotion
of this attempt.

Nothing is of more importance to an individual, than a good character, during life. Posthumous
reputation, however desirable it may be thought, is of no service to the person whom it follows.
But a living character, if it be excellent, is inestimable, on account of the good which it
produces to him who possesses it. It procures him attention, civility, love, and respect from
others. Hence virtue may be said to have its reward in the present life. This account will
be also true of bodies, and particularly of religious bodies, of men. It will make a difference
to the individuals of these, whether they be respected, as a body, by the individuals of other
religious denominations, or by the government under which they live.

But though character be of so much importance in life, there are few who estimate it, either
when they view it individually or collectively, as if really is. It is often, on the one hand,
heightened by partiality, and, on the other, lowered by prejudice. Other causes also combine
to afford wrong apprehensions concerning it. For as different diseases throw out often the
same symptoms, and the judgment of the physician is baffled, so different motives produce frequently
similar actions, and the man who tries to develop a character, even if he wishes to speak truth,
finds himself at a loss to pronounce justly upon it.

As these failings and difficulties have attended men in estimating the character of individuals,
so they seem to have attended those who have attempted to delineate that of the society of
the Quakers. Indeed, if we were to take a view of the different traits which have been assigned
to the latter, we could not but conclude, that there must have been some mistake concerning
them. We should have occasion to observe, that some of these were so different in their kind,
that they could not reasonably be supposed to exist in the same persons. We should find that
others could scarcely be admitted among a body of professing Christians. The Quaker character,
in short, as it has been exhibited to the world, is a strange medley of consistency and contradiction,
and of merit and defect.

Amidst accounts, which have been so incongruous, I shall attempt the task of drawing the character
of the Quakers. I shall state, first, all the excellencies, that have been said to belong to
it. I shall state also, all the blemishes with which it has been described to be chargeable.
I shall then enquire how far it is probable that any of these, and in what degree they are
true. In this enquiry, some little reliance must be placed upon my personal knowledge of the
Quakers, and upon my desire not to deceive. It is fortunate, however, that I shall be able,
in this case, to apply to a test, which will be more satisfactory to the world, than any opinion
of my own upon this subject. I mean to say that the Quakers, like others, are the creatures
of their own education and habits, or that there are circumstances in their constitution, the
knowledge of which will assist us in the discussion of this question; circumstances, which
will speak for themselves and to which we way always refer in the case of difficulty or doubt.
Their moral education, for example, which has been already explained, cannot but have an influence
on the minds of those who receive it. Their discipline also, which has appeared to be of so
extraordinary a nature, and to be conducted in so extraordinary a manner, cannot but have an
effect of its own kind. The peculiar customs, in which they have been described to have been
born and educated, and which must of course act upon them as a second nature, must have a correspondent
influence again. From these, and other prominent and distinguishing features in their constitution,
I may hope to confirm some of the truths which have been told, and to correct some of the errors
that have been stated, on the subject which is now before us.

Nor am I without the hope, that the discussion of this subject upon such principles, will be
acceptable to many. To those, who love truth, this attempt to investigate it will be interesting.
To the Quakers it will be highly useful. For they will see, in the glass or mirror which I
shall set before them, the appearance which they make in the world. And if they shall learn,
in consequence, any of the causes either of their merits or of their failings, they will have
learnt a lesson, which they may make useful by the farther improvement of their moral character.

CHAP. II.

Good part of the character of the Quakers--This general or particular--Great general trait
is, that they are a moral people--This opinion of the world accounted for and confirmed by
a statement of some of the causes that operate in the production of character--One of these
causes is, the discipline peculiar to this society.

I come, according to my design, to the good part of the character of the Quakers. This may
be divided into two sorts, into that which is general, and into that which is particular. On
the subject of their general good character I shall first speak.

It is admitted by the world, as I had occasion to observe in the first chapter of the first
volume, that whatever other objections might be brought against the Quakers as a body, they
deserved the character of a moral people.

Though this fact be admitted, and there would therefore appear to be no necessity for confirming
it, I shall endeavour, according to the plan proposed, to shew, by means of the peculiar system
of the Quakers as a religious body, that this is one of the traits given them by the world,
which cannot be otherwise than true.

The Quakers believe, in the first place, that the Spirit of God, acting in man, is one of the
wises of virtuous character. They believe it to be, of all others, the purest and sublimest
source. It is that spring, they conceive, to good action, and of course to exalted character,
in which man can have none but a passive concern. It is neither hereditary nor factitious.
It can neither be perpetuated in generation by the father to the child, nor be given by human
art. It is considered by the Quakers as the great and distinguishing mark of their calling.
Neither dress, nor language, nor peculiar customs, constitute the Quaker, but the spiritual
knowledge which he possesses. Hence all pious men may be said to have been Quakers. Hence the
patriarchs were Quakers, that is, because they professed to be led by the Spirit of God. Hence
the Apostles and primitive Christians were Quakers. Hence the virtuous among the Heathens,
who knew nothing of Christianity, were Quakers also. Hence Socrates may be ranked in profession
with the members of this society. He believed in the agency of the Divine Spirit. It was said
of him, "that he had the guide of his life within him; that this spirit furnished him with
divine knowledge; and that it often impelled him to address and exhort the people." Justin
the Martyr had no scruple in calling both Socrates and Heraclitus Christians, though they lived
long before Christ; "for all such as these, says he, who lived according to the divine word
within them, and which word was in all men, were Christians." Hence also, since the introduction
of Christianity, many of our own countrymen have been Quakers, though undistinguished by the
exterior marks of dress or language. Among these we may reckon the great and venerable Milton.
His works are full of the sentiments of[32] Quakerism. And hence, in other countries and in
other ages, there have been men, who might be called Quakers, though the word Quakerism was
unknown.

[Footnote 32: Milton not only considered the Spirit of God as a divine teacher, but that the
scriptures were not to be spiritually understood but by the means of this spirit. He believed
also, that human learning was not necessary for the qualification of a minister of the Gospel.
And he wrote an essay against tithes.]

But independently of the agency of the Spirit of God, which the Quakers thus consider to be
the purest cause of a good life and character, we may reckon a subordinate cause, which may
be artificial, and within the contrivance and wisdom of man. When the early Quakers met together
as a religious body, though they consisted of spiritually minded men, they resolved on a system
of discipline, which should be followed by those who became members of the society. This discipline
we have already seen. We have seen how it attempts to secure obedience to Christian precepts.
How it marks its offences. How it takes cognizance of them when committed. How it tries to
reclaim and save. How, in short, by endeavouring to keep up the members of the society to a
good life, it becomes instrumental in the production or preservation of a good character.

From hence it will appear, that the virtue of the Quakers, and of course that their character
may be distinguished into two kinds, as arising from two sources. It may arise from spiritual
knowledge on the one hand, or from their discipline on the other. That which arises from the
first, will be a perfect virtue. It will produce activity in excellence. That which arises
from the second, will be inferior and sluggish. But, however it may be subject to this lower
estimation, it will always be able to produce for those who have it, a certain degree of moral
reputation in the opinion of the world.

These distinctions having been made as to the sources of virtuous character, there will be
no difficulty in shewing, that the world has not been deceived in the point in question. For
if it be admitted that the Divine Spirit, by means of its agency on the heart of man, is really
a cause of virtuous character, it will then be but reasonable to suppose, that the Quakers,
who lay themselves open for its reception more than others, both by frequent private retirements,
and by their peculiar mode of public worship, should bear at least as fair a reputation as
others, on account of the purity of their lives. But the discipline, which is unquestionably
a guardian of morals, is peculiar to themselves. Virtue therefore is kept up among the Quakers
by an extraordinary cause, or by a cause which does not act among many other bodies of men.
It ought therefore to be expected, while this extraordinary cause exists, that an extraordinary
result should follow, or that more will be kept apparently virtuous among the Quakers, in proportion
to their numbers, than among those where no such discipline can be found, or, in other words,
that, whenever the Quakers are compared with those of the world at large, they will obtain
the reputation of a moral people.

CHAP. III.

SECT. I.

Particular traits in the Quaker character--The first of these is benevolence--This includes
good will to man in his temporal capacity--Reasons why the world has bestowed this trait upon
the Quakers--Probability of its existence--from their ignorance of many degrading diversions
of the world--from their great tenet on war--from their discipline which inculcates equality--and
watchfulness over morals--and from their doctrine that man is the temple of the Holy Spirit.

[33]Of the good traits in the Quaker character, which may be called particular, I shall first
notice that of benevolence. This benevolence will include, first, good will to man in his temporal
capacity, or a tender feeling for him as a fellow creature in the varied situations of his life.

[Footnote 33: The reader must be aware, that all Quakers do not partake of this good part of
the character. That the generality do, I believe. That all ought to do, I know, because their
principles, as will be clearly seen, lead to such a character. Those, therefore, who do not,
will see their own deficiency, or how much they have yet to attain, before they can become
Quakers.]

The epithet of benevolent has been long given to this society. Indeed I know of no point, where
the judgment of the world has been called forth, in which it has been more unanimous, than
in the acknowledgment of this particular trait, as a part of the Quaker character.

The reasons for the application of this epithet to the society, may be various.

It has been long known, that as the early Christians called each other brethren, and loved
each other as such, so there runs through the whole society of the Quakers a system of similar
love, their affection for one another having been long proverbial.

It has been long known again, that as the early Christians extended their benevolence out of
the pale of their own society to others who lived around them, so the Quakers manifest a similar
disposition towards their countrymen at large. In matters of private distress, where persons
of a different religious denomination have been the objects, and where such objects have been
worthy, their purses have been generally open, and they have generally given as largely in
proportion to their abilities as other people. To public charities in their respective places
of residence, they have generally administered their proper share. But of late years, as they
have mixed more with the world, this character of the society has become more conspicuous or
better known. In the cases of dearth and distress, which happened a few years ago, it is a
matter of publicity, that they were among the foremost in the metropolis, and in same other
towns in the kingdom, not only in pecuniary contributions, but in frequent and regular attendances
for the proper distribution of them. And if their character has ever stood higher for willingness
to contribute to the wants of others at any one time than at another, it stands the highest,
from whatever cause it may happen, at the present day.

It has been long known again, that as the early Christians extended their love beyond their
own society, and beyond those of the world who lived around them, to those who were reputed
natural enemies in their own times, so the Quakers do not confine their benevolence to their
own countrymen, but extend it to the various inhabitants of the globe, without any discrimination,
whether they are reputed hostile to the government under which they live. In times of war we
never see them bearing arms, and in times of victory we never see them exulting, like other
people. We never see them illuminating their houses, or running up and down the streets, frantic
with joy upon such occasions. Their joy, on the other hand, is wounded by the melancholy consideration
of the destruction of the human race, when they lament, with almost equal sympathy, over the
slaughter of enemies and friends.

But this character of a benevolent people has been raised higher of late years in the estimation
of the public by new circumstances or by the unanimous and decided part, which they have taken
as a body, in behalf of the abolition of the slave-trade. For where has the injured African
experienced more sympathy than from the hearts of Quakers? In this great cause the Quakers
have been singularly conspicuous. They have been actuated as it were by one spring. In the
different attempts, made for the annihilation of this trade, they have come forward with a
religious zeal. They were at the original formation of the committee for this important object,
where they gave an almost unexampled attendance for years. I mentioned in the preceding volume,
that near a century ago, when this question had not awakened the general attention, it had
awakened that of the Quakers as a body; and that they had made regulations in their commercial
concerns with a view of keeping themselves clear of the blood of this cruel traffic. And from
that time to the present day they have never forgotten this subject. Their yearly epistles
notice it, whenever such notice is considered to be useful. And they hold themselves in readiness,
on all fit occasions, to unite their efforts for the removal of this great and shocking source
of suffering to their fellow-creatures.

But whether these be the reasons, or whether they be not the reasons, why the Quakers have
been denominated benevolent, nothing is more true than that this appellation has been bestowed
upon them, and this by the consent of their countrymen. For we have only to examine our public
prints, to prove the truth of the assertion. We shall generally find there, that when there
is occasion to mention the society, the word "benevolent" accompanies it.

The reader will perhaps be anxious to know how it happens, that the Quakers should possess
this general feeling of benevolence in a degree so much stronger than the general body of their
countrymen, that it should have become an acknowledged feature in their character. He will
naturally ask, does their education produce it? Does their discipline produce it? Do their
religious tenets produce it? What springs act upon the Quakers, which do not equally act upon
other people? The explanation of this phenomenon will be perfectly consistent with my design;
for I purpose, as I stated before, to try the truth or falsehood of the different traits assigned
to the character of the Quakers, by the test of probabilities as arising from the nature of
the customs or opinions which they adopt. I shall endeavour therefore to show, that there are
circumstances, connected with their constitution, which have a tendency to make them look upon
man in a less degraded and hostile, and in a more kindred and elevated light, than many others.
And when I shall have accomplished this, I shall have given that explanation of the phenomenon,
or that confirmation of the trait, which, whether it may or may not satisfy others, has always
satisfied myself.

The Quakers, in the first place, have seldom seen a man degraded but by his vices. Unaccustomed
to many of the diversions of the world, they have seldom, if ever, seen him in the low condition
of a hired buffoon or mimic. Men, who consent to let others degrade themselves for their sport,
become degraded in their turn. And this degradation increases with the frequency of the spectacle.
Persons in such habits are apt to lose sight of the dignity of mankind, and to consider them
as made for administration to their pleasures, or in an animal or a reptile light. But the
Quakers, who know nothing of such spectacles, cannot, at least as far as these are concerned,
lose either their own dignity of mind, or behold others lose it. They cannot therefore view
men under the degrading light of animals for sport, or of purchasable play-things.

And as they are not accustomed to consider their fellow-creatures as below themselves, so neither
are they accustomed to look with enmity towards them. Their tenet on the subject of war, which
has been so amply detailed, prevents any disposition of this kind. For they interpret those
words of Jesus Christ, as I have before shewn, which relate to injuries, as extending not to
their fellow-citizens alone, but to every individual in the world, and his precept of loving
enemies, as extending not only to those individuals of their own country, who may have any
private resentment against them, but to those who become reputed enemies in the course of wars,
so that they fix no boundaries of land or ocean, and no limits of kindred, to their love, but
consider Jew and Gentile, Greek and Barbarian, bond and free, as their brethren. Hence neither
fine nor imprisonment can induce them to learn the use of arms, so as to become qualified to
fight against these, or to shed their blood. And this principle of love is not laid as it were
upon the shelf, like a volume of obsolete laws, so that it may be forgotten, but is kept alive
in their memories by the testimony which they are occasionally called to bear or by the sufferings
they undergo by distraints upon their property, and sometimes by short imprisonments, for refusing
military service.

But while these circumstances may have some influence in the production of this trait of benevolence
to man in the character of the Quakers, the one by preventing the hateful sight of the loss
of his dignity, and the other by destroying the seeds of enmity towards him, there are others,
interwoven into their constitution, which will have a similar, though a stronger tendency towards
it.

The great system of equality, which their discipline daily teaches and enforces, will make
them look with an equal eye towards all of the human race. Who can be less than a man in the
Quaker society, when the rich and poor have an equal voice in the exercise of its discipline,
and when they fill equally the important offices that belong to it? And who is there out of
the society, whom the Quakers esteem more than human? They bow their knees or, their bodies,
as I have before noticed, to no man. They flatter no man on account of his riches or his station.
They pay homage to no man on account of his rank or title. Stripped of all trappings, they
view the creature man. If then they view him in this abstracted light, they can view him only
as an equal. Bit in what other society is it, that a similar estimate is made of him? The world
are apt in general to make too much of those in an elevated station, and those again in this
station are apt to make less of others beneath them than they ought. Thus an under or an over
valuation of individuals generally takes place in society; from whence it will unavoidably
happen, that if some men are classed a little below gods, others will be classed but a little
above the brutes of the field. Their discipline, again, has a tendency to produce in them an
anxious concern for the good of their fellow-creatures. Man is considered, in the theory of
this discipline, as a being, for whose spiritual welfare the members are bound to watch. They
are to take an interest in his character and his happiness. If he be overtaken in a fault,
he is not to be deserted, but reclaimed. No endeavour is to be spared for his restoration.
He is considered, in short, as a creature, worthy of all the pains and efforts that can be
bestowed upon him.

The religion of the Quakers furnishes also a cause, which occasions them to consider man in
an elevated light. They view him, as may be collected from the preceding volume, as a temple
of the Spirit of God. There is no man, so mean in station, who is not made capable by the Quakers
of feeling the presence of the Divinity within him. Neither sect, nor country, nor colour,
excludes him, in their opinion, from this presence. But it is impossible to view man as a tabernacle,
in which the Divinity may reside, without viewing him in a dignified manner. And though this
doctrine of the agency of the Spirit dwelling in man belongs to many other Christian societies,
yet it is no where so systematically acted upon as by that of the Quakers.

These considerations may probably induce the reader to believe, that the trait of benevolence,
which has been affixed to the Quaker character, has not been given it in vain. There can be
no such feeling for the moral interests of man, or such a benevolent attention towards him
in his temporal capacity, where men have been accustomed to see one another in low and degrading
characters, as where no such spectacles have occurred. Nor can there be such a genuine or well
founded love towards him, where men, on a signal given by their respective governments, transform
their pruning-hooks into spears, and become tygers to one another without any private provocation,
as where they can be brought under no condition whatever, to lift up their arm to the injury
of any of the human race. There must, in a practical system of equality, be a due appreciation
of man as man. There must, in a system where it is a duty to watch over him, for his good,
be a tender attention towards him as a fellow creature. And in a system, which considers him
as a temple in which the Divine Being may dwell, there must be a respect towards him, which
will have something like the appearance of a benevolent disposition to the world.

SECT. II.

Trait of benevolence includes again good will towards man in his religious capacity--Quakers
said to have no spirit of persecution, nor to talk with bitterness, with respect to other religious
sects--This trait probable--because nothing in their doctrines that narrows love--their sufferings
on the other hand--and their law against detraction--and their aversion to making religion
a subject of common talk--all in favour of this trait.

The word benevolence, when mentioned as a trait in the character of the Quakers, includes also
good will to man in his religious capacity.

It has often been observed of the Quakers, that they shew no spirit of persecution, and that
you seldom hear them talk with bitterness, with respect to other religious societies.

On the first part of this trait it may be observed, that the Quakers have never had any great
power of exercising dominion over others in matters of religion. In America, where they have
had the greatest, they have conducted themselves well. William Penn secured to every colonist
the full rights of men as to religious opinion and worship. If the spirit of persecution is
ever to be traced to the Quakers, it must be found in their writings on the subject of religion.
In one or two of the productions of their first authors, who were obliged to support their
opinions by controversy, there is certainly an appearance of an improper warmth of temper;
but it remarkable that, since these times, scarcely a book has appeal written by a Quaker against
the religion of another. Satisfied with their own religious belief, they seem to have wished
only to be allowed to enjoy it in peace. For when they have appeared as polemical writers,
it has been principally in the defence of themselves.

On the second part of the trait I may remark, that it is possible, in the case of tithes, where
their temper has been tried by expensive distraints, and hard imprisonments, that they may
utter a harsh expression against a system which they believe to be anti-Christian, and which
they consider also as repugnant to equity, inasmuch as it compels them to pay labourers, who
perform work in their own harvest; but this feeling is only temporary, and is seldom extended
beyond the object that produces it. They have never, to my knowledge, spoken with bitterness
against churchmen on this account. Nor have I ever heard them, in such a season of suffering,
pass the slightest reflection upon their faith.

That this trait of benevolence to man in his religious capacity is probably true, I shall endeavour
to shew according to the method I have proposed.

There is nothing, in the first place, in the religious doctrines of the Quakers, which can
produce a narrowness of mind in religion, or a contempt for the creeds of others. I have certainly,
in the course of my life, known some bigots in religion, though, like the Quakers, I censure
no man for his faith. I have known some, who have considered baptism and the sacrament of the
supper as such essentials in Christianity, as to deny that those who scrupled to admit them,
were Christians. I have known others pronouncing an anathema against persons, because they
did not believe the atonement in their own way. I have known others again, who have descended
into the greatest depths of election and reprobation, instead of feeling an awful thankfulness
for their own condition as the elect, and the most tender and affectionate concern for those
whom they considered to be the reprobate, indulging a kind of spiritual pride on their own
account, which has ended in a contempt for others. Thus the doctrines of Christianity, wonderful
to relate, have been made to narrow the love of Christians! The Quaker religion, on the other
hand, knows no such feelings as these. It considers the Spirit of God as visiting all men in
their day, and as capable of redeeming all, and this without any exception of persons, and
that the difference of creeds, invented by the human understanding, will make no difference
in the eternal happiness of man. Thus it does not narrow the sphere of salvation. It does not
circumscribe it either by numerical or personal limits. There does not appear therefore to
be in the doctrines of the Quaker religion any thing that should narrow their love to their
fellow creatures, or any thing that should generate a spirit of rancour or contempt towards
others on account of the religion they profess.

There are, on the contrary, circumstances, which have a tendency to produce an opposite effect.

I see, in the first place, no reason why the general spirit of benevolence to man in his temporal
capacity, which runs through the whole society, should not be admitted as having some power
in checking a bitter spirit towards him in his religious character.

I see again, that the sufferings, which the Quakers so often undergo on account of their religious
opinions, ought to have an influence with them in making them tender towards others on the
same subject. Virgil, who was a great master of the human mind, makes the queen of Carthage
say to Aeneas, "Haud ignara mali, miseris succurere disco," or, "not unacquainted with misfortunes
myself, I learn to succour the unfortunate." So one would hope that the Quakers, of all other
people, ought to know how wrong it is to be angry with another for his religion.

With respect to that part of the trait, which relates to speaking acrimoniously of other sects,
there are particular circumstances in the customs and discipline of the Quakers, which seem
likely to prevent it.

It is a law of the society, enforced by their discipline, as I shewed in a former volume, that
no Quaker is to be guilty of detraction or slander. Any person, breaking this law, would come
under admonition, if found out. This induces an habitual caution or circumspection in speech,
where persons are made the subject of conversation. And I have no doubt that this law would
act as a preventive in the case before us.

It is not a custom, again, with the Quakers, to make religion a subject of common talk. Those,
who know them, know well how difficult it is to make them converse, either upon their own faith,
or upon the faith of others. They believe, that topics on religion, familiarly introduced,
tend to weaken its solemnity upon the mind. They exclude subjects also from ordinary conversation
upon another principle. For they believe, that religion should not be introduced at these times,
unless it can be made edifying. But, if it is to be made edifying, it is to come, they conceive,
not through the medium of the activity of the imagination of man, but through the passiveness
of the soul under the influence of the Divine Spirit.

SECT. III.

Trait of benevolence includes again a tender feeling toward the brute creation--Quakers remarkable
for their tenderness to animals--This feature produced from their doctrine, that animals are
not mere machines, but the creatures of God, the end of whose existence is always to be attended
to in their treatment--and from their opinion as to what ought to be the influence of the Gospel,
as recorded in their own summary.

The word benevolence, when applied to the character of the Quakers, includes also a tender
feeling towards the brute creation.

It has frequently been observed by those who are acquainted with the Quakers, that all animals
belonging to them are treated with a tender consideration, and are not permitted to be abused,
and that they feel, in like manner, for those which may be oppressed by others, so that their
conduct is often influenced in some way or other upon such occasions.

It will be obvious, in enquiring into the truth of this trait in the character of the Quakers,
that the same principles, which I have described as co-operating to produce benevolence towards
man, are not applicable to the species in question. But benevolence, when once rooted in the
heart, will grow like a fruitful plant, from whatever causes it may spring, and enlarge itself
in time. The man, who is remarkable for his kindness towards man, will always be found to extend
it towards the creatures around him. It is an ancient saying, that "a righteous man regards
the life of his beast, but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel."

But, independently of this consideration, there is a principle in the Quaker constitution,
which, if it be attended to, cannot but give birth to the trait in question.

It has been shewn in the first Volume, on the subject of the diversions of the field, that
the Quakers consider animals, not as mere machines, to be used at discretion, but in the sublime
light of the creatures of God, of whose existence the use and intention ought always to be
considered, and to whom rights arise from various causes, any violation of which is a violation
of a moral law.

This principle, if attended-to by the Quakers, must, as I have just observed, secure all animals
which may belong to them, from oppression. They must so consider the end of their use, as to
defend them from abuse. They must so calculate their powers and their years, as to shield them
from excessive labour. They must so anticipate their feelings, as to protect them from pain.
They must so estimate their instinct, and make an allowance for their want of understanding,
as not to attach to their petty mischiefs the necessity of an unbecoming revenge. They must
act towards them, in short, as created for special ends, and must consider themselves as their
guardians, that these ends may not be perverted, but attained.

To this it may be added, that the printed summary of the religion of the society constantly
stares them in the face, in which it is recorded, what ought to be the influence of Christianity
on this subject.

CHAP. IV.

Second trait is that of complacency of mind or quietness of character--This trait confirmed
by circumstances in their education, discipline, and public worship, which are productive of
quiet personal habits--and by their disuse of the diversions of the world--by the mode of the
settlement of their differences--by their efforts in the subjugation of the will--by their
endeavour to avoid all activity of mind during their devotional exercises--all of which are
productive of a quiet habitude of mind.

A second trait in the character of the Quakers is that of complacency, or evenness, or quietness
of mind and manner.

This trait is, I believe, almost as generally admitted by the world, as that of benevolence.
It is a matter of frequent observation, that you seldom see an irascible Quaker. And it is
by no means uncommon to hear persons, when Quakers are the subject of conversation, talking
of the mysteries of their education, or wondering how it happens, that they should be able
to produce in their members such a calmness and quietness of character.

There will be no difficulty in substantiating this second trait.

There are circumstances, in the first place, in the constitution of the Quaker system, which,
as it must have already appeared, must be generative of quiet personal habits. Among these
may be reckoned their education. They are taught, in early youth, to rise in the morning in
quietness, to go about their ordinary occupations in quietness, and to retire in quietness
to their beds. We may reckon also their discipline. They are accustomed by means of this, when
young, to attend the monthly and quarterly meetings, which are often of long continuance. Here
they are obliged to sit patiently. Here they hear the grown up members of the society speak
in order, and without any interruption of one another. We may reckon again their public worship.
Here they are accustomed occasionally to silent meetings, or to sit quietly for a length of
time, when not a word is spoken.

There are circumstances again in the constitution of the Quakers, which are either preventive
of mental activity, and excitement of passion, or productive of a quiet habitude of mind. Forbidden
the use of cards, and of music, and of dancing, and of the theatre, and of novels, it must
be obvious, that they cannot experience the same excitement of the passions, as they who are
permitted the use of these common amusements of the world. In consequence of an obligation
to have recourse to arbitration, as the established mode of decision in the case of differences
with one another, they learn to conduct themselves with temper and decorum in exasperating
cases. They avoid, in consequence, the frenzy of him who has recourse to violence, and the
turbid state of mind of him who engages in suits at law. It may be observed also, that if,
in early youth, their evil passions are called forth by other causes, it is considered as a
duty to quell them. The early subjugation of the will is insisted upon in all genuine Quaker
families. The children of Quakers are rebuked, as I have had occasion to observe, for all expressions
of anger, as tending to raise those feelings, which ought to be suppressed. A raising even
of their voice is discouraged, as leading to the disturbance of their minds. This is done to
make them calm and passive, that they may be in a state to receive the influence of the pure
principle. It may be observed again, that in their meetings for worship, whether silent or
vocal, they endeavour to avoid all activity of the mind for the same reason.

These different circumstances then, by producing quiet personal habits on the one hand, and
quiet mental ones on the other, concur in producing a complacency of mind and manner, so that
a Quaker is daily as it were at school, as far as relates to the formation of a quiet character.

CHAP. V.

Third trait is, that they do not temporize, or do that which they believe to be improper as
a body of Christians--Subjects, in which this trait is conspicuous--Civil oaths--Holy or consecrated
days--War--Tithes --Language--Address--Public illuminations--Utility of this trait to the Quaker
character.

It is a third trait in the character of the Quakers, that they refuse to do whatever as a religious
body they believe to be wrong.

I shall have no occasion to state any of the remarks of the world to shew their belief of the
existence of this trait, nor to apply to circumstances within the Quaker constitution to confirm
it. The trait is almost daily conspicuous in some subject or another. It is kept alive by their
discipline. It is known to all who know Quakers. I shall satisfy myself therefore with a plain
historical relation concerning it.

It has been an established rule with the Quakers, from the formation of their society, not
to temporize, or to violate their consciences, or, in other words, not to do that which as
a body of Christians they believe to be wrong, though the usages of the world, or the government
of the country under which they live, should require it, but rather to submit to the frowns
and indignation of the one, and the legal penalties annexed to their disobedience by the other.
This suffering in preference of the violation of their consciences, is what the Quakers call
"the bearing of their testimony," or a demonstration to the world, by the "testimony of their
own example," that they consider it to be the duty of Christians rather to suffer, than to
have any concern with that which they conceive to be evil.

The Quakers, in putting this principle into practice, stand, I believe, alone. For I know of
no other Christians, who as a body[34] pay this homage to their scruples, or who determine
upon an ordeal of suffering in preference of a compromise with their ease and safety.

[Footnote 34: The Moravians, I believe, protest against war upon scriptural grounds. But how
far in this, or in any other case, they bear a testimony, like the Quakers, by suffering, I
do not know.]

The subjects, in which this trait is conspicuous, are of two kinds, first as they relate to
things enjoined by the government, and secondly as they relate to things enjoined by the customs
or fashions of the world.

In the first case there was formerly much more suffering than there is at present, though the
Quakers still refuse a compliance with as many injunctions of the law as they did in their
early times.

It has been already stated that they refused, from the very institution of their society, to
take a civil oath. The sufferings, which they underwent in consequence, have been explained
also. But happily, by the indulgence of the legislature, they are no longer persecuted for
this scruple, though they still persevere in it, their affirmation having been made equal to
an oath in civil cases.

It has been stated again, that they protested against the religious observance of many of those
days, which the government of the country for various considerations had ordered to be kept
as holy. In consequence of this they were grievously oppressed in the early times of their
history. For when their shops were found open on Christmas day, and on Good Friday, and on
the different fast-days which had been appointed, they were taken up and punished by the magistrates
on the one hand, and insulted and beaten by the people on the other. But, notwithstanding this
ill usage, they persevered as rigidly in the non-observance of particular days and times, as
in their non-compliance with oaths, and they still persevere in it. It does not appear, however,
that their bearing of their testimony in this case is any longer a source of much vexation
or trouble to them: for though the government of the country still sanctions the consecration
of particular days, and, the great majority of the people join in it, there seems, to have
been a progressive knowledge or civilization in both, which has occasioned them to become tender
on account of this singular deviation from their own practice.

But though the Quakers have been thus relieved by the legislature, and by the more mild and
liberal disposition of the people, from so much suffering in bearing their testimony on the
two occasions which have been mentioned, yet there are others, where the laws of government
are concerned, on which they find themselves involved in a struggle between the violation of
their consciences and a state of suffering, and where unfortunately there is no remedy at hand,
without the manifestation of greater partiality towards them, than it may be supposed an equal
administration of justice to all would warrant.

Hie first of these occasions is when military service, is enjoined. The Quakers, when drawn
for the militia, refuse either to serve, or to furnish substitutes. For this refusal they come
under the cognizance of the laws. Their property, where they have any, is of course distrained
upon, and a great part of a little substance is sometimes taken from them on, this account.
Where they have not distrainable property, which is occasionally the case, they never fly,
but submit to the known punishment, and go patiently to prison. The legislature, however, has
not been inattentive to the Quakers even upon this occasion; for it has limited their confinement
to three months. The government also of the country afforded lately, in a case in which the
Quakers were concerned, an example of attention to religious scruples upon this subject. In
the late bill for arming the country en masse, both the Quakers and the Moravians were exempted
from military service. This homage to religious principle did the authors of these exemptions
the highest honour. And it certainly becomes the Quakers to be grateful for this unsolicited
favour; and as it was bestowed upon them upon the full belief that they were the people they
professed themselves, they should be particularly careful that they do not, by any inconsistency
of conduct, tarnish the high reputation, which has been attached to them by the government
under which they live.

The second occasion is, when tithes or other dues are demanded by the church. The Quakers refuse
the payment of these upon principles, which have been already explained. They come of course
again under the cognizance of the laws. Their property is annually distrained upon by warrant
from justices of the peace, where the demand does not exceed the value of ten pounds, and this
is their usual suffering in this case. But there have not been wanting instances where an unusual
hardness, of heart has suggested a process, still allowable by the law, which has deprived
them of all their property, and consigned them for life to the habitation of a prison.[35]

[Footnote 35: One died, not a great while ago, in York Castle, and others, who were confined
with him, would have shared his fate, but for the interference of the king.

It is surprising, that the clergy should not unite in promoting a bill in parliament, to extend
the authority of the justices to grant warrants of distraint for tithes to more than the value
of ten pounds, and to any amount, as this is the most cheap and expeditious way for themselves.
If they apply to the ecclesiastical courts, they can enforce no payment of their tithes then.
They can put the poor Quaker into prison, but they cannot obtain their debt. If they apply
to the exchequer, they may find themselves, at the conclusion of their suit, and this after
a delay of three years, liable to the payment of extra costs, to the amount of forty or fifty
pounds, with which they cannot charge the Quaker, though they may confine him for life. Some,
to my knowledge, have been glad to abandon these suits, and put up with the costs, incurred
in them; rather than continue them. Recourse to such courts occasion the clergy frequently
to be charged with cruelty, when, if they had only understood their own interests better, they
would have avoided them.]

But it is not only in cases, of which the laws of the land take cognizance, that the Quakers
prefer suffering to doing that which their consciences disapprove. There are other cases, connected,
as I observed before, with the opinion of the world, where they exhibit a similar example.
If they believe any custom or fashion of the world to be evil in itself, or to be attended
with evil, neither popular applause nor popular fury can make them follow it, but they think
it right to bear their testimony against it by its disuse, and to run the hazard of all the
ridicule, censure, or persecution, which may await them for so doing.

In these cases, as in the former, it must be observed, that the sufferings of the Quakers have
been much diminished, though they still refuse a compliance in as many instances as formerly,
with the fashions of the world.

It was stated in the first volume, that they substituted the word Thou for You, in order that
they might avoid by their words, as well as by their actions, any appearance of flattery to
men. It was stated also, that they suffered on this account; that many magistrates, before
whom they were carried in the early times of their institution, occasioned their punishment
to be more severe, and that they were often abused and beaten by others, and put in danger
of their lives. This persecution, however, for this singularity in their language, has long
ceased; and the substitution of Thou for You is now only considered as an innocent distinction
between Quakers and other people.

It was stated again in the same volume, that the Quakers abstained from the usual address of
the world, such as from pulling off their hats, and from bowing the body, and from their ceremonious
usages. It was explained also, that they did this upon two principles. First, because, as such
ceremonies were no real marks of obeisance, friendship or respect, they ought to be discouraged
by a people, whose religion required that no image should be held out, which was not a faithful
picture of its original, and that no action should be resorted to, which was not correspondent
with the feelings of the heart. Secondly, because all such ceremonies were of a complimentary
or flattering nature, and were expressly forbidden by Jesus Christ. It was stated also, that,
on account of their rejection of such outward usages, their hats were forcibly taken from their
heads and thrown away; that they were beaten and imprisoned on this sole account; and that
the world refused to deal with them as tradesmen, in consequence of which many could scarcely
supply their families with bread. But this deviation from the general practice, though it still
characterizes the members of this society, is no longer a source of suffering. Magistrates
sometimes take care that their hats shall be taken gently from their heads on public occasions,
and private persons expect now no such homage from Quakers, when they meet them.

There is, however, a custom, against which the Quakers anciently bore their testimony, and
against which they continue to bear it, which subjects them occasionally to considerable inconvenience
and loss. In the case of a general illumination, they never light up their houses, but have
the courage to be singular in this respect, whatever may be the temper of the mob.

They believe that the practice of general illuminations cannot be adopted consistently by persons,
who are lovers of the truth. They consider it as no certain criterion of joy. For, in the first
place, how many light up their houses, whose hearts are overwhelmed with sorrow? And, in the
second place, the event which is celebrated, may not always be a matter of joy to good minds.
The birth-day of a prince, for example, may be ushered in as welcome, and the celebration of
it may call his actions to mind, upon which a reflection may produce pleasure, but the celebration
of the slaughter or devastation of mankind can afford no happiness to the Christian.

They consider the practice again, accompanied as it is with all its fiery instruments, as dangerous
and cruel. For how many accidents have happened, and how many lives have been lost upon such
occasions?

They consider it again as replete with evil. The wild uproar which it creates, the mad and
riotous joy which it produces, the licentiousness which it favours, the invidious comparisons
which it occasions, the partial favour which it fixes on individuals who have probably no moral
merit, the false joys which it holds out, and the enmity which it has on some occasions a tendency
to perpetuate; are so many additional arguments against it in the opinion of the Quakers.

For these and other reasons they choose not to submit to the custom, but to bear their testimony
against it, and to run the hazard of having their windows broken, or their houses pillaged,
as the populace may dictate: And in the same manner, if there be any other practice, in which
the world may expect them to coincide, they reject it, fearless of the consequences, if they
believe it to be productive of evil.

This noble practice of bearing testimony, by which a few individuals attempt to stem the torrent
of immorality by opposing themselves to its stream, and which may be considered as a living
martyrdom, does, in a moral point of view, a great deal of good to those, who conscientiously
adopt it. It recalls first principles to their minds. It keeps in their remembrance the religious
rights of man. It teaches them to reason upon principle, and to make their estimates by a moral
standard. It is productive both of patience and of courage. It occasions them to be kind and
attentive, and merciful to those who are persecuted and oppressed. It throws them into the
presence of the Divinity when they are persecuted themselves. In short, it warms their moral
feelings, and elevates their religious thoughts. Like oil, it keeps them from rusting. Like
a whetstone, it gives them a new edge. Take away this practice from the constitution of the
Quakers, and you pull down a considerable support of their moral character. It is a great pity
that, as professing Christians, we should not, more of us, incorporate this noble principle
individually into our religion. We concur unquestionably in customs, through the fear of being
reputed singular, of which our hearts do not always approve, though nothing is more true, than
that a Christian is expected to be singular with respect to the corruptions of the world. What
an immensity of good would be done, if cases of persons, choosing rather to suffer than to
temporize, were so numerous as to attract the general notice of men! Would not every case of
suffering operate as one of the most forcible lessons that could be given to those who should
see it? And how long would that infamous system have to live, which makes a distinction between
political expediency and moral right?

CHAP. VI.

A fourth trait is, that, in political affairs, they reason upon principle, and not from consequences--This
mode of reasoning insures the adoption of the maxim of not doing evil that good may come--Had
Quakers been legislators, many public evils had been avoided, which are now known in the world--Existence
of this trait probable from the influence of the former trait--and from the influence of the
peculiar customs of the Quakers--and from the influence of their system of discipline upon
their minds.

The next trait, which I shall lay open to the world as belonging to the Quaker character, is,
that in all those cases, which may be called political, the Quakers generally reason upon principle,
and but seldom upon consequences.

I do not know of any trait, which ever impressed me more than this in all my intercourse with
the members of this society. It was one of those which obtruded itself to my notice on my first
acquaintance with them, and it has continued equally conspicuous to the present time.

If an impartial philosopher, from some unknown land, and to whom our manners, and opinions,
and history, were unknown, were introduced suddenly into our metropolis, and were to converse
with the Quakers there on a given political subject, and to be directly afterwards conveyed
to the west end of the town, and there to converse with politicians, or men of fashion, or
men of the world, upon the same, he could not fail to be greatly surprised. If he thought the
former wise, or virtuous, or great, he would unavoidably consider the latter as foolish, or
vicious, or little. Two such opposite conclusions, as he would hear deduced from the reasonings
of each, would impress him with an idea, that he had been taken to a country inhabited by two
different races of men. He would never conceive, that they had been educated in the same country,
or under the same government. If left to himself, he would probably imagine, that they had
embraced two different religions. But if he were told that they professed the same, he would
then say, that the precepts of this religion had been expressed in such doubtful language,
that they led to two sets of principles contradictory to one another. I need scarcely inform
the reader, that I allude to the two opposite conclusions, which will almost always be drawn,
where men reason from motives of policy or from moral right.

If it be true that the Quakers reason upon principle in political affairs, and not upon consequences,
it will follow as a direct inference, that they will adopt the Christian maxim, that men ought
not to do evil that good may come. And this is indeed the maxim, which you find them adopting
in the course of their conversation on such subjects, and which I believe they would have uniformly
adopted, if they had been placed in political situations in life. Had the Quakers been the
legislators of the world, we should never have seen many of the public evils that have appeared
in it. It was thought formerly, for example, a glorious thing to attempt to drive Paganism
from the Holy Land, but Quakers would never have joined in any of the crusades for its expulsion.
It has been long esteemed, again, a desideratum in politics, that among nations, differing
in strength and resources, a kind of balance of power should be kept up, but Quakers would
never have engaged in any one war to preserve it. It has been thought again, that it would
contribute to the happiness of the natives of India, if the blessings of the British constitution
could be given them instead of their own. But Quakers would never have taken possession of
their territories for, the accomplishment of such a good. It has been long thought again a
matter of great political importance, that our West-Indian settlements should be cultivated
by African labourers. But Quakers would never have allowed a slave-trade for such a purpose.
It has been thought again, and it is still thought, a desirable thing, that our property should
be secured from the petty depredations of individuals. But Quakers would never have consented
to capital punishments for such an end. In short, few public evils would have arisen among
mankind, if statesmen had adopted the system, upon which the Quakers reason in political affairs,
or if they had concurred with an ancient Grecian philosopher in condemning to detestation the
memory of the man, who first made a distinction between expediency and moral right.

[36]That this trait of reasoning upon principle, regardless of the consequences, is likely
to be a feature in the character of the Quakers, we are warranted in pronouncing, when we discover
no less than three circumstances in the constitution of the Quakers, which may be causes in
producing it.

[Footnote 36: The Sierra Leone Company, which was founded for laudable purposes, ought have
been filled by Quakers; but when they understood that there was to be a fort and depot of arms
in the settlement, they declined becoming proprietors.]

This trait seems, in the first place, to be the direct and legitimate offspring of the trait
explained in the last chapter. For every time a Quaker is called upon to bear his testimony
by suffering, whether in the case of a refusal to comply with the laws, or with the customs
and fashions of the land, he is called upon to refer to his own conscience, against his own
temporal interest, and against the opinion of the world. The moment he gives up principle for
policy in the course of his reasoning upon such occasions, then he does as many others do,
that is, he submits to the less inconvenience, and then he ceases to be a Quaker. But while
he continues to bear his testimony, it is a proof that he makes expediency give way to what
he imagines to be right. The bearing therefore of testimony, where it is conscientiously done,
is the parent, as it is also the bulwark and guardian of reasoning upon principle. It throws
out a memento whenever it is practised, and habituates the subject of it to reason in this
manner. But this trait is nourished and supported again by other causes, and first by the influence,
which the peculiar customs of the Quakers must occasionally have upon their minds. A Quaker
cannot go out of doors, but he is reminded of his own singularity, or of his difference in
a variety of respects from his fellow-citizens. Now every custom, in which he is singular,
whether it be that of dress or of language, or of address, or any other, is founded, in his
own mind, on moral principle, and in direct opposition to popular opinion and applause. He
is therefore perpetually reminded, in almost all his daily habits, of the two opposite systems
of reasoning, and is perpetually called upon as it were to refer to the principles, which originally
made the difference between him and another citizen of the world.

Neither has the discipline of the Quakers a less tendency to the production of the trait in
question. For the business, which is transacted in the monthly and quarterly and yearly meetings,
is transacted under the deliberations of grave and serious men, who consider themselves as
frequently under the divine influence, or as spiritually guided on such occasions. In such
assemblies it would be thought strange if any sentiment were uttered, which savoured of expediency
in opposition to moral right. The youth therefore, who are present, see no other determination
of any question than by a religious standard. Hence these meetings operate as schools, in which
they are habituated to reason upon principle, and to the exclusion of all worldly considerations,
which may suggest themselves in the discussion of any point.

CHAP. VII.

A fifth trait is, that they have an extraordinary independence of mind--This probable, because
the result of the farmer trait--because likely to be produced by their discipline--by their
peculiar custom--and by their opinions on the supposed dignity of situations in life--because
again, they are not vulnerable by the seduction of governments--or by the dominion of the church--or
by the power of fashion and of the opinion of the world.

The next trait, conspicuous in the character of the Quakers, and which is nearly allied to
the former, is that of independence of mind.

This trait is of long standing, having been coeval with the society itself. It was observed
by Cromwell, that "he could neither win the Quakers by money, nor by honours, nor by places,
as he could other people." A similar opinion is entertained of them at the present day. For
of all people it is generally supposed that they are the least easily worked upon, or the least
liable to be made tools or instruments in the bands of others. Who, for example, could say,
on any electioneering occasion, whatever his riches might be, that he could command their votes?

There will be no difficulty in believing this to be a real feature in the character of the
Quakers. For when men are accustomed to refer matters to their reason, and to reason upon principle,
they will always have an independence of mind, from a belief that they are right. And wherever
it be a maxim with them not to do evil that good may come, they will have a similar independence
from a consciousness, that they have never put themselves into the power of the world. Whether the ohngefähr similar sounding baschm - translated as basalt verd - here
may belong, I can be-ing to be seen.

jaspid, ijaspis in Ethiopic; - jasper, haspis in Armenian, - ijaspis in Syriac, a similar stone was the nephrtijos
where nebrites, nephrite, - jaschpe, Jasper, jesper in Hebrew, - [Greek: jasper] of the Greeks,
with amendments: aerizusa, blue; capnia, smoke-colored; assiri with white lines; terebinthinae,
sea green. Also here is part of the [Greek: nibritês] the Orpheus mentioned, - Jasper of the
Romans, were counted which included similar stones, with the same mentioned changes, and others,
as: grammatias, polygrammos, etc. A similar jasponyx Stone nebrites (where nephrite in modern
mineralogy) was.

Jasper is our will to Achates have expected.

yaschma in Russian, also understands our Jasper, - jaspid in Polish,
as are plasma di Smeraldo the Italians, even diosporo differs bey
which: giallo, verde, bruno, rosso, nero antico. plasma in English,
French, etc

H. Our jasper.

In Jasper we see a green, yellow, red, brown, monochrome or polychrome, almost opaque, capable
of polishing, quartz-rock term, less noble than plasma and Agathe, those but related, which is mostly
processed only for small works of art, nor that of the less noble Hornstein stands near. It is
common in Europe, the most beautiful in Siberia, especially the green Orsk in the Urals and the means
of rothbandirte Verkh-Uralsk, the bandirte multicolored Bandjaspis,
jaspe ruban-onyx-Panaché-vein, striped jasper.

In Syria and Egypt, particularly in the deserts, a bandirter Kugeljaspis is very common which
belongs to the local limestone formation known as: melons of Mount Caramel, Egyptian Jasper, Ciotto
d'Egitto in Italian, in French jaspe Egyptien; aegyptian pebl in
English, bey difference which one eye stones, rocks glasses, double-eye
stones, etc, also occurs in a similar fashion in Sicily.

In the East it was understood him and Sard jasb, he is also called
the current bey jaschb Arabs jaschm also roekoemi; among the Greeks
and Romans as agate, sardonyx coecus; the Aegyptilla of Pliny. is
our Egyptian Kugeljaspis, the agates from Sicily, the local jasper.

jaschma
in Russian, - Jasma drahule, even in the Czech tables, - jaspid in
Polish, - jaszpisz in Wlachischen, - [Greek: jasper] in the New Greek;
- diasporo in Italian and Old Spanish; - Jasper in French, - jasper
in English, - jasper in Danish, Swedish, Dutch, - sinopel zinopel
or otherwise in Hungary was called the red jasper.

J. The heliotrope.

Heliotropium of the Greeks and Romans had a green plasma with red
dots, and probably a similarly colored jasper, which we call Now,
with the name, as the Orientals bey is, do I have to be-ing to be
seen.

In the Middle Ages, also finds it [Greek: dialion].

eliotropio in Italian, - heliotrope in French, - heliotrope in English, Swedish etc., - geliotrop
in Russian, - szentkö in Magyar.

K. The chrysoprase.

The Chrysopasius the Romans and Greeks may be one from Beryl been kind. The chrysoprasius (Topazius)
is be-ing been a yellow-green fluor spar.

These names were in the forming mineralogy of recent, sometimes you understood very different
green stones without gemmenartige specific term.

In the upper strata of the Serpentingebirges in Silesia, particularly bey Kosemütz, there is a
widely known as chrysoprase vein, with many different types of colored quartz, a beautiful apple
green that takes a good polish, is suitable for gemstones. Since In 1741 it was aware of him,
won and processed them; Klaproth was 1788, that the staining by nickel
oxide due sey.

Allmäblig limited to the name chrysoprase only on this fossil, in
Linnaeus's system, it was called nitre, fluorine viride; Werner sat
it only at the Talk, since 1791 the crystal.

Our turquoise or Calait L. genus.

Such is an esteemed blue-green, opaque, unkrystallisirter gem that
good Polish takes in small, as occurs in fairly large pieces, the
pretty excludes, has been widely used since ancient times for jewelry.

It is found only in Khorasan (Iran) from where he was seduced by trading down anywhere, but only
recently has it his locality met more closely.

As a surrogate was used for a long time in Europe, the copper penetrated, green colored, fossil bones,
which are found especially in southern France believed: that the true Turquoise Sey similar origin,
and removed him from the long mineralogy; only by Chardin (Voyage en Perse), Agaphi (1791)
and Fraser (1830) are geological deposits was determined he is now recognized for its own mineral
species, the Calait was called, by this or the turqoise de vielle
roche distinction was the fossil bones as turqoise de nouvelle roche-osseuse
[or: rocheosseuse] and odontolithe in French and Turchina rocca de
nova in Italian.

gyu in Tibetan translated by turquoise, probably
is our plasma; druga druga-mara and dakara is translated as turquoise.

Peros in the Hindu; - perodscha in Sanskrit, also haritaçman Tues green stone, - pirusa in Kurdish, - piurjeh
in Armenian, usually translated as berillus will belong here, as well as the purjehham; - Firuzeh in
Persian, also firozah, Firoze, Firuz, firusae with the species: a) Abu ishaki, - b) escheri, - c)
suleimani; - sermune d) - e) Chaki, - f) abd ol medschidi, - g) andelibi. Bey jewelers say He also:
Mesha, and the zweyfarbige ebresch; - Ferus in Arabic, also feruzegi, peruzegi, perosao, with
the species: buscechica, most of the bluish color; b) lahahica; - ferozeh in Turkish, also Piruz,
biruzeg, peruse bihruz, Peruz; - perosag in Chaldean, even tarkja, tareja, torkei, torkeja
(whence perhaps the name Turcosa, turquoise).

[Greek: kalleinos] of the Greeks, the sea-green color (the [Greek:
kallainos]; among the Romans Venetus was called), - Callais, calleina
the Romans.

Turcosa in the Middle Ages, even Turchina, turchesia, torcois, torques, lapis turcicus (probably from
torkeja in Chaldean, not because it was obtained by the Turks).

perudota, peritot, pelidor, a precious stone in the middle ages, which we know nothing more may
be referred to the peruse, related perosao etc.

Turcia in modern Latin, and Borea, - [Greek: peryze] in the New Greek;
- birjura, borivea in Russian, - bronzusa in Windisch, the bron of
ore; - Turchina in Italian, - turquesa in Spanish, - turqoise in French,
- Turkoise in Dutch; - Turks in the old Germans, - turquoise In Swedish,
Danish.

M. Our malachite.

An emerald green, copper carbonate, usually silky gloss, and if it
in solid, clean, polish capable, breaks into larger pieces, so there
may be highly valued ornaments and utensils will be processed as a
gemstone in the Malachite is rare.

It is found in the copper mines at its best only in Siberia, where he is much processed. Besides,
it serves as a copper ore.

stretching from the Persian, where, after the color of the emerald-garlic-basilicumgrünen, the
dark and light is different, and the pure states Shirin also the impure Telch, - dehnedsch in Arab,
also dahnag, danadsch, dahanadsch (gemma similis smaragdo) will belong
here, not for fluorspar as Raineri says.

Taifaschi says he emerged from copper Sey, Copper mines and get 4 types have: a) efrandi, the
most beautiful emerald green, b) Indiani, - c) Kermani, - d) caraki; - dana in Kurdish, is an emerald-colored
gem.

[Greek: chalkosmaragdos] of the Greeks, - pseudosmaragdus of the Romans, Smaragdus atticus, cyprius,
medicus and calchedonius (from the copper mines of the island across
from Demonesus Calchedon) came from the copper mines;. may also include
here the Plin tanos of, comfortable with stretch in Persian connected;
amphitane also may belong here.

Malachite in Russian, Polish and most modern languages ​​(probably from molochites) (see the
next §), Malagita in Italian, -. malachite in French.

N. The Molochites of the ancients.

The Molochites of the Romans (like Being where borrowed our name malachite), is emerald green
than one opaque gem characterisirt, which was also used to seal stones, which may, however, were usually finely
engraved, including the malachite not well are good, so it seems very doubtful whether the molochites
our malachite was, what he was even a stone, it must made we stay
there.

A similar name is missing in the ancient and oriental literature.

O. The Omphax of the ancients.

Theophrastus mentions the [Greek: omphax] as a green stone, which served to seal rings (the name
is associated with omphacium, di Oehl from impure olive, or juice from unripe grapes - onfak
in Arabic). What was this for a stone stands at the time not to determine, since a similar
Name is not widely known.

From this omphax is the name of omphacite in our mineralogy borrowed,
for a granular Augite in combat with garnet, etc, which occurs particularly
in the Fichtelgebirge, the omphax has no relation.

Our species P. Idocrase or vesuvianite.

In the lavas of Vesuvius are found beautiful green and brown crystals, a considerable polish
ground and take the name of Vesuvius gems - GEMM de Vesuvio - including chrysolite, Hyacinth,
Topaz hot. This species is distributed in other areas, in part to the more beautiful so well
in Siberia, Lake Baikal, etc Werner fixated this genus, which was formerly Hyacinth or credited
to the schorl, she called vesuvianite, Hauy (1801) Idocrase which
name in the modern languages ​​went on, the Russian is known as the
stone mostly because Wiluit he finds himself on Wilui in Kamchatka.

Perhaps the stone was already known to the ancient times, was also used well, but we do not
know under what name.

Q. Our genus epidote, Pistacit, Thallit.

A crystalline green Fossil, sometimes so beautifully colored and polish enough to produce it as
Gem serves.

It is found quite frequently in Europe, especially in Sweden, in India, in the company of corundum.
It was earlier expected to schorl, Werner fixated the Genus as Pistacit, Hauy called them
epidote, also gave the names: Arendalit, Akantikon, Delphinit, Thallit,
etc Oisinit antiquity may be-ing the genus have been known since it
also occurs in India, but we do not know under what name.

R. Our genus augite or pyroxene.

A very common crystalline mineral of black and green color, very often in the basalts and lavas,
but is not technically apply. It was formerly part of the schorl expected, Werner fixated on the genre as augite,
Hauy she called pyroxene, and has many species, partly the special names were given as: diopside,
Sahlit, Malacolith, Alalit, Mussit, Coccoliths, etc.

Because the fossil is very common in Italy, you will have met even in antiquity. The black, very
rich in augite sand and tuff of the area of ​​Rome was called by Vitruvius: carbunculus arena,
probably was expected, therefore, the augite carbunculus to the genus, ie to our garnet.

The augite (where the name taken for our augite) leads only to Pliny beyläufig, observing: that
he is usually thought of different Callais, and he therefore our turquoise was similar, or a variation
of it was, so with our augite no relation.

S. The genus or hornblende amphibole.

From augite hardly much different, a fossil of black or green color, usually blättrich, also
radiating, then jet stone, Tremolith called. Has no industrial use. The crystals are common
in the lavas and basalts.

The foliated hornblende frequently appears as Felsart, particularly
with feldspar, quartz and mica, here is the syenite (see below marble),
also Feldstein with the diorite or greenstone, and when they appear
here very preponderant, the hornblende rock, Amphibolite or Aphanit,
almost black color, preferably by the ancient Egyptians was applied
to their idols, the basanite of the ancients (basalte nero the Italians)
was.

Even in Kashmir there is Diess tough rock often used to frame works. The labrador sized Hornblende,
also called Paulite and Hyper Sten (dwulitschnewaja Obmana in Russian, ipersteno in Italian),
of Labrador, Greenland, etc., is characterized by a peculiar Schiller was, but the antiquity
and the East probably not known, was in 1789 by Werner characterisirt.

The hornblende was previously expected to the genus granatus and basalt, which was later schorl
called (the most different fossils included) Walls are called 1772
granatus vulgaris; Linnaeus (1768), borax margodes; - Rome de l'Isle
1783: schorl en masse, - the name is probably from Swedish, where
sphalerite hornblände actually means, in Sweden called but our earlier
hornblende usually spatosus corneus.

       Werner fixated the species under these Name in 1788, she called Hauy
amphibole (fluctuating).

Yu-Tsing-chy is the Tremolith in Chinese, and yang-ky-pe-yang, and chy-chy .-- tsillampo in Magyar;
- obmanka, rogowaja blenda in Russian, is hornblende, lutschistoi Kamenje is jet stone, gimoraz,
the Czech jinoraz tables, - hornblende in the modern languages.

T. The genus Diallage and Smaragdite, otherwise also called prisme d'Emeraude.

A green, leafy, usually in serpentine ingrown Fossil, with a peculiar Iridescence, which in itself
does not apply. In forming the mixture of serpentine and Feldstein it all rocks under the name
euphotide, gabbro, gabbro granito Tues, verde di Corsica, granito del impruneta. This rock is
on works of art, is often in Italy, was much used in ancient times, but we do not know the
name under which special in the General If we are certainly in marble .-- Saussure stressed the genre
emerged as Smaragdite, called Hauy they Diallage, Werner it expected to jet stone.

* * * * *

# §. 5. Yellow gems and related rocks #.

A. Our species topaz.

The jeweler usually referred to all yellow gems called topaz, corundum, such as yellow, yellow
spinel, etc; mineralogical is the genus of crystalline form, hardness, weight and chemical content
sharply defined, with different colors.

Ceylon, as the whole of India, rich in all other gemstones, has a
remarkable way no Topaz, or if they should find here what is said
here and there, they appear it at least as the highest rarity, what
is called the oriental topaz jewelry, is usually yellow corundum,
the Yakut sary of the Orientals.

In Saxony there are the beautiful wine-yellow topaz (formerly called chrysolite) to the Oriente and
antiquity were probably foreign. In Brazil, red, green and fairly water-white topaz often, in ordinary
life are often referred to as ruby ​​and sapphire. wins in Siberia
you a lot lately Topaz, particularly in the Ural bey secondary sedimentary,
which is usually water-white, and bey Mursinsk of mostly bluish and
greenish color.

This Siberian topaz is the antiquity have known him probably combined with Smararagd or beryl,
with which latter he often occur together, as here occur but no yellow topaz, then the antiquity
and the Orient have known gems reported difficulty with the name topaz. In Jekatharinenburg in Siberia,
where Siberian topaz are a lot of ground, called this - I do not
know why - tjeschelowes, tjejelowjesi what is to say: the serious
(the weight of wjes tjesolui and difficult); as topazi but refers
to the color changes of the rock-crystal.

In the Sanscrit literature is a name for the yellow topaz (the mineralogist) not to expect,
so when Wilson, Pott, and others the name of yellow jewels, such as: pita pitasara, pitaspatica,
pitamane translate with Topaz so Diess - taken mineralogical - incorrect
ing, these gems are among the yellow corundum or some other mineral
species, and the same the case with pitaçma gomedaka and in Bengal,
with manikang, Kunig is in puresjeragan Malaysian, Sri Lankan in pusperajan
etc, all probably erroneously translated with Topaz be.

tobadsch
means in our current Turkish Topaz, which word from the European languages
Being borrowed, may be-ing even though top and adsch Turkish syllables
can do what I do not know; also one should take them (which word is
supposed to be Persian origin) Sofya Tashi and sirtcha call Kibris
also elmasi (Diamond of Cyprus) and Tashi Kibris (Cyprus stone) used
to rock-crystal will belong.

The word topaz, which may come from Egypt (where it may have referred to our fluorspar) passed
in all European languages, topaz, in English, Swedish, Magyar; Topaas in Dutch; topazio in Spanish
and Italian; topass in Polish, Windisch, Czech tables.

B. The topazion the Old and pitdan of the Hebrews.

paz in Hebrew is translated as topazion. tuphasjon in Syriac. [Greek: pazon] (as paz in Hebrew),
[Greek: topazion] (tuphasjon how) in Greek, Roman topazius. Upon this stone, we have Greek
writer sensible news is not rely solely on the uncritical Pliny.

Strabo 16, 198 says, is from the island of topazion Ophiodes bey Egypt
a golden yellow ([Greek: chrysoeidês]), a transparent stone that shines
such light (), that he was on the day not see (different) may, only
during the night he is seen by the collector.

Diodorus. Siculus III. 3 says: the topazion is glassy ([Greek: hyalô paremephrês]), golden yellow
([Greek: enchryson]), is found in rocks, because of the sunlight it can be not in the day To see
by night it glows in the dark. Agatharchides says the same thing, calls him a non-transparent,
glass-like, yellow stone, Orpheus de lapidibus repeated what was said, observing: that he was
used for magical purposes.

Plin. 37. 32 leads to the Juba: the island was named after Topazon topazin, or - as a manuscript reads
- opazum what in the language of Troglodite (ie in the Egyptian) hot look. The Arsinoe, wife
of Ptolemy Philadelphus had this one rocks Statue of 4 cubitus height (5 '7 "Rhineland) obtained in
the delubrum set sey. The species can be distinguished: the prasoides chrysopteros of garlic
and green.

In modern times has Bruce (Journey to the sources of the Nile I. Pag. 255), the topaz island
(the in the local language or Jibbel siberget zumrud means) visits, he found pieces of a green
wire, cloudy, fragile rock, not as hard as quartz, and the siberget
were called bilur the people.

Whether this made a couple of recent detailed studies has is not my attention.

The [Greek: topazion] of the masses occurred in large, glass-like
and soft, like all gems, had yellow and green colors, distinguished
by the fact: that he, by the sun during the day, in the dark, lit
phosphorescirte Tues.

No fossil phosphorescirt so strong and as easily as the fluor spar in some amendments, particularly
the most emerald green Chlorophan from Siberia, is that glows in the sunlight, and it leads him into
the dark, so he was so strong that you can see near objects dabey.

       

Well, no doubt hereafter was the topazion our fluor spar, especially our Chlorophan or strongly phosphorescent
fluorspar, this was called topazion when he was yellow, chrysoprasius bey yellow-green color (which
you also vases [vessels] and larger items manufactured) pazion bey and green color, prasion, prasoides.

These
names have been transferred gradually to a very different rocks, on the topazion our topaz,
and the chrysoprase chrysoprase on our a polish performance green quartz, and the prasion on
our Pras, a green coarser quartz.

Strange to be fluor spar and topaz in a certain internal relation, they contain both, albeit
in different quantities, hydrofluoric acid and after observations of free-living (Geognostic
work V. Pag. 232) both go over into each other.

* * * * *

pitdah in Hebrew was one of 12 gems in the ornament of the high priest among the Jews, which
in Greek with [Greek: topazion] is translated, in Syriac with sorjo, the Chaldean with jarkan,
jarukta (ie green), in Arabic with asphax. Braun (de vestitu sacerd.) Investigated to show that
such a light, in the Semitic languages ​​frequent confusion of the letters from topaza, topza,
topda, pitdah is be-ing which I found very etymology then leave. War of the Greeks topazion
our fluor spar, he can not probably the pitdah of the Hebrews been be, because a piece of
fluor spar would be in addition to other precious stones Jewelry of the high priest have exempted
not good.

I would think: it wants a relationship held between pitdah
in Hebrew, with pita in Sanskrit and Indian languages, which is the
yellow Indian gems denotes the yellow corundum, spinel, etc. (the
topaz of jewelers, not the mineralogist) This is also indicated: that
the Persian is translated pitdah by Laal, which our spinel or zirconium
was.

C. Bernstein.

The amber, fossilized tree resin, although a
part, but to the minerals, and preferably to the gems. He is yellow
in color, which disappears into the white, often a stitch added to
red, translucent, often transparent and very strong electrisch. Although
he finds in many areas, most often, most beautiful, and only on the
largest pieces on the Baltic coast, especially on the Prussian and
bey Palmünken, partly in the earth, usually as the ejection Sea, here
it is gained since the very earliest times, and seems strikingly be
ejected for thousands of years an almost equal quantity to Bernstein,
the yield to reduce not.

The first of the intellectually defective traits consists in the imputation, that the Quakers
are deficient in the cultivation of the intellect of their children, or that, when they grow
up in life, they are found to have less knowledge than others in the higher branches of learning.
By this I mean, that they are understood to have but a moderate classical education, to know
but little of the different branches of philosophy, and to have, upon the whole, less variety
of knowledge than others of their countrymen in the corresponding stations of life.

This trait seems to have originated with the world in two supposed facts. The first is, that
there has never been any literary writer of eminence born in the society, Penn, Barclay and
others having come into it by convincement, and brought their learning with them. The second
is, that the society has never yet furnished a philosopher, or produced any material discovery.
It is rather a common remark, that if the education of others had been as limited as that of
the Quaker, we should have been probably at this day without a Newton, and might have been
strangers to those great discoveries, whether of the art of navigation, or of the circulation
of the blood, or of any other kind, which have proved so eminently useful to the comfort, health,
and safety of many of the human race.

This trait will be true, or it will be false, as it is applied to the different classes, which
may be found in the society of the Quakers. The poor, who belong to it, are all taught to read,
and are therefore better educated than the poor belonging to other bodies of men. They who
spring from parents whose situation does not entitle them to rank with the middle class, but
yet keeps them out of the former, are generally educated, by the help of a[38] subscription,
at Ackworth school, and may be said to have more school learning than others in a similar situation
in life. The rest, whatever may be their situation, are educated wholly at the expence of their
parents, who send them either to private Quaker seminaries, or to schools in the neighbourhood,
as they judge it to be convenient or proper. It is upon this body of the Quakers that the imputation
can only fall; and as far as these are concerned, I think it may be said with truth, that they
possess a less portion of what is usually called liberal knowledge than others in a corresponding
station in life. There may be here and there a good classical, or a good mathematical scholar.
But in general there are but few Quakers, who excel in these branches of learning. I ought,
however, to add, that this character is not likely to remain long with the society. For the
young Quakers of the present day seem to me to be sensible of the inferiority of their own
education, and to be making an attempt towards the improvement of their minds, by engaging
in those, which are the most entertaining, instructive, and useful, I mean, philosophical pursuits.

[Footnote 38: Their parents pay a small annual sum towards their board and clothing. The rest
is made up by a subscription among the society, and by the funds of the school.]

That deficiency in literature and science is likely to be a trait in the character of the Quakers,
we may pronounce, if we take into consideration circumstances which have happened, and notions
which have prevailed, in this society.

The Quakers, like the Jews of old, whether they be rich or poor, are brought up, in obedience
to their own laws, to some employment. They are called of course at an early age from their
books. It cannot therefore be expected of them, that they should possess the same literary
character as those who spend years at our universities, or whose time is not taken up by the
concerns of trade.

It happens also in this society, that persons of the poor and middle classes are frequently
through industry becoming rich. While these were gaining but a moderate support, they gave
their children but a moderate education. But when they came into possession of a greater substance,
their children had finished their education, having grown up to men.

The ancient controversy too, relative to the necessity of human learning as a qualification
for ministers of the Gospel, has been detrimental to the promotion of literature and science
among the Quakers. This controversy was maintained with great warmth and obstinacy on both
sides, that is, by the early Quakers, who were men of learning, on the one hand, and by the
divines of our universities on the other. The less learned in the society, who read this controversy,
did not make the proper distinction concerning it. They were so interested in keeping up the
doctrine, that learning was not necessary for the priesthood, that they seemed to have forgotten
that it was necessary at all. Hence knowledge began to be cried down in the society; and though
the proposition was always meant to be true with respect to the priesthood only, yet many mistook
or confounded its meaning, so that they gave their children but a limited education on that
account.

The opinions also of the Quakers relative to classical authors, have been another cause of
impeding in some degree their progress in learning, that is, in the classical part of it. They
believe these to have inculcated a system of morality frequently repugnant to that of the Christian
religion. And the Heathen mythology, which is connected with their writings, and which is fabulous
throughout, they conceive to have disseminated romantic notions among youth, and to have made
them familiar with fictions, to the prejudice of an unshaken devotedness to the love of truth.

CHAP. XI.

Second trait is, that they are a superstitious people--Circumstances that have given birth
to this trait--Quakerism, where it is understood, is seldom chargeable with superstition--Where
it is misunderstood, it leads to it--Subjects in which it may be misunderstood are those of
the province of the Spirit--and of dress and language--Evils to be misapprehended from a misunderstanding
of the former subject.

It may seem wonderful at first sight, that persons, who have discarded an undue veneration
for the saints, and the saints days, and the relics of the Roman Catholic religion, who have
had the resolution to reject the ceremonials of Protestants, such as baptism and the sacrament
of the supper, and who have broken the terrors of the dominion of the priesthood, should, of
all others, be chargeable with superstition. But so it is. The world has certainly fixed upon
them the character of a superstitious people. Under this epithet much is included. It is understood
that Quakers are more ready than others to receive mystical doctrines, more apt to believe
in marvellous appearances more willing to place virtue in circumstances, where many would place
imposition; and that, independently of all this, they are more scrupulous with respect to the
propriety of their ordinary movements, waiting for religious impulses, when no such impulses
are expected by other religious people.

This trait of superstition is an ancient trait in the character of the Quakers, and has arisen
from the following causes.

It has been long imagined, that where a people devote themselves so exclusively to the influence
of the Spirit as the Quakers appear to do, they will not be sufficiently on their guard to
make the proper distinctions between imagination and revelation, and that they will be apt
to confound impressions, and to bring the divine Spirit out of its proper sphere into the ordinary
occurrences of their lives. And in this opinion the world considers itself to have been confirmed
by an expression said to have been long in use among Quakers, which is, "that they will do
such and such things if they have liberty to do them." Now by this expression the Quakers may
mean only, that all human things are so uncertain, and so many unforeseen events may happen,
that they dare make no promises, but they will do the things in question if no obstacle should
arise to prevent them. And this caution in language runs through the whole society; for they
seldom promise but provisionally in any case. But the world has interpreted the expression
differently, and maintains that the Quakers mean by it, that they will do such and such things,
if they feel that they have liberty or permission from the Spirit of God.

Two other circumstances, which have given birth to this trait in the character of the Quakers,
are the singularities of their dress and language. For when they are spoken of by the world,
they are usually mentioned under the name of the idolatry or superstition of the Quaker language,
or the idolatry or superstition of the Quaker dress.

Now this trait, which has originated in the three causes that have been mentioned, is considered
by the world to have been still more confirmed by a circumstance which happened but a few years
ago, namely, that when animal magnetism was in fashion, there were more of this society worked
upon by these delusions, than of any other.

With respect to the truth of this trait, I believe it cannot easily be made out, as for as
animal magnetism is concerned. For though undoubtedly there were Quakers so superstitious as
to be led away on this occasion, yet they were very few in number, and not more in proportion
than others of other religious denominations. The conduct of these was also considered as reprehensible
by the society at large, and some pains were taken to convince them of their error, and of
the unsuitableness of such doctrines with the religion they professed.

With respect to the truth of this trait, as it may have existed on other occasions, it may
be laid down as a position generally true, that where Quakers understand their own constitution,
it can have no place among them. But where they do not understand it, there are few people
among whom it is more likely to exist, as we may see from the following account.

It is the doctrine of Quakerism on the subject of the Spirit, that it is an infallible guide
to men in their spiritual concerns. But I do not see where it is asserted by any of the Quaker
writers, that it is to be a guide to man in all the temporal concerns of his life, or that
he is to depreciate the value of human reason. George Fox was very apprehensive that even in
matters of religion, which constitute the immediate province of the divine Spirit, men might
mistake their own enthusiastic feelings for revelation; and he censured some, to use his own
expression, "for having gone out into imaginations." The society also have been apprehensive
of the same consequences. Hence one among other reasons for the institution of the office of
elders. It is the duty of these to watch over the doctrine of the ministers to see that they
preach soundly, and that they do not mistake their own imaginations for the Spirit of God,
and mix his wisdom with the waywardness of their own wills. They therefore, who believe in
the doctrine of the agency of the Spirit, and at the same time in the necessity of great caution
and watchfulness that they may not confound its operations with that of their own fancies,
will never incur the charge, which has been brought against the body at large. But if there
are others, on the other hand, who give themselves up to this agency without the necessary
caution, they will gradually mix their impressions, and will, in time, refer most of them to
the same source. They will bring the Divine Being by degrees out of his spiritual province,
and introduce him into all the trivial and worthless concerns of their lives. Hence a belief
will arise, which cannot fail of binding their minds in the chains of delusion and superstition.

It is the doctrine of Quakerism again on the subject of dress, that plainness and simplicity
are required of those who profess the Christian character; that any deviation from these is
unwarrantable, if it be made on the plea of conformity to the fashions of the world; that such
deviation bespeaks the beginning of an unstable mind; and, if not noticed, may lead into many
evils. They therefore, who consider dress in this point of view, will never fall into any errors
of mind in their contemplation of this subject. But if there are members, on the other hand,
who place virtue in the colour and shape of their cloathing, as some of the Jews did in the
broad phylacteries on their garments, they will place it in lifeless appearances and forms,
and bring their minds under vassalage to a false religion. And in the same manner it may be
observed with respect to language, that if persons in the society lay an undue stress upon
it, that is, if they believe truth or falsehood to exist inherently in lifeless words, and
this contrary to the sense in which they know they will be understood by the world, so that
they dare not pronounce them for religion's sake, they will be in danger of placing religion
where it is not, and of falling into errors concerning it, which will be denominated superstition
by the world.

As I am now on the subject of superstition, as capable of arising from the three causes that
have been mentioned, I shall dwell for a short time on some of the evils which may arise from
one of them, or from a misunderstanding of the doctrine of the agency of the Spirit.

I believe it possible, in the first place, for those who receive this doctrine without the
proper limitations, that is, for those who attribute every thing exclusively to the Spirit
of God, and who draw no line between revelation and the suggestions of their own will, to be
guilty of evil actions and to make the Divine Being the author of them all.

I have no doubt, for example, that many of those, who engaged in the crusades, considered themselves
as led into them by the Spirit of God. But what true Quaker, in these days, would wish to make
the Almighty the author of all the bloodshed in the wars that were undertaken on this account?

The same may be said with respect to martyrdoms. For there is reason to believe, that many
who were instrumental in shedding the blood of their fellow-creatures, because they happened
to differ from them in religious opinion, conceived that they were actuated by the divine Spirit,
and that they were doing God service, and aiding the cause of religion by their conduct on
such occasions. But what true Quaker would believe that the Father of justice and mercy was
the author of these bloody persecutions, or that, if men were now to feel an impulse in their
own minds to any particular action, they ought to obey it, if it were to lead them to do evil
that good might come?

The same may be said with respect to many of the bad laws, which are to be found in the codes
of the different nations of the world. Legislators no doubt have often thought themselves spiritually
guided when they made them. And judges, who have been remarkable for appealing to the divine
Spirit in the course of their lives, have made no hesitation to execute them. This was particularly
the case with Sir Matthew Hale. If there be any one, whose writings speak a more than ordinary
belief in the agency of the Spirit of God, it is this great and estimable man. This spirit
he consulted not only in the spiritual, but in the temporal concerns, of his life. And yet
he sentenced to death a number of persons, because they were reputed to be witches. But what
true Quaker believes in witchcraft? or does he not rather believe, that the Spirit of God,
it rightly understood, would have protested against condemnation for a crime, which does not exist?

But the mischief, if a proper distinction be not made between the agency of the Spirit and
that of the will of man, may spread farther, and may reach the man himself, and become injurious
both to his health, his intellect, and his usefulness, and the Divine Being may be made again
the author of it all.

Many, we all know, notwithstanding their care and attention, have found that they have gone
wrong in their affairs in various instances of their lives, that is, events have shewn that
they have taken a wrong course. But if there be those who suppose themselves in these instances
to have been acted upon by the Spirit or God, what is more likely than that they may imagine
that they have lost his favour, and that looking upon themselves as driven by him into the
wrong road, they may fall into the belief, that they are among the condemned reprobate, and
pine away, deprived of their senses, in a state of irretrievable misery and despair?

Others again may injure their health, and diminish their comfort and their utility in another
way. And here I may remark, that if I have seen what the world would call superstition among
the Quakers, it has been confined principally to a few females, upon whose constitution, more
delicate than that of men, an attention to undistinguished impressions, brought on in a course
of time by a gradual depreciation of human reason, has acted with considerable force. I fear
that some of these, in the upright intention of their hearts to consult the Almighty on all
occasions as the sole arbiter of every thing that is good, have fostered their own infirmities,
and gone into retirements so frequent, as to have occasioned these to interfere with the duties
of domestic comfort and social good, and that they have been at last so perplexed with doubts
and an increasing multitude of scruples, that they have been afraid of doing many things, because
they have not had a revelation for them. The state of such worthy persons is much to be pitied.
What must be their feelings under such a conflict, when they are deserted by human reason?
What an effect will not such religious doubts and perplexities have upon their health? What
impediments do they not throw in the way of their own utility?

I should be sorry if by any observations, such as the preceding, I should be thought to censure
any one for the morality of his feelings. And still more sorry should I be, if I were to be
thought to have any intention of derogating from the character of the Supreme Being. I am far
from denying his omniscience, for I believe that he sees every sparrow that falls to the ground,
and even more, that he knows the innermost thoughts of men. I deny not his omnipresence, for
I believe that he may be seen in all his works. I deny neither his general nor his particular
providence, nor his hearing of our prayers, nor his right direction in our spiritual concerns,
nor his making of all things work together for good to those who love him. Neither do I refuse
to admit him either into our journies, or into our walks, or into our chambers, for he can
make all the things we see subservient to our moral instruction, and his own glory. But I should
be sorry to have him considered as a clock, that is to inform us about the times of our ordinary
movements, or to make him a prompter in all our worldly concerns, or to oblige him to take
his seat in animal magnetism, or to reside in the midst marvellous delusions. Why should we
expect a revelation in the most trivial concerns of our lives, where our reason will inform
us? Why, like the waggoner, apply to Jupiter, when we may remove the difficulty by putting
our own shoulders to the wheels? If we are reasonable creatures, we can generally tell, whether
we ought to go forwards or backwards, or to begin, or to postpone, whether our actions are
likely to be innocent or hurtful, or whether we are going on an errand of benevolence or of
evil. In fact, there can be no necessity for this constant appeal to the Spirit in all our
worldly concerns, while we possess our reason as men. And unless some distinction be made between
the real agency of God and our own volitions, which distinction true Quakerism suggests, we
shall be liable to be tossed to and fro by every wind that blows, and to become the creatures
of a superstition, that may lead us into great public evils, while it may be injurious to our
health and intellect, and to the happiness and utility of our lives.

CHAP. XII.

Morally defective traits--First of these is that of obstinacy--This was attached also to the
early Christians--No just foundation for the existence of this trait.

I come now to the consideration of those which I have denominated morally defective traits.

The first trait of this kind, which is attached to the character of the Quakers, is that of
an obstinate spirit.

This trait is a very ancient one. It was observed in the time of George Fox, of the members
of this society, that they were as "stiff as trees," and this idea concerning them has come
down to the present day.

The origin of this trait must be obvious to all. The Quakers, as we have seen, will neither
pay tithes, nor perform military service, nor illuminate their houses, like other people, though
they are sure of suffering by their refusal to comply with custom in these cases. Now, when
individuals, few in number, become singular, and differ from the world at large, it is generally
considered that the majority are in the right, and that the minority are in the wrong. But
obstinacy may be defined to be a perseverance in that which is generally considered to be wrong.

This epithet has attached, and will attach to those who resist the popular opinion, till men
are better educated, or till they lose their prejudices, or have more correct and liberal notions
on religion. The early Christians were themselves accused of obstinacy, and this even by the
enlightened Pliny. He tells, us, that they would not use wine and frankincense before the statues
of the emperors; and that "there was no question that for such obstinacy they deserved punishment."[39]

[Footnote 39: "Pervicaciam certe et inflexibitem obstinationem debere puniri."]

In judging of the truth of this trait, two queries will arise. First, whether the Quakers,
in adhering rigidly to those singularities which have produced it, are really wrong as a body
of Christians? And, secondly, whether they do not conscientiously believe themselves to be right?

In the case of the early Christians, which has been mentioned, we, who live at this day, have
no doubt that Pliny put a false estimate on their character. We believe them to have done their
duty, and we believe also that they considered themselves as doing it, when they refused divine
honours to the emperors. And the action, therefore, which Pliny denominated obstinacy, would,
if it had been left to us to name it, have been called inflexible virtue, as arising out of
a sense of the obligations imposed upon them by the Christian religion.

In the same manner we may argue with respect to the Quakers. Who, for example, if he will try
to divest himself of the prejudices of custom, and of the policy of the world, feels such a
consciousness of his own powers as positively to pronounce, that the notions of the Quakers
are utterly false, as to the illicitness of wars under the Christian system? The arguments
of the Quakers on this subject are quite as good, in my apprehension, as any that I have heard
advanced on the other side of the question. These arguments too are unquestionably much more
honourable to Christianity, and much more consistent with the nature and design of the Gospel
dispensation. They are supported also by the belief and the practice of the earliest Christians.
They are arguments again, which have suggested themselves to many good men, who were not Quakers,
and which have occasioned doubts in some instances, and conviction in others, against the prejudice
of education and the dominion of custom. And if the event should ever come to pass, which most
Christians expect, that men will one day or other turn their swords and their spears into ploughshares
and pruning-hooks, they, who live in that day, will applaud the perseverance of the Quakers
in this case, and weep over the obstinacy and inconsistency of those who combated their opinions.

But the great question after all is, whether the Quakers believe themselves in this or in any
other of their religious scruples, to be right, as a Christian body? If there are those among
them who do not, they give into the customs of the world, and either leave the society themselves,
or become disowned. It is therefore only a fair and a just presumption, that all those who
continue in the society, and who keep up to these scruples to the detriment of their worldly
interest, believe themselves to be right. But this belief of their own rectitude, even if they
should happen to be wrong, is religion to them, and ought to be estimated so by us in matters
in which an interpretation of Gospel principles is concerned. This is but an homage due to
conscience, after all the blood that has been shed in the course of Christian persecutions,
and after all the religious light that has been diffused among us since the reformation of
our religion.

CHAP. XIII.

SECT. I.

Next trait is that of a money-getting spirit--Probability of the truth of this trait examined--An
undue eagerness after money not unlikely to be often the result of the frugal and commercial
habits of the society--but not to the extent, as insisted on by the world--This eagerness,
wherever it exists, seldom chargeable with avarice.

The next trait in the character of the Quakers is that of a money-getting spirit, or of a devotedness
to the acquisition of money in their several callings and concerns.

This character is considered as belonging so generally to the individuals of this society,
that it is held by the world to be almost inseparable from Quakerism. A certain writer has
remarked, that they follow their concerns in pursuit of riches, "with a step as steady as time,
and with an appetite as keen as death."

I do not know what circumstances have given birth to this trait. That the Quakers are a thriving
body we know. That they may also appear, when known to be a domestic people, and to have discarded
the amusements of the world, to be more in their shops and counting-houses than others, is
probable. And it is not unlikely, that, in consequence of this appearance, connected with this
worldly prosperity, they may be thought to be more intent than others upon the promotion of
their pecuniary concerns. There are circumstances, however, belonging to the character and
customs of the society, which would lead to an opposite conclusion. The Quakers, in the first
place, are acknowledged to be a charitable people. But if so, they ought not to be charged,
at least, with that species of the money-getting spirit, which amounts to avarice. It is also
an undoubted fact, that they give up no small portion of their time, and put themselves to
no small expence, on account of their religion. In country places they allot one morning in
the week, and in the towns generally two, besides the Sunday, to their religious worship. They
have also their monthly meetings, and after these their quarterly, to attend, on account of
their discipline. And this they do frequently at a great distance, and after a considerable
absence as tradesmen, from their homes. I do not mean to insinuate by this latter instance,
that men become pious, and therefore proof against the influence of money, exactly in proportion
as they attend their religious meetings, but that, where they are voraciously intent upon the
getting of money, they could hardly be expected to make such a sacrifice of their time.

But whatever may be the appearance on either side, the question is, whether the imputation
of the trait, which is now under our consideration, be founded in fact. What circumstances
make in favour of it? What circumstances make against it? And which of these preponderate on
the whole?

We may say then, at the first sight, that the precepts of Quakerism make decidedly against
it. And we may say again, that it ought to be expected, that all those principles and circumstances,
which have an influence in the production of moral character, or of such a character as belongs
to the Quakers as a body, should work together either towards its prevention or its cure.

On the other hand, if we examine the situation of the society, we shall find circumstances,
the operation of which is directly in favour of such a trait.

And first, in looking into the human heart, we seem to discover a circumstance, which, on account
of the situation alluded to, may operate as a spring in producing it. Men, generally speaking,
love consequence. Now the Quakers, though they have consequence in their own society, have
none in the world. They can be neither legislators nor magistrates. They can take no titles
to distinguish them. They pass therefore in the world, like the common and undistinguished
herd, except from the circumstances of their dress. But riches give all men consequence. And
it is not clear to me, but that this circumstance may have its operation on the minds of some
who are called Quakers, in contributing to the production of the money-getting spirit, inasmuch
as it may procure them a portion of estimation, which they cannot otherwise have, while they
remain in their own body.

In looking again into the human heart, we find another, and this a powerful spring, connected
with the situation of the society, for the production of such a trait.

The Quakers, as I have observed before, are mostly in trade. Now they are generally a sedate,
thoughtful, sober, diligent, and honest people. It is not then too much to say, with these
qualifications, that they will be as successful in trade as others. Hence their incomes will
be as great, in proportion to their capitals, as those of others, from the same source.

But let us look for a moment at their outgoings. They neither spend nor lose their money at
cards, or at horse-races, or by any other species of gaming. They do not waste their substance
either in drinking at taverns or at home. Not having, in general, an enlarged education, or
a taste for literature, they have no expensive libraries. They buy no costly paintings. They
neither powder their hair, nor dress in a splendid manner. They use no extravagant furniture.
They keep no packs of hounds for their diversion. They are never seen at the theatres. They
have neither routes, balls, nor music meetings. They have neither expensive liveries nor equipages.
Hence it must follow, that their outgoings, as far as their living is concerned, cannot in
general be as great as those of others in a similar condition of life. But if their inlets
are greater than their outlets of money, when compared with those of other persons, a greater
overplus of money beyond the expences of living, will be the constant result, or there will
be a greater increasing accumulation of money, upon the whole, than falls within the possession
of others. Now a question arises here, founded on a knowledge of the infirmity of our nature.
Are men likely, in general, constituted as they are, to see the golden idol constantly rising
in dimensions before them, and to refrain front worshipping it, or, are they likely to see
it without a corruption of their moral vision? It is observed[40] by one of the scriptural
writers, "A merchant shall hardly keep himself from doing wrong, and a huckster shall not be
free from sin." And where is it, that this old saying, except the mind be strongly fortified
by religion, will not be found equally true in the present, as in former times? The truth is,
that the old maxim, Creseit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia creseit, is a just one. That is,
it is true, "that the coming in of money in an undue proportion begets the love of it", that
the love of money again leads to the getting of more; that the getting of more again generally
increases the former love. And hence a round is kept up of circumstances and feelings, till
a money-getting spirit creeps into the character of him, who is placed in a situation so unfortunate
for the purity of his heart.

[Footnote 40: Ecclesiasticus xxvi. 29.]

These then are the acting and the counteracting circumstances on both sides. Which of the two
are likely to be predominant, we must conjecture. When men have become full grown Quakers,
the latter will lose their power. But where they have not (and it is to be presumed that there
are many in the society who have not reached this stature, and many again who bear only the
name of their profession) they will frequently prevail. I own I fear that precepts, though
there may be a general moral bias, will not always be found successful against those, which
are considered to be the most powerful of the temptations, to which our nature is exposed.
I own, when I consider that the Quakers, in consequence of their commercial and frugal habits,
have greater pecuniary accumulations before their eyes than others in a similar condition of
life, when I consider how few are able to bear these accumulations without moral injury to
themselves, and that even the early Christians began to relax in their character when they
begun to be prosperous, I am of opinion, that there is some foundation far the existence of
such a spirit, though not to the extent, as insisted on by the world; or, that there is in
the society, notwithstanding the many bright and amiable exceptions that are to be found in
it, greater eagerness after wealth than is consistent with its religious profession. And to
this opinion I am inclined from another consideration, which cannot be overlooked in the present
case. The book of Extracts itself acknowledges the existence of such a spirit, for it characterises
it under the name of "hastening to be rich," and it calls it "a growing evil."

But when I say that I so for accede to the opinion of the world, as to allow that the money-getting
spirit may be fixed upon a part of the society, I feel that I ought to make a proper distinction
concerning it. I must observe, that the money-getting spirit, wherever it may be chargeable
upon Quakers, seldom belongs to that species which is called avarice. It is by no means incongruous
to suppose, that there may be in the same person an unreasonable love of money, and yet a shew
of benevolence. The money-getting spirit will have a different effect, as it operates upon
different persons. Upon those, who have been brought up in an ignorant and unfeeling manner,
it will operate to make them hoard their substance, and to keep it exclusively to themselves.
But it will not always hinder those who have been humanely educated, though it may lead them
to unreasonable accumulations, from dispensing a portion of their gains. In the first instance
it is highly criminal, because it keeps the whole of its talent in a napkin. In the second,
though less criminal, it is greatly to be deplored, but more particularly in a Quaker, who,
making a higher profession of Christianity than many others, ought to give to the world the
example of a purer mind.

SECT. II.

Farther observations on the subject of the former trait--Practicable methods suggested for
its extirpation--These methods not destructive, but promotive, of the temporal interests of
the members of this society, and consistent with the religion they profess.

As the Quakers appear to me, in consequence of their commercial and frugal habits, to be in
danger of contracting a money-getting spirit, and as this spirit is the worst feature that
can exist in the Quaker character, I shall allot a few pages to the farther consideration of
the subject, with a view of the prevention of such an evil.

That it is the worst feature that can exist in the character of the society, I repeat. It is
worse than a want of knowledge, or than superstition, because these relate to the understanding,
while this is confined to the heart. It renders the system of the moral education of the Quakers
almost nugatory. For what is the use of keeping the mind in a state of spiritual purity by
means of prohibitions, or by attempting to shut it out from the knowledge of corruptive amusements,
if it be afterwards to be rendered impure by the love of money? It occasions them again to
bear their testimony as it were against their own religion. For a Quaker is not in the situation
of on ordinary person. He looks upon himself as a highly professing Christian; as one, who
is not to conform to the fashions of the world; as one, who is to lead a life of self-denial;
as one, who is to go forward in virtue, his belief being that of a possibility of perfection
even in the present life. He considers himself too as a representative of the early Christians,
and holds himself ready to follow them by the bearing of his testimony, into suffering, and
even unto death. But what Christian can harbour a money-getting spirit, or be concerned in
an extensive accumulation of wealth? If a Quaker therefore should go into the common road,
and fall down before the idol mammon, like any other ordinary person, how can the world give
him any pretension but to an ordinary religion?

My object in the present consideration of the subject, will be to shew the Quakers in general,
and those in particular who may need it, some practical cure for this evil, and to convince
them, that the mode of effecting it will not be detrimental to the temporal interests of their
families, but promotive of their spiritual, and consistent with the religion they profess.

The first method, which I would recommend to those who are in trade, and who know their own
habits of life, and the extent of their families, would be to fix upon a certain sum, which
they may think sufficient for a future decent and moderate competency, and to leave off business,
as soon as this should be obtained. Such a step would be useful. It would be making room for
others to live as well as themselves. It would be honourable, for it would be generous. And
it would operate as a certain preventive of the money-getting spirit, as well as of the imputation
of it. For if such a retreat from trade, were laid down and known as a general custom of the
society, the Quakers might bid their hearts rise in defiance against the corruptions of money,
and their reputation against the clamours of the world.

This step, hard and difficult as it may appear to those who are thriving in the world, is,
notwithstanding, not a novel one, if we may judge either by the example of many of the pure
minded Christians of other denominations, or by that of many estimable persons in this society.
John Woolman, among many others, was uneasy on account of his business "growing cumbersome,"
for so he expresses it, lest it should hurt the purity of his mind. And he contracted it, leaving
himself only enough of it, and this by the labour of his own hands, for a decent support. And
here I might mention other individuals of this society, if I had no objection to offend the
living by praise, who, following his example, have retired upon only a moderate competency,
though in the way of great accumulations, for no other reason than because they were afraid,
lest such accumulations should interfere with their duty, or injure their character, as Christians.

But if this measure should not be approved of under an idea that men ought to have employments
for their time, or that in these days of increasing taxes and of progressively expensive living,
they cannot specify the sum that may be sufficient for their future wants, I have another to
propose, in consequence of which they may still follow their commercial pursuits, and avoid
the imputation in question. I mean that the Quakers ought to make it a rule, after the annual
expences of living have been settled, to lay by but small savings. They ought never to accustom
their eyes to behold an undue accumulation of money, but liberally to deal it out in charity
to the poor and afflicted in proportion to their gains, thus making their occupations a blessing
to mankind. No other measure will be effectual but this, if the former be not resolved upon,
while they continue in trade. Their ordinary charity, it is clear, will not do. Large as it
may have been, it has not been found large enough to prove a corrective of this spirit in the
opinion of the world. Indeed, it matters not how large a charitable donation may seem, if we
view it either as a check upon this spirit, or as an act of merit, but how large it is, when
compared with the bulk of the savings that are left. A hundred pounds, given away annually
in benevolence, may appear something, and may sound handsomely in the ears of the public. But
if this sum be taken from the savings of two thousand, it will be little less than a reproach
to the donor as a Christian. In short, no other way than the estimation of the gift by the
surplus-saving will do in the case in question. But this would certainly be effectual to the
end proposed. It would entirely keep down the money-getting spirit. It would also do away the
imputation of it in the public mind. For it is impossible in this case, that the word Quakerism
should not become synonimous with charity, as it ought to be, if Quakerism be a more than ordinary
profession of the Christian religion.

Now these methods are not chimerical, but practicable. There can be no reasonable objection
against them, because they allow of the acquisition of a decent and moderate competency. The
only one that can be started will be, that Quakers may injure the temporal interests of their
children, or that they cannot, upon this plan, leave them independent at their deaths ...

That independence for children is the general aim of the world, I know well. But I know also,
in reply to this objection, that Christianity has no such word as independence in her book.
For of what do people wish to make their children independent? Certainly not of Providence,
for that would be insanity indeed. Of the poor then shall I say? That is impossible, for how
could they get their daily bread? Of the rich, then, like themselves? That would be folly,
for where would they form their friendships or their connubial connections, in which they must
place a portion of the happiness of their lives? Do they wish then to make them independent
of society at large, so as not to do it good? That is against all religion. In short it is
impossible, while we exist in this life, to be independent one of another. We are bound by
Christianity in one great chain, every link of which is to support the next; or the band is
broken. But if they mean by independence such a moneyed situation as shall place their children
out of the reach of the frowns, and crosses, and vicissitudes of the world, so that no thought
or care shall be necessary for the means of their own livelihood, I fear they are procuring
a situation for them, which will be injurious even to their temporal interests as men.

The matter then seems to me to be brought to this question, whether it is better, I mean as
a general proposition, to bring up children with the expectation of such a moderate portion
of wealth, that they shall see the necessity of relying upon their own honest endeavours and
the Divine support, or to bring them up with such notions of independence, that, in the pride
and exultation of their hearts, they may be induced to count themselves mighty, and to lose
sight of the power and providence of God?

If we were to look into the world for an answer to this question, we should find no greater
calamity than that of leaving to children an affluent independence. Such persons, when grown
up, instead of becoming a blessing, are generally less useful than others. They are frequently
proud and haughty, fancying themselves omnipotent, they bid defiance to the opinions of the
virtuous part of the community. To the laws of honour and fashion they pay a precise obedience,
but trample under foot, as of little consequence, the precepts of the Christian religion. Having
sensual gratifications in their power, they indulge to excess. By degrees they ruin their health
and fortunes, and get wisdom by experience, when it is too late to use it. How many young persons
have I known, and I wish I could make a different statement, whose ruin originated wholly in
a sense of their own independence of the world!

Neither, if we look into the society of the Quakers, shall we find a different account. It
is undoubtedly true, though there are many amiable exceptions, that the worst examples in it
are generally among the children of the rich. These presently take wings, and fly away, so
that, falling into the corruptive and destructive fashions of the times, their parents have
only been heaping up riches; not knowing who were to gather them. And here it may be remarked,
that the Quaker education, by means of its prohibitions, greatly disqualifies its young members,
who may desert from the society, from acting prudently afterwards. They will be, in general,
but children, and novices in the world. Kept within bounds till this period, what is more probable
than that, when they break out of them, they will bunch-into excess. A great river may be kept
in its course by paying attention to its banks, but if you make a breach in these restrictive
walls, you let it loose, and it deluges the plains below.

In short, whether we turn our eyes to the Quaker society, or to the world at large, we cannot
consider an affluent independence as among the temporal advantages of youth. And as they, who
only leave their children a moderate portion of substance, so that they shall see the necessity
of relying upon their own honest endeavours, and the Divine support, act wisely in their own
generation, so they act only consistently with the religion they profess. For what does the
religion of the Quakers hold out to them as the best attainment in life? Is it not spiritual
knowledge? Is it not that knowledge, which shall fit them best for the service of their Maker?
But such knowledge is utterly unattainable while a money-getting spirit exists; for it has
been declared by the highest authority, that we cannot serve God and mammon.

CHAP. XIV.

Another trait is that of a want of animation or affection--This an appearance only, and not
a reality, arising from a proper subjugation of the passions--from the prohibitions relative
to dress--and address--and the amusements of the world.

It is said next of the Quakers, that they are a cold and inanimate people; and that they have
neither the ordinary affection, nor the gradation of affection, of other people.

I may immediately pronounce upon this trait, that it is merely an outward appearance. The Quakers
have as warm feelings as the rest of their countrymen. Their love of their fellow-creatures,
more conspicuous in them than in many others, as has been amply shewn, gives them a claim to
the possession of warm and affectionate feeling. The Quakers too have the character of a domestic
people; but surely, if they do not possess affection, and this in a very high degree, they
must have miserable homes. There is indeed a want of gradation in their affections, which may
be traced upon some occasions. In making their wills, for example, they are not apt to raise
up an eldest son to the detriment of the rest of their offspring. And this certainly is a proof,
that they do not possess the gradation of affection of many other people! Happy is it for their
own comfort and the welfare of their families, that they give this proof to the world of this
equal affection for their children.

That this trait is only an appearance, and not a reality, I shall shew, by staring many outward
circumstances, in the Quaker constitution, which may be preventive of apparent animation, but
which can have no influence on the heart.

We must all of us be sensible, that both opinions and customs have an influence on the warmth
or coldness of our characters. Who would expect, if two faithful portraits could have been
handed down to us from antiquity, to find the same gravity or coldness of countenance and manners
in an Athenian, as in a Spartan? And in the same manner who can expect, that there will not
be a difference in the appearance of Quakers and other people?

The truth is, that the discipline and education of the Quakers produce an appearance of a want
of animation, and this outward appearance the world has falsely taken as a symbol of the character
of the heart. Can we expect that a due subjugation of the passions, which is insisted upon
in true Quaker families, will give either warmth to the countenance, or spirit to the outward
manners? Do not the passions animate, and give a tone to the characters of men? Can we see
then the same variety of expression in the faces of the Quakers as in those of others on this
account? The actions of men, again, enliven their outward appearances, but Quakers, being forbidden
to use the address of the world, can assume no variety of action in their intercourse with
others. The amusements, again, of the world, such as of music and the theatre, reach the mind,
and, animating it, give a greater expression to the countenance, on which the contemplation
afterwards produces a similar though a slighter effect. But in what Quakers can you see sensibility
from the same cause? The dress too, of the members of this society gives them an appearance
of gravity and dulness. It makes them also shy of their fellow citizens. But gravity, and dulness,
and shyness, have generally, each of them, the appearance of coldness of manners.

CHAP. XV.

Another trait is that of evasiveness in speech--This an appearance only, arising from a peculiar
regard to truth--and from a caution about the proper use of words, induced by circumstances
in the discipline, and by the peculiarities in the Quaker language.

It is alleged against the Quakers, as another bad trait in their character, that they are not
plain and direct, but that they are evasive in their answers to any questions that may be asked
them.

There is no doubt but that the world, who know scarcely any thing about the Quakers, will have
some reason, if they judge from their outward manner of expression, to come to such a conclusion.
There is often a sort of hesitation in their speech, which has the appearance of evasiveness.
But though there may be such an appearance, their answers to questions are full and accurate
when finally given; and unquestionably there is no intention in them either to hold back any
thing, or to deceive.

This outward appearance, strange to relate, arises in part from an amiable trait in the character
of the Quakers!! Their great desire to speak the truth, and not to exceed it, occasions often
a sort of doubtfulness of speech. It occasions them also, instead of answering a question immediately,
to ask other questions, that they may see the true bearings of the thing intended to be known.
The same appearance of doubt runs also through the whole society in all those words which relate
to promises, from the same cause. For the Quakers, knowing the uncertainty of all human things,
and the impossibility of fulfilling but provisionally, seldom, as I have observed before, promise
any thing positively, that they may not come short of the truth. The desire therefore of uttering
the truth has in part brought this accusation upon their heads.

Other circumstances also to be found within the Quaker constitution have a tendency to produce
the same effect.

In their monthly and quarterly and annual meetings for discipline, they are taught by custom
to watch the propriety of the expressions that are used in the wording of their minutes, that
these may accurately represent the sense of the persons present. And this habit of caution
about the use of words in the affairs of their own society naturally begets a caution concerning
it also in their intercourse with the world.

The peculiarities of their language produce also a similar circumspection. For where people
are restrained from the use of expressions which are gene rally adopted by others, and this
in the belief that, as a highly professing people, they ought to be watchful over their words
as well as their actions, a sort of hesitation will accompany them, or a sort of pause will
be perceptible, while they are choosing as it were the proper words for a reply to any of the
questions that may be asked them.

CHAP. XVI.

Another trait is that of shyness--This an appearance only, arising from the former trait--and
from that of coldness of manners--and from the great sobriety of the Quaker character.

Another bad trait, which the world has fixed upon the Quakers, is that of being a sly people.
This trait has been long given them. We find it noticed by Pope:

   "The Quaker sly, the Presbyterian sour."

This charge is grounded on appearances. It arises in part from the last mentioned trait in
their character; for if men be thought cautious in the use of their words, and evasive in their
answers, whether they be so or not, they will be marked as sly.

It arises again from the trait of want of animation or of coldness of manners. For if men of
good understanding, in consequence of the subjugation of their passions, appear always to be
cool, they will have an appearance of wariness.

It arises again from the great sobriety of the Quakers. For where men are always sober, they
appear to be always on their guard, and men, who are always on their guard, are reputed cunning.

These circumstances of coolness and sobriety, when called into action, will only confirm the
world in the opinion of the existence of the trait in question. For it will not be easy to
deceive a man of but moderate understanding, who never loses his senses either by intoxication
or by passion. And what man, in such habits, will not make a better bargain than one who is
hot in his temper, or who is accustomed to be intoxicated?

Hence the trait arises from appearances, which are the result of circumstances, favourable
to the morality of the Quaker character.

CHAP. XVII.

Last bad trait is a disregard of truth--Apparent rise of this trait--Falsehood of it probable
from considerations on the language of the Quakers--from their prohibition of detraction--their
rejection of romantic books--their punctuality to words and engagements--and their ideas with
respect to the unlawfulness of civil oaths.

The last charge against the Quakers will be seen in a vulgar expression, which should have
had no place in this book, if it had not been a saying in almost every body's mouth. The expression,
is, "Though they will not swear, they will lie."

This trait has arisen in part from those different circumstances, which have produced the appearance
of evasiveness. For if people are thought evasive, they will always be thought liars. Evasiveness
and lying are almost synonimous terms. It is not impossible also, if Quakers should appear
to give a doubtful answer, that persons may draw false conclusions from thence, and therefore
may suppose them to have spoken falsely. These two circumstances of an apparent evasiveness,
and probably of a deduction of conclusions from doubtful or imaginary premises, have, I apprehend,
produced an appearance, which the world has interpreted into evil.

No trait, however, can be more false than this. I know of no people, who regard truth more
than the Quakers. Their whole system bends and directs to truth. One of the peculiarities of
their language, or their rejection of many of the words which other people use, because they
consider them as not religiously appropriate to the objects of which they are the symbols,
serves as a constant admonition to them to speak the truth.

Their prohibition of all slanderous reports, as mentioned in a former volume, has a tendency
to produce the same effect; for detraction is forbidden partly on the idea, that all such rumours
on character may be false.

They reject also the reading of plays and novels, partly under a notion, that the subjects
and circumstances in these are fictitious, and that a taste therefore, for the reading, of
these, if acquired, might familiarize their youth with fictions, and produce in them a romantic
and lying spirit.

It is a trait, again, in the character of the Quakers, as we have seen, that they are remarkable
for their punctuality in the performance of their words and engagements. But such punctuality
implies neither more nor less, than that the words spoken by Quakers are generally fulfilled;
and, if they are generally fulfilled, then the inference is, that all such words have been
generally truths.

To this I may add, that the notions of the Quakers on the subject of oaths, and their ideas
of the character which it becomes them to sustain in life, must have a powerful effect upon
them in inducing an attention to the truth; for they consider Jesus Christ to have abolished
civil oaths, because he wished to introduce a more excellent system than that of old, that
is, because he meant it to be understood by his disciples, that he laid such an eternal obligation
upon them to speak truth, that oaths were to be rendered unnecessary, where persons make a
profession of his religion.

CHAP. XVIII.

SECT. I.

Character of the Quaker women--This differs a little from that of the men--Women share in the
virtues of the former--but do not always partake of all their reputed imperfections--are not
chargeable with a want of knowledge--nor with the money-getting spirit--Modesty a feature in
their character.

Having now amply enquired into the character of the men, I shall say a few words on the subject
of that of the women of this society. For though it might be supposed at the first sight (the
Quakers being cast as it were in one mould) that the same character would attach to both, yet
it must be obvious, on farther consideration, that it cannot be wholly applicable to the female
sex.

It may be laid down as a position, that the women of this society share in the virtues of the
men. They possess their benevolence, their independence of mind, and the other good traits
in their moral character. But they do not always partake of all their reputed imperfections.

The want of knowledge, which was reckoned among the failings of the men, can have no room as
a charge against the women.

For, first, let us compare the Quaker women with the Quaker men. Now it generally happens in
the world, that men have more literary knowledge than women, but this is not so generally the
case in this society. As the women here are not taken from their books, like the men, at an
early age, and put into trade, they have no bar, like these, to the farther improvement of
their minds. They advance often in the acquisition of knowledge, while the latter, in consequence
of their attention to business, are kept stationary. Hence it almost uniformly happens, that
they are quite as well informed, and that they have as great a variety of knowledge as these,
so that they suffer no disparagement, as the women of the world do, by a comparison with the
other sex.

Neither will the Quaker women be considered as deficient in knowledge, if compared with women
of other religious denominations. It is too much the practice, but particularly in the higher
circles, to educate females for shew. We too seldom see a knowledge of the domestic duties.
To dance well, to sing well, and to play well, these are the usual accomplishments that are
insisted on, and they are insisted upon with an earnestness, as if they included all the valuable
purposes of life. Thus the best part of youth is spent in the acquirement of trivial things:
or rather the acquirement of such things takes up so much time, as to leave but little for
the moral and intellectual improvement of the mind. The great object, on the other hand, of
the education of the Quaker females, is utility and not shew. They are taught domestic economy,
or the cares and employments of a house. They are taught to become good wives and good mothers.
Prohibited the attainments of music and dancing, and many of the corruptive amusements of the
world, they have ample time for the improvement of the understanding. Thus they have in general
as good an education as other females, as far as literary acquirements are concerned; so that,
whether they are compared with Quaker men, or with the other women of the island, they will
not incur the imputation of a deficiency of knowledge.

It must be obvious too, that the money-getting spirit, which the world has fixed upon as a
trait in the character of some of the men, can seldom be a trait in that of the women of this
society. For men are the principals in trade. They lay their plans for the getting of money.
They see the accumulating surplus rise. They handle it. They count it. They remember it. The
women, on the other hand, see it only in the disposition of their husbands or parents, who
make probably a larger allowance for domestic wants or gratifications than before. Hence a
charge cannot be so frequently brought against them of a want of that spiritual mindedness,
which is the great characteristic of Quakerism, as they have but little to do with the mammon
of the world.

To these exceptions in Quaker women from the reputed imperfections of Quaker men, I cannot
help adding in this place, that the females of this society are peculiarly distinguishable
for that which has been at all times considered as one of the brightest ornaments of their
sex. Modesty is particularly conspicuous in their looks and in their whole outward demeanour.
It is conspicuous in their conversation. It is conspicuous also in their dress. And here it
may not be improper to observe, that, whatever objections may be made to the Quaker apparel,
it is estimable, as far as it gives this appearance of modesty to the females who wear it,
or rather as far as it hinders them from wearing the loose and indelicate garments, which are
frequently worn, without any scruple, by many of the females of the world.

SECT. II.

Quaker women, besides their private, have a public character--Low light in which women have
been held--Importance given them by chivalry--and by the revival of learning in Europe--and
by the introduction of Christianity--but still held in an inferior light--Quakers have given
them their due importance in society--Influence of their public character on their minds.

The Quaker women, independently of their private, have that which no other body of women have,
a public character. This is a new era in female history. I shall therefore make a few observations
on this, before I proceed to another subject.

It is melancholy, when we look into the history of women, to see the low estimation in which
they have been held from the earliest times. It is possible, because they have not possessed
the strength of constitution, that they may have been thought not to have had the intellect
of men. It is possible, because domestic cares and the rearing of children have been consigned
to them, that other occupations may not have been considered as falling within the province
of their stations. But whatever may have been the causes, polygamy or concubinage has unquestionably
been the greatest, in hindering women from occupying an useful, dignified, and important station
in society. This custom has held them up as little better than slaves, or than living toys
or play-things. And this custom has prevailed over a great portion of the globe from times
of the earliest antiquity to the present day.

Among the many circumstances which contributed to give importance to women in Europe, we may
reckon the introduction of chivalry. Honour and humanity were the characteristics of this institution.
Hence weakness was to be protected by it. And as weakness was more particularly the lot of
women, so these became more peculiarly the objects of its care. Hence women began to feel a
consequence, which had been hitherto denied them. They were treated with politeness and tenderness
by all, and men began to be even solicitous of their applause. But though this was the case,
chivalry did not elevate them beyond a certain height. It rendered a polite attention to them
essential. But this attention was an homage to the weakness of females, and not to their intellect.
It presupposed no capacity of usefulness in them, for every thing, in fact, was to be done
for them, and they were to do but little for themselves.

The revival of learning in the twelfth century was another cause of adding to the importance
of women. As men became more learned, they began to respect the power of the human understanding.
They began to be acquainted, by means of history, with the talents of women in former ages.
They began to give a better education to their families. These circumstances produced a more
enlarged opinion of female genius. Hence learning became an instrument of giving new consequence
to women. But it gave it to them on a principle different from that of chivalry: for whereas
chivalry insisted upon a polite attention to them on account of the weakness of their constitutions,
learning insisted upon it on account of the strength of their understanding, or because they
were intellectual and reasonable beings. But that which contributed most to make women important
in society, was the introduction of the Christian religion. By the mild spirit which it diffused,
it produced a certain suavity of behaviour towards them. By the abolition of polygamy it allowed
of no division of a man's love among many women, but limited it to one. Thus it made one woman
dearer than another, and of course every individual woman of consequence. By the abolition
of polygamy, it added to their consequence again, by raising them from the rank of slaves to
that of the companions of men. This importance it increased again by the inculcation of specific
duties towards them, and by the doctrine, that, as all, without exception, were equally accountable
for their actions, and the Divine Being was no respecter of persons, so all, whether men or
women, were of equal importance in his sight.

But though Christianity has operated, as it always will, where it is felt in the heart, to
the production of a tender attention to women, and to the procuring of an honourable station
for them in society, we have yet to lament, that this operation has not been more general,
considering our public profession of this religion, than we find it at the present day. Women
are still seldom appreciated as they ought to be. They are still weighed in a different scale
from men. Their education is still limited, as if their understandings, notwithstanding the
honourable testimony which history has borne concerning them, were incapable of high attainments.
If homage be paid to their beauty, very little is paid to their opinions. Limits also are assigned
to the sphere of their utility. To engage in other pursuits than they do would be thought strange.
In short, the education they receive marks the inferior situation for which they are considered
to be designed. Its tendency is mostly to outward shew. Formed like dolls or play-things, which
are given to children to captivate by outside appearances, they are generally rendered incapable
of exhibiting great talents, or of occupying an important station in life.

But it seems to have been reserved for the Quakers us a religious body, to insist upon that
full practical treatment and estimation of women, which ought to take place wherever Christianity
is professed. They have accordingly given to the females of their own society their proper
weight in the scale of created beings. Believing them to have adequate capacities, and to be
capable of great usefulness, they have admitted them to a share in the administration of almost
all the offices which belong to their religious discipline, so that, independently of their
private, they have a public character, like the men.

In the first volume, I had occasion to observe, when treating on the subject of the discipline,
that representatives were chosen by the men out of their own body to the different meetings
which were then named. Just so it is with the Quaker women. Representatives are appointed out
of these by the other women on similar occasions. I stated also that, at certain times, the
men assembled by themselves; that they discussed the business that came before them; that they
replied to those who supported opposite opinions to their own; and that the young men were
present during these discussions. So it is with the women. They sit in council by themselves.
They argue and reply in like manner. The young females are also present. I stated also, that
during these meetings of the men, one of them held the office of drawing up and recording the
minutes of the proceedings or resolutions that had taken place. The women also appoint one
of their own body to the same office. I stated again, that, in these meetings of the men, some
were chosen as a committee to act in particular cases. So also are women chosen to act as a
committee by their own meetings. I explained the nature of the office of overseer, and I observed
that there were overseers among the men. There are also overseers among the women. I explained
the nature of the office of elder, and I observed that there were elders among the men. The
women have their elders likewise. The men were said to preach as in other societies. The women
are permitted to preach also. In short, if the men consider themselves to be qualified for
any office belonging their religious discipline, they believe their women to be equally capable
of holding the same. No distinction is made as to the powers of usefulness between the men
and the women of this society. There are few offices held by men, but there is a corresponding
one for those of the other sex.[41]

[Footnote 41: The principal exceptions are, that they are not correspondents, arbitrators,
legislators, or on committees of appeal.]

The execution of these and other, public offices, by which the Quaker women have an important
station allotted them in society, cannot but have an important influence on their minds. It
gives them, in fact, a new cast of character. It imparts to them, in the first place, a considerable
knowledge of human nature. It produces in them thought, and foresight, and judgment. It creates
in them a care and concern for the distressed. It elevates their ideas. It raises in them a
sense of their own dignity and importance as human beings, which sets them above every thing
that is little and trifling, and above all idle parade and shew. Fond as they are of the animal
creation, you do not see them lavishing their caresses on lap-dogs, to the contempt of the
poor and miserable of their own species. You never see them driving from shop to shop to make
up a morning's amusement, by examining and throwing out of order the various articles of tradesmen,
giving them great trouble, and buying nothing in return. You never find them calling upon those
whom they know to be absent from their homes, thus making their mimic visits, and leaving their
useless cards. Nothing, in short, so ridiculous or degrading, is known among them. Their pursuits
are rational, useful, and dignified. And they may be said in general to exhibit a model for
the employment of time, worthy of the character they profess.

MISCELLANEOUS PARTICULARS RELATIVE TO THE QUAKERS

Quakers a happy people--Subordinate causes of this happiness--namely, their comfortable situation--their
attachment to domestic life--their almost constant employment--this happiness not broken like
that of others, by an interruption of the routine of constituted pleasures--or by anger and
other passions or by particular enquiries and notions about religion.

If a person were to judge of the Quakers by the general gravity of their countenances, and
were to take into consideration, at the same time, the circumstance, that they never partook
of the amusements of the world, in which he placed a part of his own pleasures, he would be
induced to conclude, that they had dull and gloomy minds, and that they could not be upon the
whole a happy people. Such a conclusion, however, would be contrary to the fact. On my first
acquaintance with them I was surprised, seeing the little variety of their pursuits, at the
happiness which they appeared to enjoy, but as I came to a knowledge of the constitution and
state of the society, the solution of the problem became easy.

It will not be difficult to develope the subordinate causes of this happiness.[42] To shew
the first of these, I shall view the society in the three classes of the rich, the middle,
and the poor. Of the rich, I may observe, that they are not so affluent in general as the rich
of other bodies. Of the middle, that they are upon the whole in better circumstances than others
of the same class in life. Of the poor, that they are not so poor as others in a similar condition.
Now the rich in the Quaker society have of course as many of the comforts of life in their
power as they desire. The middle classes in this society have more of these than the middle
classes of other denominations. The poor in the same society have also more of these, in consequence
of the handsome provision which is made for them, than others in a similar situation with themselves.
There is therefore upon the whole a greater distribution of the comforts of life, among all
the ranks of this society, than is to be found in any other community, in proportion to their
numbers. But this superior state, in point of comfortable circumstances, ought to be undoubtedly
a source of superior happiness. For where the comforts of life are wanting, it is in vain to
suppose men can be happy, unless their minds are more than usually comforted by their religion.

[Footnote 42: Religion, which includes positive virtues, and an absence from vices, joined
to a peaceful conscience and a well grounded hope of a better life, is the first and greatest
cause of happiness, and may belong to all. But I confine myself, in this chapter, to such causes
only as may be called subordinate, and in which the Quakers are more particularly concerned.]

Another source of their happiness may be found in their domestic situation. The Quakers, as
I have observed before, in consequence of denying themselves the pleasures of the world, have
been obliged to cherish those which are found in domestic life. In the fashionable world, men
and their wives seldom follow their pleasures together. They resemble the little wooden figures
of the man and the woman, which, by moving backwards and forwards in a small painted house,
denote the changes of the weather. While one of these is within, the other is out of doors.
But this is not the case with the Quakers. The husband and wife are not so easily separable.
They visit generally together. They are remarked as affectionate. You never hear of intrigues
among them. They are long in each others society at a time, and they are more at home than
almost any other people. For neither the same pleasures, nor the same occupations, separate
these as others. The husband is never seen at a play, nor at a tavern, nor at a dance. Neither
the naval nor the military profession summons him abroad. He is seldom concerned in voyages
as a mariner. Hence he must of necessity be much at home. Add to this, that the Quakers have
generally families, with the power of providing for them. But these circumstances render their
homes agreeable to them, and increase their domestic delights.

A third source of the happiness of the Quakers arises from the circumstance of their being
almost constantly employed. Few are so miserable as those who have nothing to do, or who, unable
to find employment, feel a dull vacuum in their time. And the converse of this proposition
is equally true, that the time of those flies pleasantly away, who can employ it rationally.
But there is rarely such a being among the Quakers as a lazy person, gaping about for amusement.
Their trades or callings occupy the greater portion of their time. Their meetings of discipline,
as has been already shewn, occupy their time again. The execution of the various offices to
which they may be appointed, such as of overseers, or elders, or committee-men, or arbitrators
in disputes, occupies more. Few Quakers, but particularly the more respectable, have many vacant
hours. And here it may not be improper to remark, that the discipline of the society, organized
as it is, is productive of a cheerful and friendly intercourse of the members, or of a sociable
manner of spending their time, one with another. The monthly meetings usually bring two or
three particular meetings together. The members of these, when they have dispatched their business,
retire to the houses of their friends, where they take their refreshment, and indulge in the
pleasures of conversation. The quarterly meetings again bring the monthly meetings of the county
into one. Here again, when the business is over, they partake of a similar repast. Hence a
renewal of conversation and of friendship. The yearly meeting again brings many, from the quarterly
together. And here the Quakers from all parts of the kingdom have an opportunity of seeing
and conversing with one another. I may add too, that many individuals in the interim, who travel,
whether on business or on pleasure, or on religious errands, enlarge this friendly intercourse;
for few Quakers pass through the towns where Quakers live, without calling upon these, so that
there are many sources within the customs and constitution of the society, that are productive
of cheerful hours.[43]

[Footnote 43: It may be mentioned here, that the Quakers acknowledge their relations to a much
farther degree of consanguinity, than other people. This relationship, where it can be distinctly
traced, is commemorated by the appellation of cousin. This custom therefore is a cause of endearment
when they meet, and of course of additional pleasure.]

But here it will probably be said, that these sources of happiness, which have been hitherto
described, are common to many others. I grant they are to individuals, but not to communities
at large. No society has probably so many of the comforts of life in its power, number for
number, and rank for rank, as that of the Quakers. None probably so wholly domestic. None,
where the members of it have such frequent intercourse with each other, or where they are so
connected in the bonds of brotherly love, and none, as far as I know men, who have such constant
employment for their time.

Having explained some of those, which may be considered as positive sources of happiness to
the Quakers, I shall now shew what may be causes of unhappiness to others, and that the Quakers
seldom partake of these. Such an exposition, however strange it may appear at the first sight,
will be materially to the point. For though an exemption from the causes of the uneasiness
of others can never be admitted as a proof of the existence of positive enjoyment among the
Quakers, yet if the latter have solid sources of happiness of their own, and these are not
in any material degree diminished by the causes of the uneasiness of the former, there will
be left to them, because there will be no drawback, a certain portion of happiness with less
alloy. And here it is obvious at the first sight, that the Quakers have not the same, nor so
many wants as others, with respect to their pleasures, and that they do not admit the same
things to be component parts of them. Hence they have not the same causes of uneasiness from
the chance of interruption. Hence also their happiness is more in their own power. What individual
can annihilate the comforts which arise from their own industry, or their domestic enjoyments,
or their friendly intercourse with each other, or their employments, which arise from their
discipline, and from their trade and callings? But how easily are many of the reputed enjoyments
of the world to be broken? Some people place their happiness in a routine of constituted pleasures.
In proportion as these have been frequently resorted to, they will have got into the habit
as the necessary enjoyments of life. Take away then from persons in such habits the power of
these their ordinary gratifications, and you will make them languid, and even wretched. There
will be a wide chasm, which they will not know how to fill up; a dull vacuum of time, which
will make their existence insipid; a disappointment, which will carry with it a lacerating
sting. In some of the higher circles of life, accustomed to such rounds of pleasure, who does
not know that the Sunday is lamented as the most cruel interrupter of their enjoyments?--No
shopping in the morning--no theatre or route in the evening--Nothing but dull heavy church
stares them in the face. But I will not carry this picture to the length to which I am capable.
I shall only observe that, where persons adopt a routine of constituted pleasures, they are
creating fictitious wants for themselves, and making their own happiness subject to interruption,
and putting it into the power of others. The Quakers, however, by the total rejection of all
the amusements included in the routine alluded to, know nothing of the drawbacks or disadvantages
described.

The Quakers again are exempt from several of the causes of uneasiness, which attach to the
world at large. Some go to the gaming-table, and ruin themselves and their families, and destroy
the peace of their minds. But the Quakers are never found injuring their fortunes or their
happiness by such disreputable means.

Others disturb the harmony of their lives by intemperate sallies of passion. It has been well
observed, that, whatever may be the duration of a man's anger, so much time he loses of the
enjoyment of his life. The Quakers, however, have but few miserable moments on this account.
A due subjugation of the passions has been generally instilled into them from early youth.
Provocation seldom produces in them any intemperate warmth, or takes away, in any material
degree, from the apparent composure of their minds.

Others again, by indulging their anger, are often hurried into actions of which the consequences
vex and torment them, and of which they often bitterly repent. But the Quakers endeavour to
avoid quarrelling, and therefore they often steer clear of the party and family feuds of others.
They avoid also, as much as possible, the law, so that they have seldom any of the lawsuits
to harass and disturb them, which interrupt the tranquillity of others by the heavy expence,
and by the lasting enmities they occasion.

The Quakers again are exempt from many of the other passions which contribute to the unhappiness
of the world at large. Some men have an almost boundless ambition. They are desirous of worldly
honours, or of eminent stations, or of a public name, and pursue these objects in their passage
through life with an avidity which disturbs the repose of their minds. But the Quakers scarcely
know any such feeling as that of ambition, and of course scarcely any of the torments that
belong to it. They are less captivated by the splendour of honours than any other people, and
they had rather live in the memory of a few valuable friends, than be handed down to posterity
for those deeds, which generally constitute the basis of public character. Pliny 18th 29 above: the flour zea (spelled) is the only way to the finest alica
that it is added to a creta from the Naples area, which stands in high prices, making the pastry
excellent beauty gets to the distorted (adult erina) alica is reacted instead gypsum. This
is probably creta leucogaica natural carbonate Magnesia have been be, for it is known, especially
in London very general, that the Wheaten some alum or carbonate of magnesia is added, making
it very white and fluffy is.

G. soapstone.

An impure soapstone, a greenish-gray, coarse talk sided rock that in all the mountain masses
occurs is soft, is infusible in the fire hard, is to cookware and much similar Processed goods,
in particular in Egypt since ancient times, and in Switzerland, Canton Tessino, Val Maggia and
Grisons, here known as Spire, soapstone, Lavetzstein (From lavezzo
in Italian, the pot), the Graubünden stone pots go on Como to all
Parts of Italy - in the barbarous Latin lebetum, lapis, lapis ollaris.

ballapam
in the Hindu (like soapstone).

Baram in Egypt, actually stone from Baram, as the place in Upper Egypt is, where the soapstone
is won.

(In Aswan we make of crushed stone and clay pot vessels, which burned
be.)

Stone Siphnos the Greeks.

lapis comensis the Romans, - piedra
di Como in Italian, - pierre de Come, ollaire-,-LAVEG in French, -
the Spanish piedra Ollar, - potstene in English, - telgstene in Swedish.

H.

serpentine.

The pot like stones, hard, green, different colors, takes a good polish,
is to various items processed.

kelo, berkelo in Malay, - Ophites
of the Romans (see Marble) - serpentine in the modern languages. kigyokö
in Magyar.

mar natha, Lubach, cuairteagach in Gälschen.

smejewik,
serpentine in Russian, - Memphites, maybe nephrite the Romans and
Greeks, may belong here.

net in the Egyptian hieroglyphic language
Champollion translated diluted with stone, serpentine.

I. sea foam.

A clayey, plastic, white very light rock that much of magnesia (magnesium)
containing is preferably known to the Turkish pipe bowls, used rarely
Thongeschirr.

The actual sea foam, the material of genuine Turks heads, comes from Anatolia (Asia Minor), where
he bey Konie and Brusa is dug.

A mineralogically similar fossil there are also in other areas, in
Moravia, Spain, but is not used this way.

Istif in Turkish, also kil (Thon), kile keffi, keffekil (Schaumthon). The workers describe It also
myRS, a Tartar word that refers to a similar clay, which also serves to Walken. myRS This Tartar
teutsche the word has made the sea foam, of the sea has nothing in common stock purchased in
schistose limestone.

Pinka Morskaya (from myRS) in Russian, - piana morska in Polish.

ecume de mer (translation of the Germanic word sea foam) in French,
- schiuma del mare in Italian, - tajtek in Magyar.

K. Walkthon.

A fat-to sentient mild, usually greenish clay, foam in the water at times, desirous attracts the
fat is applied, therefore, for walking and cleaning cloths, in many areas occurs, sometimes he
is black, called mountain soap.

lucharidis in Arabic (as the Egyptian name was), also thin chimulia (the cimolische) - borith
in Hebrew (also called soap) - kill (Thon) in Turkish, - GE kimulgo in Syriac (the cimolische );--[
Greek: ge kimolia] of the Greeks (from the island cimolis, jetzo kimolo), the [Greek: Gê pnigitis]
was probably a mountain of soap. The [Greek: ge samia, gE chia], etc, were in the bathrooms used to smooth
the skin, as even the Turks keffekil jetzo bey, often with rose petals
mixed.

creta fullonum - cimolia - thessalica - sarda - umbrica the
Romans, was very common to Walking and cleaning the clothes - fullare,
- the Walker was Fullo (in Gaelic is fucadair Walk the miller, the
fucadh Walken).

Walk the earth of the island Cimolis (mostly from decomposed trachyte created) is seduced yet
jetzo throughout Greece.

criadh to fhucadair in Gälschen.

In Waelsch is walking Panu, paneor the Walker, - [Greek: kimoli, pilo stinnias] in Modern Greek (in
the Wallachian pio is a mill, pioariu Walker), - fullers earth, in English, - follatori, terra da Follon
in Italian; - terre a foulon, argile smectique in French, - walklera, skifverler in Swedish,
-; wäscherdt - volöarda in the Dutch Seiffen earth füllererdt in Altteutschen; - folarda in Polish, - suknowaljnaja
Semla in Russian, - ruhatiszatoagyag in Magyar.

L. Thon, in general, common clay, Töpferthon, Porzellanthon.

Gray or white, in the earthy fracture, soft rocks, which are plastic with water, is forms can
be hard in the fire, so much used to Thongefässen. The hardest and most beautiful varieties
of the fired porcelain and faience Thongefässe form, is less Earthenware; bey all this has melted,
the glass-like mass, bey the usual Thongeschirr only be strengthened. One of the oldest and most beautiful
Thongefässen include the Greek and the so-called Campanian, which have the Romans as a vascularised
operis antiqui in the sepulcris vetustissimis same kind antiques, than they are to us (see Suetonius
in Jul. Caesar. 18) were.

Plastic Thon is common in all countries.

kin in Chinese, and also gno ka-olin, ie the Porzellanthon which name in the has gone modern languages.

hagima-pa
in Tibetan, even RDSA-sa, sa the earth (RDSA-makhana the potter's); Dagara rtse is white earth, as
lime, chalk, dakara-gona is the mass of clay and flint, from which
China (dakara-gola) is made.

dschambala in Sanskrit.

djabor, Chabor
in Mongolian, and Balchik, totcho; - tschabar, tschedo in Lezgian
and in the Caucasian languages, also Tapur, chjach, Zertuche, luchti;
jata in Circassian, - ticha in Georgia, - paitschig the Tartars.

Sue sjui, su, so in the Samoyed languages, even so, Zattu, Tyumen, tub, tal, - sjui in the Permian,
- clean, sawi in Finnish, also klay (march earth), - sawwi in Ehstnischen;
- kar, gaw in Armenian, - oh, doi, toi in Kurdish, - Agyag in Magyar,
even fajaszagyag, közönseges, the pottery is gerentser.

tina in old
Persian, kil, gil, tobrak in Persian, also doctors and lime, which
means more mud, - tyn, thina, tit in Arabic; skilled workers is pottery;
tinn ARMAT or - rumi is the Arab officinal Bol, - tin in the Chaldean,
even tephel, tpel, haspa, gargusch, gargischta.

oue currents, oome,
in Coptic, - homer in Hebrew (Pechar potter) - arkega in Berber, -
tzebur labekawi in Ethiopic; - gil, kil in Turkish, also lay, Balchik,
baltschyk; - gil in an Aryan.

glina in Russian, is pharphorowaja
Semla Porzellanthon; - Glina, gley in Polish; Zdunska is the real
Töpferthon, Gancarz the potter, - FG, hljna in the Czech tables, Hrncir
is the potter; - Glina, IJU, iu, ilouza in Windisch, - lina in Wendisch,
- Hlina in Slovak; - gnyla the Dalmatian, - ghgnilla in Bosnian, -
glina in Krainschen; - ilowacha in Croatia, - glihsda, be ground,
Mali in Latvia (lonzhar potter) - Dohn in Mongolian.

thaho in the
Gothic, - thon, than, Thann, and clover haffnererd in the old Germans,
where alumina, which used mostly the top layer of earth - the earth
dam - meant.

liime in Frisian, - lime, lam, pottererd in Anglo-Saxon.

laire
raire in Lapland; - leir in Iceland, - empty, leerjord in Danish,
- learning, lera in Swedish, the common clay is lera Gemen, Blot,
Siol, Murle, and the Porzellanthon lera eldfastler cell line or the
real Töpferthon krukmakarler, tärnigeler.

pri, bry in Breton, also
courroie, courrez; - pridd in Waelsch (priddawr the potter) also llai,
llaid; - criadh in Gaelic (hence the Latin creta, chalk on the Germans),
criadh Gheal, criadh-chriadhadair (ie, the potters) even clabar (if
more sticky soil).

creta figlinorum (ie, the potter) in Latin; (creta
ever realized several white, earthy substances; the creta melia -
[Greek: ge melia], which were melinum Paraetonium and chalk, so the
creta annularis, selenusia and Argentaria), - argilla was more of
a real white Thon comes forth from ar earth, and Cille know geal in
Gälschen, opera figlinorum was our Pottery ware.

[Greek: Argillon] in the Greek (probably of [Greek: arges] white), mostly [Greek: pêlos] (probably
from the Albanian palta), also [Greek: ge kerammidês, KERAMIT] (the
actual Töpferthon) [Greek: glia, Lyma].

[Greek: argillos, pêlos] in Modern Greek, [Greek: aggeia, pêlina]
is the potter stuff.

Palta, paigta in Albanian, - pamentu de Lutu, even in the Wallachian vierss; Olariu is the potter.

argilla
in Italian, also creta, as is generally called the blue clay of the Apennines, - argilla in
Portuguese, also barro, which is a very fat clay; - arcilla in Spanish, also barro, greda; - Argile in
French, also Glaise, brie, brou; - argielo in Provençal.

clay in English (probably from Finnish hard, probably by llai, llaid, Thon in Waelsch) Scotland Blaes,
- small, even potoarda in Dutch.

tafal, TAFIa, tfali in Maltese, - basacua in Basque, - tschikk in the Gypsy language.

M. The porcelain.

The most important use of the clay is Thongefässen. The finest and most durable there suffers
from the same porcelain, the mass of a kind glass.

At best this the kaolin or Porzellanthon from tattered feldspar, which one or other substances
mostly fresh feldspar is added. In the art to produce beautiful, ordinary Thongeschirr, had made
it very far antiquity, were particularly famous in Italy, the vasa aretina of Arretum, the present
Arezzo (the pottery still jetzo, in terms of substance and Form a big reputation). Apparently
they understood to also prepare a kind of porcelain, for the vasa
samia were estimated to be highest, and their fragments, the castration
Many priests Casten completed (Pliny 35th 46) indicated that on a
hard, glassy mass; also have (as among Salzburg) small statues of
porcelain or biscuit found.

The Chinese fabricirten since the earliest times, porcelain, which was tempting them to Europe,
where does it began only about 1703, where the invention in Saxony by chance (of Cooper) made is.
The porcelain is similar to the earthenware and faience, which takes
its name from the city Faenza in Italy, from where you got it first.

The signin vessels, which the bey Rammed clay shards and clay were
added, were clearly earthenware.

tsee, ky-tse in China, - dakara-gola
in Tibetan, - hachdschapaki in Armenian, - gehere the Tartar-Manchu,
- Sanani in Arabic.

In Persian, the vessels made of beautiful porcelain hot mertabani.

fagfuri in Turkish (fagfur of what the Chinese royal title) - farfuri in Kurdish, - farfurie in Walachiscben,
- [Greek: pharphoyri, phêrphêr] in Modern Greek, - pharfor in Russian,
- farfury in Polish, - majoleka in Krainschen.

filizanki in Portuguese,
also Porcelain, - porzelach, porcellin in older Teutsch, - porcelain
in the modern languages.

N. Siegel earth.

In ancient times you did not need sealing wax, one sealed with wax, with putty, paste, usually
with clay, which was the ancient Egyptians bey common, as Herodotus first §. above 38th The clay ([Greek:
pêlos]) for sealing, which was used in Asia Minor, Italy, etc, seems even by the Byzantine emperors
and later be-ing used. The common clay shall not be liable on parchment and linen dries very
hard, probably had ing the clay in this converging dissected, which we have no news. Even the
ancients Some turned to clay in medicine, was very famous among the Greeks a Thon by Island
of Lemnos, which was produced under the supervision of the priests and sealed, the one still
under Turkish government sent much, in modern times a lot of clays were officinal, as terra sigillata,
since they were formed and imprinted with a seal, which only last Century left off.

macheum thin, even choetem in Arabic, - [Greek: ge sphragis, gE sêmantridan] in Greek, - creta
in Latin, for example erythraea; - terra sigillata in medieval and modern Latin.

O. Marl.

A calcareous clay, or clayey sand, which breaks down easily in the
air at all a Erdstratum, which serves to improve the lands.

Since ancient times was the marls of the fields important for agriculture.

mala in Sanskrit, - tanah lilling in Malay, - gerenk in Turkish, -
ready jerkir - Hogh in Turkish (di fat soil).

thin Magara in Arabic,
- Marg in Abyssinian, - marl in Waelsch, - marla in Gälschen; - marg
in Breton, - marga in Old-Celtic (Gallic); eglecopala in Gaul, the
blue Marl was called among the Romans columbina.

marga of the Romans
(as in Gaul), of different styles and colors, as rufa, alba, columbina,
argillacea, tofacea, arenaria, was conceived under argilla; as leucargillon
etc, - marla in medieval Latin, - Marlar, marl (marl to in English),
marlaria the marl pit, - marl in English, in French marle, - marga
in Spanish and Portuguese; - marna in Italian; - merge in Anglo-Saxon,
- margilla in Iceland, - marl in Danish, - märgel, marlrekor, näkelroed
in Swedish, - once a Wallachian.

gluhds in Latvian, - tsapodo in
Magyar; - mergeli, chernozem in Russian, also nowos, opoika ruchläkj;
- remember, in the Bohemian sljn; - Margiel in Polish, - merglina
in Krainschen and Windisch.

P. clay, glue, clay.

A yellowish coarse clayey mass, a paragraph of waters, the exquisitely molded to clay or brick
is used, partly than dried, and partly burned, since the oldest purpose Times was used.

mala in Sanskrit, - ledschm, lay, in the Persian gil, lime mud is more, our MedR Moder, - davidat in
Arabic, - boz, tit in Hebrew, - rekak in Chaldean, - schino in Syriac, - zot in the Ethiopian,
- Marg in Abyssinian.

[Greek: Lyma, Chou, Telma, pêlos] in Greek, - [Greek: Chora, pêlos] in Modern Greek.

Lutu in Wallachian, - lutum in Latin, - Lehites, laid, conductors, whether in private Breton, - pridd in
Waelsch, - creadh in Gälschen; - clay, clat in Scottish.

limo, even barro, arcilla in Spanish, - limo in Italian and Portuguese; - limon in French, - lime,
loan, brick earth, in English, - lom in Anglo-Saxon, - lim in Iceland, - LACM, clay Lätt,
blasphemous letthen in Altteutschen, - lem, glue in the Dutch and
Belgium, - liim, leerjord in Danish.

il, ilowaty, Glina, oblepa in
Polish, - ilovacha in Croatischen; - illovacsa in Illyrian, - g 'luch
in Slovak, - Guillo in Dalmatia, - Mahli in Latvian.

Q. tile, brick, roof tiles.

Bricks, only air dried, and partly burned in the fire were in ancient
times prepared with extreme care, as can be seen from Vitruvius, had
several years to dry.

They had several types; the [Greek: lidion] was 11 / 2 'long, the [Greek: pentathoron] served on public,
the [Greek: tetrathoron] for private buildings.

so-phaga in Tibetan, - ischtaka in Sanscrit, - khapara in Bengal, - phey, Tchou, OUA in Chinese,
- mouker fais-in Tartar, - Sagher, laminating, keluch in Persian, - gghmindr, keghminter [?*], aghius
in Armenian, - tugla in Turkish, is the brick; kernitsch the unfired,
kiremit the fired brick.

tabe in the Amharic, - tobs in Coptic, -
tobgelka in Berber, - Lebena in Hebrew, - Lebena, taphk, karmid, Kephis
in Chaldean, - Libner in Arabic.

karamida in Wlachischen; also Tegla,
ie, the roof tiles, - keramida in Albanian, even tula and plaidari,
- [Greek: kermide, toublon] in Modern Greek, - [Greek: plinthos] in
Greek, - [Greek: bêsalon] bessalus in the Middle Ages.

later, in
Latin, is partly crudus, the unfired, partly coctilis who fired.

tivleen
in Breton; tivlereah Ziegelstreicherey is, - brice in Gaelic, - priddell
in Wälischen, - brick in English (tile roof tile), - the French brique
(is tuile Tile), - ladrillo is in Spanish (teja tile); - mattone in
Italian (Tegula the tile).

zigelo in Altteutschen; - tigel, tigla
in Anglo-Saxon, - Tegel in the Dutch and Swedish; - Tigler in Icelandic.

Cegla

in Polish, is Cegielka bricks, roof tiles is dachowe, surowka the unfired Bricks; - cyhla, the Czech
topynka tables, - cyhla, tehla in Slovak; - cigely in Illyrian, - tihla the Moravian, - cigla
in Slavonian, - zegl in Kärnthschen; - zegu in Windisch, - zyhel
in Wend; - kegelis in Latvian, - Opeka, oppeka the Croat, Bosnian,
Dalmatian, Ragusa, - teegla in Magyar.

R. Bolus, red chalk, red chalk.

A red, ferruginous, argillaceous rock, which serves as a painter paint, red pencil, etc.

ou-sse-chy-tchy in Chinese, - atridscha, asmadscha is in Sanskrit
(Roth rohide in Sanskrit, ruden in Persian, Rudka in Slavic) - gairika,
geri, gerimati in Bengal, - gamrisch, susr in Armenian, - wesni in
Persian, - gili sürch, Kyzyl Balcik, a Turkish Armenian kil, - misgh,
moeghret, thin Tues Almagra in Arabic.

Persson in Coptic, - menis, MNIS, odanto in Syriac.

[Greek: Miltos] in Greek, especially the [Greek: Sinope] and [Greek: Lemnia], partly also [Greek:
ge sphragis] (Seal earth );--[ Greek: sinopidiôn, sirikon] in the Middle Ages, - [Greek: bolos]
in Modern Greek.

rubrica, Sinopis, including terra Lemnia in Latin, - ruddela in Gaelic,
- rhuddel in Wälischen, - rhuddela in Breton.

wochra in Russian,
- SMUR smarka, ogr, Rudka cerwena in the Czech tables, - rubryka,
czerwieniec, Glinka in Polish, - samija, erdenzha Krida in Windisch;
samija, kutmonka in Krainschen; - crrigljeno, zemglga in Bosnian,
- tzerwena Kreda in Sorbian, - zareljenizza in Ragusa, - serkana Cherith
in Latvian.

petsetes in Agyag, veresvasagyag Magyar.

rubrica in
Spanish and Portuguese, also Almagre what a special kind of Roethel
is from Almazarron in Murcia, that now serves chiefly to red coloring
of the tobacco.

raud kryt in Iceland, - rödjord, rötkrita in Swedish,
- roodörde, roodzel in Dutch, - rubrique, bol, sinopel in French,
- red chalk, bole, in English, - Röd Krid, bolus in Danish, - bools
Platt in the Germans.

S. ocher, yellow ocher, yellow earth.

Ochre or Ocher is understood under generally the iron, the earthy
iron, and what which is similar, but especially the yellow Eisenoxydhydrath
and the resulting colored clay, the place as a painter paint a very
general application.

artekan in Arabic, - djeghnahogh in Armenian.

[Greek: ochra] in Greek, is from the odhar Gälschen what pale fuscus, dyed, ie, - [Greek; ochra,
kitrinochôma] in Modern Greek, - ochra in Latin, especially with
several sil Species as: atticum, marmarosum pressum, syricum etc -
creadh bhuidhe Gälschen in the yellow earth, - ocre, terre jaune in
French, - ocre ocher, in Spanish and Portuguese; - ocra, terra gialla
in Italian, - yellow, oker in English, - oker in Dutch, - Okker in
Danish, - Ogar, ochreous in Altteutschen also Gilb and berggeel (Buidhe,
gel - yellow - in Gälschen, gilvus in Latin), - yellow, in English,
- ochra, scolding wochra, scheltaja Semla in Russian, - okra Ugie,
Glinka Zoltan in Polish, - ogr, the Czech ogrowly tables, - Ogra in
Krainschen.

T. Green Earth, Green Mountain.

A green clayey soil, which serves as a green color, especially at
bey Verona in Italy monte baldo occurs.

lo in Chinese, - creta viridis
the Romans, from Syria, from an estate of Theodotus As was said .--
diodotion creta, so also viridis Celtic origin, is in the Green Spaces
Waelsch, guirm in Gaelic, verde in Wlachischen and Albanian.

[Greek: tes prasinon tot] in Modern Greek, - in the middle prasis Latin, also prasinum; - terra
verde di Brentonico in Italian; - terre vert, - de Verone, talc chlorite in French, - verde montana
in Spanish, - verdemontanha, verdacre in Portuguese; - green-earth,
in English, - grönkrita in Swedish, - mountain groen in Dutch,-sargaagyag
in Magyar; - Zelenaya Semla in Russian.

U. Umbra.

A brown earth, which serves as a color, in part, the lignite formation belong.

azzebaxe in Arabic, - azeche in Spanish, - azevixe in Portuguese;
- umer in English, - ombre in French, - umber in Swedish.

In ancient times, bey the Egyptians, Persians, Greeks and so was the painting, such as dyeing on
a very high level of training - like the paintings have come to us on many best Teaching - was
as widespread as it was on us, and perhaps even further. Our oil paintings seems you have not applied,
however, had a lot more lasting wax painting, which always still
not quite known, and encaustic painting on wet lime, we first jetzo
begin to apply.

They used naturally very different colors, from all realms of nature,
partly natural, more or less dissected, such as green earth, yellow
earth, etc., partly artificial, such as white lead, verdigris, etc,
and partly the color itself, and partly of chalk-based pastels, partly
on pure alumina-bound paints.

After our very incomplete knowledge of the colors of antiquity, was
used preferably, as:

A. White Colors:

a) The white lead (see this),
cerussa, [Greek: mylibdos].

b) The chalk, creta annularis, selinusia,
Argentaria, terra melia, Eretria, pnigitis, Paraetonium; It was partly
dissected, used by itself, and partly also stained with other colors
as a pastel.

The pure alumina of (with baking soda, etc)-treated alum (Alum melinum) was indeed not the color
itself (the least among us), but as a mordant in dyeing and as the witness Pigment to paint different colors.

B.
Black Colors:

a) ink-like color of dissolved iron vitriol and gall or a similar
astringent; Atramentum, Atranit; Sutorium.

b) Ink, feinpräparirter
Russ, Atramentum Librarium.

To win the requisite purpose Russ converging furnaces had been constructed, the Vitruvius
VII 10 and Pliny, 35, 25, describe what was exquisitely charred resin
(resina).

Greek artists with similar other substances Apelles as ivory (hence [Greek: elephantinon]), and Micon Traste (hence
[Greek: triginon] called by [Greek: TRYX] the yeast), nor jetzo it highly values ​​the Bone Black vigne
yeasts and the black, le noir de. The finer ink came from India,
was the [Greek: indikon melas].

atramentum sepia was the blackness
of the squid.

C. Brown Colors:

This used to be in any case, probably our Umbra, Italy in the very
nice happens, but I find no special mention.

Melinos, [Greek: mêlinos], a color luteus, who came to the melody could possibly belong here.
 We sometimes see fathers and sons, and mothers
and daughters, so different in their appearance and deportment, that we should scarcely have
imagined them to be of the same family. I am not now speaking of those parents, who may live
in the towns, and who may be more than ordinarily devoted to the mammon of the world, but of
some who, living both in town and country, give an example of a liberal and amiable spirit,
and of a blameless conduct to the world. That the former should neglect and lose sight of their
offspring, when their moral vision is clouded by an undue eagerness after money, is not to
be wondered at, but that the latter should do it, is surprising. It is certainly true that
some of these are too indulgent in their families, contrary to the plan and manner of their
own education, or that they do not endeavour to nip all rising inconsistencies in the bud.
The consequence is, that their children get beyond control in time, when they lament in vain
their departure from the simplicity of the society. Hence the real cause of their disownment,
which occasionally follows, is not in the children running out of bounds, but in the parents
running out of bounds in the manners of their children. And here I may add, that some parents,
dwelling too much on the disuse of forms in religion, because such disuse is inculcated by
their own doctrines, run into the opposite extreme, and bring up their children in too much
ignorance of the general plan of Christianity, as it is laid down in the letter of the scriptures.

With respect to education, as for it is literary or philosophical, it is frequently sufficient
for those upon whom it is bestowed. But it does not appear to me to be carried to its proper
extent, in the case of the children of the rich, when I consider how friendly it might be made
towards the promotion of virtue. Some, we know, growing wealthy, have had children when they
were poorer, and, when in this poorer state, they have given them an education which has been
suitable to it, not calculating upon their future rise in life. But their children, having
had such a limited education, have not had that which has been proper for their subsequent
station in life. Others again, who have been born in better circumstances, have, on account
of an undue depreciation of human knowledge, educated their children as improperly for their
station as the former. The children then, in both these cases, have not had an education sufficient,
with the prospect of riches before them, to keep them out of the way of harm. They have not
had, in addition to any religious instruction, that taste given them for sublime pursuits,
which should make them despise those which were frivolous. Thus many of the corruptive opinions,
fashions, and amusements of the world have charmed them. Giving way to these, they have been
overcome. When overcome, they have run into excesses, and for these excesses they have been
disowned. But surely, with a better education, they would have thought all such corruptive
opinions, fashions, and amusements, as below their notice, and unworthy of their countenance
and support.

CHAP. IV.

Supposed remedies for the diminution of some of these causes--Regulations in the case of mixed
marriages--Measures to be adopted in the pursuit of trade--Education, as it is moral or religious,
to be more strictly enforced in some families--as it is literary or philosophical, to be carried
to a greater extent among the children of the rich--Object of this latter education--Nature
of it as consisting both knowledge and prohibitions--How it would operate against the fascinating
allurements of the world, or to the end proposal.

I Purpose now to suggest, as briefly as I can, such opinions, as, if adopted, might possibly
operate as remedies to some of the evils which have been described. In doing this I am aware
of the difficulties that await me. I am sensible that I ought not to be too sanguine as to
the result of all my observations upon this subject and yet, I cannot but think, that I may
be successful in some of them. Arduous, however, as the task, and dubious as my success may
be, I am encouraged, on the prospect of being but partially useful, to undertake it.

On the first of the original and immediate causes which have been mentioned, I mean mixed marriages,
I shall have but little to say. I do not see how it is possible, while the society means to
keep up a due subordination among its members, not to disown such as may marry out of it. In
mixed families, such as these marriages produce, it is in vain to expect that the discipline
can be carried on, as has been shewn in the second volume. And, without this discipline, the
society would hardly keep up, in the extensive manner it does, the character of a moral people.
I think, however, that some good might be done by regulations to be universally observed. Thus
they, who are deputed to inform the disowned of their exclusion from membership, should be
of the most amiable temper and conciliatory manners. Every unqualified person should be excluded
from these missions. Permission should be solicited for both the married persons to be present
on such occasions. It is difficult to estimate the good effect which the deputed, if of sweet
and tender dispositions, or the bad effects which the deputed, if of cold and austere manners,
might have upon those they visited, or what bias it might give the one in particular, who had
never been in membership, for or against the society. Permission also might be solicited, even
when the mission was over for future friendly opportunities or visits, which would shew in
the society itself a tender regard and solicitude for the welfare of its former members. It
is not at all improbable, from the impression which such apparent regard and solicitude might
occasion, that the children of the visited, though not members, might be brought up in the
rules of membership. And finally it appears to me to be desirable, that the disowned, if they
should give proof by their own lives and the education of their children, of their attachment
to the principles of the society, and should solicit restoration to membership, should be admitted
into it again without any acknowledgment of past errors, and wholly as new and convinced members.

With respect to the second of the immediate and original causes, which is to be found in tithes,
I may observe that it is, as for as I can collect, but a small and an inferior one, few being
disowned on this account, and still fewer now than formerly. It would be desirable, however,
few as these instances may be, to prevent them. But I fear that no remedy can be pointed out,
in which the Quakers would acquiesce, except it could be shewn, that a distinction might be
made between the payment of ecclesiastical and lay-tithes, which would not interfere with the
great tenets of the society on this subject. I may propose as remedies for this, first, that
parents should be careful to exhibit a good example to their children. Secondly, as I have
before observed, that they should prescribe to themselves moderation in the acquisition of
wealth, either by relinquishing trade at a given time, or by dealing out the profits of it
more liberally than common in the way of benevolence, so that their children, in each case,
may never have the misfortune of the prospect of a large moneyed independence before their
eyes. Or lastly, that they should give them a better education than they do at present, on
which subject, according to the prescribed order of things, I am now to speak.

A fourth cause then, but this belongs also to the original and remote, was shewn to exist in
education. And education, as it was promotive of the diminution of the society, was of two kinds.

With respect to that part of it which is alien, the remedy is easy. There has been great difficulty
in procuring proper schoolmasters, I mean such as have been Quakers. Two reasons may be given
for this. The first is, that the society having been backward in affording due encouragement
to learning, few of any great literary acquisitions have been brought up in it. The second
is, that persons have found, that they could make much less of their time in such a line of
employment than in the way of trade. But surely the Quakers, as a body in comfortable and independent
circumstances, might easily remedy the evil. Does not a man, who devotes his time to the instruction
of youth, deserve to be made as comfortable as the man who sells silver utensils, or bracelets,
or ear-rings, or other articles of trade? Is there any comparison between the moral usefulness
of these? Is there any profession more useful than that which forms the youthful mind? or rather,
is it not the most important profession in the state?[52]

[Footnote 52: It is but justice to the Quakers to observe, that they are taking more pains
than formerly in the promotion of this object. I am told that there are more private seminaries
now kept by Quakers for the education of the youth of their own society, than even before the
institution of Ackworth school.]

With respect to the education which is acquired in the society itself, the remedy is not difficult.
This education was shewn to be of two kinds.

On that part of it, which is moral or religious, I may observe, that the remedy is in the parents
themselves. The first thing to be recommended is an universal vigilance over the disposition
and manners of children, so that no censurable appearance, whether in temper or in conduct,
may be allowed to pass without suitable notice or reproof, or that the bud, which promises
to be corruptive of morals, should no sooner make its appearance, than it should be cut off.
In cases of so much importance, as where the happiness both of parents and children is concerned,
the former should be peculiarly circumspect. They should not talk about things, but insist
upon them, on all proper occasions. They should not point out, but redress. They should not
lop off the branches, but lay the axe to the root. And surely youth is the best season for
such wholesome interference. It is, in the first place, the season in which a remedy is practicable;
for we are assured, "if we train up a child in the way he should go, that, when he is old,
he will not depart from it." It is, secondly, the season in which it is most practicable; for
can we hope to bend the tree so easily to our form, as the sapling from whence it came? and,
thirdly, it is the season in which it is practicable only, for will not a small irregularity
grow, if uncontrolled, to a greater? Will not one irregularity also, if not properly checked,
give birth to others? And may not these be so incorporated into the inner man in a course of
time, that it may be as difficult for parents to eradicate them, as for the Ethiopian to change
his colour, or the leopard his spots? But surely the Quakers ought to know the impropriety
of undue indulgences in their families, as well as any other people? Is not the early subjugation
of the will a doctrine more particularly adopted by them as a society? Without such a subjugation
do they not conceive the mind to be in an unfit state to receive the admonitions of the pure
principle, and of course to make a true proficiency in religion? Do they not consider themselves
also as a highly professing people, and do they not know that the world expects more from them
than from others? But how can their children ever perpetuate this extraordinary character after
them, or shew that their parents possessed it, unless they are brought up in a peculiarly guarded
manner? In addition to these observations it may be recommended, that parents should be careful
to give their children what may be called a literal instruction in Christianity, in contradistinction
to pure theism, or to those doctrines which they conceive may come from the teachings of the
Holy Spirit, so that they may have a more intimate knowledge of all their principles, as a
Christian body.

With respect to that part of education which may consist of knowledge as it is literary or
philosophical, I conceive it might be attended with advantage to carry it to a greater extent
than has hitherto been practised in the society, but particularly the latter. Nothing is so
delightful to youth as experimental philosophy, by which they see the causes of things unfolded
to their view. No science takes their attention more, or inclines them, in the farther pursuit
of it, to be satisfied with home. And yet I doubt whether this branch of learning be not almost
wholly neglected in the Quaker schools. The education which is received in the society, as
it consists of the two kinds of knowledge described, is not, in my apprehension, carried far
enough, so as to suit the peculiar situation of the children of the rich. These are they, who
are most in danger. These are they, who, having the prospect of wealth before them, have the
prospect of being able to procure destructive pleasures. These are they, who, having the prospect
of independence, do not fear the opinion of the world or the loss of reputation in it, like
those, who have their livelihood to obtain by their own industry. Now it should be the particular
object of the education of these, as indeed it should be of all rich persons, so to instruct
them, that, while they are obliged to live in the world, they may be enabled to live out of
it, or deny it; so that, when seated amidst its corrupt opinions, amusements, and fashions,
they should estimate them as below their notice, and as utterly unworthy of their countenance
and support.

I should be sorry if, in holding up this species of education to a farther encouragement, as
a preservative of the morals of the children of rich parents amidst the various temptations
of life, I were to be thought to endeavour to take away in any degree the necessity of the
influence of the Holy Spirit on the mind of man, or to deny that this Spirit ought not to be
resorted to as the first and best guide, both by rich and poor, during their pilgrimage upon
earth. For who can teach us best to deny the world? Who can teach us best to estimate its pursuits?
Who can instruct us best to resist its temptations? To the Divine Being then we are first to
look up, as to him who can be the best author of all our good, and the surest averter of all
our evils, who can apply the best remedy to the imperfections of our nature, and who, while
he leads us in safety, can lead us into the way of truth. But when we consider how many are
inattentive, on account of the cares, and pleasures, and fashions, and prejudices, and customs
of the world, to the secret notices of his grace, I cannot help considering that we may be
allowed to have secondary and subordinate helps to our virtue. As the discipline of the Quaker
society may produce and preserve a certain purity of life, so may a literary and philosophical
education operate to the same end. Such an education is in its general tendency a friend to
the promotion of virtue and to the discouragement of vice. It sets us often unquestionably
above many of the corruptive opinions and customs in the midst of which we live. It leads us
also frequently to the contemplation of the Divine Being in all the variety of his works. It
gives us amiable, awful, and sublime conceptions of him. As far, therefore, as it is capable
of doing this, it is a useful, though it be only a subordinate source of our purity, and we
may therefore adopt it innocently. But we are never to forget, at the same time, that, though
it may help us occasionally to resist corrupt temptations, and to encourage desirable propensities,
yet it cannot do every thing for us that is necessary, and that we are never to overlook, on
this account, the necessity of the influence of the Holy Spirit.

To shew in what the education, which under these limitations I am going to propose, may consist,
I shall revive the controversy between the philosophical moralists and the Quakers, as described
in the eighth chapter of the first volume. The philosophical moralists contended, that knowledge
was to be preferred, as being more to be relied upon than prohibitions: that prohibitions were
often causes of greater evils than they were intended to prevent; that they themselves were
friends to occasional indulgencies; that they saw nothing necessarily or inherently mischievous
in the amusements of the world; that it was not wise to anticipate danger by looking to distant
prospects, where the things were innocent in themselves; that ignorance of vice was no guardian
of morals; that causes, and not sub-causes, were to be contended against; and that there was
no certain security but in knowledge and in a love of virtue. To this the Quakers replied,
that prohibitions were sanctioned by divine authority; that as far as they related to the corrupt
amusements of the world, they were implied in the spirit of Christianity; that the knowledge,
which should be promotive of virtue, could not be inculcated without them; that knowledge again,
if it were to be acquired by the permission of occasional indulgences, or by being allowed
to pass through scenes which might be dangerous to virtue, would be more ruinous than ignorance
by a prohibition of vice; that ignorance of vice was an essential in Christian morals; and
that prohibitions therefore were indispensably necessary, and better to be relied upon, than
any corrupt knowledge, which might arise from an acquaintance with the customs of the world.

This then was the state of the controversy, as described in the first volume. And in this state
it was left. But, to explain the education which I have in view, I shall now bring it to a
conclusion.

I must observe then, that the philosophical moralists had the advantage of the Quakers in this
controversy, inasmuch as they supposed that knowledge was a better safeguard to morals than
a mere ignorance of vice; but they failed in this, that they permitted this knowledge to be
acquired by passing through scenes which might not be friendly to virtue. Now this latter permission
is inadmissible in a Christian education; for no Christian youth ought to be permitted to see
or to hear that which ought not to be uttered or exhibited by a Christian. The Quakers, on
the other hand, had the advantage of the philosophical moralists, inasmuch as they considered
ignorance to be better than corrupted knowledge; but they failed in this, that they seemed
to rely upon ignorance of vice as a safeguard against it, without a proper portion of knowledge.
The education then, to which I allude, ought to embrace the most valuable positions of both.
It should consist of knowledge, and it should consist of wise prohibitions also. Knowledge
and prohibitions are inseparable. While the mind is gaining knowledge, it should be kept innocent.
And while it is kept innocent, it should be gaining knowledge. Youth should have that kind
of knowledge instilled into them, by which they should discern the value of the prohibitions
which are enjoined them. They should have such and so much knowledge, that if they were accidentally
placed in the way of the things prohibited, they should be able to look them in the face, and
pass through them without injury. This is that education, which, without superseding the necessity
of the influence of the Holy Spirit, has a tendency to enable persons, while they live in the
world, to live out of it or deny it.

But lest I should not be clearly understood upon this subject, I will exemplify how such an
education would act or operate to the end proposed.

And, first of all, knowledge may be acquired by reading. Now there are two kinds of reading,
the one useful, the other dangerous. By the premises, I am to adopt the first, and to prohibit
the last. If then I accustom my child to the best and purest models of ancient and modern literature,
I give him a certain taste for composition. If I accustom him to the purest and most amiable
sentiments, as contained in these, I give him a love of virtue. If I heighten these sentiments
by beautiful selections from the more pure and amiable sentiments of Christianity, I increase
that love. If I give him in my own conduct an example, he sees me practise that which I recommend.
I give him then a taste for the purest reading, and the choicest compositions, and I offer
to his notice, at the same time, a certain system of morality, which he cannot but gradually
adopt as his own. Now I would ask, what influence could a novel have upon a mind formed in
this manner, if thrown accidentally in his way. If its composition were but moderate, as is
the case with most of them, it would not suit the taste of my child. If its sentiments were
impure, it would disgust him. These would be so contrary to the taste and to the feelings he
had acquired, that the poison in such a book, like a ball, fired at a globular surface, would
slide off without detriment to the morals of my child.

Knowledge again may be acquired in the course of amusements, and of such as may be resorted
to within doors. Now of these again there are two kinds, the innocent and the corruptive. By
the premises I am to be concerned with the first only. If then I accustom my child to mathematical
and philosophical pursuits, if I incite him to experiments in these, if I assist him in measuring
the motions of the heavenly bodies, and in discovering the wisdom and power of Omnipotence
as displayed in these, if I occasion him to be interested in, the contemplation of such subjects,
what have I done for my child? Have I not called out his intellectual faculties? Have I not
laid in him the foundation of a serious and a thoughtful mind? Have I not accustomed him to
solid things, in opposition to those that are light, and to sublime things, in opposition to
those that are frivolous? Have I not inculcated in him a love for science? But take my child,
after he has been accustomed to such thoughts and such subjects, to the theatre. Let the pantomime
display its various attracting scenes to his view. And will he not think his entertainment
low and superficial, in comparison of that which he left at home.

Knowledge again may be acquired by amusements which are out of doors. These again may be innocent
or exceptionable. As before, I have nothing to do but with the former. If then I accustom my
child to range the fields, as an employment promotive of his health, and connect this healthy
exercise with the entertainment of botanical pursuits, do I not, in examining with him the
shape, the colour, and the mechanism of plants and flowers, confirm in him his former love
of the works of nature? Do I not confirm his former notion of the wisdom and power of omnipotence?
Do I not teach him by these, and the other pursuits which have been mentioned, that all recreations
should be innocent, and that time should be wisely employed? But hark! another amusement, and
one of those which are followed out of doors, is at hand. The hounds are in view, and fast
approaching. My son is accidentally solicited to join them. He would ask my permission, but
I am absent. At length he goes. He follows them in wild tumult and uproar for an hour. He sees
some galloping over hedges and ditches like madmen, and hazarding their persons in a presumptuous
manner. He sees others ride over the cultivated fields of their neighbours, and injure the
rising corn. He finds that all this noise and tumult, all this danger and injury, are occasioned
by the pursuit of a little hare, whose pain is in proportion to the joy of those who follow
it. Now can this diversion, educated as my child has been, fascinate him? Will he not question
its innocence? And will he not question its consistency as a natural pursuit, or as an employment
for his time?

It is thus then that knowledge will be found to operate as an artificial and innocent preservative
against the destructive pleasures of the world. But prohibitions without knowledge will be
but of little avail, where there is a prospect of riches, and the power of gratifying any improper
appetites as they may arise. But by knowledge we shall be able to discover the beauty of things,
so that their opposites, or the things prohibited, will cease to charm us. By knowledge we
shall be able to discern the ugliness of the things prohibited, so that we shall be enabled
to loathe them, if they should come into our way. And thus an education, conducted upon the
principles of knowledge, may operate to the end proposed.

CHAP. V.

Education continued, as consisting of knowledge and prohibitions--Good, which the Quakers have
done by prohibitions, without any considerable knowledge--Greater good, which they would do
with it--Knowledge then a great desideratum in the Quaker education--Favourable state of the
society for the communication of it with purity, or without detriment to morals--In what this
knowledge should consist--General advantages of it--Peculiar advantages, which it would bring
to the society.

When we consider that men have all the same moral nature, we wonder, at the first sight, at
the great difference of conduct which they exhibit upon earth. But when we consider the power
of education upon the mind, we seem to lose our surprize. If men in all countries were educated
alike, we should find a greater resemblance in their character. It is, in short, education,
which makes the man. And as education appears to me to be of so much importance in life, I
shall make it the subject of this and the succeeding chapter.

All education should have two objects in view, the opening of the understanding and the improvement
of the heart. Of the two, the latter is most important. There cannot be a question, whether
the person of the most desirable character be the virtuous or the learned man. Without virtue
knowledge loses half its value. Wisdom, without virtue, may be said to be merely political;
and such wisdom, whenever it belongs to a man, is little better than the cunning or craftiness
of a fox. A man of a cultivated mind, without an unshaken love of virtue, is but a dwarf of
a man. His food has done him no good, as it has not contributed to his growth. And it would
have been better, for the honour of literature, if he had never been educated at all. The talents
of man, indeed, considering him as a moral being, ought always to be subservient to religion.
"All philosophy, says the learned Cudworth, to a wise man, to a truly sanctified mind, as he
in Plutarch speaketh, is but matter for divinity to work upon. Religion is the queen of all
those inward endowments of the soul: and all pure natural knowledge, all virgin and undeflowered
arts and sciences, are her handmaids, that rise up and call her blessed."

Now if the opening of the understanding, and the improvement of the heart, be the great objects
to be attained, it will follow, that both knowledge and wise prohibitions should always be
component parts of the education of youth. The latter the Quakers have adopted ever since the
institution of their society. The former they have been generally backward to promote, at least
to any considerable extent. That they have done good, however, by their prohibitions, though
unaccompanied by any considerable knowledge, it would be disingenuous not to acknowledge. But
this goad has been chiefly confined to the children of those who have occupied middle stations
in the society. Such children have undoubtedly arrived at the true wisdom of life at an early
age, as I described in the first volume, and have done honour to the religion they professed.
But prohibitions, without knowledge, have not been found to answer so well among the children
of those who have had the prospect of a large moneyed independence before them, and who have
not been afraid either of the bad opinion of their own society, or of the bad opinion of the
world. It has been shewn, however, that knowledge with prohibitions would, in all probability,
be useful to these; that it would have a tendency to enable them, in the perilous situation
in which they are placed, to stand against the corrupt opinions and fashions, and while they
were living in the world, to live out of it, or to deny it.

Peculiarly situated as the Quakers are, they have opportunities, beyond any other people, of
ingrafting knowledge into their system of education without danger, or, in other words, of
giving knowledge to their children with the purity which Christianity would prescribe. The
great misfortune in the world is, that a learned education is frequently thought more of than
a virtuous one; that youth, while they are obtaining knowledge, are not properly watched and
checked; and that they are suffered to roam at large in the pursuit of science, and to cultivate
or not, at their own option, the science, if I may so call it, of religion. Hence it will happen,
that, where we see learned men, we shall not always see these of the most exemplary character.
But the Quakers have long ago adopted a system of prohibitions, as so many barriers against
vice, or preservatives of virtue. Their constitution forbids all indulgences that appear unfriendly
to morals. The Quakers therefore, while they retain the prohibitions which belong to their
constitution, may give encouragement to knowledge, without a fear that it will be converted
to the purposes of vice.

The Quakers, again, have opportunities or advantages, which others have not, in another point
of view. In the great public seminary at Ackworth, which belongs to them, and which is principally
for those who are of the poor and middle classes, every thing is under the inspection and guidance
of committees, which can watch and enforce an observance of any rules that may be prescribed.
Why then, if public seminaries were instituted for the reception of the children of the rich,
or if the rich were to give encouragement to large private seminaries for the same purposes,
should they not be placed under the visiting discipline of the society? Why should they not
be placed under the care of committees also? Why should not these committees see that the two
great objects of the education proposed were going on at the same time, or that, while knowledge
was obtaining, discipline had not been relaxed. Why should not such seminaries produce future
Penns, and Barclays, and others, who, while they were men capable of deep literary researches,
should be exemplary for their virtue?

As knowledge then ought to form a part of the proposed education, on a much larger scale than
has been hitherto encouraged, I shall say a few words as to the component parts of it, and
as to the general advantages of these, and I shall afterwards speak to the advantages which
the society in particular would derive from such a change.

In the education I propose, I do not mean, in the slightest manner, to break in upon the moral
system of the Quakers, as described in the first volume. I do not propose to them the polite
arts. I do not recommend them to make children musicians, or that they should learn, under
the dancing-master, to step gracefully. I advise only such knowledge as will be strictly innocent
and useful.

In the first place, I recommend a better classical education. Classical knowledge gives the
foundation both of particular and universal grammar. While it gives the acquisition of the
dead languages, it is the root, and thereforce facilitates the acquisition of many of the living.
As most of the technical terms in the professions and sciences are borrowed from these languages,
it renders them easily understood. The study of the structure and combination of words and
sentences calls forth the reflecting powers of youth, and expands their genius. It leads to
penetration and judgement. It induces habits of diligence and patience. By means of this knowledge
we have access to the sacred writings in the languages in which they were written, and we are
therefore not liable to be imposed upon, for the sense of them, by others. We become acquainted
also, by means of it, with the sentiments and knowledge of the ancients. We see their thoughts
and expressions. We acquire a literary taste.

A knowledge of ancient history is necessarily conpected with the former. To this, however,
should be added that of the modern. History, while it entertains us, instructs us morally.
We cannot see the rise and fall of empires, or the causes of their formation and dissolution,
or read the histories of good and bad men, without impressions of moral importance to ourselves.

A philosophical education is peculiarly important. By this I mean, a general knowledge of the
mathematics, of mechanics, optics, hydrostatics, astronomy, chemistry, botany, and the like.
The teaching of these should be accompanied by experiments. Experimental philosophy, as I observed
before, is peculiarly interesting to youth. Such knowledge teaches us the causes of things.
Mysteries, hitherto hidden both in the garden and in the field, and in the heaven and in the
air, lie unfolded to our view. Every walk we take, while the surface of the earth remains as
it is, and the canopy of the firmament is spread over us, gives its the opportunity, in all
the innumerable objects presented to our view, of almost endless investigation and delight.
And the deeper we go into the hidden things of nature, and the more we unfold them, have we
not a better belief of the existence of the Creator, and grander notions of the symmetry, order,
beauty, and wisdom of his works? Such knowledge leads also, as it has always done, to discoveries,
by which we may make ourselves useful to mankind. And, besides the utility, of which it may
make us capable, can discoveries of the principles of nature lessen oar love and admiration
of the first great Cause?

To philosophical knowledge should be added general reading. Such reading should be of the purest
kind. Of knowledge, acquired in this manner, it maybe said, that it opens new sources of right
views and sentiments, and this even independently of Christianity, from which our most valuable
information is derived. Thus at a time, when as a nation we professed to be Christians, we
shed the blood of the martyrs. Thus when even such men as the great Sir Matthew Hale, one of
the brightest Christian patterns in our country, were at the head of it, we condemned persons
to death for witchcraft. But knowledge superior to that of those times, has taught us better
things. By means of it we perceive, that persecution does not destroy, but that it propagates
opinions, and that the belief of the existence of witchcraft is absurd.

These then appear to me to be the general advantages, or such as are inseparable from education
when composed of the various branches of knowledge which have been described. I shall now endeavour
to shew the peculiar advantages, which the Quakers would derive from it.

It will appear then, if we look back into the character of the Quakers, as described in this
volume, that the world charges them, I mean the more affluent part of them, with having less
learning, than others in a similar rank of life. But surely the education I propose would remove
this intellectual defect.

The world again, as we have seen, has fixed another intellectual blemish upon them by the imputation
of superstition. But how does superstition enter, but where there is a want of knowledge? Does
not all history bear testimony, that in proportion as men have been more or less enlightened,
they have been less or more liable to this charge? It is knowledge then, which must banish
this frightful companion of the mind. Wherever individuals acknowledge, in a more extensive
degree than others, the influence of the Divine Spirit in man, these, of all other people,
will find the advantages of it. Knowledge leads to a solution of things, as they are connected
with philosophy, or the theory of the human mind. It enables men to know their first and their
second causes, so as to distinguish between causes and occasions. It fixes the nature of action
and of thought; and, by referring effects to their causes, it often enables men to draw the
line between the probability of fancy and inspiration. How many good men are there, who, adopting
a similar creed with that of the Quakers on this subject, make themselves uneasy, by bringing
down the Divine Being, promiscuously and without due discrimination, into the varied concerns
of their lives? How many are there, who attribute to him that which is easily explained by
the knowledge of common causes? Thus, for instance, there are appearances in nature, which
a person of an uninformed mind, but who should adopt the doctrine of the influence of the Spirit,
would place among signs, and wonders, and divine notices, which others, acquainted with the
philosophy of nature, would almost instantly solve. Thus again there may be occasions, which
persons, carrying the same doctrine to an undue extent, might interpret into warning or prophetic
voices, but which a due exercise of the intellect, where such exercise has been properly encouraged,
would easily explain. This reminds me of a singular occurrence: A friend of mine was lately
walking in a beautiful vale. In approaching a slate-quarry he heard an explosion, and a mass
of stone, which had been severed by gunpowder, fell near him as he walked along. He went immediately
to the persons employed. He represented the impropriety of their conduct in not having given
proper notice to such as were passing by, and concluded by declaring emphatically, that they
themselves would be soon destroyed. It happened, but six weeks afterwards, that two of these
men were blown to pieces. The words then of my friend were verified. Now I have no doubt that
ignorant persons, in the habit of referring every thing promiscuously to the Divine interference,
would consider my friend as a prophet, and his words as a divinely forewarning voice. But what
did my friend mean? or where did he get his foresight on this occasion? The answer is, that
my friend, being accustomed to the exercise of his rational faculties, concluded, that if the
people in question were so careless with respect to those who should be passing by in such
times of danger, they would by custom become careless with respect to themselves, and that
ultimately some mischief would befal them. It is knowledge, then, acquired by a due exercise
of the intellectual powers, and through the course of an enlightened education, which will
give men just views of the causes and effects of things, and which, while it teaches them to
discover and acknowledge the Divine Being in all his wondrous works, and properly to distinguish
him in his providences, preserves them from the miseries of superstition.

The world again has fixed the moral blemish of the money-getting, spirit upon the Quaker character.
But knowledge would step in here also as a considerable corrector of the evil. It would shew,
that there were other objects besides money, which were worthy of pursuit. Nor would it point
out only new objects, but it would make a scale of their comparative importance. It would fix
intellectual attachments, next to religion, in the highest class. Thus money would sink in
importance as a pursuit, or be valued only as it was the means of comfort to those who had
it, or of communicating comfort to others. Knowledge also would be useful in taking off, to
a certain degree, the corruptive effects of this spirit, for it would prevent it by the more
liberal notions it would introduce, from leaving the whole of its dregs of pollution upon the mind.

The Quakers again, as we have seen, have been charged with a want of animation, from whence
an unjust inference has been drawn of the coldness of their hearts. But knowledge would diminish
this appearance. For, in the first place, it would enlarge the powers, and vary the topics
of conversation. It would enliven the speaker. It would give him animation in discourse. Animation
again would produce a greater appearance of energy, and energy of the warmth of life. And there
are few people, whatever might be the outward cold appearance of the person with whom they
conversed, whose prejudices would not die away, if they found a cheerful and an agreeable companion.

Another charge against the Quakers was obstinacy. This was shewn to be unjust. The trait, in
this case, should rather have been put down as virtue. Knowledge, however, would even operate
here as a partial remedy. For while the Quakers are esteemed deficient in literature, their
opposition to the customs of the world, will always be characterized as folly. But if they
were to bear in the minds of their countrymen a different estimation as to intellectual attainments,
the trait might be spoken of under another name. For persons are not apt to impute obstinacy
to the actions of those, however singular, whom they believe to have paid a due attention to
the cultivation of their minds.

It is not necessary to bring to recollection the other traits that were mentioned, to see the
operation of a superior education upon these. It must have already appeared, that, whatever
may be the general advantages of learning, they would be more than usually valuable to the
Quaker character.

CHAP. VI.

Arguments of those of the society examined, who may depreciate human knowledge--This depreciation
did not originate with the first Quakers--with Barclay--Penn--Ellwood--but arose afterwards--Reputed
disadvantages of a classical education--Its heathen mythology and morality--Disadvantages of
a philosophical one--Its scepticism--General disadvantages of human learning--Inefficiency
of all the arguments advanced.

Having shewn the advantages, which generally accompany a superior education, I shall exhibit
the disadvantages which may be thought to attend it, or I shall consider those arguments, which
some persons of this society, who have unfortunately depreciated human learning, though with
the best intentions, might use against it, if they were to see the contents of the preceding
chapter.

But, before I do this, I shall exonerate the first Quakers from the charge of such a depreciation.
These exhibited in their own persons the practicability of the union of knowledge and virtue.
While they were eminent for their learning, they were distinguished for the piety of their
lives. They were indeed the friends of both. They did not patronize the one to the prejudice
and expulsion of the other.[53]

[Footnote 53: George Fox was certainly an exception to this as a scholar. He was also not friendly
to classical learning on account of some of the indelicate passages contained in the classical
authors, which he and Farley and Stubbs, took some pains to cite, but, if these had been removed,
I believe his objections would have ceased.]

Barclay, in his celebrated apology, no where condemns the propriety or usefulness of human
learning, or denies it to be promotive of the temporal comforts of man. He says that the knowledge
of Latin, Greek and Hebrew, or of logic and philosophy, or of ethics, or of physics and metaphysics,
is not necessary. But not necessary for what? Mark his own meaning. Not necessary to make a
minister of the Gospel. But where does he say that knowledge, which he himself possessed to
such a considerable extent, was not necessary, or that it did not contribute to the innocent
pleasures of life? What would have been the character of his own book, or what would have been
its comparative value and usefulness, if he had not been able to quote so many authors to his
purpose in their original texts, or to have detected so many classical errors, or to have introduced
such apposite history, or to have drawn up his propositions with so much logical and mathematical
clearness and precision, or if he had not been among the first literary characters of his day?

William Penn was equally celebrated with Barclay as a scholar. His works afford abundant proof
of his erudition, or of the high cultivation of his mind. Like the rest of his associates,
he was no advocate for learning, as a qualification for a minister of the Gospel, but he was
yet a friend to it, on the principle, that it enlarged the understanding, and that it added
to the innocent pleasures of the mind. He entreated his wife, in the beautiful letter which
he left her, before he embarked on his first voyage to America, "not to be sparing of expence
in procuring learning for his children, for that by such parsimony all was lost that was saved."
And he recommended also in the same letter the mathematical or philosophical education which
I have described.

Thomas Ellwood, a celebrated writer among the early Quakers, and the friend of the great John
Milton, was so sensible of the disadvantages arising from a want of knowledge, that he revived
his learning, with great industry, even after he had become a Quaker. Let us hear the account
which he gives of himself in his own Journal. "I mentioned before, says he, that, when I was
a boy, I made some progress in learning, and that I lost it all again before I came to be a man.

By means of this extract, made from the life of Thomas Ellwood, we come to three conclusions.
First, that the early Quakers were generally men of eminent learning. Secondly, that they did
not decry or depreciate human knowledge. And thirdly, that the calumny of such a depreciation
by them arose from the controversy which they thought it right to maintain, in which they denied
it to be necessary as a qualification for a Gospel minister.

This latter conclusion brings me round again to the point. And here I must observe, that, though
this famous controversy occasioned the first Quakers to be unduly blamed on account of such
a depreciation, yet it contributed to make some of their immediate successors, as I stated
in a former volume, justly chargeable with it. But whether this was or was not the real cause,
it is not material to the question. Many of the society, from came cause or other, did undoubtedly,
in the age immediately succeeding that of their founders, begin to depreciate human knowledge,
the effects of which, though gradually dissipating, have not been wholly done away at the present
day. The disadvantages, therefore, of human learning, or the arguments which would be advanced
against it by those who may undervalue it, I shall now consider.

These arguments may be divided into particular and general. On the former I shall first speak.

A classical education is considered to be objectionable, first, on account of the Heathen mythology
that is necessarily connected with it. Its tendency, as it relates to fabulous occurrences,
is thought to be unfavourable, as it may lead to a romantic propensity, and a turn for fiction.
But surely the meaning of such occurrences cannot be well mistaken. If they are represented
to our view in fable, they have had their foundation in truth. Many of them again are of such
importance, that we could not wish to see them annihilated. Let us refer, for example, to the
story of Deucalion and Pyrrha. Is it not one among the many outward confirmations of the truth
of the history of Moses? Or do we not trace in it additional proofs of the deluge, and of the
renewal of mankind?

Its tendency again, as it relates to the fabulous history of the Heathen gods, their number,
their offices, and their character, is considered as degrading and exceptionable. I will concede
this for a moment. But may it not, on the other hand, be rendered instructive and useful? May
not the retention of such an history be accompanied with great moral advantages to our children?
The emperor Theodosius commanded the idol temples to be destroyed. Instead of devoting them
to the use of the Christians of those times, by which they might have been preserved to future
generations, the most beautiful remains of antiquity were reduced to ruins. But would it not
have been better, if Theodosius had brought good out of evil by retaining them? Would it not
have been a high moral gratification to those who knew the fact, that temples, appropriated
to the worship of idols, had been devoted to the service of the only true God? Would it not
have been a matter of joy to these to have reflected upon the improving condition of mankind?
And, while they looked up to these beautiful structures of art, might not the sight of them
have contributed to the incitement of their virtue? If it be the tendency of the corrupt part
of our nature to render innocent things vicious, it is, on the other hand, in the essence of
our nature to render vicious things in process of time innocent, so that the very remnants
of idolatry may be made subservient to our moral improvement. "If, as I observed in the first
volume, we were to find an alter which had been sacred to Moloch, but which had been turned
into a stepping-stone to help the aged and infirm upon their horses, why should we destroy
it? Might it not be made useful to our morality, as for as it could be made to excite sorrow
for the past and gratitude for the present?" And in the same manner the retention of the Heathen
mythology might be made serviceable. Ought it not, whenever we contemplate it, to make us thankful,
that we have not the dark and cheerless path of our ancestors to tread; that we have clearer
light; that we have surer prospects; that we have a steadier ground of hope; and ought we not,
on a contemplation of these superior advantages, brought to us by revelation, to be roused
into the practice of a superior virtue.

Classical education again is considered as objectionable by the Quakers on account of the Heathen
notions, which it may spread. Thus the highest reputation of man is placed in deeds of martial
achievement, and a martial ardour is in consequence infused into youth, which it is difficult
to suppress. That such notions and effect are produced, there can be no doubt; but how are
we to avoid these whilst we are obliged to live in the world? The expulsion of the classics
would not expel them. Our own newspapers, which are open to all, spread the same opinions,
and are instrumental of course in producing the same excitements, but they do it in a much
more objectionable way than the classical authors, that is, they do it with less delicacy,
and with a more sanguinary applause. But where, as I observed before, shall we retire from
such impressions? Does not the recruiting drum propagate them in all our towns? Do not the
ringing of the bells, and the illuminations, which occasionally take place in the time of war,
propagate them also? And do we not find these, both in war and in peace, the sentiments and
impressions of the world? Our own notions then, our own writings, and our own customs, are
more to be blamed in this respect, than the literary compositions of ancient times. But this,
of all others, ought to be least an objection with the Quakers to such an education; because,
to their honour, they have a constant counteraction of the effects of such sentiments and impressions
in the principles of their own constitution, and which counteraction cannot cease, while, by
the bearing of their testimony, they live in a continual protest against them.

The last objection to a classical education is, that the system of the Heathen morality is
generally too deficient for those who are to be brought up as Christians. To this I answer,
that it is quite as good as the system of the morality of the world. I could procure purer
sentiments, and this generally from the Heathen authors usually called[54] classical, than
I can collect from many, even of the admired publications of our own times. The morality of
the heathens is not so deficient as many have imagined. If their best opinions were duly selected
and brought into one view, the only matter of surprise would be, how, with no other than the
law written upon the heart, they had made such sublime discoveries. It was principally in their
theology, where the law written upon the heart could not reach, that the ancients were deficient.
They knew but little of the one true God. They did not know that he was a Spirit, and that
he was to be worshiped in spirit and in truth. They were ignorant of his attributes. They had
learnt nothing of the true origin, nature, and condition of man, or of the scheme of creation
and redemption. These things were undoubtedly hidden from the eyes of the ancient philosophers.
And it was in knowledge of this kind chiefly, that their deficiency was apparent. But how is
this particular deficiency detrimental to youth, or how rather might it not be rendered useful
to them in the way described? What a sublime contrast does knowledge, as exhibited by revelation,
afford to the ignorance of those times, and what joy and gratitude ought we not to feel in
the comparison? And this is the only use which can be made of their mythology? For when we
send youth to the classical authors, we send them to learn the languages, and this through
a medium where the morality is both useful and respectable, but we do not send them, living
where the blessings of revelation are enjoyed, to be instructed in religion.

[Footnote 54: It must however be acknowledged, that, amidst beautiful sentiments, such as are
indelicate are occasionally interspersed. But the quakers might remedy this objection by procuring
a new edition of the purest classics only, in which particular passages might be omitted. They
might also add new Latin notes, founded on Christian principles, where any ideas were found
to be incorrect, and thus make Heathenism itself useful, as a literal teacher of a moral system.
The world, I believe, would be obliged to the Quakers for such an edition, and it would soon
obtain in most of the schools of the kingdom.]

The principal argument against a philosophical education, which is the next subject for consideration,
is, that men, who cultivate such studies, require often more proofs of things than can always
be had, and that, if these are wanting, they suspend their belief. And as this is true in philosophy,
so it may be true in religion. Hence persons accustomed to such pursuits, are likely to become
sceptics or infidels. To this I answer, that the general tendency of philosophy is favourable
to religion. Its natural tendency is to give the mind grand and sublime ideas, and to produce
in it a belief of the existence of one great cause, which is not visible among men. 

Sparkalk in common Teutsch, will come from the Anglo-Saxon, where the plaster Spaerstein, the selenite
spaerglass means, which may be associated with lapis specularis is.

C. Alabaster.

The alabaster is a pretty white and colored thick gypsum or anhydrite (waterless Gyps bardiglione,
in Italian), and partly translucent, which is always much to works of art processed in ancient
times was counted among the marbles. But the Italian Artists and archaeologists call jetzo Oriental
alabaster, is usually a nice tight Tuffkalk.

Egypt provided most beautiful alabaster, there are sarcophagi come down to us the rock is almost
transparent, and gives a silver sound.

rdo-manyina also ka-ma-ru (ie, soft rock) in Tibetan, - pualam is in Malay ( and marble), - obesiksak
in Greenland (also marble) - see below mermer in Turkish, - aghabast
in Armenian.

peka in Ethiopic (also white stone), - schatiphto, schotiphjotho,
dagugitho, bistho in Syriac, which both alabaster, as an ointment
box means.

al-bassrah (ie white stone), as su mermeri in Arabic,
is a Ballat the marble-like, but softer stone, dschodsdsam is the
name of a soft stone lachfat, a thin soft Stone, but whether these
rocks belong to the Gyps, has made quite remain there, - rokham alabid
is translated as oriental alabaster, but is probably the Persian,
alabaster-like Tuffkalk being.

unch, uncha in Chaldean, - ount Egyptian
hieroglyphs in the language, - ount in Coptic, Onyx is actually, is
translated as marble, can also be referred to the multi-colored alabaster
have.

[Greek: onyx] in Greek, is our Onyx, but also the multi-colored alabaster (see above bey Onyx)
- also, especially in the later period, [Greek: alabastros] (which also ointment vessel means),
[Greek: alabastritês].

Whether the name came from the city Alabastron in the Thebaid, or (as is perhaps more likely) from
the Semitic al bassrah, I have been there ing, can always he will be Semitic origin, as Pliny 37th noted
18th

[Greek: alabastron] in Modern Greek.

alabastrites of the Romans, which was used chiefly for cream cans, even in stacks, also [Greek:
chertritês] chermites, who served on sarcophagi, a very translucent
alabaster, is be-ing been the phengite, were constructed from the
small temples and halls, from the Cappadocia in Asia Minor came.

clach-Eiting
in Gälschen (perhaps from eith the ice), - alabastro in Breton (probably
from Latin).

alabatre in French, - alabastro in Spanish, Italian
and Portuguese, where effingites is a translucent stone that will
belong here, - alabaster in the Dutch and Danish, - alabastursteiern
in Iceland, - Alabastr in English, Polish, Czech tables (Also sadrowec
zrnaty) and Windisch, - ALABASTRI Kiwwi in Esthnischen; - alabastron
coe in Magyar.

D. Gypsspath, Marie Glass.
 To this I may answer,
that as prodigies are daily produced in nature, though they may be but as one to a hundred
thousand when compared with the perfect things of their own kind, so such phenomena may occasionally
make their appearance in the world. But as far as my own experience goes, I believe the true
tendency of learning to be quite the reverse. I believe the most learned to be generally the
most humble, and to be the most sensible of their own ignorance. Men, in the course of their
studies, daily find something new. Every thing new shews them only their former ignorance,
and how much there is yet to learn. The more they persevere, in their researches, the more
they acknowledge the latter fact. The longer they live, the more they lament the shortness
of life, during which, man with all his industry, can attain so little, and that, when he is
but just beginning to know, he is cut off. They see, in short, their own nothingness, and,
however they may be superior in their attainments, they are convinced that their knowledge
is, after all, but a shadow; that it is but darkness; that it is but the absence of light;
and that it no sooner begins to assume an appearance than it is gone.

The last general argument against learning is, that it does not lead to morality, or that learned
men do not always exhibit an example of the best character. In answer to this I must observe,
that the natural tendency of learning is to virtue. If learned men are not virtuous, I presume
their conduct is an exception to the general effect of knowledge upon the mind. That there
are, however, persons of such unnatural character, I must confess. But any deficiency in their
example is not to be attributed to their learning. It is to be set down, on the other hand,
to the morally defective education they have received. They have not been accustomed to wise
restraints. More pains have been taken to give them knowledge, than to instruct them in religion.
But where an education has been bestowed upon persons, in which their morals have been duly
attended to, where has knowledge been found to be at variance, or rather where has it not been
found to be in union, with virtue? Of this union the Quakers can trace some of the brightest
examples in their own society. Where did knowledge, for instance, separate herself from religion
in Barclay, or in Penn, or in Burroughs, or in Pennington, or in Ellwood, or in Arscott, or
in Claridge, or in many others who might be named. And as this has been the case in the Quaker
society, where a due care has been taken of morals, so it has been the case where a similar
care has been manifested in the great society of the world.

   "Piety has found
   Friends In the friends of Science, and true pray'r
   Has flow'd from lips wet with Castalian dews.
   Such was thy wisdom, Newton, childlike sage!
   Sagacious reader of the works of God,
   And in his word sagacious. Such too thine,
   Milton, whose genius had angelic wings,
   And fed on manna. And such thine, in whom
   Our British Themis gloried with just cause,
   Immortal Hale! for deep discernment prais'd
   And sound integrity not more, than fam'd
   For sanctity of manners undefil'd."  Cowper.

It appears then, if I have reasoned properly, that the arguments usually adduced against the
acquisition of human knowledge are but of little weight. If I have reasoned falsely upon this
subject, so have the early Quakers. As they were friends to virtue, so they were friends to
science. If they have at any time put a low estimate upon the latter, it has been only as a
qualification for a minister of the Gospel. Here they have made a stand. Here they have made
a discrimination. But I believe it will no where be found, that they have denied, either that
learning might contribute to the innocent pleasures of life, or that it might be made a subordinate
and auxiliary instrument towards the promotion of virtue.

CHAP. VII.

Conclusion of the work--Conclusionary remarks divided into two kinds--First, as they relate
to those who may have had thoughts of leaving the society--Advantages, which these may have
proposed to themselves by such a change--These advantages either religious or temporal--The
value of them considered.

Having now gone through all the subjects, which I had prescribed to myself at the beginning
of this work, I purpose to close it. But as it should be the wish of every author to render
his production useful, I shall add a few observations for this purpose. My remarks then, which
will be thus conclusory, relate to two different sorts of persons. They will relate, first,
to those who may have had thoughts of leaving the society, or, which is the same thing, who
persist in a course of irregularities, knowing beforehand, and not regretting it, that they
shall be eventually disowned. It will relate, secondly, to all other persons, or to those who
may be called the world. To the former I shall confine my attention in this chapter.

I have often heard persons of great respectability, and these even in the higher circles of
life, express a wish, that they had been brought up as Quakers. The steady and quiet deportment
of the members of this society, the ease with which they appear to get through life, the simplicity
and morality of their character, were the causes which produced the expression of such a wish.
"But why then, I have observed, if you feel such a disposition as this wish indicates, do you
not become Quakers?" "Because, it has been replied, we are too old to be singular. Dressing
with sufficient simplicity ourselves, we see no good reason for adopting the dress of the society.
It would be as foolish in us to change the colour and fashion of our clothing, as it would
be criminal in the Quakers, with their notions, to come to the use of that which belongs to
us. Endeavouring also to be chaste in our conversation, we cannot adopt their language. It
would be as inconsistent in us to speak after the manner of the Quakers, as it would be inconsistent
in them to leave their own language for ours. But we wish we had been born Quakers. And, if
we had been born Quakers, we would never have deserted the society."

Perhaps they to whom I shall confine my remarks in this chapter, are not aware, that such sentiments
as these are floating in the minds of many. They are not aware, that it is considered as one
of the strongest things for those who have been born in the society, and been accustomed to
its particularities, to leave it. And least of all are they aware of the worthless motives,
which the world attributes to them for an intended separation from it.

There is, indeed, something seemingly irreconcileable in the thought of such a dereliction
or change. To leave the society of a moral people, can it be a matter of any credit? To diminish
the number of those who protest against war, and who have none of the guilt upon their heads
of the sanguinary progress of human destruction which is going on in the world, is it desirable,
or rather, ought it not to be a matter of regret? And to leave it at a time, when its difficulties
are over, is it a proof of a wise and a prudent choice? If persons had ever had it in contemplation
to leave the society in its most difficult and trying times, or in the days of its persecution,
when only for the adoption of innocent singularities its members were insulted, and beaten,
and bruised, and put in danger of their lives, it had been no matter of surprise: but to leave
it, when all prejudices against them are gradually decreasing, when they are rising in respectability
in the eyes of the government under which they live, and when, by the weight of their own usefulness
and character, they are growing in the esteem of the world, is surely a matter of wonder, and
for which it is difficult to account.

This brings me to the point in question, or to the examination of those arguments, which may
at times have come into the heads of those who have had thoughts of ceasing to be members of
this society.

In endeavouring to discover these, we can only suppose them to be actuated by one motive, for
no other will be reasonable, namely, that they shall derive advantages from the change. Now
all advantages are resolvable into two kinds, into such as are religious, and into such as
are temporal. The first question then is, what advantages do they gain in the former case,
or do they actually come into the possession of a better religion?

I am aware that to enter into this subject, though but briefly, is an odious task. But I shall
abstain from all comparisons, by which I might offend any. If I were to be asked which, among
the many systems of the Christian religion, I should prefer, I should say, that I see in all
of them much to admire, but that no one of them, perhaps, does wholly, or in every part of
it, please me; that is, there is no one, in which I do not see some little difficulty, which
I cannot solve, though this is no impediment to my faith. But, if I were pressed more particularly
upon this point, I should give the following answer. I should say, that I should prefer that,
which, first of all, would solve the greatest number of difficulties, as far as scriptural
texts were concerned, in conformity with the Divine attributes, which, secondly, would afford
the most encouraging and consolatory creed, if it were equally well founded with any other;
and which, thirdly, either by its own operation, or by the administration of it, would produce
the post perfect Christian character. Let us then judge of the religion of the Quakers by this
standard.

That there are difficulties with respect to texts of scripture, must be admitted; for if all
men were to understand them alike, there would be but one profession of the Christian religion.
One man endeavours to make his system comport wholly with human reason, and the consequence
is, that texts constantly stare him in the face, which militate against it. Another discards
reason, with a determination to abide literally by that, which is revealed, and the consequence
is, that, in his literal interpretation of some passages, he leaves others wholly irreconcileable
with his scheme. Now the religion, of the Quakers has been explained, and this extensively.
In its doctrinal parts it is simple. It is spiritual. It unites often philosophy with revelation.
It explains a great number of the difficult texts with clearness and consistency. That it explains
all of them I will not aver. But these which it does explain, it explains in the strictest
harmony with the love, goodness, justice, mercy, and wisdom of God.

As to the creed of the Quakers, we have seen its effects. We have seen it to be both encouraging
and consolatory. We have seen it produce happiness in life, and courage in death. The doctrine
of the possibility of human perfection, where it is believed, must be a perpetual stimulus
to virtue, it must encourage hope and banish fear. But it may be said, that stimulative and
consolatory as it may be, it wants one of the marks which I have insisted upon, namely, a sound
foundation. But surely they, who deny it, will have as many scriptural texts against them as
they who acknowledge it, and will they not be rendering their own spiritual situation perilous?
But what do the Quakers mean by perfection? Not the perfection of God, to which there are no
limits, as has been before explained, but that which arises to man from the possibility of
keeping the divine commands. They mean that perfection, such as Noah, and Job, and Zacharias,
and Elizabeth, attained, and which the Jewish rabbies distinguished by the name of Redemption,
and which they conceived to be effected by the influence of the Holy Spirit, or that state
of man in Christian morals, which, if he arrives at it, the Divine Being (outward redemption
having taken place by the sacrifice of Christ) is pleased to accept as sufficient, or as the
most pure state at which man, under the disadvantages of the frailty of his nature, can arrive.
And is not this the practicable perfection, which Jesus himself taught in these words, "Be
ye perfect, even as your Father, which is in heaven is perfect." Not that he supposed it possible,
that any human being could be as perfect as the Divine Nature. But he proposed, by these expressions,
the highest conceivable model of human excellence, of which our natures were capable, well
knowing that the higher our aspirations the higher we should ascend, and the sooner we should
reach that best state of humanity that was attainable. And here it is, that Christianity, as
a rule of moral conduct, surpasses all others. Men, in general, look up to men for models.
Thus Homer makes one of his heroes, when giving counsel to his son, say, "Always emulate the
best." Thus also we should say to our children, if a person of extraordinary character were
to live in our neighbourhood, "This is the pattern for your virture." But Jesus Christ says,
aim at perfection beyond that which is human, alluding to the attributes of God, and thus you
will attain a higher excellence than the study of any other model can produce.

With respect to the formation of man according to the model which Christianity prescribes,
the system of the Quakers is no where to be excelled. No one, that we know of, is more powerful
in the production of a subjugated mind and of a moral character. By this I mean, that there
is none which is more universally powerful. It is the tendency of Christianity, whatever denomination
it may assume, to produce these effects. But there is full as general an appearance of these
among the Quakers, as in any other Christian profession.

It will appear then, that, if the three criterions, which have been specified, should be admitted
to be those by which a judgment may be formed in the present case, they, who have had thoughts
of leaving the society, will not be much better off by an exchange of their religion.

Let us see next, what would be the greater temporal advantages, which they would obtain. These
may be summed up in two essential ingredients of happiness, in tranquillity of mind, in consequence
of which we pass through the troubles of life in the most placid manner, and in a moderate
pecuniary independence, in consequence of which we know none of the wants and hardships, but
enjoy the reasonable comforts of it.

With respect to tranquillity of mind, we have shown this to be constitutional with the Quakers.
It arises from their domestic enjoyments, from seldom placing their pleasures or their fortunes
in the power of others, from freedom from the ambition and envyings of the world, from the
regulation of the temper, from avoiding quarrels and lawsuits, and from other causes. And with
respect to a moderate pecuniary independence, we have shewn not only that this is the general
portion of the society, but that it is in the very nature of their habits to acquire it. Now
these essential ingredients of happiness, or these temporal advantages, do not belong to the
present Quakers only. They have always belonged to Quakers; and they will be perpetuated as
an inheritance to their children, as long as Quakerism lasts. By this I mean to say, that if
any Quakers, now living, could be sure that their descendants would keep to the wholesome regulations
of the society for ten generations to come, they might have the comfort of believing, that
tranquillity of mind would accompany them, as an effect of the laws and constitution belonging
it, and that at any rate an easy pecuniary situation in life would be preserved to them. For
if it be no difficult thing, with the natural habits of the society, to acquire an independence,
it is much easier to preserve that which has been left them. But will they, who have had it
in contemplation to leave the society, be able to say this for their children, when they adopt
the world for their home? What certainty is there, that these will experience tranquillity,
unless they are seen, quite as far as manhood, in the habits of religion? Will the cares of
the world, its ambition, its thirst after honours, and its unbridled affections and passions,
give them no uneasiness? And can the fortunes transmitted to them, subject as they will be
to its destructive fashions and pleasures, be insured to them for even half of their times?
How many have we seen, who have been in the prime of health in the morning, who have fallen
before night in the duel? And how many have we seen in a state of affluence at night, who have
been ruined by gaming in the morning?

But it is possible that they, who may have had thoughts of leaving the society; may picture
to themselves another advantage, which I have not yet mentioned. It is possible, that there
may be yet one which they may distinguish by such a name. They may possibly think it to be
a gain to get rid of the restraint of the discipline of the society, and to enjoy the freedom
of the world.

That the discipline is a restraint, I do not deny. But it must never be forgotten, that its
object is moral good, and its effect the preservation of a moral character. But, come you,
who complain of this heavy burden imposed upon you, and let us converse together for a moment,
and let us see, if, when you relinquish it, you do not impose upon yourself a worse. Are you
sure that, when you get rid of this discipline, you will not come under the discipline of fashion?
And who is Fashion? Is she not of all mistresses the most imperious, and unreasonable, and
cruel? You may be pleased with her for a while, but you will eventually feel her chains. With
her iron whip, brandished over your head, she will issue out her commands, and you must obey
them. She will drive you, without mercy, through all her corruptive customs, and through all
her chameleon changes, and this against your judgment and against your will. Do you keep an
equipage? You must alter the very shape of your carriage, if she prescribes it. Is the livery
of your postilion plain? You must make it of as many colours as she dictates. If you yourself
wear corbeau or raven colour to-day, you must change it, if she orders you, to that of puce,
or the flea, to-morrow. But it is not only, in your equipage and your dress, that she will
put you under her control. She will make you obedient to her in your address and manners. She
will force upon you rules for your intercourse with others. She will point out to you her amusements,
and make you follow them. She will place you under her cruel laws of honour, from which she
will disown you, if you swerve. Now I beseech you, tell me, which you think you would prefer,
the discipline of the goddess Fashion, or that of the good old mistress, which you may have
wished to leave? The one kindly points out to you, and invites and warns you to avoid, every
dangerous precipice, that may be before you. The other is not satisfied, but with your destruction. 

Q. Our cat's eye.

This stone belongs to the genus although mineralogically quartz, technically
the white gems; but as he has a shimmering as the chrysoberyl, he
may follow here.

Our cat's eye, or perhaps gunuko, is a very fine-fibred quartz, gray of most often, and red or
yellow color, honed particularly convex, a suitable changing glow
has, thus resembling the eye of the cat.

He is beautiful and not rare in India and Ceylon before, the Oriental was always known, is
also described by Ben Manssur very true.

mao-tsing in Chinese, - patamra kaonywen on-Awa, - billi-ke-ankk in the Hindu; - ainol-hur, mithrax
also in Persian, is sebedsch Augenstein, is probably not the place, - ain al Hirche, ainu 'ihirri
(cats eye) in Arabic. Whether the Turkish ainischenes devil eye belongs here, I do not know. In
the old Greek name is not known. Asteria of the Romans, probably the belioculus as the astrolobon, like
the eyes of the fish, the mithrax, the multi- Colors shone will belong here, if it is true that
the Persian mithrax in our Cat eye. koschetschei glass kosetchetscheg in Russian, - fireplace bialy in Polish,
- matskaszem in Magyar; - oeil de chat in French, - ojo de gato in
Spanish, - Occhio di gatto in Italian, - cats-eye in English, - katte-Oege
in Danish, - katt-öga in Swedish, - katten-oog in Dutch.

G. Our species plasma.

It is this: precious jasper, rich jade, the stone cutters bey aka dismeraldo plasma, prime d'Emeraude,
Oriental Jade, also DIASPRO. A beautiful stone that is unique to the Bucharey refers to the
Chinese border, very rarely comes to us, in ancient times and Oriente more it was known among us as
it is the case. He is unkrystallisirt, very hard, takes an excellent To polish, has a pure, deep
green color, but also white, red, black, sometimes mottled, veined related to the Sard fine, but
oily, shiny. He is quite excellent to cut, raised and recessed can be edited, is still jetzo how,
since the oldest Times, to wonderful works of art that are in very high value. Most used seems
him the noble nephrite (Punama or Beilstein, pierre de Hache Taraipunama of the island, south of
New Zealand), similar to the common nephrite (Jade tenace) and our
Jasper (diosporo) only less noble.

As for our Carnelian Sard, then our acts for oriental jasper plasma. Sharp boundary lines are not to
drag this bey unkrystallinischen masses.

The stone was completely unknown in modern times, was found in Rome, Herculaneum and so cut and
crude pieces that prime by archaeologists d'Emeraude, Jade is said to be (a Turkish word, dschede
is pronounced), also called plasma dismeraldo were. Werner took this ancient Stones in his first
mineral system, as the species on plasma. Marco Polo and some older Travelers mention most beautiful
green stones from the Bucharey, the most important news also provided Timkowsky (travel by Sina II), lead,
that they not far from Jarkin (formerly Capital of East Turkestan), and partly in the river
Khoton, partly on the steep mountain Mirtschai, be partly found in major crowds, and most part out
to Beijing.

Excellent Combinations of these traditional stone: recherches sur la Remusat in the de pierre
You et le Jaspe the anciens (.

Histoire de la ville de Kotan 1820), and Hager in Pavia in the pantheon
chinois 1806, (also in the Giornale di fisica II 1810).

In Sanscrit I find no name for this stone in Wilson's dictionary, and it may could include the
Garud here, which is translated as emerald (Emerald).

giök in India,
probably in the Hindu; - giuk in Japan and Tana; tran in Tonquin;
- kin in Siam; mra at Ava.

yu, yü (di precious) in Chinese, also
Yu-sce (precious stone) and TUSC, ick in Canton bey the jewelers.

jas,
kas in the Tartar and the openings for the bright stones hot ak-clad,
dark for the kut-clad. It is no where contended
at random, in speaking against these, that their origin is objectionable. It is no where insisted
upon, that there is evil in them considered abstractedly by themselves, or that they may not
be used innocently, or that they may not be made the occasion of innocent mirth. The evil is
candidly stated to arise from their abuse. The nature of this evil is unfolded. Thus the malevolent
passions, such as anger, envy, hatred, revenge, and even avarice, are stirred up, where they
should be particularly prevented, in the youthful breast. A spirit of gaming, which may be
destructive of fortune, health, and morals, is engendered. A waste of time[56] is occasioned,
inasmuch as other pursuits might be followed, which would be equally amusing, but conducive
to the improvement of the mind. The nature of the abuse is unfolded likewise. It consists of
making games of chance productive of loss and gain. Thus they hold up speedy pecuniary acquisitions,
and speedy repairs of misfortune. Thus they excite hope and fear, and give birth to pain and
disappointment. The prevention also of the abuse, and that alone which can be effectual, is
pointed out. This consists of a separation of emolument from chance, or of the adoption of
the maxim, that no youth ought to be permitted to lay a wager, or to reap advantage from any
doubtful event by a previous agreement on a moneyed stake. Now if the reader be not disposed
to go the length which the Quakers do, by the abolition of such amusements, he will at least
have had the advantage of seeing that there may be evil in them, and where it lies, and the
extent (if he will only look at the historical instances cited) to which it may proceed, and
its infallible prevention or its cure.

[Footnote 56: This argument is usually applied to grown up people, but may be applicable to
youth, when we consider the ingenious inventions of modern times, such as maps of dissected
geography, historical and other games, which, while they afford pleasure, promote improvement.]

The next subject which offers itself to our view, is music, and this comes before us in two
forms, either as it is instrumental or vocal.

With respect to instrumental, it is no where insisted upon that its origin is evil, or that
it is not productive of a natural delight, or that it does not soothe and tranquilize the passions,
or that it may not be innocently used, or that it may not be made, under limitations, a cheerful
companion in solitude. But it is urged against it, that it does not tend, like many other studies,
to the improvement of the mind; that it affords no solid ground of comfort either in solitude
or affliction; that it is a sensual gratification; and that sensual gratifications, if indulged
in leisure hours, take up the time which should be devoted to those of a higher nature, that
is, intellectual and moral pursuits. It is urged against it again, that, if abused, it is chargeable
with a criminal waste of time, and a criminal impairing of health; that this abuse, in consequence
of proficiency being insisted upon (without which it ceases to be delightful) is at the present
day almost inseparable from its use; and that where the abuse of a thing, either in consequence
of fashion, or its own seductive nature, or any other cause, is either necessarily or very
generally connected with the use of it, watchfulness to avoid it is as much a duty in Christian
morals, as it is a duty against the common dangers of life.

On vocal again we observe a proper distinction attempted. We find, that the singing is no more
criminal than the reading of a song, being but another mode of expressing it, and that, the
morality of it therefore will depend upon the words and sentiments it contains. If these are
indelicate, or unchaste, or hold out false and corruptive ideas, as has been shewn to be the
case with a variety of songs, then singing may from an innocent become a vicious amusement.
But it has been observed, that youth seldom make any discrimination or selection with respect
to songs, but that they pick up all that come in their way, whatever may be the impropriety
of the words or sentiments, which they may contain.

Now then, whether we speak of instrumental or vocal music, if the reader should not be willing
totally to discard this science as the Quakers do, he will at least have learnt some good from
the observation which the work will have held out to him on this subject. He will see that
evil may unquestionably be produced by the cultivation of it. He will see the absolute necessity
of guarding his children against the learning of it to professional precision, as it is now
unfortunately taught, to the detriment of their health, and of the acquisition of more important
knowledge. He will see also the necessity of great vigilance with respect to the purity of
the words and sentiments which may be connected with it.

The important subject, which is brought next before us, is that of the theatre. Here we are
taught, that, though dramatic pieces had no censurable origin, the best of the ancient moralists
condemned them. We are taught, that, even in the most favourable light in which we can view
them, they have been thought objectionable, that is, that where they have pretended to teach
morality, they have inculcated rather the refined virtue of heathenism, than the strict though
mild morality of the Gospel; and where they have attempted to extirpate vice, they have done
it rather by making it appear ridiculous, than by teaching men to avoid it as evil, or for
the love of virtue. We are taught, that, as it is our duty to love our neighbour, and to be
solicitous for his spiritual welfare, we ought not, under a system which requires simplicity
and truth, to encourage him to be what he is not, or to personate a character which is not
his own. We are taught that it is the general tendency of the diversions of the stage, by holding
out false morals and prospects, to weaken the sinews of morality; by disqualifying for domestic
enjoyments, to wean from a love of home; by accustoming to light thoughts and violent excitement
of the passions, to unfit for the pleasures of religion. We are taught that diversions of this
nature particularly fascinate, and that, if they fascinate, they suggest repetitions. And finally
we are taught, that the early Christians on their conversion, though before this time they
had followed them as among the desirable pleasures of their lives, relinquished them on the
principles now explained.

The next subject, which comes to us in order, is dancing. This is handed down to us, under
two appearances, either as it is simple, or as it is connected with preparations and accompaniments.

In viewing it in its simple state, it is no where contended, if it be encouraged on the principle
of promoting such an harmonious carriage of the body, or use of the limbs, as maybe more promotive
of health, that it is objectionable, though it is supposed that it is not necessary for such
purposes, and that, without music and its other usual accompaniments, it would not be pleasant.
Neither is it contended that a simple dance upon the green, if it were to arise suddenly and
without its usual preparations, may not be innocent, or that if may not be classed with an
innocent game at play, or with innocent exercise in the fields, though it is considered, that
it would hardly be worthy of those of riper years, because they who are acknowledged to have
come to the stature of men, are expected to abandon amusements for pursuits of usefulness,
and particularly where they make any profession of the Christian name.

In viewing it with its preparations, and with its subsequent accompaniments, as usually displayed
in the ball-room, we see it in a less favourable light. We see it productive, where it is habitually
resorted to, of a frivolous levity, of vanity and pride, and of a littleness of mind and character.
We see it also frequently becoming the occasion of the excitement of the malevolent passions,
such as anger, envy, hatred, jealousy, malice, and revenge. We find it also frequently leading
to[57] indisposition. We find lastly, that, in consequence of the vexation of mind, which may
arise from a variety of causes, but more particularly from disappointment and the ascendency
of some of the passions that have been mentioned, more pleasure is generally perceived in the
anticipation of these amusements, than in the actual taste or use of them.

[Footnote 57: Not only colds, head-aches, and a general lassitude, ore the result Of dancing
in ball-rooms, but occasionally serious indisposition. I have known the death of two young
persons attributed to it by the physicians who attended them in their illness.]

The subject of novels is presented next to our view. And here it has appeared, that no objection
can be truly adduced against these on account of the fictitious nature of their contents. Novels
also are not all of them promiscuously condemned. It is contended, however, from a variety
of causes which were shewn, that they are very generally censurable. We are taught again, that
the direct tendency of those which are censurable is to produce conceit and affectation, a
romantic spirit, and a perverted morality among youth. We are taught again, that, on account
of the peculiar construction of these, inasmuch as they have plot and character like dramatic
compositions, they fascinate, and this to such a degree, that youth wait for no selection,
but devour promiscuously all that come in their way. Hence the conclusion is, that the effects,
alleged against novels, cannot but be generally produced. We are presented also with this fact,
that, on account of the high seasoning and gross stimulants they contain, all other writings,
however useful, become insipid. Hence the novel reader, by becoming indisposed to the perusal
of more valuable books, excludes himself from the opportunity of moral improvement, and, if
immoral sentiments are contracted, from the chance of any artificial corrective or cure.

The diversions of the field offer themselves next to our notice. We are taught, on the discussion
which has arisen on this subject, that we are not permitted to take away the lives of animals
wantonly but only as they may be useful for food, or as they may be dangerous to ourselves
and to the other animals which may belong to us, and that a condition is annexed to the original
grant or charter, by which permission was given to kill, which is never to be dispensed with,
or, in other words, that we are to take away their lives as speedily as we can. Hence rights
have sprung up on the part of animals, and duties on the part of men, any breach of which is
the violation of a moral law. Hence the diversions of the field become often objectionable,
because life is not thus taken away as speedily as it might otherwise have been, and because
food or noxiousness is not often the object of the destruction of animals, but mere pleasure
or sport. We are taught also to consider animals, not as mere machines, but as the creatures
of God. We are taught also, that as they were designed to have their proper share of happiness
during the time of their existence, any wanton interruption of this is an innovation of their
rights as living beings. And we are taught finally, that the organic nature of men and animals
being the same, as far as a feeling of pain is concerned, the sympathy which belongs to our
nature, and the divine law of doing as we would be done by, which will hold as far as we can
enter into the perceptions either of man or brutes, impose upon us the duty of anticipating
their feelings, and of treating them in a corresponding or tender manner.

If we take a view of other customs, into which the Quakers have thought it right to introduce
regulations with a view of keeping their members pure and innocent, we learn other lessons
of usefulness. Thus, for example, the reader, if he does not choose to adopt their dress, may
obtain desirable knowledge upon this subject. He will see that the two great objects of dress
are decency and comfort. He will see, though Christianity prescribes neither colour nor shape
for the clothing, that it is not indifferent about it. It enjoins simplicity and plainness,
because, where men pay an undue attention to the exterior, they are in danger of injuring the
dignity of their minds. It discards ornaments from the use of apparel, because these, by puffing
up the creature, may be productive of vanity and pride.

On the subject of language, though the reader may be unwilling to adopt all the singularities
of the Quakers, he may collect a lesson that may be useful to him in life. He may discover
the necessity of abstaining from all expressions of flattery, because the use of these may
be morally injurious to himself by abridging the independence of his mind, and by promoting
superstition; while it may be injurious to others, by occasioning them to think more highly
of themselves than they ought, and more degradingly of their fellow-creatures. He may discover
also the necessity of adhering to the truth in all expressions, whether in his conversation
or in his letters; that there is always a consistency in truth, and an inconsistency in falsehood;
that as expressions accord with the essences, qualities, properties and characters of things,
they are more or less proper; and that an attempt to adhere to the truth is productive of moral
good, while a departure from it may lead into error, independently of its injury as a moral evil.

With respect to the address, or the complimentary gestures or ceremonies of the world, if he
be not inclined to reject them totally as the Quakers do, he may find that there may be unquestionably
evil in them, if they are to be adjudged by the purity of the Christian system. He may perceive,
that there may be as much flattery and as great a violation of truth through the medium of
the body, as through the medium of the tongue, and that the same mental degradation, or toss
of dignified independence of mind, may insensibly follow.

On the subject of conversation and manners, he may learn the propriety of caution as to the
use of idle words; of abstaining from scandal and detraction; of withholding his assent to
customs when started, however fashionable, if immoral; of making himself useful by the dignity
of the topic he introduces, and by the decorum with which he handles it; of never allowing
his sprightliness to border upon folly, or his wit upon lewdness, but to clothe all his remarks
in an innocent and a simple manner.

From the subject of customs connected with meals, such as that, for example, of saying grace,
he may team that this is a devotional act; that it is not to be said as a mere ceremony, by
thanking the Supreme Being in so many words while the thoughts are roving on other subjects,
but that it should be said with seriousness and feeling, and that it should never come as an
oblation from the tongue, except it come also an oblation from the heart. And on that which
relates to the drinking of toasts, he may see the moral necessity of an immediate extirpation
of it. He may see that this custom has not one useful or laudable end in view; that it is a
direct imitation of Pagans in the worst way in which we can follow them--their enjoyment of
sensual pleasures; that it leads directly and almost inevitably to drunkenness, and of course
to the degradation of the rational and moral character.

A second advantage, which they who compose the world may derive on this occasion, will be seen
from a recapitulation of some of the principles which the work contains. The advantage in question
will chiefly consist in this, that, whatever these principles may be, they may be said to be
such as have been adopted by a moral people, and this after serious deliberation, and solely
on a religious ground. It is of great importance from whence principles come recommended to
our notice. If they come from the inconsiderate and worthless, they lose their value. If from
the sober and religious, we receive them under the impression, that they may be promotive of
our good. I shall give therefore a summary of these, as they may be collected from the work.

God has imparted to men a portion of his own Spirit, though he has given it to them indifferent
degrees. Without this Spirit it would be impossible for them to discern spiritual things. Without
this it would be impossible for them to know spiritually, even that the Scriptures were of
divine authority, or spiritually to understand them. This Spirit performs its office of a teacher
by internal monitions, and, if encouraged, even by the external objects of creation. It is
also a primary and infallible guide. It is given to all without exception. It is given to all
sufficiently. They who resist it, quench it, and this to their own condemnation. They who encourage
it receive it more abundantly, and are in the way of salvation and redemption. This Spirit
therefore becomes a Redeemer also. Redemption may he considered in two points of view, as it
is either by outward or inward means, or as it relates to past sins or to sins to come. Jesus
Christ effected redemption of the first kind, or that from past sins, while he was personally
upon earth, by the sacrifice of himself. But it is this Spirit, or Christ within, as the Quakers
call it, which effects the latter, or which preserves from future transgressions. It is this
Spirit which leads, by means of its inward workings, to a new birth, and finally to the highest
perfection of which our nature is capable. In this office of an inward Redeemer, it visits
all, so that all may be saved, if they will attend to its saving operations, God being not
willing that any should perish, but that all should inherit eternal life.

This Spirit also qualifies men for the ministry. It qualifies women also for this office as
well as men. It dictates the true season for silence, and the true season for utterance, both
in public and private worship.

Jesus Christ was man because he took flesh, and inhabited the body which had been prepared
for him; but he was Divinity, because he was the Word.

A resurrection will be effected, but not of the body as it is. Rewards and punishments will
follow, but guilt will not be imputed to men till they have actually committed sin.

Baptism and the Lord's Supper are essentials of the Christian religion. They are not, however,
essentials as outward ordinances, but only as they are administered by the Holy Spirit.

Civil government is for the protection of virtue and for the removal of vice. Obedience should
be paid to all its laws, where the conscience is not violated in doing it. To defraud it in
any manner of its revenues, or to take up arms on any consideration against it, is unlawful.
But if men cannot conscientiously submit to any one or more of its ordinances, they are not
to temporize, but to obey Jesus Christ rather than their own governors in this particular case. 

And what was it that had been brought them back to Felix, and why he's so long time to come,
and where is he been?

They did not know.

In the church he had been with, - almost childlike reverence, as once he had on the Words of the
priest obeys, meek, he was turned next to the mother's home, and then at dinner when the father
took the floor, it broke his attention from the Felix and heard - and in the evening he sat
with the Grandmother in the shadow of Hollunderbusches, and talked with it, which it very strange and
incomprehensible stories vorlallte [83] --- and if you as the day looked over the curiosity
of the mother in his eye, half happy, half full of pain, when they investigated the former soft
features - their former cheerful, loyal-hearted, Haide beautiful boy she was looking for ---- and
behold, they found him also in low traces was the picture the good-hearted boy struck in the face
of the man, but infinitely more beautiful - so beautiful that they often thought for a moment,
she could not be his mother - when he the quiet Mirror of his eyes directed against them, so
sensible and so kind - or if it's cheeks looked almost as young as before, only much darker brown, however,
that the teeth as Pearls gleamed, the same teeth, which shone even in the heath boys are so
innocent and healthy - and around them still the same sweet lips, but which were now ripe
and male, and so beautiful, you should then immediately come a sweet
word of it, be it love, be it of instruction ----

"He's been good,"
then shouted to her mother's heart, "he has remained well when too
much is noble, as we do.

"

And, in fact, it was such luster chaste purity of the man that he himself of was the raw heart
of Haideweibes recognized and honored.

What lived in for him, he carried through the untouched world that
he gave his body as a temple brought back, as he once taken away from
the solitude ?----

They did not know, just almost always cheerful
and simple-minded are explained to his heart, [84] so the hours of
quiet hard day passed by and by.

Late in the evening he told them, as all sat around the white book table, and Marthe because her
child was, and Benedict and other neighbors - he told them of the promised Land, as he had been
there, as he saw Jerusalem and Bethlehem, as the Tabor sat, washed in the Jordan ;---- the Sinai,
he saw the awful jagged Mountain, and he was transformed in the desert .-- He told how his hewn trunks
with the postman would come, then he would show them the earth, which he made the holy countries
welcome - even dried flowers he had, and herbs, from that country and kicks of the Lord, and what
is always there create the earth and bring - and much more holy, more hotter and more lonely
ever had [85] Haider, deserts, as the local, the more of a garden call to ---- and how he
spoke, everyone looked at him, and listened - and they forgot that sleep over it, the evening red
fading away long ago that the stars pulled up, and over the roofs glittered in a dense crowd.
 Abstinence from hazardous enterprises by the failure of which innocent persons
might be injured, and honesty in dealing, and punctuality to words and engagements, are essentials
in the prosecution of trade.

Having made observations on the customs, and brought to the view of the reader some of the
prominent principles of the Quakers, a third advantage will arise from knowing the kind of
character, which these in conjunction will produce.

On this subject we might be permitted our conjectures. We might insist upon the nature and
immediate tendencies of these customs and principles, and we might draw our conclusions from
thence, or we might state how they were likely to operate, so as probably not to be far from
the truth. But we are spared both the trouble of such a task, and are relieved from the fear
of having the accuracy of our conclusions doubted. The Quaker character has been made up from
the acknowledgments of others. It has been shewn that they are a moral people; that they are
sober, and inoffensive, and quiet; that they are benevolent to man in his religious and temporal
capacity; that they are kind or tender-hearted to animals; that they do not make sacrifices
of their consciences to others; that in political affairs they reason upon principle; that
they are punctual to their words and engagements; and that they have independence of mind,
and courage. Their character, as it is defective, has been explained also. It has been probed,
and tried by a proper touchstone. Appearances have been separated from realities. The result
has been, that a deficiency in literature and science, and that superstition, and that an undue
eagerness after money, has been fixed upon a portion of them. The
father listened to already, to speak of him, Martha had a small child and did not think of
him, the Haidedoerfler did not know it, and loved him not, as one who once since went away, and
the Grandmother asked only occasionally after Jacobus - but was the mother's heart his indelible
and painful in itself, since the day he moved from there, and at its Breasts had been crying -
and the mother's heart carried him into the house in the evening and morning to the fields - and the
mother's heart was also alone, which recognized him as one at Pentecost by the Evening red was
a complete stranger walked sunburnt man, a staff in hand, the knapsack on the back, and stood in front
of the Heath home.

"Felix" - "Mother!"

The next advantage will be in seeing the manner of the operation of these customs and principles,
or how they act. To go over the whole character of the Quakers with this view would be both
tedious and unnecessary. I shall therefore only select one or two parts of it for my purpose.
And first, how do these customs and principles produce benevolence? I reply thus: The Quakers,
in consequence of their prohibitions against all public amusements, have never seen man in
the capacity of a hired buffoon or mimic, or as a purchasable plaything. Hence they have never
viewed him in a low and degrading light. In consequence of their tenet on war, they have never
viewed him as an enemy. In consequence of their disciplinary principles, they have viewed him
as an equal. Hence it appears, that they have no prejudices against him from causes which often
weigh with others, either on account of rank, or station, or many of the customs of the world.
Now I conceive, that the dereliction of prejudice against man is as necessary, as a first measure,
to the production of benevolence towards him, as the dereliction of vice towards the production
of virtue. We see then their minds free from bias on this subject. But what is there on the
other side to operate actively towards the promotion of this trait? They view man, in the first
place, as the temple in which the Divinity may reside. This procures him respect. Secondly,
as a being for whose spiritual welfare they ought to be solicitous. This produces a concern
for him. And thirdly, as a brother. This produces relationship. We see then the ground cleared.
We see all noxious weeds extirpated. We see good seed sown in their places; that is, we see
prejudices removed from the heart, and we see the ideas of respect, concern, and relationship
implanted in it. Now it is impossible that these ideas, under these circumstances, should not
as naturally and immediately produce a general benevolence to man, as common seeds, when all
obstructive weeds are removed, should produce their corresponding saplings or flowers.

How again are these customs and principles of the Quakers promotive of independence of mind?
I answer thus: There is a natural independence of mind in man, but it is often broken and weakened.
Some men injure it by the solicitation and acceptance of honours, and pensions, and places;
others by flattery and falsehood; others by customs of obeisance; others by their obedience
to fashion. But the independence of mind of the Quakers is not stunted in its growth by the
chiding blasts of such circumstances and habits. It is invigorated, on the other hand, by their
own laws. No servility is allowed either in word or gesture. Neither that which is written,
nor that which is uttered, is to please the vanity of the persons addressed, or to imply services
never intended to be performed. The knee is not to be bent to any one. It is strengthened again
and made to shoot by their own maxims. 

The Orientals are conceived for him under the names have crystal (see this) .--

spath culcaire in French, - lime-saving in English, - meszkovalz in
Magyar; - wapanec, Uhlan wapnicity in the Czech tables, - weglan wapna
blaskowy in Polish. And can reasoning upon principle have any
other effect than that of being promotive of its growth?

These then are the ways in which these customs and principles operate. Now the advantage to
be derived from seeing this manner of their operation, consists in this: First, that we know
to a certainty, that they act towards the production of virtue. Knowing again what these customs
and principles are, we know those which we are bound to cherish. The boy looked at the Heath edge, which
cut the clear black sky - then he went to the Grandmother and said: "Dear Mother, I am now,
farewell and pray for me!"

"Child, you have to take care of the sheep, the dew is too early
and too cool!"
For if the effect of any of them be only small, a number of effects of little causes or springs,
when added together, may be as considerable as a large one. Of these again we observe, that
some are to be round where many would hardly have expected them. This consideration should
make us careful to look into all our customs and principles, that we may not overlook any one
which we may retain for our moral good. And as we learn the lesson of becoming vigilant to
discover every good spring, and not to neglect the least of these, however subtle its operation,
so we learn the necessity of vigilance to detect every spring or cause, and this even the least,
whether in our customs or our principles, if it should in its tendency be promotive of vice.

And in the same manner we may argue with respect to other productions of these customs and
principles of the Quakers. As we have seen the latter lead to character, so we have seen them
lead to happiness. The manner of their operation to this end has been also equally discernible.
As we value them because they produce the one, so we should value them because they produce
the other. We have seen also which of them to value. And we should be studious to cherish the
very least of these, as we should be careful to discard the least of those which are productive
of real and merited unhappiness to the mind. 

The heath-dwellers.

And the next day as the first rays of sun shone, and the heath villagers
already prepared against the hard plaster had to go to the remote
church: it was one of the residents more and one of the Kirchgaenger
more. I have a wish, that it may be useful to those who may be called the world, by giving
them an insight into many excellent institutions, of which they were before ignorant, but which
may be worthy of their support and their patronage. I have a wish also, that it may be useful
to the Quakers themselves, first, by letting them see how their own character may be yet improved;
and secondly, by preserving them, in some measure, both from unbecoming remarks, and from harsh
usage, on the part of their fellow-citizens of a different denomination from themselves. For
surely when it is known, as I hope it is by this time, that they have moral and religious grounds
for their particularities, we shall no longer hear their scruples branded with the name of
follies and obstinacies, or see magistrates treating them with a needless severity, but giving[58]
them, on the other hand, all the indulgences they can, consistently with the execution of the
laws. In proportion as this utility is produced, my design will be answered in the production
of the work, and I shall receive pleasure in having written it. Titan #.

The Titan is a rare, hard to being represented, only recently reduced
metal, which, like its ores, which occur only sparingly, not a technical
applies.

Titanic acid and zirconia are chemically very close.

Klaproth first fixated the titanium oxide.

A. titanium iron.

Ferric oxide, with more or less iron oxide, magnetic
iron ore is very similar, mostly in grains occurring, also known under
the name Iserin, Nigrin, Menakan.

Titane oxyde Ferrif in French,
- ferrougineous oxides of titanium in English.

[Footnote 58: Some magistrates, much to their honour, treat them with tenderness; and no people
are more forward than the Quakers in acknowledging any attention that may be shewn them, but
particularly where their religious scruples may be concerned.]

END OF THE THIRD VOLUME

