When the war ended he became colonel of the Twenty-fourth Infantry in the regular army, and
later received a cavalry command, gaining much distinction by his services in the Indian campaigns
in the West and on the Mexican border. He was made brigadier-general in 1882, shortly after
placed on the retired list, and died at Governor's Island in 1889.

       *       *       *       *       *

The unsuccessful assault on Lee's works at Cold Harbor marked the end of the first part of
Grant's campaign. The next move was to swing the army southward to the line of the James River
and prepare to move upon Richmond and its defences from that side. This change of base was
one of General Grant's finest achievements, admirably planned, and so skilfully executed that
for three days Lee remained in total ignorance of what his adversary was doing. The Second
Connecticut withdrew from its position on June 12th, late at night, reached the river on the
16th, and, moving up it in transports, was disembarked and sent toward Petersburg, to a point
on the left wing of the army. It reached position on the night of the 19th and entrenched.
The usual occurrences of such marches as attended this change of scene were varied for the
men, as the regimental history suggestively relates, by a notable circumstance--a bath in the
river. "It was the only luxury we had had for weeks. It was a goodly sight to see half a dozen
regiments disporting themselves in the tepid waters of the James. But no reader can possibly
understand what enjoyment it afforded, unless he has slept on the ground for fourteen days
without undressing, and been compelled to walk, cook, and live on all fours, lest a perpendicular
assertion of his manhood should instantly convert it into clay."

The operations against Petersburg had been going on for some time when the regiment arrived,
and for two days it lay in the rifle pits it had dug under continual fire, with frequent resulting
casualties. It was "the most intolerable position the regiment was ever required to hold. We
had seen a deadlier spot at Cold Harbor, and others awaited us in the future; but they were
agonies that did not last. Here, however, we had to stay, hour after hour, from before dawn
until after dark, and that, too, where we could not move a rod without extreme danger. The
enemy's line was parallel with ours, just across the wheat field; then they had numerous sharpshooters,
who were familiar with every acre of the ground, perched in tall trees on both our flanks;
then they had artillery posted everywhere. No man could cast his eyes over the parapet, or
expose himself ten feet in the rear of the trench without drawing fire. And yet they did thus
expose themselves; for where there are even chances of being missed or hit, soldiers will take
the chances rather than lie still and suffer from thirst, supineness, and want of all things.
There was no getting to the rear until zig-zag passages were dug, and then the wounded were
borne off. Our occupation continued during the night and the next day, the regiment being divided
into two reliefs, the one off duty lying a little to the rear, in a cornfield near Harrison's
house. But it was a question whether 'off' or 'on' duty was the more dangerous."

On the 21st, relieved from this post, the regiment was moved to a new position further southwest
and about the same distance from the city of Petersburg, which lay in plain view and whose
city clocks could be heard distinctly. The Sixth Corps was engaged in an operation having the
purpose of breaking Lee's communications with the South by the line of the Weldon Railroad,
and in the course of this the Second Connecticut took part in a "sharp skirmish" with Hill's
Division, on June 22nd, an affair which to other experiences would be notable as a battle of
some proportions. The desired result was not gained; the attempt on Petersburg, which if successful
might have hastened the end of the Confederacy by six months, and which came so near success,
was changed to besieging operations, and for some time Grant's army lay comparatively quiet.
In its four days in action here, the regiment suffered as follows: Killed or died of wounds,
fifteen; wounded but not mortally, fifteen; missing, three; prisoners who died, five.

On July 9th came the orders which took the Second Connecticut for many months away from its
place before Petersburg, where, after the activities described, it had settled down to a less
exciting course of constructing batteries, forts, and breastworks, and laying out camps, with
days of comparative peace and comfort notwithstanding several alarms showing the possibility
of more arduous service.

The Confederate Army which had been sent under General Early into the Shenandoah Valley to
create a diversion in that quarter, had unexpectedly appeared on the Potomac in a sudden dash
upon Washington, then defended chiefly by raw levies. Part of the Sixth Corps had been detached
from Grant's army and sent to protect the capital a few days before; now the rest of the corps,
including the Second Connecticut, was hurried north and reached Washington just in time to
defeat Early's purpose. He had planned to storm the city on the 12th, and with good prospects
of success; it was on that very day at an early hour, that the reinforcing troops arrived.
They were hurried through the city to the threatened point, and the enemy, seeing the well-known
corps badge confronting them at Fort Stevens, and recognizing that the opportunity was gone,
promptly retreated, after an engagement in which the Second Connecticut took no active part.
This occasion was notable by reason of the fact that for the only time during the war President
Lincoln was under fire, as he watched the progress of affairs from the parapet of Fort Stevens.

The pursuit which began at once entailed some hard marching, but the enemy could not be brought
to a stand. It continued for several days until the Valley of the Shenandoah was reached, when
Early, as was supposed, having hurried back to join Lee at Petersburg, the Sixth Corps was
marched again swiftly to the capital. Here it developed that the authorities had decided to
keep part of the forces sent for their protection, to man the defences, since Early's attempt
had come so dangerously near succeeding, and the Second Connecticut was chosen to remain. On
July 25th it was moved into the same forts it had occupied when called to the front two months
before, and here it might have remained through the rest of its term of service, if Early had,
as was presumed, gone back to join Lee at Petersburg. But it was learned now that he had faced
about when the chase ceased and was again threatening a northward move. The Sixth Corps was
therefore ordered against his force once more, the Second Connecticut going from the anticipated
comforts of its prospective garrison duty with anything but satisfaction. LONDON: 1846.

EDITOR'S PREFACE.

Among the numerous works on Culinary Science already in circulation,
there have been none which afford the slightest insight to the Cookery
of the Hebrew kitchen.

Replete as many of these are with information on various important points, they are completely
valueless to the Jewish housekeeper, not only on account of prohibited
articles and combinations being assumed to be necessary ingredients
of nearly every dish, but from the entire absence of all the receipts
peculiar to the Jewish people.

This deficiency, which has been so frequently the cause of inconvenience
and complaint, we have endeavoured in the present little volume to
supply.

And in taking upon ourselves the responsibility of introducing it to the notice of our readers,
we have been actuated by the hope that it will prove of some practical utility to those for whose
benefit it is more particularly designed.

It has been our earnest desire to simplify as much as possible the directions given regarding
the rudiments of the art, and to render the receipts which follow,
clear, easy, and concise. Our collection will be found to contain
all the best receipts, hitherto bequeathed only by memory or manuscript,
from one generation to another of the Jewish nation, as well as those
which come under the denomination of plain English dishes; and also
such French ones as are now in general use at all refined modern tables.


It was about midday that in a counter charge against the Union center, the enemy found a weak
point at the junction of the Sixth Corps with the Nineteenth, of which they quickly took advantage,
breaking the line and driving back the troops on the flanks of both corps in great disorder.
Their successful advance and the flight of the opposing forces gave such assurances of victory
that more than one Confederate writer says that at this point the battle which had raged since
daylight was won. Jefferson Davis himself wrote, years after, of the charge: "This affair occurred
about 11 A.M., and a splendid victory had been gained,"--a judgment which lacked finality.
In fact, had the separation of the wings of Sheridan's army been accomplished, as it was threatened,
the result would have been utter disaster; just now, however, Upton's brigade, of which the
Second Connecticut formed a large part, was brought up to the point of danger. The charge was
checked, the enemy in turn driven back, and the Union line re-established.

In the regimental history it is related that the brigade was pushed forward gradually, "halted
on a spot where the ground was depressed enough to afford a little protection, and only a little,--for
several men were hit while lying there, as well as others, while getting there. In three minutes
the regiment again advanced, passed over a knoll, lost several more men, and halted in another
hollow spot, similar to the first. The enemy's advance had now been pushed well back, and here
a stay was made of perhaps two hours. Colonel Mackenzie rode slowly back and forth along the
rise of ground in front of this position in a very reckless manner, in plain sight and easy
range of the enemy, who kept up a fire from a piece of woods in front, which elicited from
him the remark, 'I guess those fellows will get tired of firing at me by and by.' But the ground
where the regiment lay was very slightly depressed, and although the shots missed Mackenzie
they killed and wounded a large number of both officers and men behind him.

"About three o'clock, an advance of the whole line having been ordered by Sheridan, the regiment
charged across the field, Mackenzie riding some ten rods ahead, holding his hat aloft on the
point of his saber. The distance to the woods was at least a quarter of a mile, and was traversed
under a fire that carried off its victims at nearly every step. The enemy abandoned the woods,
however, as the regiment approached. After a short halt it again advanced to a rail fence which
ran along the side of an extensive field. Here, for the first time during the whole of this
bloody day, did the regiment have orders to fire, and for ten minutes they had the privilege
of pouring an effective fire into the rebels, who were thick in front. Then a flank movement
was made along the fence to the right, followed by a direct advance of forty rods into the
field. Here was the deadliest spot of the day. The enemy's artillery, on a rise of ground in
front, plowed the field with canister and shells, and tore the ranks in a frightful manner.
Major Rice was struck by a shell, his left arm torn off, and his body cut almost asunder. Major
Skinner was struck on the top of the head by a shell, knocked nearly a rod with his face to
the earth, and was carried to the rear insensible. General Upton had a good quarter pound of
flesh taken out of his thigh by a shell. Colonel Mackenzie's horse was cut in two by a solid
shot which just grazed the rider's leg and let him down to the ground very abruptly. Several
other officers were also struck; and from these instances as well as from the appended list
of casualties some idea may be gained of the havoc among the enlisted men at this point. Although
the regiment had been under fire and losing continually from the middle of the afternoon, until
it was now almost sunset, yet the losses during ten minutes in this last field were probably
equal to those of all the rest of the day. It was doubtless the spot referred to by the rebel
historian, Pollard, when he says, 'Early's artillery was fought to the muzzle of the guns.'
Mackenzie gave the order to move by the left flank and a start was made, but there was no enduring
such a fire, and the men ran back and lay down. Another attempt was soon made, and after passing
a large oak tree a sheltered position was secured. The next move was directly into the enemy's
breastwork. They had just been driven from it by a cavalry charge from the right, and were
in full retreat through the streets of Winchester, and some of their abandoned artillery which
had done us so much damage stood yet in position, hissing hot with action, with their miserable
rac-a-bone horses attached. The brigade, numbering less than half the muskets it had in the
morning, was now got into shape, and after marching to a field in the eastern edge of the city,
bivouacked for the night, while the pursuit rolled miles away up the valley pike." Night alone,
wrote General Wesley Merritt, saved Early's army from capture.

To the losses of the day the Second Connecticut contributed forty-two killed and one hundred
and eight wounded, the proportion of officers being very large.

Unlike their previous severe engagement at Cold Harbor, the regiment had the thrilling consciousness
of complete victory to hearten them after this battle, and, later, when the full history of
the day was learned, the realization that they had played a part of no little importance in
attaining it.

The moment when they were brought into action was a critical one. General Sheridan, in his
report summing up the operations of the campaign, said: "At Winchester for a moment the contest
was uncertain, but the gallant attack of General Upton's brigade of the Sixth Corps restored
the line of battle," and of this brigade the Second Connecticut formed fully half. Upton's
report gave high praise to Colonel Mackenzie, and said: "His regiment on the right initiated
nearly every movement of the division, and behaved with great steadiness and gallantry."

The victory itself, with the sequel which followed so promptly three days later, had an importance
far beyond its purely military value, through its marked effects upon public sentiment throughout
the country; it brought to one side jubilant satisfaction, and gave a corresponding depression
to the other, and it elevated Sheridan at once to that high place in popular affection which
he always afterwards held. That it was "the turning-point of the fortunes of the war in Virginia,"
was the verdict of a Confederate officer of high rank, and Nicolay and Hay in the "Life of
Lincoln" describe it as "one of the most important of the war."

As for the Litchfield County regiment, among its many proud memories, none surely holds a higher
place than that of the worthy and effective part it took in this day's work, forming, as it
did, so large a part of the brigade which, in the words of General Upton's biographer, turned
possible defeat into certain victory.

       *       *       *       *       *

General Sheridan's method of operation could hardly be held as dilatory. It would doubtless
have commended itself more highly to his men if it had been somewhat more so, when at daylight
on the morning after the splendid success of September 19th they were ordered in pursuit of
Early's army.

The Confederate forces had taken position on Fisher's Hill, considered the Gibraltar of the
Valley, and according to Sheridan, almost impregnable to a direct assault. Two days were occupied
in bringing up troops and making dispositions for the attack. The Second Connecticut reached
its assigned position on the 21st near midnight, and found itself "on the very top of a hill
fully as high as Fisher's Hill, and separated from it by Tumbling River. The enemy's stronghold
was on the top of the opposite hill directly across the stream."

On the 22nd more or less skirmishing took place all day. A force had been sent round the enemy's
left flank; the attack it delivered late in the afternoon was a complete surprise to Early's
men, and an advance by the whole Union line quickly routed them.

To make this charge the regiment moved down the steep hill, waded the stream, and moved up
the rocky front of the rebel Gibraltar. How they got up there is a mystery,--for the ascent
of that rocky declivity would now seem an impossibility to an unburdened traveller, even though
there were no deadly enemy at the top. But up they went, clinging to rocks and bushes. The
main rebel breastwork, which they were so confident of holding, was about fifteen rods from
the top of the bluff, with brush piled in front of it. Just as the top was reached the Eighth
Corps struck the enemy on the right, and their flight was disordered and precipitate. The Second
Connecticut was the first regiment that reached and planted colors on the works from the direct
front.

They were marching in pursuit all that night and for three succeeding days, until the chase
was seen to be hopeless and the army faced northward again. Four killed and nineteen wounded
were added at Fisher's Hill to the growing record of the Second Connecticut's losses.

Such complete failure in their campaign had, it was now believed, eliminated the enemy in the
Shenandoah Valley. The Sixth Corps was accordingly ordered back to Grant's army before Petersburg
after a few days of rest, and was moving toward Washington on its way when there came a sudden
change of orders.

Early, reinforced and once more ready, was again in the works he had been driven from at Fisher's
Hill. The corps, recalled to join the forces of Sheridan, went into camp along the north bank
of Cedar Creek on October 14th, and here there soon took place one of the most thrilling and
dramatic conflicts of the war.

"For the next few days," the history of the regiment states, "there was much quiet and a good
deal of speculation among the troops as to what would be the next shift of the scenes. The
enemy was close in front, just as he had been for weeks preceding the battle of Winchester,
but this attitude which might once have been called defiance, now seemed to be mere impudence,--and
it was the general opinion that Early did not wish or intend to fight again, but that he was
to be kept there as a standing threat in order to prevent Sheridan's army from returning to
Grant. And yet there was something mysterious in his conduct. He was known to be receiving
reinforcements, and his signal flags on Three-top Mountain (just south of Fisher's Hill) were
continually in motion. From the top of Massanutton Mountain his vedettes could look down upon
the whole Union army, as one can look down upon New Haven from East Rock, and there is no doubt
that the exact location of every camp, and the position of every gun and every picket post
were thoroughly known to him. Nevertheless, it seemed the most improbable thing in the world
that he could be meditating either an open attack or a surprise. The position was strong, the
creek and its crossings in possession of our pickets both along the front and well out on either
flank." But Early himself, being in difficulties his enemy knew nothing of, says, "I was compelled
to move back for want of provisions and forage, or attack the enemy in his position with the
hope of driving him from it, and I determined to attack."

His plan was, like his adversary's at the last encounter, a surprise around the left flank
with a feint on the right, and it was carried out on the morning of October 19th with complete
success. General Sheridan had been called to Washington a few days before, as no active operations
seemed imminent, and the army lay feeling quite secure.

Good fortune attended the attacking forces, and the surprise was perfect. General Merritt writes:
"Crook's (Eighth Corps) camp and afterwards Emory's (Nineteenth Corps) were attacked in flank
and rear, and the men and officers driven from their beds, many of them not having time to
hurry into their clothes, except as they retreated, half awake and terror-stricken from the
overpowering numbers of the enemy. Their own artillery in conjunction with that of the enemy,
was turned on them, and long before it was light enough for their eyes, unaccustomed to the
dim light, to distinguish friend from foe, they were hurrying to our right and rear intent
only on their safety. Wright's (Sixth Corps) infantry, which was farther removed from the point
of attack, fared somewhat better, but did not offer more than a spasmodic resistance." Nevertheless,
they made Early "pay dearly for every foot gained and finally brought him to a stand," as Nicolay
and Hay record.

The history of the Second Connecticut tells the story of the day as follows: "Most of the regiment
were up next morning long before Reveille and many had begun to cook their coffee on account
of that ominous popping and cracking which had been going on for half an hour off to the right.
They did not exactly suppose it meant anything, but they had learned wisdom by many a sudden
march on an empty stomach and did not propose to be caught napping. The clatter on the right
increased. It began to be the wonder why no orders came. But suddenly every man seemed to lose
interest in the right, and turned his inquiring eyes and ears toward the left. Rapid volleys
and a vague tumult told that there was trouble there. 'Fall in!' said Mackenzie. The brigade
moved briskly off toward the east, crossing the track of other troops and batteries of artillery
which were hurriedly swinging into position, while ambulances, orderlies, staff officers, camp
followers, pack horses, cavalrymen, sutler's wagons, hospital wagons, and six-mule teams of
every description came trundling and galloping pell mell toward the right and rear and making
off toward Winchester. It was not a hundred rods from our own camp to the place where we went
into position on a road running north. General Wright, the temporary commander of the army,
bareheaded, and with blood trickling from his beard, sat on his horse near by, as if bewildered
or in a brown study. The ground was cleared in front of the road and sloped off some thirty
rods to a stream, on the opposite side of which it rose for about an equal distance to a piece
of woods in which the advance rebel line had already taken position. The newly risen sun, huge
and bloody, was on their side in more senses than one. Our line faced directly to the east
and we could see nothing but that enormous disk, rising out of the fog, while they could see
every man in our line and could take good aim. The battalion lay down, and part of the men
began to fire, but the shape of the ground afforded little protection and large numbers were
killed and wounded. Four fifths of our loss for the entire day occurred during the time we
lay here,--which could not have been over five minutes,--by the end of which time the Second
Connecticut found itself in an isolated position not unlike that at Cold Harbor. The fog had
now thinned away somewhat and a firm rebel line with colors full high advanced came rolling
over the knoll just in front of our left not more than three hundred yards distant. 'Rise up,--Retreat,'
said Mackenzie,--and the battalion began to move back.

"For a little distance the retreat was made in very good order, but it soon degenerated into
a rout. Men from a score of regiments were mixed up in flight, and the whole corps was scattered
over acres and acres with no more organization than a herd of buffaloes. Some of the wounded
were carried for a distance by their comrades, who were at length compelled to leave them to
their fate in order to escape being shot. About a mile from the place where the retreat commenced
there was a road running directly across the valley. Here the troops were rallied and a slight
defence of rails thrown up. The regimental and brigade flags were set up as beacons to direct
each man how to steer through the mob and in a very few minutes there was an effective line
of battle established. A few round shot ricochetted overhead, making about an eighth of a mile
at a jump, and a few grape were dropped into a ditch just behind our line, quickly clearing
out some soldiers who had crawled in there, but this was the extent of the pursuit. The whole
brigade (and a very small brigade it was) was deployed as skirmishers under Colonel Olcott
of the One Hundred and Twenty-first New York. Three lines of skirmishers were formed and each
in turn constituted the first line while the other two passed through and halted, and so the
retreat was continued for about three miles until a halt was made upon high ground, from which
we could plainly see the Johnnies sauntering around on the very ground where we had slept."

Once more could Early claim the credit of a victory of which at night he was to find himself
again deprived. Sheridan's famous ride, his meeting and turning of the tide of fugitives, is
the feature of the day's occurrences which will always live in the popular memory. It is a
significant hint of the scale of such a battlefield to know that the men of the Second Connecticut
had no visual perception of his presence that day, though they heard the cheering occasioned
by his appearance in other parts of the scene, and in his report there is mention of a meeting
with Colonel Mackenzie, whom he tried to persuade to go to the rear on account of his wounds.

The Confederate belief in their victory was not unreasonable, but it was now to suffer an astonishing
upset. Weary and demoralized with success, they were entirely unprepared for the vigor of their
opponents, who after repulsing their last assault, quickly reformed the lines and prepared
for a general advance. Sheridan writes: "This attack was brilliantly made, and as the enemy
was protected by rail breastworks and at some portions of his line by stone fences, his resistance
was very determined."

The history of the Second Connecticut gives a detailed account of its movement, first against
a stone wall in front which after some opposition was abandoned by the enemy, who then "attempted
to rally behind another fence a little further back, but after a moment or two gave it up and
'retired.' Not only in front of our regiment, but all along as far as the eye could reach,
both to the right and left, were they flying over the uneven country in precisely the same
kind of disorder that we had exhibited in the morning. The shouts and screams of victory mingled
with the roar of the firing, and never was heard 'so musical a discord, such sweet thunder.'
The sight of so many rebel heels made it a very easy thing to be brave, and the Union troops
pressed on, utterly regardless of the grape and canister which to the last moment the enemy
flung behind him. It would not have been well for them to have fired too much if they had had
ever so good a chance, for they would have been no more likely to hit our men than their own,
who were our prisoners and scattered in squads of twenty, squads of ten, and squads of one,
all over the vast field. At one time they made a determined stand along a ridge in front of
our brigade. A breastwork of rails was thrown together, colors planted, a nucleus made, and
both flanks grew longer and longer with wonderful rapidity. It was evident that they were driving
back their men to this line without regard to regiment or organization of any kind. This could
be plainly seen from the adjacent and similar ridge over which we were moving,--the pursuers
being in quite as much disorder (so far as organizations were concerned) as the pursued. That
growing line began to look ugly and somewhat quenched the ardor of the chase. * * * * *

ORANGE JELLY.

This can be made with calf's feet or without. One quart of water will require one ounce of
isinglass, simmer the isinglass in the water, and add the peel of
one lemon and one orange; when the isinglass is dissolved, add the
juice of a lemon and six fine oranges; although the quantity must
vary according to the season for them, sweeten with half a pound of
white sugar; a Seville orange is added if there should not be much
flavor in the others.

Lemon jelly is made in the same way; the peel of a Seville orange and of a lemon is used, with
the juice of five lemons; rather more sugar will be required with this jelly than with the former.

Punch
jelly is made in the same way. An equal quantity of brandy and rum, with the juice of two
or three lemons is mixed with the isinglass, which is dissolved in one pint of water, the other
pint of liquid being made up by the lemon juice and spirits.

The essence of noyeau is reckoned to give an exquisite flavor, in this case it requires to be coloured
with a few drops of cochineal.

* * * * *

AN EASY TRIFLE.

Soak three sponge cakes and half a pound of macaroons and ratafias in one wine glass of brandy
and three of white wine, lay them at the bottom of the trifle dish, and pour over nearly a pint of thick
rich custard, made of equal portions of milk and cream, with seven eggs, according to directions
for "Custards;" before the custard is added, jam and sweetmeats are sometimes spread over the
cakes; a fine light froth is prepared with cream and the whites of two eggs, flavored with
wine and sugar, heap it over the trifle lightly.

* * * * *

A STILL MORE SIMPLE ONE, AND QUICKLY MADE.

Soak ratafia cakes in wine, with a little brandy; pour over a thick custard, and cover with a
froth of the white of eggs, flavored with wine and sweetened with white sugar.

* * * * *

BLANCMANGE.

To a quart of milk add half an ounce of fine isinglass, a handful of beaten almonds, and two
or three bitter almonds, a couple of bay leaves, and a piece of lemon
peel; when the isinglass is dissolved, strain the milk into a basin;
sweeten with four ounces of white sugar, and pour into a mould.

       

The juice of fresh strawberries is a fine addition to blancmange.

* * * * *

A JUDITHA.

Put some gooseberries into a saucepan with
very little water, when they are soft, pulp them through a sieve,
and add several well-beaten yolks of eggs, and sweeten with white
sugar; have ready a shape of biscuit ice, or any other cream ice that
may be preferred, take off a thick slice of the ice from the top carefully,
and without breaking, so that it may be replaced on the ice. Scoop
out a large portion of the ice which may be mixed with the gooseberry
cream, and fill the hollow with it. Cover the shape with the piece
that was removed and serve. This is an elegant dish, the ice should
be prepared in a round mould--brown-bread ice is particularly well
adapted to a Juditha.

* * * * *

TOURTE A LA CRÊME.

This is a fashionable
and delicate description of tart. A couple of round cutters about
the size of a pie plate are required for it, one of the cutters must
be about two inches smaller than the other, if they are fluted the
tourte will have a better appearance.

Roll out some very rich puff
paste to the thickness of one inch, and cut two pieces with the larger
tin cutter, then press the smaller cutter through one of these pieces,
and remove the border which will be formed round it; this must be
laid very evenly upon the other piece of paste, and slightly pressed
to make it adhere; place the tourte in an oven to bake for about twenty
minutes, then let it become cool, but not cold, and fill it with a
fine custard or with any rich preserves; if the latter, a well whipped
cream may be laid lightly over; the pastry may be glazed if approved.

*
* * * *

THE GROSVENOR PUDDING. These losses were in fact proportionately
even larger than those met with at Cold Harbor, as the hard service of the preceding months
had reduced the regiment's effective strength to about twenty-five officers and seven hundred
men present for duty.

General Sheridan's report on the Shenandoah campaign gave high praise to Colonel Mackenzie,
who, as a result of his conduct, received a promotion and was commissioned brigadier-general
in December. His disability from the two wounds received at Cedar Creek, however, necessitated
his relinquishing the command of the regiment immediately after that engagement, and this devolved
upon Lieutenant-Colonel James Hubbard; to him in due course came the colonel's commission,
and he led the regiment throughout the rest of its career.

Colonel Hubbard, though born in Salisbury, had lived in the West before the war, and first
saw service with an Illinois regiment. Returning to Connecticut, he assisted in raising a company
for the Nineteenth, and was mustered in as its captain. He was steadily promoted until the
death of Colonel Kellogg brought him naturally to the command of the regiment; but, as has
been said, his own modest estimate of his qualifications for this responsibility caused him
to decline the appointment. When it came to him a second time he accepted, and proved by his
subsequent handling of the regiment a worthy successor to the remarkably able soldiers under
whom he had served, winning the brevet rank of brigadier-general in the final campaigns. His
ambition was, a comrade wrote, to do his full duty without a thought for personal glory; and
he enjoyed in a high degree the respect and affection of his command. He died in Washington,
where he lived for many years, on December 21, 1886, and was buried in Winsted.

       *       *       *       *       *

The brilliant victories in which the Second Artillery had borne so worthy a part, and the re-election
of President Lincoln in November (1864), put an end to all anxieties as to danger in the quarter
of the Shenandoah, which before Sheridan's campaign had been a region of fatal mischance to
the national cause from the beginning of the war. As a consequence the Sixth Corps was once
more ordered to rejoin Grant's army, and the regiment left the historic valley on December
1st, arriving on the 5th before Petersburg, where it was assigned a position near the place
of its skirmish on June 22nd.

"Then it was unbroken forest," says its history; "now, hundreds of acres were cleared, and
dotted with camps. A corduroy road ran by, and a telegraph, and Grant's railroad. No other
such railroad was ever seen before, or ever will be again. It was laid right on top of the
ground, without any attempt at grading, and you might see the engine and rear car of a long
train, while the middle of the train would be in a valley, completely out of sight. Having
reached Parke Station, we moved to a camp near Battery Number Twenty-seven, and went into the
snug and elegant little log houses just vacated by the Ninety-fourth New York. This was a new
kind of situation for the 'Second Heavies.' The idea of being behind permanent and powerful
breastworks, defended by abatis, ditches, and what not, with approaches so difficult that ten
men could hold five hundred at bay, was so novel, that the men actually felt as if there must
be some mistake, and that they had got into the wrong place."

       *       *       *       *       *

For two months no fighting fell to the regiment's lot, for though the Union commanders and
armies were ready and eager to make an end of the war as soon as possible, little could be
done during the winter. Though this inactivity brought perhaps some relief from the rigors
of army life, the men had numerous reminders that they were still in active service. One of
the chief events of this season the history of the regiment describes as follows: "On the afternoon
of the 9th (December, 1864), the First and Third Divisions of the Sixth Corps were marched
to the left, beyond the permanent lines, and off in the direction of the Weldon Railroad, to
prevent any attack on the Fifth and Second Corps, now returning from their expedition. After
going for about six miles we halted for the night, in a piece of woods. It was bitter cold
when we left camp, but soon began to moderate, then to rain, then to sleet; so that by the
time we halted, everything was covered with ice, with snow two inches deep on the ground, and
still sifting down through the pines. It was the work of an hour to get fires going,--but at
last they began to take hold, and fuel was piled on as though it did not cost anything. Clouds
of steam rolled out of the soaked garments of the men, as they stood huddled around the roaring,
cracking piles,--and the black night and ghostly woods were lighted up in a style most wonderful.
The storm continued all night, and many a man waked up next morning to find his legs firmly
packed in new fallen snow. At daylight orders came to pack up and be ready to move at once;
which was now a difficult order to execute, on account of many things, especially the shelter
tents;--for they were as rigid as sheet-iron and yet had to be rolled up and strapped on the
knapsacks. Nevertheless it was not long before the regiment was in motion; and after plodding
off for a mile to the left, a line of battle was formed, vedettes sent out, trees felled and
breastworks built, and at dinner-time the men were allowed to build fires and cook breakfast.
Then, after standing until almost night in the snow, which had now turned to sleet, the column
was headed homeward. Upon arriving, it was discovered that some of the Jersey Brigade had taken
possession of our log snuggeries, and that their officers had established their heels upon
the mantels in our officers' quarters, and were smoking the pipes of comfort and complacency,
as though they had not a trouble in the world, and never expected to have. But they soon found
that possession is not nine points of military law, by any means. An order from Division Headquarters
soon sent them profanely packing,--and the Second Heavies occupied."

Though weeks were spent in such comparative comfort and immunity as the present situation afforded,
the men felt as if they were resting over a volcano which might break into fierce activity
at any moment; and as the winter passed signs of the renewal of the struggle multiplied on
all sides.

