Melanctha Herbert was sixteen when she first met Jane Harden. Jane was a negress, but she was
so white that hardly any one could guess it. Jane had had a good deal of education. She had
been two years at a colored college. She had had to leave because of her bad conduct. She taught
Melanctha many things. She taught her how to go the ways that lead to wisdom.

Jane Harden was at this time twenty-three years old and she had had much experience. She was
very much attracted by Melanctha, and Melanctha was very proud that this Jane would let her
know her.

Jane Harden was not afraid to understand. Melanctha who had strong the sense for real experience,
knew that here was a woman who had learned to understand.

Jane Harden had many bad habits. She drank a great deal, and she wandered widely. She was safe
though now, when she wanted to be safe, in this wandering.

Melanctha Herbert soon always wandered with her. Melanctha tried the drinking and some of the
other habits, but she did not find that she cared very much to do them. But every day she grew
stronger in her desire to really understand.

It was now no longer, even in the daylight, the rougher men that these two learned to know
in their wanderings, and for Melanctha the better classes were now a little higher. It was
no longer express agents and clerks that she learned to know, but men in business, commercial
travelers, and even men above these, and Jane and she would talk and walk and laugh and escape
from them all very often. This yearning must have expressed itself in some way, for I distinctly remember
how a man with my bow and arrows led the way, and I in restrained delight followed him to the
cedar grove. I remember how he maneuvered among the trees, and with keen eyes watched for
an opportunity to make a shot.

He stopped, whispered to me, pointed to a bird in the trunk of a cedar.

Raising the bow, it bent taut under his firm, cautious pull. "Whiz," went the arrow, and there,
pinned to the tree with the iron spike, fluttered a hairy woodpecker. To my wondering child-mind
it was a great feat--my inherent instinct for hunting the wild approved and applauded.
That very phase of human nature is what we are now trying to eliminate
from the present and coming generation.

--Eugene Swope. She liked Melanctha Herbert for the things that she had like
her, and then Melanctha was young, and she had sweetness, and a way of listening with intelligence
and sympathetic interest, to the stories that Jane Harden often told out of her experience.

Jane grew always fonder of Melanctha. Soon they began to wander, more to be together than to
see men and learn their various ways of working. Then they began not to wander, and Melanctha
would spend long hours with Jane in her room, sitting at her feet and listening to her stories,
and feeling her strength and the power of her affection, and slowly she began to see clear
before her one certain way that would be sure to lead to wisdom.

Before the end came, the end of the two years in which Melanctha spent all her time when she
was not at school or in her home, with Jane Harden, before these two years were finished, Melanctha
had come to see very clear, and she had come to be very certain, what it is that gives the
world its wisdom.

Jane Harden always had a little money and she had a room in the lower part of the town. Jane
had once taught in a colored school. She had had to leave that too on account of her bad conduct.
It was her drinking that always made all the trouble for her, for that can never be really
covered over.

Jane's drinking was always growing worse upon her. Melanctha had tried to do the drinking but
it had no real attraction for her.

In the first year, between Jane Harden and Melanctha Herbert, Jane had been much the stronger.
Jane loved Melanctha and she found her always intelligent and brave and sweet and docile, and
Jane meant to, and before the year was over she had taught Melanctha what it is that gives
many people in the world their wisdom.

Jane had many ways in which to do this teaching. She told Melanctha many things. She loved
Melanctha hard and made Melanctha feel it very deeply. She would be with other people and with
men and with Melanctha, and she would make Melanctha understand what everybody wanted, and
what one did with power when one had it.

Melanctha sat at Jane's feet for many hours in these days and felt Jane's wisdom. She learned
to love Jane and to have this feeling very deeply. She learned a little in these days to know
joy, and she was taught too how very keenly she could suffer. It was very different this suffering
from that Melanctha sometimes had from her mother and from her very unendurable black father.
Then she was fighting and she could be strong and valiant in her suffering, but here with Jane
Harden she was longing and she bent and pleaded with her suffering.

It was a very tumultuous, very mingled year, this time for Melanctha, but she certainly did
begin to really understand.

In every way she got it from Jane Harden. There was nothing good or bad in doing, feeling,
thinking or in talking, that Jane spared her. Sometimes the lesson came almost too strong for
Melanctha, but somehow she always managed to endure it and so slowly, but always with increasing
strength and feeling, Melanctha began to really understand.

Then slowly, between them, it began to be all different. Slowly now between them, it was Melanctha
Herbert, who was stronger. Slowly now they began to drift apart from one another. 

2. What is the etymology of the game Blind Man's Buff? I am led to doubt whether that was the
old spelling of it, for in a catalogue now before me I find a quarto work by Martin Parker, entitled
The Poet's Blind Man's Bough, or Have among you my Blind Harpers,
1641. Melanctha now sometimes
quarreled with Jane, and they no longer went about together, and sometimes Melanctha really
forgot how much she owed to Jane Harden's teaching.

Melanctha began now to feel that she had always had world wisdom. She really knew of course,
that it was Jane who had taught her, but all that began to be covered over by the trouble between
them, that was now always getting stronger.

Jane Harden was a roughened woman. Once she had been very strong, but now she was weakened
in all her kinds of strength by her drinking. Melanctha had tried the drinking but it had had
no real attraction for her.

Jane's strong and roughened nature and her drinking made it always harder for her to forgive
Melanctha, that now Melanctha did not really need her any longer. Now it was Melanctha who
was stronger and it was Jane who was dependent on her.

Melanctha was now come to be about eighteen years old. She was a graceful, pale yellow, good
looking, intelligent, attractive negress, a little mysterious sometimes in her ways, and always
good and pleasant, and always ready to do things for people.

Melanctha from now on saw very little of Jane Harden. Jane did not like that very well and
sometimes she abused Melanctha, but her drinking soon covered everything all over.

It was not in Melanctha's nature to really lose her sense for Jane Harden. On his journeys across
the country he usually camped in the woods, although the pioneer latch-string was always hanging
out for "Apple-seed John." He carried his cooking utensils with him.

His mush-pan serving him for a hat. Melanctha could do anything now
that she wanted. Melanctha knew now what everybody wanted.

Melanctha had learned how she might stay a little longer; she had learned that she must decide
when she wanted really to stay longer, and she had learned how when she wanted to, she could
escape.

