He left the room, slowly, and sat alone in the library. It had struck deep, that even one God-fearing
but not God-loving old man should think him unfit to sit in the church in which his father
and mother had been married, from which they had been carried side by side for their long rest.
It was midnight when he went up the broad staircase to his room.

The following afternoon he dropped in to see Father Jennings, the gentle little priest who
had been beloved by two generations of all denominations--and those of none. Terry loved the
old study, which in forty years had taken on something of the priest's character. It was a
comfortable room; cheerful in its wide windows, warm with a bright hearthfire, and well worn
with long years of service.

Terry had found friendship and counsel here since his boyhood, had been one of the procession
that passed through the door in search of wisdom and cheer. All the gossip of the town came
to the priest: he knew of Terry's hunting trip and of the climax which had scandalized the
sterner factions of the community. He was of those who knew Terry best, and entertained no
misgivings about the state of his immortal soul.

They talked fitfully, as intimate friends do. The old man knew that it was worry over the town's
harsh reaction to the Sunday fox hunt that had brought Terry to him. He broached the subject.

"Dick, I have wanted to see you since Sunday morning. I had a question to ask you nobody else
could answer."

As Terry turned to him with somber mien he concluded, his eyes twinkling: "I wanted to know
if it was the best fox ever!"

And that was all, though Terry stayed to sup with him. Till nine o'clock they sat before the
fire, the priest in a worn rocker drawn up close to the hearth: the single log burning glorified
his fine old face as he placidly rocked and pondered.

He had spent the morning among his foreign parishioners, who lived in the squalid section of
the town, across the river. A frugal, law-abiding lot, they furnished the brawn needed in the
three pulp factories and lived a life apart from the balance of the towns-people, bitterly
but voicelessly resenting the villagers' careless ostracism of all who came under the easy
classification of the term "wop." There existed a tacit agreement among property owners that
no house north of the river should be sold or leased to a foreigner, and that no garlic might
taint the atmosphere their children breathed in school, they had erected a small schoolhouse
upon the southside. So, sequestered six days in the week in a settlement that was entirely
foreign, communicating their thoughts in the tongues of the Mediterranean and the Balkans,
the southsiders mingled with Americans only during the brief hours of Sunday worship.

In his morning visit Father Jennings had again met with several evidences of Terry's curious
influence over the foreigners. Terry understood them instinctively, grasped their viewpoints
and ideals, and was the only layman on the northside in whom they confided, called in to settle
knotty problems and to partake of the hospitality they lavished upon appropriate occasions
of weddings, christenings and the neverending procession of days of patron saints. Subtle,
romantic, circumscribed by alien environment, they recognized in him a kindred spirit and opened
their hearts wide to him. Terry, his ardent young pastor--Dr. Mather--and Father Jennings were
the only northsiders whom they called friends. None of the three had been named on the town's
"Committee on Americanization." ...

The priest roused from his revery and for a long time contemplated the quiet, thoughtful lad
who sat beside him. Gradually a deep concern spread across his comfortably aged features, a
presentiment of impending loss shadowed his pleasant eyes. He reached out to lay his hand on
Terry's forearm.

"Dick," he said, "there is plenty for you to do right here in Crampville--what is this I hear
about your going to the Philippines?"

CHAPTER II

TERRY DECIDES

Christmas Eve, the large snowflakes drifted slowly down out of a windless sky. The dusk was
cheerful with the sound of sleigh bells that announced the arrival or departure of last-hour
shoppers.

Terry, at his desk in the great living room, surveyed the finished trophy happily. It was an
unusually black and lustrous pelt. He buried his face in the silky mat a moment, then drew
out paper and pen, and wrote:

     DEANE-DEAR:--

     Some three years ago a mother fox suffered that this one
     might be born: denied herself food that he might satisfy his
     urgent little appetite as he grew bigger and stronger. When
     he was big enough he left her and forgot her--she may have
     suffered then, too.

     He lived as foxes do. Things died that he might eat;
     rabbits, pheasants, chickens, field-mice. He stalked all
     things less strong and clever than himself. A cruel cycle,
     but it is the law of the wild, something that you and I
     cannot alter.

     He enjoyed the summers best, with their longer days, fuller
     larders, sweet wood odors, long naps in the cool shadows of
     the thicket. But winter came, with its hardships and its
     cold, a cold that little foxes feel the same as you and I.
     But it was this cold that stimulated and silkened his fur,
     made it this wondrous, prized thing.

     Then I came, and he ceased to be what he was--a hunter of
     smaller, weaker things--and became what you see here: a
     finer thing--a token. Your kind heart need find no cruelty
     in a merciful shot that spelled no pain and that by stopping
     him assured that gentler, weaker things will live on and on.

     And he will be glad, too, as not only is he forever
     freed from cold and hunger and stark fear, but his is to be
     a tender office.

     Will you lay it at your bedside, that each night it may
     cushion your last step at slumbertime, and each morning
     soften the first contact between the vistas of dreamland and
     the less yielding surfaces of life to which we wake.

     So even the things of the wild are made to serve. To
     serve--is that not the law of man?

     My part in it? But little: none other than I will have
     touched it till it reaches your dear hands. I shaped it,
     wrought to preserve its beauties that it might give you
     pleasure.

     To give pleasure--is that not the law of love?

     A very, very Merry Christmas!

                                                  DICK.

He sent his gift, at about nine o'clock. In gay mood, he wandered about the great house: entered
the kitchen where Fanny was singeing the Christmas turkey: returned to the living room to throw
a fresh log in the wide fireplace. His mood was too expansive for indoors. He donned short
coat and thick cap, but as he passed out of the gate a scared little lad, a foreigner, rushed
up breathlessly and begged him to come--trouble was brewing on the southside.

His questions elicited meager information. Excited, the lad relapsed so often into his native
tongue that Terry could make nothing of his tale.

Hand in hand they hurried through the village, crossed the dark bridge and approached a ramshackle
house from which a babble of voices rose in strident argument. The excited chorus abated at
Terry's sharp knock and the door was thrown open to disclose the belligerent figure of Tony
Ricorro, the leader of the Italian colony. Recognizing the reefered figure that smiled up at
him through the falling flakes, Tony's dark scowl faded as he reached out his powerful hands
and with a joyous shout fairly lifted Terry into the house.

Terry laughed as the gaudily dressed occupants of the room crowded around him, and greeted
most of the score of swarthy men and women by name. Tony masterfully stripped him of his overcoat
and cap and placed them in the kitchen from which emanated odors of strange things cooking. For
Juanita's reappearance in itself was unusual, as Sunday afternoon
and evening were her own to spend at home.

"People are saying Mr. Weir is to be arrested and hanged from a tree
in the court house yard!

Everybody has come to town to see.

Three uncles and aunts and nine cousins of ours have already come
to our house from where they live four miles down the river.

All the town is talking about it.

But though I said nothing, I knew how Mr. Weir had saved you and that he had done nothing to be
hanged for. If anybody is to be killed it ought to be that Ed Sorenson."

"Are you sure of this, Juanita?"

"Yes, yes, Miss Janet. It is so."

"Then
this is part of the plot against him; let me think. They might arrest
him but they would never dare try to hang him, unless they could pretend----"

"Now, listen to me," he began, after quiet was restored, "I'm going to ask you all to keep
silent, and to promise me that no one will speak except those I call by name." They all promised--each
one not once but in a series of lengthy assurances which he had to raise his hand to cut short.

"Now, Tony, you first. What's the matter?"

Tony's face registered his utter disgust. "What'sa matt'? What'sa matt'? Evra teeng 'sa matt'!
Tommor' we christen our bab' and evra' bod' want a name heem!" He glared at the restless circle
which ringed them.

The odd wistful twist at the corner of Terry's mouth disappeared for a moment in his slow smile;
this was so like these people, who bore big troubles stoically and reacted powerfully to inconsequentials.

He called on several others. All were relatives of Tony or of his wife; sisters, brothers,
several "in-laws," Tony's father, two uncles. Each had his or her name for the child, and sound
reasons for the choice.

"Tony, where is Felice?" he asked, noting that Tony's wife was not in the crowded dining room.

Tony took him into a dimly lighted room, where his wife lay in bed; the guiltless cause of
all this dissension, obviously inured to clamor, was asleep in her arm. She smiled up at Terry
as he sat down on the edge of the bed and took her hand.

Tony stood looking down at Felice and their first-born, his heart in his eyes.

"Tony, what does Felice wish to name your son?" Terry asked suddenly.

Receiving no answer, he looked up at Tony and read in the agonized contrition of Tony's dark
face that she had not yet been consulted. Tears glistened in the forgiving eyes Felice turned
on Tony, and as he flung himself down at the side of the bed and buried his face in her pillow,
Terry tiptoed out of the room and softly closed the door.

In a few minutes Tony flung the door open and strode into the room, unashamed of the tears
that shone on his rough cheeks.

"You all a go to hell-a with your a-names! Felice, she name-a our boy and to-morrow we go Padre
Jenneeng. She a name heem"--he paused with true Latin sense of the value of suspense--"She
a name heem--Reechar' Terree--Ricorro!"

A moment of hesitation, of assimilation, and then a hubbub of delighted acceptance and acclaim.
Terry stayed but a few minutes, realizing that much as they liked him, there would be more
spontaneity at the fiesta if there were none but their own people at the table.

He went in and thanked Felice gravely for the honor she had conferred upon him, wished for
them all a merry Christmas, and passed out amid a medley of thanks and benedictions.

The snowfall had ceased. He crossed to the North Side and hastened up Main Street, and though
it lacked but an hour of midnight, he found Judd's jewelry store still open. He went in and
found young Judd about to close up.

Judd, hollow eyed with the fatigue of the long day, studied his old friend's beaming face:
"Hello, Sir Galahad!" he said.

Terry eyed him scornfully: "Hello, Rut!" He drew himself up proudly. "Behold in me a new dignity--I
am now a god-father!"

Having in mind the parents' love for the elaborate, he gayly selected an ornate silver cup
for the infant.

"I'll engrave it for you after the holidays," Judd offered.

"Good old boy, Judd! The initials will be R--T--R."

He buttoned his coat and went to the door: Judd was musing over the monogram: "Richard--Terry--what's
the 'R' stand for, Dick?"

Terry grinned as he called back through the open door.

"Why,--Romance, of course!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He tramped far out the north road through the new fallen snow, his whole being glowing. The
stars sparkled through the clear cold air in myriad chorus of the message of hope that one
in the East had heralded to a sadder world on another Christmas eve. The snow-flung star beams
illuminated the peaceful countryside: there was no moon, no light save the great glow of the
heavens, no shadows under gaunt oaks or huddled evergreens.

He was in harmony with the night. He followed the sleigh-rutted highway for several miles,
then swung back to town along a woodcutter's trail that edged the lakeshore, winding through
the new growths of pine and balsam whose night-black branches were outlined by the white fall.

He loved the open: there was no loneliness here.... Magic-wrought, Deane's phantom figure kept
apace, matched step with step along the shore trail through the hushed woods, across the white
sheen of open spaces. Ever, when summoned thus, she came to share the hours and the places
that he loved best.

Love surged hot through his veins: love of friends, of living, of youth, love of a woman ...
probably his gift lay at her bedside now, as she slept....

Unconsciously he slowed his pace and lifted his fine, pale face upward: his low, clear baritone
flooded the broken woods, carried far out across the silent frozen lake, unechoed; it was vibrant
with the very spirit of yuletide--love of man and woman.

    Love, to share again those winged scented days,
    Those starry skies:
    To see once more your joyous face,
    Your tender eyes:
    Just to know that years so fair might come again,
    Awhile:
    Oh! To thrill again to your dear voice--
    Your smile!

It was long past midnight when he reached town, his mood chilling indefinably at sight of its
dark houses.

"You're a queer old town," he muttered. "You go to bed on this night of nights--yes, and you
batten your windows tight against this glorious air--and all of the other glorious things."

Passing the suspicious village constable, he penetrated even his callous heart with the most
gladsome Christmas greeting he had heard in many a year.

Home, he stirred the dying logs into flame and sank into a deep cushioned chair drawn up before
the glowing embers. The long day had taken no toll of his lithe frame: sleepless, he sat long
in pleasant retrospection of the day, which had brought him opportunities to contribute to
the sum of peace on earth and to give pleasure to those whom he loved.

His gift to Deane had approached even his exacting criterion of what was fit for her. He envied
the skin its rapturous reception, the sparkle of bright eyes its beauty would invoke. It was
characteristic that his vision did not carry him to the daily contact of pink toes he had assigned
as its function. And it was characteristic of him, too, that he did not think of the gifts
which had come for him.

He would see the elders, he mused, and apologize for what must have seemed to them a deliberate
flaunting of their standards ... he had been a little careless, lately ... he would remedy
that ... it was a good town--his failure to settle down had been a fault ... he would find
something to do, worth doing--and do it.... Deane's friendship might ripen into something mellower,
and then....

He reached into an inner pocket and withdrew a telegram, bending nearer the fireplace to read it.

                                                  Washington, D. C.

     Richard Terry, Crampville, Vermont.

     Wire will you accept commission second lieutenant Philippine
     Constabulary period immediate decision essential period if
     you accept wire date you will be able to sail from San
     Francisco

                                             Wilson Insular Bureau

The glow from the fire which ruddied his face revealed the struggle of the minute before decision
came. With an expression curiously mingled of renunciation and relief he tossed the paper among
the glowing embers. He rose as the sheet took fire and in the brief flash of light which marked
the consumption of the telegram he saw a familiar-looking package on the library table in the
shadow cast by his big chair. He carried it to the now fainter glow of the hearth and saw that
it was addressed to him in Deane's trim hand. He opened it eagerly, to see what form her remembrance
had taken.

It was the fox-skin, returned. Vague, trouble-eyed, he read the inclosed note.

     DEAR DICK:--

     I am sending you back your present. Father insists, because
     you secured it on Sunday.

     It hurts me, Dick, dreadfully, but you know how he feels
     about such things.

     It is the loveliest present I ever received--and it makes me
     want to cry, sometimes, when I think of your doing such
     things for me and thinking about me as you do. I AM
     crying, now, Dick.

     Though I can not have it, your present will always be
     mine--I can never forget that you were good enough to wish
     me to have it.

     And will you accept my very best wishes that your Christmas
     may be a very merry one.

                                                  DEANE.

He sank back into the chair again, sickened.... "That your Christmas may be a very merry one."

       *       *       *       *       *

Susan, first down in the morning, raised the curtains to the brilliant Christmas morning, and
turned to find him sitting in the chilled room before the dead fire. Shocked by the haggard
face, she hurried to him.

"Dick, are you sick?" As she sank by the side of his chair her hand brushed against the rich
fur which lay across his knees, and she understood. She placed a pitying arm about his shoulders.

"I feared it, Dick--I feared it! You know how he is--her father. I'll never speak to him again
as long as--" She burst into tears.

Gently he withdrew her arm and took her hand in his.

"It's all right, Sue, it's--all--right."

Through her tears she read the pain that lurked in his eyes, the agony that betrayed the patient
smile. She sobbed convulsively, heartsick in her helplessness to ease this young brother to
whom she had been half mother.

"That's what you always say--about everything: 'it will be all right.' When you were a boy
it was always the same--'it's all right.'"

He comforted her with quiet words till the storm abated. Then, "I'm going to miss you, Sue-sister,"
he said.

She stood up, comprehension dawning in her wide eyes.

"You're going away!"

He nodded gravely.

Slowly, fearfully, she asked, "When?"

"To-night."

"Way off to--those--Philippines?"

He nodded, then unable to bear longer the hurt in her tremulous face, he sought refuge in the
ridiculous; he struck an attitude.

"I'm going in quest of adventure--riches--romance! I'm going to sail the Spanish Main--seek
golden doubloons--maids in distress--the Fountain of Youth! I'm going to cross strange waters--travel
untraveled forest ... see unseen peoples ... know unknown hills...."

An odd light flickered in his eyes, as if he half believed what he spoke. Fanny appeared at
the kitchen door and with her cheery call of "Merry Christmas," the light faded from his face
as he turned in quick response.

He turned to his sister in mock reproof: "Shure and it's ye that has not yet wished me aven
a dacent top o' the marnin', let alone the gratin's of the sason! Shame on ye--ye heartless,
thoughtless, loveless--"

He broke off, laughing at her bewilderment: she never could keep apace with his quick moods.
Noting a tear still glistening he took her cheeks between his hands and kissed the wet eyes,
then asked her to get word to Deane that he would be over some time during the evening.

Surprised and pleased that he should ask her to participate in his affair with Deane, she hurried
to the desk set in a deep bay window.

Ellis, sleepy-eyed, came down with his hearty greetings of the day, and was surprised to find
Sue bent earnestly over her writing.

"Say," he said, "can't you wait till after breakfast to thank everybody for their presents?
What's the rush? Say, Dick, did you hear yet what Bruce gave to the lady of his heart? No?
Well, he out-Bruced Bruce this time! He gave her a patented, electric foot-warmer!"

Terry smiled his appreciation of Ellis' chuckling loyalty and escaped upstairs to his room.
Ellis wandered aimlessly over to the Christmas table and noted the number of unopened packages
marked with Terry's name, then called up from the foot of the stairs:

"Come right down here, you ungrateful Non-christian, and see what Santa Claus brought you!
You got more than any of us and--"

He desisted as he suddenly became aware of his wife's frantic signals, and reading the grievous
trouble in her twitching face, he went to her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Susan, entering Terry's room at dusk, found him standing at the window staring out into the
evening, watching the shadows paint out one by one the landmarks he had known from boyhood.
Two large leather bags, packed but still open, stood at the side of the bed. The two frames
which had held the pictures of his father and mother lay upon the table, empty, beside letters
addressed to Father Jennings, Doctor Mather, and Tony Ricorro.

He did not hear her but continued at the window, his relaxed shoulders giving an unwonted aspect
of frailty to his body. She tiptoed out of the room, crept back again to look through brimming
eyes at the lonely figure silhouetted against the darkening window, then stumbled into her
own room and closed the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

Terry returned to Deane in the sitting room after bidding her father and mother a courteously
friendly farewell. Mr. Hunter, vaguely disturbed, had followed his wife upstairs reluctantly;
he was not quite confident that his decision regarding the fox skin had been justified, and
would have been glad had Terry given him opportunity to discuss it. In a moment his voice sounded
down to them as he defended himself against his irate spouse.

"I don't care what you say, Marthy, he's got to settle down and--"

Then their door closed.

For a long time Deane and Terry stood voiceless, each leaden with a dull misery. The shock
of his announcement had paled her and she stared hopelessly at him out of wide blue eyes, her
full red lips aquiver at the hurt she read in the gray eyes and the queer wistful mouth.

She broke the pulsing silence: "I never understand you, Dick,--quite. Is it because of the
fox skin?"

He shook his head uncertainly, barely conscious of her words in a last rapt gaze at her, vaguely
aware that this was the picture of her that he would carry in his mind through the years to
come. Rounded, long of lines, apart from him she looked as tall as he, though there was a two
inch discrepancy; the wide eyes and generous, curved mouth indicated her infinite capacity
for affection. The shadow of a dimple flickered high on her left cheek: the quickened beat
of heart pulsed in the white column of her throat.

"Is it because you hate the town, Dick?" she asked tremulously.

Again he shook his head slowly: "No, Deane, it is not that. The town is all right--it is not that."

He paused, brooding, then went on: "Last night I did not sleep--much--thinking about it. It's
all my fault.... I do not fit. So I am going away, going to try to find my own place, somehow."

Tortured by his patient smile, she followed him out into the dim hall, half blinded by her
burning tears. She sobbed unrestrainedly as he slipped into his overcoat.

He came to her, his hand outstretched, his voice husky.

"Good-by, Deane-girl," he said.

Taking his hand she stepped close to him, misty-eyed, atremble.

"Good-by, Di--Oh, Dick! Don't go! Don't go way over to those awful Islands!"

He steadied her with an arm about the shaking shoulders. She leaned full against him and in
the soft contact his pulses leaped. He fought to resist the temptation to take advantage of
her mood, knew that for the moment she was his if he but pressed his claim.

Suddenly she looked up at him, glorious in her grief and surrender.

"Shall I--do you want me to--to--wait?"

For a few moments it seemed that he had not heard the low voice.

Then: "Don't wait, Deane-girl,--don't wait."

Then the arm was gone from about her shoulder.

"But I will, Dick, I will!" she sobbed, but as the words fell from her lips she heard the door
close and felt the gust of cold air that chilled the hall.

       *       *       *       *       *

She was still awake when the midnight accommodation whistled its impending arrival from the
north. She listened, tense, as the train came to a stop in the town. A brief halt, then it
sounded its underway, the pistons accelerated their chugging beat and it passed out of Crampville
into the south.

She stood, still-breathed, dry-eyed, till the last grinding rumble died out of the frosty night,
then as a full realization of her loss came home, she dropped to the side of the bed and buried
her face in the coverlid.

The floor where she knelt seemed cold and hard.

CHAPTER III

MINDANAO

The old Francesca, directed by a nervous and none too competent Tagalog captain, maneuvered
in the six-mile tidal current which swept west through the Straits making Zamboanga a nightmare
to all the native skippers who called at that port. Crab-like, she crawled obliquely to within
a few hundred feet of the low-lying town, then the screw churned up a furious wake as the anxious
Tagalog on the bridge swung her back into the Straits to circle in a new attempt. Carried by
the tidal rush the old tub circled in a great ellipse.

Alone at the rail on the dingy promenade Terry stood enjoying his first glimpse of Mindanao.
Seven months in Luzon had brought him countless tales of this uncertain southland--tales of
pirates, of insolent, murderous datos defiant behind their cotta fortresses, of kris and barong
wielded by fanatic Moros gone amok; of pearls as large as robins' eggs, of nuggets tossed as
playthings by naked children of the forests, of mysterious tribes who inhabited the fastnesses
of inaccessible hills.

He wore the service uniform of the Constabulary, the field uniform of khaki blouse and breeches,
tan shoes and leggings, and stiff-brimmed cavalry Stetson. The smart uniform set his erect
figure off trimly and added to the impression of alertness conveyed by his steady gray eyes.

In the two wide swings back into midstream that ensued before the steamer approached near enough
land to get ropes to the little brown stevedores who waited on the dock, Terry had ample opportunity
for study of the tropic panorama. The sea was dotted with Moro vintas, swiftest of all Malayan
sailing craft; tide and wind borne, some scurried at tremendous pace toward the fishing grounds
of the Sulu Sea, others tacked painfully into the Celebes. A Government launch, its starred
and striped flag brilliant against the green sea in the morning light, left its jetty and headed
south toward the dim coastline of Basilan. A score of gulls, that had followed the ship down
from Sorsogon, fattening on the waste thrown overboard after each meal, circled around the
ship aimlessly, uttering unpleasant cries. The young sun mounted swiftly in a cloudless sky,
hot on the trail of the cool morning breezes, white in its threat of blistering punishment
of all who dared its shafts.

The hawser snubbed, the drum of the rusty winch rattled and banged on worn bearings to a tune
of escaping steam, laboriously warping the smelly hull alongside the dock. Terry watched the
sturdy little Moros spring into agile life as the vessel slowly neared the pier, then he turned
to look over the town which was built flush with the edge of the narrow beach, extending each
way from the shore end of the pier. The galvanized-iron roofs of the taller buildings--church,
convent, club, a few more pretentious dwellings,--were visible above the low foliage and between
the tall acacias and firetrees which jagged the skyline. A heavily laden breeze identified
unmistakably several long buildings as copra warehouses.

It seemed a busy town, as towns near the equator go. In the street into which the pier opened
a thin stream of pedestrians passed by in brief review before the watcher: Moros, a few Filipinos,
a Chino staggering under a heavy balanced pinga, two white-clad Americans, while several rickshaws,
Moro drawn, jogged by with patrons concealed under raised tops. Then a big foreign touring
car turned the corner and drew up in front of the government building to deposit a middle aged
American, immaculate in fresh pongee.

Terry, observing him idly from where he stood at the rail, saw a larger, uniformed American
swing the corner with vigorous stride and after saluting the older man accompany him respectfully
to the entrance to the big building, where they stood a moment in conversation. Terry's interest
quickened as he recognized the big American as a member of his own service; he watched him
approach the ship through the crowd of half-nude sweating Moros who now swarmed the dock.

Terry, hastening down the ship's ladder, met the tall officer as he reached the end of the pier.

He was a loosely knit, raw-boned man of about thirty-five, of serious but pleasant mien. As
he stepped to meet Terry, Terry saw that he wore the leaves of a Major.

"Lieutenant Terry?" he asked, responding with friendly informality to Terry's stiff salute.

"Yes, sir."

"I'm Bronner. Mighty glad to know you. We've been looking for you ever since receiving a copy
of the Headquarters Bulletin ordering you down here. Have a good trip?"

"Well, Major, the Francesca is no Empress liner but we got along all right. I am very glad
to know you, Major. Your brother and I were roommates at college--he used to tell me of your
experiences with the head hunters--"

"Huh!" the Major interrupted. "Guess he stretched things some. Fine boy. Wants to come over
when he graduates this June, but his mother says one son over here is enough. And she's right."

Terry liked the big irregular features. In the steady eyes he saw something that forced instant
credence to the stories told of the Major's resourceful bravery under difficult situations,
a bravery which had made the name of Bronner famous in a service made up of intrepid men.

"Welcome to Moroland," the Major continued. "I hope you like it down here--I think you will.
If I didn't I wouldn't have requested your transfer. You are assigned to the most interesting
of the Moro provinces,--Davao. You go there to command a Macabebe company. Your baggage still
aboard?"

"Yes, sir."

"Forget the 'sir'! Leave your stuff on board--the Francesca sails at daylight to-morrow, and
you go on to Davao with her. Had breakfast? I thought not. Pack a bag with what you will need
for a day ashore--put on a white uniform for to-night. My orderly will take you to my quarters
where you can get a shower and some breakfast. Join me at the Service Club for lunch."

Throughout the abrupt discourse Terry had endured the frank appraisal of the shrewd black eyes.
He experienced a pleasant reaction when the Major again extended his broad hand.

"Lieutenant, I said a minute ago that I was glad to know you. He therefore asked the military
storekeeper in charge of the arsenal for two muskets and accouterments
for those two sergeants.

The storekeeper replied that he had no authority for the issue of two muskets for this purpose,
but that the old order for forty muskets was on file, and the muskets and accouterments were ready
packed for delivery to him. Foster received them, and after issuing two muskets to the ordnance
sergeants at Fort Sumter and Castle Pinckney, placed the remainder
in the magazines of those two forts.

He followed the soldier down the main street, a dusty thoroughfare lined with the usual assortment
of structures which adorn Philippine provincial towns: adobe, tile-roofed business houses honeycombed
with little box-like shops in which the Chinese merchants displayed their wares: square wooden
houses set high on stone understructures: scores of bamboo shacks stilted on crooked timbers,
unkempt, wry, powdered with the dust risen since the last rains.

Though it was not yet nine o'clock, they sought the shaded side of the street with the habit
which becomes instinctive near the equator, and welcomed the coolness of Bronner's low house.

The cook and the houseboy looked after him with the unobtrusive perfection of service found
only in the East. A good breakfast cheered a stomach outraged by the greasy mess perpetrated
upon native boats in the name of Spanish cookery, and a cool shower bath eliminated the stench
of stale copra which had clung to his nostrils if not to his clothing. An hour before noon
he left the house and strolled about the scorching town, regardless of where he went so long
as he found shaded walks on which to tread.

       *       *       *       *       *

Most Philippine towns are coast towns, and most coast towns are flat and uninteresting unless
you are interested in their peoples--and you are not interested in them unless they are of
a different tribe than you have known previously.

Take a couple of dusty--or muddy--streets, unroll them along some freshwater stream just above
a line of palmed beach: place an immense, deserted-looking softstone church in an unkept square
flanked with a few straggled acacias and a big convent in which a native priest lives in weary
and squalid detachment from a world he knows nothing about: line the two streets with an assortment
of rusty bamboo and mixed-material houses which impress one as never having been built but
as always having stood there: sprinkle a few naked, pot-bellied, brown children staring at
each other in pathetic, Malay ignorance of the manner and spirit of play: set a few brown manikins
in the open windows--women who let life fly by in dull wonder of what it is all about: add
a few carabaos lying in neck-deep content in mudwallows, and a score of emaciated curs which
snarl at each other in habitual, gnawing hunger and which greet their masters with terrified
whines: spread over it all a pall of still moist heat and a sky arched by a molten sun. Contrive
all this, then imbue every object--human and creature, animate and inanimate,--with an air
of hopelessness, of the futility of effort, and you will have a typical Malay town as the Americans
found them.

