"But, in my opinion, she would do a far nobler thing if she regarded herself as bound to some
extent to bear her mother's burden--to pay her mother's debt to society. It may sound harsh--but
is it? Is a dedicated life necessarily an unhappy life? Would not everybody respect and revere
her? She would sacrifice herself, as the Sister of Mercy does, or the missionary, and she would
find her reward. But to enter a family with an unstained record, bearing with her such a name
and such associations, would be, in my opinion, a wrong and selfish act!"

Lady Lucy drew herself to her full height. In the dusk of the declining afternoon the black
satin and white ruffles of her dress, her white head in its lace cap, her thin neck and shoulders,
her tall slenderness, and the rigidity of her attitude, made a formidable study in personality.
Sir James's whole soul rose in one scornful and indignant protest. But he felt himself beaten.
The only hope lay in Oliver himself.

He rose slowly from his chair.

"It is useless, I see, to try and argue the matter further. But I warn you: I do not believe
that Oliver will obey you, and--forgive me Lady Lucy!--but--frankly--I hope he will not. Nor
will he suffer too severely, even if you, his mother, desert him. Miss Mallory has some fortune--"

"Oliver will not live upon his wife!"

"He may accept her aid till he has found some way of earning money. What amazes me--if you
will allow me the liberty of an old friend--is that you should think a woman justified in coercing
a son of mature age in such a matter!"

His tone, his manner pierced Lady Lucy's pride. She threw back her head nervously, but her
tone was calm:

"A woman to whom property has been intrusted must do her best to see that the will and desires
of those who placed it in her hands are carried out!"

"Well, well!"--Sir James looked for his stick--"I am sorry for Oliver--but"--he straightened
himself--"it will make a bigger man of him."

Lady Lucy made no reply, but her expression was eloquent of a patience which her old friend
might abuse if he would.

"Does Ferrier know? Have you consulted him?" asked Sir James, turning abruptly.

"He will be here, I think, this afternoon--as usual," said Lady Lucy, evasively. "And, of course,
he must know what concerns us so deeply."

As she spoke the hall-door bell was heard.

"That is probably he." She looked at her companion uncertainly. "Don't go, Sir James--unless
you are really in a hurry."

The invitation was not urgent; but Sir James stayed, all the same. Ferrier was a man so interesting
to his friends that no judgment of his could be indifferent to them. Moreover, there was a
certain angry curiosity as to how far Lady Lucy's influence would affect him. Chide took inward
note of the fact that his speculation took this form, and not another. Oh! the hypocritical
obstinacy of decent women!--the lack in them of heart, of generosity, of imagination!

The door opened, and Ferrier entered, with Marsham and the butler behind him. Mr. Ferrier,
in his London frock-coat, appeared rounder and heavier than ever but for the contradictory
vigor and lightness of his step, the shrewd cheerfulness of the eyes. It had been a hard week
in Parliament, however, and his features and complexion showed signs of overwork and short sleep.

For a few minutes, while tea was renewed, and the curtains closed, he maintained a pleasant
chat with Lady Lucy, while the other two looked at each other in silence.

But when the servant had gone, Ferrier put down his cup unfinished. "I am very sorry for you
both," he said, gravely, looking from Lady Lucy to her son. "I need not say your letter this
morning took me wholly by surprise. I have since been doing my best to think of a way out."

There was a short pause--broken by Marsham, who was sitting a little apart from the others,
restlessly fingering a paper-knife.

"If you could persuade my mother to take a kind and reasonable view," he said, abruptly; "that
is really the only way out."

Lady Lucy stiffened under the attack. Drawn on by Ferrier's interrogative glance, she quietly
repeated, with more detail, and even greater austerity, the arguments and considerations she
had made use of in her wrestle with Sir James. Chide clearly perceived that her opposition
was hardening with every successive explanation of it. What had been at first, no doubt, an
instinctive recoil was now being converted into a plausible and reasoned case, and the oftener
she repeated it the stronger would she become on her own side and the more in love with her
own contentions.

Ferrier listened attentively; took note of what she reported as to Sir James's fresh evidence;
and when she ceased called upon Chide to explain. Chide's second defence of Juliet Sparling
as given to a fellow-lawyer was a remarkable piece of technical statement, admirably arranged,
and unmarked by any trace of the personal feeling he had not been able to hide from Lady Lucy.

"Most interesting--most interesting," murmured Ferrier, as the story came to an end. "A tragic
and memorable case."

He pondered a little, his eyes on the carpet, while the others waited. Then he turned to Lady
Lucy and took her hand.

"Dear lady!" he said, gently, "I think--you ought to give way!"

Lady Lucy's face quivered a little. She decidedly withdrew her hand.

"I am sorry you are both against me," she said, looking from one to the other. "I am sorry
you help Oliver to think unkindly of me. But if I must stand alone, I must. I cannot give way."

Ferrier raised his eyebrows with a little perplexed look. Thrusting his hands into his pockets,
he went to stand by the fire, staring down into it a minute or two, as though the flames might
bring counsel.

"Miss Mallory is still ignorant, Oliver--is that so?" he said, at last.

"Entirely. But it is not possible she should continue to be so. She has begun to make inquiries,
and I agree with Sir James it is right she should be told--"

"I propose to go down to Beechcote to-morrow," put in Sir James.

"Have you any idea what view Miss Mallory would be likely to take of the matter--as affecting
her engagement?"

"She could have no view that was not unselfish and noble--like herself," said Marsham, hotly.
"What has that to do with it?"  

"She might release you," was Ferrier's slow reply.

Marsham flushed.

"And you think I should be such a hound as to let her!"

Sir James only just prevented himself from throwing a triumphant look at his hostess.

"You will, of course, inform her of your mother's opposition?" said Ferrier.

"It will be impossible to keep it from her."

"Poor child!" murmured Ferrier--"poor child!"

Then he looked at Lady Lucy.

"May I take Oliver into the inner room a little while?" he asked, pointing to a farther drawing-room.

"By all means. I shall be here when you return."

Sir James had a few hurried words in private with Marsham, and then took his leave. As he and
Lady Lucy shook hands, he gave her a penetrating look.

"Try and think of the girl!" he said, in a low voice; "the girl--in her first youth."

"I think of my son," was the unmoved reply. "Good-bye, Sir James. I feel that we are adversaries,
and I wish it were not so."

Sir James walked away, possessed by a savage desire to do some damage to the cathedral in pith,
as he passed it on his way to the door; or to shake his fist in the faces of Wilberforce and
Lord Shaftesbury, whose portraits adorned the staircase. The type of Catholic woman which he
most admired rose in his mind; compassionate, tender, infinitely soft and loving--like the
saints; save where "the faith" was concerned--like the saints, again. This Protestant rigidity
and self-sufficiency were the deuce!

But he would go down to Beechcote, and he and Oliver between them would see that child through.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile, Ferrier and Marsham were in anxious conclave. Ferrier counselled delay. "Let the
thing sleep a little. Don't announce the engagement. You and Miss Mallory will, of course,
understand each other. You will correspond. But don't hurry it. So much consideration, at least,
is due to your mother's strong feeling."

Marsham assented, but despondently.

"You know my mother; time will make no difference."

"I'm not so sure--I'm not so sure," said Ferrier, cheerfully. "Did your mother say anything
about--finances?"

Marsham gave a gloomy smile.

"I shall be a pauper, of course--that was made quite plain to me."

"No, no!--that must be prevented!" said Ferrier, with energy.

Marsham was not quick to reply. His manner as he stood with his back to the fire, his distinguished
head well thrown back on his straight, lean shoulders, was the manner of a proud man suffering
humiliation. He was thirty-six, and rapidly becoming a politician of importance. Yet here he
was--poor and impotent, in the midst of great wealth, wholly dependent, by his father's monstrous
will, on his mother's caprice--liable to be thwarted and commanded, as though he were a boy
of fifteen. Up till now Lady Lucy's yoke had been tolerable; to-day it galled beyond endurance.

Moreover, there was something peculiarly irritating at the moment in Ferrier's intervention.
There had been increased Parliamentary friction of late between the two men, in spite of the
intimacy of their personal relations. To be forced to owe fortune, career, and the permission
to marry as he pleased to Ferrier's influence with his mother was, at this juncture, a bitter
pill for Oliver Marsham.

Ferrier understood him perfectly, and he had never displayed more kindness or more tact than
in the conversation which passed between them. Marsham finally agreed that Diana must be frankly
informed of his mother's state of mind, and that a waiting policy offered the only hope. On
this they were retiring to the front drawing-room when Lady Lucy opened the communicating door.

"A letter for you, Oliver."

He took it, and turned it over. The handwriting was unknown to him.

"Who brought this?" he asked of the butler standing behind his mother.

"A servant, sir, from Beechcote Manor, He was told to wait for an answer."

"I will send one. Come when I ring."

The butler departed, and Marsham went hurriedly into the inner room, closing the door behind
him. Ferrier and Lady Lucy were left, looking at each other in anxiety. But before they could
put it into words, Marsham reappeared, in evident agitation. He hurried to the bell and rang it.

Lady Lucy pointedly made no inquiry. But Ferrier spoke.

"No bad news, I hope?"

Marsham turned.

"She has been told?" he said, hoarsely, "Mrs. Colwood, her companion, speaks of 'shock.' I
must go down at once."

Lady Lucy said nothing. She, too, had grown white.

The butler appeared. Marsham asked for the Sunday trains, ordered some packing, went down-stairs
to speak to the Beechcote messenger, and returned.

Ferrier retired into the farthest window, and Marsham approached his mother.

"Good-bye, mother. I will write to you from Beechcote, where I shall stay at the little inn
in the village. Have you no kind word that I may carry with me?"

Lady Lucy looked at him steadily.

"I shall write myself to Miss Mallory, Oliver."

His pallor gave place to a flush of indignation.

"Is it necessary to do anything so cruel, mother?"

"I shall not write cruelly."

He shrugged his shoulders impatiently.

"Considering what you have made up your mind to do, I should have thought least said, soonest
mended. However, if you must, you must. I can only prepare Diana for your letter and soften
it when it comes."

"In your new love, Oliver, have you quite forgotten the old?" Lady Lucy's voice shook for the
first time.

"I shall be only too glad to remember it, when you give me the opportunity," he said, sombrely.

"I have not been a bad mother to you, Oliver. I have claims upon you."

He did not reply, and his silence wounded Lady Lucy to the quick. Was it her fault if her husband,
out of an eccentric distrust of the character of his son, and moved by a kind of old-fashioned
and Spartan belief that a man must endure hardness before he is fit for luxury, had made her
and not Oliver the arbiter and legatee of his wealth? But Oliver had never wanted for anything.
He had only to ask. What right had she to thwart her husband's decision?

"Good-bye, mother," said Marsham again. "If you are writing to Isabel you will, I suppose,
discuss the matter with her. She is not unlikely to side with you--not for your reason, however--but
because of some silly nonsense about politics. If she does, I beg she will not write to me.
It could only embitter matters."

"I will give her your message. Good-bye, Oliver." He left the room, with a gesture of farewell
to Ferrier.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ferrier came back toward the fire. As he did so he was struck--painfully struck--by a change
in Lady Lucy. She was not pale, and her eyes were singularly bright. Yet age was, for the first
time, written in a face from which Time had so far taken but his lightest toll. It moved him
strangely; though, as to the matter in hand, his sympathies were all with Oliver. But through
thirty years Lady Lucy had been the only woman for him. Since first, as a youth of twenty,
he had seen her in her father's house, he had never wavered. She was his senior by five years,
and their first acquaintance had been one of boy-adoration on his side and a charming elder-sisterliness
on hers. Then he had declared himself, and she had refused him in order to marry Henry Marsham
and Henry Marsham's fortune. It seemed to him then that he would soon forget her--soon find
a warmer and more generous heart. But that was mere ignorance of himself. After awhile he became
the intimate friend of her husband, herself, and her child. Something, indeed, had happened
to his affection for her. He felt himself in no danger beside her, so far as passion was concerned;
and he knew very well that she would have banished him forever at a moment's notice rather
than give her husband an hour's uneasiness. But to be near her, to be in her world, consulted,
trusted, and flattered by her, to slip daily into his accustomed chair, to feel year by year
the strands of friendship and of intimacy woven more closely between him and her--between him
and hers--these things gradually filled all the space in his life left by politics or by thought.
They deprived him of any other home, and this home became a necessity.

Then Henry Marsham died. Once more Ferrier asked Lady Lucy to marry him, and again she refused.
He acquiesced; their old friendship was resumed; but, once more, with a difference. In a sense
he had no longer any illusions about her. He saw that while she believed herself to be acting
under the influence of religion and other high matters, she was, in truth, a narrow and rather
cold-hearted woman, with a strong element of worldliness, disguised in much placid moralizing.
At the bottom of his soul he resented her treatment of him, and despised himself for submitting
to it. But the old habit had become a tyranny not to be broken. Where else could he go for
talk, for intimacy, for rest? And for all his disillusion there were still at her command occasional
felicities of manner and strains of feeling--ethereally delicate and spiritual, like a stanza
from the Christian Year--that moved him and pleased his taste as nothing else had power to
move and please; steeped, as they were, in a far-off magic of youth and memory.

So he stayed by her, and she knew very well that he would stay by her to the end.

He sat down beside her and took her hand.

"You are tired."

"It has been a miserable day."

"Shall I read to you? It would be wise, I think, to put it out of your mind for a while, and
come back to it fresh."

"It will be difficult to attend." Her smile was faint and sad. "But I will do my best."

He took up a volume of Dean Church's sermons, and began to read. Presently, as always, his
subtler self became conscious of the irony of the situation. He was endeavoring to soothe her
trouble by applying to it some of the noblest religious thought of our day, expressed in the
noblest language. Such an attempt implied some moral correspondence between the message and
the listener. Yet all the time he was conscious himself of cowardice and hypocrisy. What part
of the Christian message really applied to Lady Lucy this afternoon but the searching words:
"He that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen?"

Yet he read on. The delicate ascetic face of his companion grew calmer; he himself felt a certain
refreshment and rest. There was no one else in the world with whom he could sit like this,
to whom he could speak or read of the inner life. Lucy Marsham had made him what he was, a
childless bachelor, with certain memories in his past life of which he was ashamed--representing
the revenge of a strong man's temperament and physical nature. But in the old age she had all
but reached, and he was approaching, she was still the one dear and indispensable friend. If
she must needs be harsh and tyrannical--well, he must try and mitigate the effects, for herself
and others. But his utmost effort must restrain itself within certain limits. He was not at
all sure that if offended in some mortal point, she might not do without him. But so long as
they both lived, he could not do without her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Early the following morning Alicia Drake appeared in Eaton Square, and by two o'clock Mrs.
Fotheringham was also there. She had rushed up from Leeds by the first possible train, summoned
by Alicia's letter. Lady Lucy and her daughter held conference, and Miss Drake was admitted
to their counsels.

"Of course, mamma," said Isabel Fotheringham, "I don't at all agree with you in the matter.
Nobody is responsible for their mothers and fathers. We make ourselves. But I shall not be
sorry if the discovery frees Oliver from a marriage which would have been a rope round his
neck. She is a foolish, arrogant, sentimental girl, brought up on the most wrong-headed principles,
and she could never have made a decent wife for him. She will, I hope, have the sense to see
it--and he will be well out of it."

"Oliver, at present, is very determined," said Lady Lucy, in a tone of depression.

"Oh, well, of course, having just proposed to her, he must, of course, behave like a gentleman--and
not like a cad. But she can't possibly hold him to it. You will write to her, mamma--and so
shall I."

"We shall make him, I fear, very angry."

"Oliver? Well, there are moments in every family when it is no use shirking. We have to think
of Oliver's career, and what he may do for his party, and for reform. You think he proposed
to her in that walk on the hill?" said Mrs. Fotheringham, turning to her cousin Alicia.

Alicia woke up from a brown-study of her own. She was dressed with her usual perfection in
a gray cloth, just suggesting the change of season. Her felt hat with its plume of feathers
lay on her lap, and her hair, slightly loosened by the journey, captured the eye by its abundance
and beauty. The violets on her breast perfumed the room, and the rings upon her hands flashed
just as much as is permitted to an unmarried girl, and no more. As Mrs. Fotheringham looked
at her, she said to herself: "Another Redfern! Really Alicia is too extravagant!"

On that head no one could have reproached herself. A cheap coat and skirt, much worn, a hat
of no particular color or shape, frayed gloves and disreputable boots, proclaimed both the
parsimony of her father's will and the independence of her opinions.

"Oh, of course he proposed on the hill," replied Alicia, thoughtfully. "And you say, Aunt Lucy,
that he guessed--and she knew nothing? Yes!--I was certain he guessed."

"But she knows now," said Lady Lucy; "and, of course, we must all be very sorry for her."

"Oh, of course!" said Isabel. "But she will soon get over it. You won't find it will do her
any harm. People will make her a heroine."

"I should advise her not to go about with that cousin," said Alicia, softly.

"The girl who told you?"

"She was an outsider! She told me, evidently, to spite her cousin, who seemed not to have paid
her enough attention, and then wanted me to swear secrecy."

"Well, if her mother was a sister of Juliet Sparling, you can't expect much, can you? What
a mercy it has all come out so soon! The mess would have been infinitely greater if the engagement
had gone on a few weeks."

"My dear," said her mother, gravely, "we must not reckon upon Oliver's yielding to our persuasions."

Isabel smiled and shrugged her shoulders. Oliver condemn himself to the simple life!--to the
forfeiture of half a million of money--for the sake of the beaux yeux of Diana Mallory! Oliver,
who had never faced any hardship or gone without any luxury in his life!

Alicia said nothing; but the alertness of her brilliant eyes showed the activity of the brain
behind them. While Mrs. Fotheringham went off to committees, Miss Drake spent the rest of the
day in ministering to Lady Lucy, who found her company, her gossip about Beechcote, her sympathetic
yet restrained attitude toward the whole matter, quite invaluable. But, in spite of these aids,
the hours of waiting and suspense passed heavily, and Alicia said to herself that Cousin Lucy
was beginning to look frail.

CHAPTER XIII

Owing to the scantiness of Sunday trains, Marsham did not arrive at Beechcote village till
between nine and ten at night. He left his bag at the village inn, tried to ignore the scarcely
concealed astonishment with which the well-known master--or reputed master--of Tallyn was received
within its extremely modest walls, and walked up to the manor-house. There he had a short conversation
with Mrs. Colwood, who did not propose to tell Diana of his arrival till the morning.

"She does not know that I wrote to you," said the little lady, in her pale distress. "She wrote
to you herself this evening. I hope I have not done wrong."

Marsham reassured her, and they had a melancholy consultation. Diana, it seemed, had insisted
on getting up that day as usual. She had tottered across to her sitting-room and had spent
the day there alone, writing a few letters, or sitting motionless in her chair for hours together.
She had scarcely eaten, and Mrs. Colwood was sure she had not slept at all since the shock.
It was to be hoped that out of sheer fatigue she might sleep, on this, the second night. But
it was essential there should be no fresh excitement, such as the knowledge of Marsham's arrival
would certainly arouse.

Mrs. Colwood could hardly bring herself to speak of Fanny Merton. She was, of course, still
in the house--sulking--and inclined to blame everybody, her dead uncle in particular, rather
than herself. But, mercifully, she was departing early on the Monday morning--to some friends
in London.

"If you come after breakfast you will find Miss Mallory alone. I will tell her first thing
that you are here."

