The Triumph Of The Egg

                            A Book Of Impressions
                             From American Life
                             In Tales And Poems

                                     By
                             Sherwood Anderson

                                 In Clay By
                              Tennessee Mitchell

                         In the fields
                         Seeds on the air floating.
                         In the towns
                         Black smoke for a shroud.
                         In my breast
                         Understanding awake.
                         Mid American Chants.

                                    To
                          Robert And John Anderson

Tales are people who sit on the doorstep of the house of my mind. It is cold outside and they
sit waiting. I look out at a window.

The tales have cold hands, Their hands are freezing.

A short thickly-built tale arises and threshes his arms about. His nose is red and he has two
gold teeth.

There is an old female tale sitting hunched up in a cloak.

Many tales come to sit for a few moments on the doorstep
     and then go away.
It is too cold for them outside.
The street before the door of the house of my mind is
     filled with tales.
They murmur and cry out, they are dying of cold and hunger.

I am a helpless man--my hands tremble. I should be sitting on a bench like a tailor. I should
be weaving warm cloth out of the threads of thought. The tales should be clothed. They are
freezing on the doorstep of the house of my mind.

I am a helpless man--my hands tremble. I feel in the darkness but cannot find the doorknob.
I look out at a window. Many tales are dying in the street before the house of my mind.

                                    CONTENTS

THE DUMB MAN I WANT TO KNOW WHY SEEDS THE OTHER WOMAN THE EGG UNLIGHTED LAMPS SENILITY THE
MAN IN THE BROWN COAT BROTHERS THE DOOR OF THE TRAP THE NEW ENGLANDER WAR MOTHERHOOD OUT OF
NOWHERE INTO NOTHING THE MAN WITH THE TRUMPET

                                   THE DUMB MAN

There is a story.--I cannot tell it.--I have no words. The story is almost forgotten but sometimes
I remember.

The story concerns three men in a house in a street. If I could say the words I would sing
the story. I would whisper it into the ears of women, of mothers. I would run through the streets
saying it over and over. My tongue would be torn loose--it would rattle against my teeth.

The three men are in a room in the house. One is young and dandified. He continually laughs.

There is a second man who has a long white beard. He is consumed with doubt but occasionally
his doubt leaves him and he sleeps.

A third man there is who has wicked eyes and who moves nervously about the room rubbing his
hands together. The three men are waiting-- waiting.

Upstairs in the house there is a woman standing with her back to a wall, in half darkness by
a window.

That is the foundation of my story and everything I will ever know is distilled in it.

I remember that a fourth man came to the house, a white silent man. Everything was as silent
as the sea at night. His feet on the stone floor of the room where the three men were made
no sound.

The man with the wicked eyes became like a boiling liquid--he ran back and forth like a caged
animal. The old grey man was infected by his nervousness--he kept pulling at his beard.

The fourth man, the white one, went upstairs to the woman.

There she was--waiting.

How silent the house was--how loudly all the clocks in the neighborhood ticked. The woman upstairs
craved love. That must have been the story. She hungered for love with her whole being. She
wanted to create in love. When the white silent man came into her presence she sprang forward.
Her lips were parted. There was a smile on her lips.

The white one said nothing. In his eyes there was no rebuke, no question. His eyes were as
impersonal as stars.

Down stairs the wicked one whined and ran back and forth like a little lost hungry dog. The
grey one tried to follow him about but presently grew tired and lay down on the floor to sleep. 6.
Sunday Meeting (if held).

III. Sub-Committee Duties:

1. Publicity Committee: This committee is responsible for press, pulpit and Sunday school notices. It
also has the duty of discovering the leader of each Sunday school and of getting the delegates pledged
and registered.

For this purpose three letters at least should be sent out (see IV). A Registration Card also
should be filled out by each delegate and signed by Secretary of
Publicity Committee before the conference.

                                TORONTO BOYS' WORK CONFERENCE

=December 31st, 1912=

This certifies
that 

Address 

has been accepted as a Delegate to the above Conference,
having made application and paid the Registration Fee in due time.

Upon presentation of this card at the Conference Office, St. James' Square Presbyterian Church,
he is entitled to the Souvenir Conference Badge, Program, and Banquet Ticket.

Registration Secretary.

The limit of accommodation for the main banquet on the floor of Association Hall will be 600. Extra
provision will be made elsewhere for the balance if registration exceeds that number.

Provision has been made for { Main Banquet } you at the {Auxiliary Supper}

This committee is also responsible for the Registration Table during the conference.

2. Meeting Place and Decoration Committee: The duties of this committee
are obvious.

Among them, however, are the following: Five chairs and two small tables should be on the platform,
and a blackboard with eraser and abundant supply of chalk in each meeting room.

3. Program and Badge Committee: This committee should be responsible for the preparation, printing
and distribution of programs. An ample supply should be on hand during the conference sessions. A badge
(delegate's) is a good thing for the conference spirit.

4. Entertainment and Recreation Committee: Where delegates attend from out-of-town, this committee
arranges for their entertainment at the homes of friends. At a local conference this committee
is steadily on the lookout for the purpose of making the conference and delegates comfortable.
Fresh air, telephone service, messages, etc., all of these are highly
important.

This committee also should be responsible for adequate plans for the conference recreation.

5.
Banquet Committee: The details for the conference banquet, the seating of the delegates and
the serving of the food, all come under this committee. If a special banquet menu and program
are used, this also is the duty of the committee. An orchestra to play through the eating period
is a splendid feature.

6. Sunday Meeting Committee: This committee should give careful attention to the following details:

(a)
That any boy over fifteen years and under twenty-one years be admitted to the meeting. One leader
to each group of boys may attend, but these must sit by themselves in the rear of the room.

To secure these arrangements it will be necessary to put a force of determined adult watchers at
every door.

(b) Be sure to have a live organist, pianist or orchestra to lead the music. A director to lead the
singing, with ginger, will help.

(c) Have four ushers to each double or central aisle, and have two
to each single or side aisle.

(d) Everyone present at the meeting should have a song book or sheet.

(e) Be sure to have a plain white card, 3x5, and a small sharpened pencil for each one present.
This is absolutely necessary for the Forward Step part of the meeting.

IV. Letters to be sent out (Publicity Committee):

1. To Pastor, Superintendent
or Teacher:

(a) Announcing the conference, its nature, purpose, etc.

(b)
That it is confined to older boys--15 to 20 years--and one adult leader
from each school.

(c) From three to five delegates (Christian boys).

(d)
Ask for name of adult leader.

(e) Enclose Postal Card.

2. To Sunday
School Adult Leader:

(a) Send plan of conference and details.

(b)
Enclose Tentative Program.

(c) Ask for names of boy (Christian) delegates,
setting time limit and enclosing credentials.

(d) Suggest that leader
have a meeting of the delegates before the conference to consider
what the conference may mean to their own local Sunday school.

3.
To Each Delegate:

(a) Send a brief letter with program.

(b) Emphasize
the Christian nature of the conference; that it is for training and
leadership, and that he has been chosen from his school for this purpose.

(c)
Suggest daily prayer as preparation.

V. Leaders' Meeting:

If possible,
arrange for a luncheon or dinner conference for the Sunday school
adult leaders who are at the conference. Talk over the plans, programs
and hopes of the conference.

VI. Follow-Up After Conference:

1.
A Second Leaders' Meeting. (Details at Conference)

2. Local Delegates'
Meeting. (Details at Conference)

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON OLDER BOYS' CONFERENCE

Dunn.--What
the State Boys' Conference Means to the Churches (American Youth,
April, 1911) (.20).

Hinckley.--The Unique Value of Conferences of
Older Boys (American Youth, April, 1912) (.20). Then there was a lot from Louisville and Lexington Henry
Rieback knew but I didn't. They were professional gamblers and Henry Rieback's father is one
too. He is what is called a sheet writer and goes away most of the year to tracks. In the winter
when he is home in Beckersville he don't stay there much but goes away to cities and deals
faro. He is a nice man and generous, is always sending Henry presents, a bicycle and a gold
watch and a boy scout suit of clothes and things like that.

My own father is a lawyer. He's all right, but don't make much money and can't buy me things
and anyway I'm getting so old now I don't expect it. He never said nothing to me against Henry,
but Hanley Turner and Tom Tumberton's fathers did. They said to their boys that money so come
by is no good and they didn't want their boys brought up to hear gamblers' talk and be thinking
about such things and maybe embrace them.

That's all right and I guess the men know what they are talking about, but I don't see what
it's got to do with Henry or with horses either. That's what I'm writing this story about.
I'm puzzled. I'm getting to be a man and want to think straight and be O. K., and there's something
I saw at the race meeting at the eastern track I can't figure out.

I can't help it, I'm crazy about thoroughbred horses. I've always been that way. When I was
ten years old and saw I was growing to be big and couldn't be a rider I was so sorry I nearly
died. Harry Hellinfinger in Beckersville, whose father is Postmaster, is grown up and too lazy
to work, but likes to stand around in the street and get up jokes on boys like sending them
to a hardware store for a gimlet to bore square holes and other jokes like that. He played
one on me. He told me that if I would eat a half a cigar I would be stunted and not grow any
more and maybe could be a rider. I did it. When father wasn't looking I took a cigar out of
his pocket and gagged it down some way. It made me awful sick and the doctor had to be sent
for, and then it did no good. I kept right on growing. It was a joke. When I told what I had
done and why most fathers would have whipped me but mine didn't.

Well, I didn't get stunted and didn't die. It serves Harry Hellinfinger right. Then I made
up my mind I would like to be a stable boy, but had to give that up too. Mostly niggers do
that work and I knew father wouldn't let me go into it. No use to ask him.

If you've never been crazy about thoroughbreds it's because you've never been around where
they are much and don't know any better. They're beautiful. There isn't anything so lovely
and clean and full of spunk and honest and everything as some race horses. On the big horse
farms that are all around our town Beckersville there are tracks and the horses run in the
early morning. More than a thousand times I've got out of bed before daylight and walked two
or three miles to the tracks. Mother wouldn't of let me go but father always says, "Let him
alone." So I got some bread out of the bread box and some butter and jam, gobbled it and lit out.

At the tracks you sit on the fence with men, whites and niggers, and they chew tobacco and
talk, and then the colts are brought out. It's early and the grass is covered with shiny dew
and in another field a man is plowing and they are frying things in a shed where the track
niggers sleep, and you know how a nigger can giggle and laugh and say things that make you
laugh. A white man can't do it and some niggers can't but a track nigger can every time.

And so the colts are brought out and some are just galloped by stable boys, but almost every
morning on a big track owned by a rich man who lives maybe in New York, there are always, nearly
every morning, a few colts and some of the old race horses and geldings and mares that are
cut loose.

It brings a lump up into my throat when a horse runs. I don't mean all horses but some. I can
pick them nearly every time. It's in my blood like in the blood of race track niggers and trainers.
Even when they just go slop-jogging along with a little nigger on their backs I can tell a
winner. If my throat hurts and it's hard for me to swallow, that's him. He'll run like Sam
Hill when you let him out. If he don't win every time it'll be a wonder and because they've
got him in a pocket behind another or he was pulled or got off bad at the post or something.
If I wanted to be a gambler like Henry Rieback's father I could get rich. I know I could and
Henry says so too. All I would have to do is to wait 'til that hurt comes when I see a horse
and then bet every cent. That's what I would do if I wanted to be a gambler, but I don't.

When you're at the tracks in the morning--not the race tracks but the training tracks around
Beckersville--you don't see a horse, the kind I've been talking about, very often, but it's
nice anyway. Any thoroughbred, that is sired right and out of a good mare and trained by a
man that knows how, can run. If he couldn't what would he be there for and not pulling a plow?

Well, out of the stables they come and the boys are on their backs and it's lovely to be there.
You hunch down on top of the fence and itch inside you. Over in the sheds the niggers giggle
and sing. Bacon is being fried and coffee made. Everything smells lovely. Nothing smells better
than coffee and manure and horses and niggers and bacon frying and pipes being smoked out of
doors on a morning like that. It just gets you, that's what it does.

But about Saratoga. We was there six days and not a soul from home seen us and everything came
off just as we wanted it to, fine weather and horses and races and all. We beat our way home
and Bildad gave us a basket with fried chicken and bread and other eatables in, and I had eighteen
dollars when we got back to Beckersville. Mother jawed and cried but Pop didn't say much. I
told everything we done except one thing. I did and saw that alone. That's what I'm writing
about. It got me upset. I think about it at night. Here it is.

At Saratoga we laid up nights in the hay in the shed Bildad had showed us and ate with the
niggers early and at night when the race people had all gone away. The men from home stayed
mostly in the grandstand and betting field, and didn't come out around the places where the
horses are kept except to the paddocks just before a race when the horses are saddled. At Saratoga
they don't have paddocks under an open shed as at Lexington and Churchill Downs and other tracks
down in our country, but saddle the horses right out in an open place under trees on a lawn
as smooth and nice as Banker Bohon's front yard here in Beckersville. It's lovely. The horses
are sweaty and nervous and shine and the men come out and smoke cigars and look at them and
the trainers are there and the owners, and your heart thumps so you can hardly breathe.

Then the bugle blows for post and the boys that ride come running out with their silk clothes
on and you run to get a place by the fence with the niggers.

I always am wanting to be a trainer or owner, and at the risk of being seen and caught and
sent home I went to the paddocks before every race. The other boys didn't but I did.

We got to Saratoga on a Friday and on Wednesday the next week the big Mullford Handicap was
to be run. Middlestride was in it and Sunstreak. The weather was fine and the track fast. I
couldn't sleep the night before.

What had happened was that both these horses are the kind it makes my throat hurt to see. Middlestride
is long and looks awkward and is a gelding. He belongs to Joe Thompson, a little owner from
home who only has a half dozen horses. The Mullford Handicap is for a mile and Middlestride
can't untrack fast. He goes away slow and is always way back at the half, then he begins to
run and if the race is a mile and a quarter he'll just eat up everything and get there.

Sunstreak is different. He is a stallion and nervous and belongs on the biggest farm we've
got in our country, the Van Riddle place that belongs to Mr. Van Riddle of New York. Sunstreak
is like a girl you think about sometimes but never see. He is hard all over and lovely too.
When you look at his head you want to kiss him. He is trained by Jerry Tillford who knows me
and has been good to me lots of times, lets me walk into a horse's stall to look at him close
and other things. There isn't anything as sweet as that horse. He stands at the post quiet
and not letting on, but he is just burning up inside. Then when the barrier goes up he is off
like his name, Sunstreak. It makes you ache to see him. It hurts you. He just lays down and
runs like a bird dog. There can't anything I ever see run like him except Middlestride when
he gets untracked and stretches himself.

Gee! I ached to see that race and those two horses run, ached and dreaded it too. I didn't
want to see either of our horses beaten. We had never sent a pair like that to the races before.
Old men in Beckersville said so and the niggers said so. It was a fact.

Before the race I went over to the paddocks to see. I looked a last look at Middlestride, who
isn't such a much standing in a paddock that way, then I went to see Sunstreak.

It was his day. I knew when I see him. I forgot all about being seen myself and walked right
up. All the men from Beckersville were there and no one noticed me except Jerry Tillford. He
saw me and something happened. I'll tell you about that.

I was standing looking at that horse and aching. In some way, I can't tell how, I knew just
how Sunstreak felt inside. He was quiet and letting the niggers rub his legs and Mr. Van Riddle
himself put the saddle on, but he was just a raging torrent inside. He was like the water in
the river at Niagara Falls just before its goes plunk down. That horse wasn't thinking about
running. He don't have to think about that. He was just thinking about holding himself back
'til the time for the running came. I knew that. I could just in a way see right inside him.
He was going to do some awful running and I knew it. He wasn't bragging or letting on much
or prancing or making a fuss, but just waiting. I knew it and Jerry Tillford his trainer knew.
I looked up and then that man and I looked into each other's eyes. Something happened to me.
I guess I loved the man as much as I did the horse because he knew what I knew. Seemed to me
there wasn't anything in the world but that man and the horse and me. I cried and Jerry Tillford
had a shine in his eyes. Then I came away to the fence to wait for the race. The horse was
better than me, more steadier, and now I know better than Jerry. He was the quietest and he
had to do the running.

Sunstreak ran first of course and he busted the world's record for a mile. I've seen that if
I never see anything more. Everything came out just as I expected. Middlestride got left at
the post and was way back and closed up to be second, just as I knew he would. He'll get a
world's record too some day. They can't skin the Beckersville country on horses.

I watched the race calm because I knew what would happen. I was sure. Hanley Turner and Henry
Rieback and Tom Tumberton were all more excited than me.

A funny thing had happened to me. I was thinking about Jerry Tillford the trainer and how happy
he was all through the race. I liked him that afternoon even more than I ever liked my own
father. I almost forgot the horses thinking that way about him. It was because of what I had
seen in his eyes as he stood in the paddocks beside Sunstreak before the race started. I knew
he had been watching and working with Sunstreak since the horse was a baby colt, had taught
him to run and be patient and when to let himself out and not to quit, never. I knew that for
him it was like a mother seeing her child do something brave or wonderful. It was the first
time I ever felt for a man like that.

After the race that night I cut out from Tom and Hanley and Henry. I wanted to be by myself
and I wanted to be near Jerry Tillford if I could work it. Here is what happened.

The track in Saratoga is near the edge of town. It is all polished up and trees around, the
evergreen kind, and grass and everything painted and nice. If you go past the track you get
to a hard road made of asphalt for automobiles, and if you go along this for a few miles there
is a road turns off to a little rummy-looking farm house set in a yard.

That night after the race I went along that road because I had seen Jerry and some other men
go that way in an automobile. I didn't expect to find them. I walked for a ways and then sat
down by a fence to think. It was the direction they went in. I wanted to be as near Jerry as
I could. I felt close to him. Pretty soon I went up the side road--I don't know why--and came
to the rummy farm house. I was just lonesome to see Jerry, like wanting to see your father
at night when you are a young kid. Just then an automobile came along and turned in. Jerry
was in it and Henry Rieback's father, and Arthur Bedford from home, and Dave Williams and two
other men I didn't know. They got out of the car and went into the house, all but Henry Rieback's
father who quarreled with them and said he wouldn't go. It was only about nine o'clock, but
they were all drunk and the rummy looking farm house was a place for bad women to stay in.
That's what it was. I crept up along a fence and looked through a window and saw.

It's what give me the fantods. I can't make it out. The women in the house were all ugly mean-looking
women, not nice to look at or be near. They were homely too, except one who was tall and looked
a little like the gelding Middlestride, but not clean like him, but with a hard ugly mouth.
She had red hair. I saw everything plain. I got up by an old rose bush by an open window and
looked. The women had on loose dresses and sat around in chairs. The men came in and some sat
on the women's laps. The place smelled rotten and there was rotten talk, the kind a kid hears
around a livery stable in a town like Beckersville in the winter but don't ever expect to hear
talked when there are women around. It was rotten. A nigger wouldn't go into such a place.

I looked at Jerry Tillford. I've told you how I had been feeling about him on account of his
knowing what was going on inside of Sunstreak in the minute before he went to the post for
the race in which he made a world's record.

Jerry bragged in that bad woman house as I know Sunstreak wouldn't never have bragged. He said
that he made that horse, that it was him that won the race and made the record. He lied and
bragged like a fool. I never heard such silly talk.

And then, what do you suppose he did! He looked at the woman in there, the one that was lean
and hard-mouthed and looked a little like the gelding Middlestride, but not clean like him,
and his eyes began to shine just as they did when he looked at me and at Sunstreak in the paddocks
at the track in the afternoon. I stood there by the window-- gee!--but I wished I hadn't gone
away from the tracks, but had stayed with the boys and the niggers and the horses. The tall
rotten looking woman was between us just as Sunstreak was in the paddocks in the afternoon.

Then, all of a sudden, I began to hate that man. I wanted to scream and rush in the room and
kill him. I never had such a feeling before. I was so mad clean through that I cried and my
fists were doubled up so my finger nails cut my hands.

And Jerry's eyes kept shining and he waved back and forth, and then he went and kissed that
woman and I crept away and went back to the tracks and to bed and didn't sleep hardly any,
and then next day I got the other kids to start home with me and never told them anything I seen.

I been thinking about it ever since. I can't make it out. Spring has come again and I'm nearly
sixteen and go to the tracks mornings same as always, and I see Sunstreak and Middlestride
and a new colt named Strident I'll bet will lay them all out, but no one thinks so but me and
two or three niggers.

But things are different. At the tracks the air don't taste as good or smell as good. It's
because a man like Jerry Tillford, who knows what he does, could see a horse like Sunstreak
run, and kiss a woman like that the same day. I can't make it out. Darn him, what did he want
to do like that for? I keep thinking about it and it spoils looking at horses and smelling
things and hearing niggers laugh and everything. Sometimes I'm so mad about it I want to fight
someone. It gives me the fantods. What did he do it for? I want to know why.

                                      SEEDS

He was a small man with a beard and was very nervous. I remember how the cords of his neck
were drawn taut.

For years he had been trying to cure people of illness by the method called psychoanalysis.
The idea was the passion of his life. "I came here because I am tired," he said dejectedly.
"My body is not tired but something inside me is old and worn-out. I want joy. For a few days
or weeks I would like to forget men and women and the influences that make them the sick things
they are."

There is a note that comes into the human voice by which you may know real weariness. It comes
when one has been trying with all his heart and soul to think his way along some difficult
road of thought. Of a sudden he finds himself unable to go on. Something within him stops.
A tiny explosion takes place. He bursts into words and talks, perhaps foolishly. Little side
currents of his nature he didn't know were there run out and get themselves expressed. It is
at such times that a man boasts, uses big words, makes a fool of himself in general.

And so it was the doctor became shrill. He jumped up from the steps where we had been sitting,
talking and walked about. "You come from the West. You have kept away from people. You have
preserved yourself--damn you! I haven't--" His voice had indeed become shrill. "I have entered
into lives. I have gone beneath the surface of the lives of men and women. Women especially
I have studied--our own women, here in America."

"You have loved them?" I suggested.

"Yes," he said. "Yes--you are right there. I have done that. It is the only way I can get at
things. I have to try to love. You see how that is? It's the only way. Love must be the beginning
of things with me."

I began to sense the depths of his weariness. "We will go swim in the lake," I urged.

"I don't want to swim or do any damn plodding thing. I want to run and shout," he declared.
"For awhile, for a few hours, I want to be like a dead leaf blown by the winds over these hills.
I have one desire and one only--to free myself."

We walked in a dusty country road. I wanted him to know that I thought I understood, so I put
the case in my own way.

When he stopped and stared at me I talked. "You are no more and no better than myself," I declared.
"You are a dog that has rolled in offal, and because you are not quite a dog you do not like
the smell of your own hide."

In turn my voice became shrill. "You blind fool," I cried impatiently. "Men like you are fools.
You cannot go along that road. It is given to no man to venture far along the road of lives."

I became passionately in earnest. "The illness you pretend to cure is the universal illness,"
I said. "The thing you want to do cannot be done. Fool--do you expect love to be understood?"

We stood in the road and looked at each other. The suggestion of a sneer played about the corners
of his mouth. He put a hand on my shoulder and shook me. "How smart we are--how aptly we put
things!"

He spat the words out and then turned and walked a little away. "You think you understand,
but you don't understand," he cried. "What you say can't be done can be done. You're a liar.
You cannot be so definite without missing something vague and fine. You miss the whole point.
The lives of people are like young trees in a forest. They are being choked by climbing vines.
The vines are old thoughts and beliefs planted by dead men. I am myself covered by crawling
creeping vines that choke me."

He laughed bitterly. "And that's why I want to run and play," he said. "I want to be a leaf
blown by the wind over hills. I want to die and be born again, and I am only a tree covered
with vines and slowly dying. I am, you see, weary and want to be made clean. I am an amateur
venturing timidly into lives," he concluded. "I am weary and want to be made clean. I am covered
by creeping crawling things."

       *       *       *       *       *

A woman from Iowa came here to Chicago and took a room in a house on the west-side. She was
about twenty-seven years old and ostensibly she came to the city to study advanced methods
for teaching music.

A certain young man also lived in the west-side house. His room faced a long hall on the second
floor of the house and the one taken by the woman was across the hall facing his room.

In regard to the young man--there is something very sweet in his nature. He is a painter but
I have often wished he would decide to become a writer. He tells things with understanding
and he does not paint brilliantly.

And so the woman from Iowa lived in the west-side house and came home from the city in the
evening. She looked like a thousand other women one sees in the streets every day. The only
thing that at all made her stand out among the women in the crowds was that she was a little
lame. Her right foot was slightly deformed and she walked with a limp. For three months she
lived in the house--where she was the only woman except the landlady--and then a feeling in
regard to her began to grow up among the men of the house.

The men all said the same thing concerning her. When they met in the hallway at the front of
the house they stopped, laughed and whispered. "She wants a lover," they said and winked. "She
may not know it but a lover is what she needs."

One knowing Chicago and Chicago men would think that an easy want to be satisfied. I laughed
when my friend--whose name is LeRoy--told me the story, but he did not laugh. He shook his
head. "It wasn't so easy," he said. "There would be no story were the matter that simple."

LeRoy tried to explain. "Whenever a man approached her she became alarmed," he said. Men kept
smiling and speaking to her. They invited her to dinner and to the theatre, but nothing would
induce her to walk in the streets with a man. She never went into the streets at night. When
a man stopped and tried to talk with her in the hallway she turned her eyes to the floor and
then ran into her room. Once a young drygoods clerk who lived there induced her to sit with
him on the steps before the house.

He was a sentimental fellow and took hold of her hand. When she began to cry he was alarmed
and arose. He put a hand on her shoulder and tried to explain, but under the touch of his fingers
her whole body shook with terror. "Don't touch me," she cried, "don't let your hands touch
me!" She began to scream and people passing in the street stopped to listen. The drygoods clerk
was alarmed and ran upstairs to his own room. He bolted the door and stood listening. "It is
a trick," he declared in a trembling voice. "She is trying to make trouble. I did nothing to
her. It was an accident and anyway what's the matter? I only touched her arm with my fingers."

Perhaps a dozen times LeRoy has spoken to me of the experience of the Iowa woman in the west-side
house. The men there began to hate her. Although she would have nothing to do with them she
would not let them alone. In a hundred ways she continually invited approaches that when made
she repelled. When she stood naked in the bathroom facing the hallway where the men passed
up and down she left the door slightly ajar. There was a couch in the living room down stairs,
and when men were present she would sometimes enter and without saying a word throw herself
down before them. On the couch she lay with lips drawn slightly apart. Her eyes stared at the
ceiling. Her whole physical being seemed to be waiting for something. The sense of her filled
the room. The men standing about pretended not to see. They talked loudly. Embarrassment took
possession of them and one by one they crept quietly away.

One evening the woman was ordered to leave the house. Someone, perhaps the drygoods clerk,
had talked to the landlady and she acted at once. "If you leave tonight I shall like it that
much better," LeRoy heard the elder woman's voice saying. She stood in the hallway before the
Iowa woman's room. The landlady's voice rang through the house.

LeRoy the painter is tall and lean and his life has been spent in devotion to ideas. The passions
of his brain have consumed the passions of his body. His income is small and he has not married.
Perhaps he has never had a sweetheart. He is not without physical desire but he is not primarily
concerned with desire.

On the evening when the Iowa woman was ordered to leave the west-side house, she waited until
she thought the landlady had gone down stairs, and then went into LeRoy's room. It was about
eight o'clock and he sat by a window reading a book. The woman did not knock but opened the
door. She said nothing but ran across the floor and knelt at his feet. LeRoy said that her
twisted foot made her run like a wounded bird, that her eyes were burning and that her breath
came in little gasps. "Take me," she said, putting her face down upon his knees and trembling
violently. "Take me quickly. There must be a beginning to things. I can't stand the waiting.
You must take me at once."

You may be quite sure LeRoy was perplexed by all this. From what he has said I gathered that
until that evening he had hardly noticed the woman. I suppose that of all the men in the house
he had been the most indifferent to her. In the room something happened. The landlady followed
the woman when she ran to LeRoy, and the two women confronted him. The woman from Iowa knelt
trembling and frightened at his feet. The landlady was indignant. LeRoy acted on impulse. An
inspiration came to him. Putting his hand on the kneeling woman's shoulder he shook her violently.
"Now behave yourself," he said quickly. "I will keep my promise." He turned to the landlady
and smiled. "We have been engaged to be married," he said. "We have quarreled. She came here
to be near me. She has been unwell and excited. I will take her away. Please don't let yourself
be annoyed. I will take her away."

When the woman and LeRoy got out of the house she stopped weeping and put her hand into his.
Her fears had all gone away. He found a room for her in another house and then went with her
into a park and sat on a bench.

       *       *       *       *       *

Everything LeRoy has told me concerning this woman strengthens my belief in what I said to
the man that day in the mountains. You cannot venture along the road of lives. On the bench
he and the woman talked until midnight and he saw and talked with her many times later. Nothing
came of it. She went back, I suppose, to her place in the West.

In the place from which she had come the woman had been a teacher of music. She was one of
four sisters, all engaged in the same sort of work and, LeRoy says, all quiet capable women.
Their father had died when the eldest girl was not yet ten, and five years later the mother
died also. The girls had a house and a garden.

In the nature of things I cannot know what the lives of the women were like but of this one
may be quite certain--they talked only of women's affairs, thought only of women's affairs.
No one of them ever had a lover. For years no man came near the house.

Of them all only the youngest, the one who came to Chicago, was visibly affected by the utterly
feminine quality of their lives. It did something to her. All day and every day she taught
music to young girls and then went home to the women. When she was twenty-five she began to
think and to dream of men. During the day and through the evening she talked with women of
women's affairs, and all the time she wanted desperately to be loved by a man. She went to
Chicago with that hope in mind. LeRoy explained her attitude in the matter and her strange
behavior in the west-side house by saying she had thought too much and acted too little. "The
life force within her became decentralized," he declared. "What she wanted she could not achieve.
The living force within could not find expression. When it could not get expressed in one way
it took another. Sex spread itself out over her body. It permeated the very fibre of her being.
At the last she was sex personified, sex become condensed and impersonal. Certain words, the
touch of a man's hand, sometimes even the sight of a man passing in the street did something
to her."

       *       *       *       *       *

Yesterday I saw LeRoy and he talked to me again of the woman and her strange and terrible fate.

We walked in the park by the lake. As we went along the figure of the woman kept coming into
my mind. An idea came to me.

"You might have been her lover," I said. "That was possible. She was not afraid of you."

LeRoy stopped. Like the doctor who was so sure of his ability to walk into lives he grew angry
and scolded. For a moment he stared at me and then a rather odd thing happened. Words said
by the other man in the dusty road in the hills came to LeRoy's lips and were said over again.
The suggestion of a sneer played about the corners of his mouth. "How smart we are. How aptly
we put things," he said.

The voice of the young man who walked with me in the park by the lake in the city became shrill.
I sensed the weariness in him. Then he laughed and said quietly and softly, "It isn't so simple.
By being sure of yourself you are in danger of losing all of the romance of life. You miss
the whole point. Nothing in life can be settled so definitely. The woman--you see--was like
a young tree choked by a climbing vine. The thing that wrapped her about had shut out the light.
She was a grotesque as many trees in the forest are grotesques. Her problem was such a difficult
one that thinking of it has changed the whole current of my life. At first I was like you.
I was quite sure. I thought I would be her lover and settle the matter."

LeRoy turned and walked a little away. Then he came back and took hold of my arm. A passionate
earnestness took possession of him. His voice trembled. "She needed a lover, yes, the men in
the house were quite right about that," he said. "She needed a lover and at the same time a
lover was not what she needed. The need of a lover was, after all, a quite secondary thing.
She needed to be loved, to be long and quietly and patiently loved. To be sure she is a grotesque,
but then all the people in the world are grotesques. We all need to be loved. What would cure
her would cure the rest of us also. The disease she had is, you see, universal. We all want
to be loved and the world has no plan for creating our lovers."

LeRoy's voice dropped and he walked beside me in silence. We turned away from the lake and
walked under trees. I looked closely at him. The cords of his neck were drawn taut. "I have
seen under the shell of life and I am afraid," he mused. "I am myself like the woman. I am
covered with creeping crawling vine-like things. I cannot be a lover. I am not subtle or patient
enough. I am paying old debts. Old thoughts and beliefs--seeds planted by dead men--spring
up in my soul and choke me."

For a long time we walked and LeRoy talked, voicing the thoughts that came into his mind. I
listened in silence. His mind struck upon the refrain voiced by the man in the mountains. "I
would like to be a dead dry thing," he muttered looking at the leaves scattered over the grass.
"I would like to be a leaf blown away by the wind." He looked up and his eyes turned to where
among the trees we could see the lake in the distance. "I am weary and want to be made clean.
I am a man covered by creeping crawling things. I would like to be dead and blown by the wind
over limitless waters," he said. "I want more than anything else in the world to be clean."

                                 THE OTHER WOMAN

"I am in love with my wife," he said--a superfluous remark, as I had not questioned his attachment
to the woman he had married. We walked for ten minutes and then he said it again. I turned
to look at him. He began to talk and told me the tale I am now about to set down.

The thing he had on his mind happened during what must have been the most eventful week of
his life. He was to be married on Friday afternoon. On Friday of the week before he got a telegram
announcing his appointment to a government position. Something else happened that made him
very proud and glad. In secret he was in the habit of writing verses and during the year before
several of them had been printed in poetry magazines. One of the societies that give prizes
for what they think the best poems published during the year put his name at the head of its
list. The story of his triumph was printed in the newspapers of his home city and one of them
also printed his picture.

As might have been expected he was excited and in a rather highly strung nervous state all
during that week. Almost every evening he went to call on his fiancee, the daughter of a judge.
When he got there the house was filled with people and many letters, telegrams and packages
were being received. He stood a little to one side and men and women kept coming up to speak
to him. They congratulated him upon his success in getting the government position and on his
achievement as a poet. Everyone seemed to be praising him and when he went home and to bed
he could not sleep. On Wednesday evening he went to the theatre and it seemed to him that people
all over the house recognized him. Everyone nodded and smiled. After the first act five or
six men and two women left their seats to gather about him. A little group was formed. Strangers
sitting along the same row of seats stretched their necks and looked. He had never received
so much attention before, and now a fever of expectancy took possession of him.

As he explained when he told me of his experience, it was for him an altogether abnormal time.
He felt like one floating in air. When he got into bed after seeing so many people and hearing
so many words of praise his head whirled round and round. When he closed his eyes a crowd of
people invaded his room. It seemed as though the minds of all the people of his city were centred
on himself. The most absurd fancies took possession of him. He imagined himself riding in a
carriage through the streets of a city. Windows were thrown open and people ran out at the
doors of houses. "There he is. That's him," they shouted, and at the words a glad cry arose.
The carriage drove into a street blocked with people. A hundred thousand pairs of eyes looked
up at him. "There you are! It is also a distinct part of the church life and an organic part of the
Sunday school, which is large enough to hold the boy's interest from
the cradle roll to the grave.

The other organizations serve their day in the life of the boy and cease to be. It is difficult,
almost an impossibility, to get normal boys, after fifteen years of age, to take much interest in
the so-called boys' organizations, because their lives have outgrown these activities and there
is no longer any need of them. The Organized Bible Class presents a method that can never
be outgrown. It also has at its heart Bible study, which is the one essential to permanence
in any work with boys.

=Class Organization=

Objective.--Class organization is of no value unless the class has definite objectives. The members
should be made to feel that there is some great purpose in the organization.

The objectives for a teen age class should be:

1. The winning of the class members to personal allegiance to Jesus Christ as Saviour and Lord;
and

2. The proper expression of the Christian life in service for others in the name and spirit of
the Christ. Thus one strengthens one's self and helps others.

Why Organize.--(a) It is natural for a boy to want to get into an organization of some kind.
Seventy-five per cent. of the boys of a community are, or have been,
connected with some sort of organization.

These organizations, rightly controlled, and dominated by strong Christian leadership, can
be made a power for good in the community and in the lives of their members. It matters not
what the organization may be connected with, it is the activities that appeal.

Why should not the Sunday school take advantage of this natural, God-given instinct, to plan
such organization in the church as will present the strongest claim for the loyalty of the boys
in the teen age?

(b) The organization is in the hands of the members of the class, activities are planned by them,
and discipline, when necessary, is administered by them. The position of the teacher is thereby
strengthened. Instead of being an "autocrat" or "czar" in dealing with the class, the function
is that of counsellor and friend.

(c) It develops initiative, self-reliance, self-control, and the ability
to do things; character is thereby developed, and strong Christian
character is what the church needs today.

(d) The Organized Boys' Bible Classes will, without a doubt, become
as universal in their scope as Organized Adult Bible Classes.

To be affiliated with the biggest teen age organization in the world will, in itself, appeal
to every teen age boy and girl.

(e) Organization increases class spirit. The organized class becomes
"our class," not the "teacher's class."

The unorganized class suffers greatly if the teacher is removed, and sometimes is obliged to
disband. The organized class helps to secure another teacher, and, in the interim, maintains its
class work and is thus kept together. Though much depends upon the teacher, the permanency of
the class should not rest wholly upon his personality and work. Changes must necessarily come.

(f)
Organization enables the class to do things. The appointment of special committees, the assignment
of definite work to each committee, and the introduction of various class activities does much
toward realizing the ideal--"an adequate Christian service for every member." Large and permanent
success is assured when this ideal is attained.

=Standard of Organization=

1. The class shall have at least five officers: President, Vice-President, Secretary, Treasurer,
and Teacher. It shall also have as many committees as necessary to carry on its work.

2. The class shall be definitely connected with a Sunday school.

3.

A Sunday Bible session and, if practicable, week-day session or activities.

4. The age limits of the class shall be not less than thirteen or more than twenty years.

=How to Organize=

Secure Secondary Division Leaflet No. 2, of the International Sunday
School Association.

Study this leaflet carefully, noting especially the standard of organization and the suggestive
constitution, which seek to define an organized class. Distribute leaflets among those whom
you wish to interest and enlist. Organization should not be forced on the class. Do not go at
it as though you were laying a trap. Observe the following:

(a) Think it through yourself; then put yourself in the pupil's place and ask yourself the question,
"How would I like to have this presented to me?" This will give you the viewpoint of your
class, and you are then ready to go ahead. You must believe in it thoroughly, enthusiastically,
before you can hope for the interest and enthusiasm of your class.

(b) Next, get two or three of your "key" pupils, and talk it over with them. Show them the possibilities
of the organization, emphasizing the physical, mental, social and spiritual activities.

(c) Follow this with a special meeting of the class, to be held either at the home of the teacher
or one of the class.

(d) Make the organization genuine, and show that you mean business. The teen age abhors shams,
and will readily detect any weak spots in the organization. Impress upon them the necessity
of selecting capable officers. Adopt the class constitution, which
follows, select class name and motto, and elect the officers.

(e) Then let the officers conduct the meetings, both in the Sunday and the mid-week sessions.
The teacher is one of the class and is the director of activities; the officers and committeemen
do the work.

(f) In all things keep in close touch with the general superintendent and the departmental superintendent
of the school. Seek the strength that comes from advice and cooperation.

=Constitution=

A class constitution is not essential, but is often helpful. The following form of constitution
is merely suggestive and may be changed to conform to the needs of the class.

Article I--Name.

Our class shall be known as and shall be connected with, and form a part of, the Sunday school
of.

Article II--Object.

The object of the class shall be the training of Christian character for Christian service in
the extension of Christ's Kingdom by means of Bible study, through-the-week activities, mutual
helpfulness, and social fellowship, in addition to the winning of its members' allegiance to
Christ as Saviour and Lord.

Article III--Class Spirit.

To create an individuality in class spirit, loyalty and enthusiasm, the class shall have an emblem,
a motto and a color. It may also have a flower, a song, a yell, a whistle, or such other additions
as may seem wise.

Article IV--Membership.

Any boy may become a member of this class on invitation of the class.

Article V--Officers.

The class officers may include the following: Teacher, President, Vice-President, Secretary and
Treasurer.

The officers shall be elected by ballot semiannually by the class, and no officer shall serve
in the same position more than two terms in succession, except the teacher, whose election
or appointment is governed by the church or Sunday school. The teacher may be elected by the
class from a list provided by the church authorities.

Article VI--Committees

There shall be as many committees in the class as necessary, such as Social, Literary, Music, Athletic,
etc.

Article VII--Meetings.

The class shall meet at o'clock each Sunday for its regular Bible study session. Week-day meetings
may be held each week. Special meetings may be called at any time by the president, and the
presence of one-fourth of the enrolled membership shall be necessary for the transaction of
class business.

Article VIII--Duties of Officers and Committees.

Sec. 1. The teacher shall teach the lesson, shall be an ex officio member of all committees, and
shall work cooperatively with the president in promoting the interests of the class.

Sec. 2. The president shall preside at meetings of the class, shall have general supervision
over the officers, and shall see that the work of the class is pushed in accordance with its
object.

Sec. 3. The vice-president shall take the president's place in case of absence, and shall render
such assistance to the president as may be required of him.

Sec. 4. The secretary shall make class announcements, keep minutes of all meetings, write to absent
members, and report any information to the teacher which may be desired.

Sec. 5. The duty of committees shall be defined by the activity each carries on, said committee being
responsible to the class for the work entrusted to it.

Article IX--By-Laws.

From time to time the class may amend this constitution and pass such by-laws as seem wise in
carrying forward the work of the class.

                                    

A careful study of the Organized Class diagram on another page (86) will furnish the teacher with a
workable plan. In all cases it should be adapted to local conditions.

Mid-week activities should be planned as a part of the weekly program, keeping in mind the fourfold
life of the pupil. The planning of these activities should be left almost entirely to the class;
any plans that the teacher may have should be turned over to the class by way of suggestion.
Place the responsibility on the members of the class, and once they have caught the idea there
will be no lack of suggestions on their part.

The class session on Sunday should be in charge of the president of
the class. The opening services may consist of a short prayer by the
teacher or pupil volunteering; reading of brief minutes, covering
the mid-week activities and emphasizing the important points brought
out by the teacher in the lesson of the previous Sunday; collection
and other business. The president then turns the class over to the
teacher for the teaching of the lesson. The closing services of the
class should by all means be observed.

Committees.--Short-term committees
are the more effective, covering the activities when planned. The
short-term committee plan, however, need not be suggested to the class
until it discovers that the long-term or standing committee has failed.
They will doubtless be the first to suggest the new plan.

=Class
Grouping and Size=

It should be sane and natural and not too large.
This should be specially borne in mind in working with boys; a "gang"
usually consists of from seven to fourteen. The girls' class is different,
and the size of the group does not materially matter. The class, however,
should not be so unwieldy as to make it impossible for the teacher
to give personal attention to each individual.

It is impossible to
get the best results when pupils of twelve and eighteen are members
of the same class, for they are living in two different worlds of
thought. A teacher cannot hope to hold together a group in which there
is such disparity of age. A working basis is (13-14), (15-17), (18-20).
This is but a foundation on which to work. The correct grouping should
be on a physiological basis instead of chronological. A pupil ofttimes
will not fit into a group of his or her own age; physiologically,
they may be a year or two in advance of the rest of the class, and
are mingling through the week with an older group. Adjustments in
such cases should be made so that the pupil is permitted to find his
or her natural grouping. Like water, they will find their level.

Under
no ordinary circumstances should classes be mixed (boys and girls
together).

=Class Names and Mottoes=

Names.--A class name will help
to create a strong and healthy class spirit, and is valuable as a
means of advertising the class and its work.

Some prefer to take
class numbers or letters, thus recognizing their relationship to the
Sunday school; others select names from the Bible to indicate their
relation to Bible study; others choose names that indicate some kind
of Christian service, thus committing the class to Christian work;
while others take names of heroes or use Greek letters.

Mottoes.--A
motto is perhaps more important than a name. It will help to place
and keep before the class a definite purpose. If often repeated it
will aid in producing in the class the spirit expressed in the motto.
The following well-known mottoes may be suggestive: We're in the King's
Business--We Do Things--The World for Christ--We Mean Business--The
Other Fellow--Every Man Up--Quit You Like Men.

=International Teen
Age Certificate of Recognition=

The International Sunday School Association,
through its Secondary Division, issues a certificate, or charter of
recognition.

This certificate represents a minimum standard of organization
for classes, which is considered practical for scholars of these ages.
It gives the class the recognition of the International, State or
Provincial Associations; and to the schools whose denominations add
their seal and signature, or provide a joint certificate, denominational
recognition as well. The certificate of the Secondary Division is
beautifully lithographed, and is suitable for framing for the class
room. For classes of the Intermediate age (13-16 years) an Intermediate
seal is affixed, and a Senior (17-20 years) or Adult seal may be added
upon the advance of the class to these departments. It can be secured
by filling out the application blank at the end of this leaflet, and
by sending the same, together with twenty-five cents to cover the
cost, to your State or Provincial Association, or Denominational headquarters.
Seals may be secured from the same sources.

This certificate and
registration links the class to the Sunday school teen age brotherhood
throughout the world.

The royal blue and white button (white center
with blue rim) has been adopted for both the Intermediate (13-16 years)
and Senior (17-20 years) Departments, the blue indicating loyalty
and the white purity.

=Application Blank= for =International Certificate
of Recognition=

=Secondary Division= Years 13-20.

Name of Class
Name of Sunday School Name of Denomination Town or City County State
or Province Has the class the following officers: President, Vice-President,
Secretary and Treasurer? Is the class of intermediate age (13-16),
or senior age (17-20)? What is the average age of the members of your
class? Name of Class Teacher Post-office address Name of Class President
Post-office address Does the class use the Secondary Division Emblem?

Class
motto Date of organization Present Membership Date of Application
19 Filled out by: Name Post-office address Kindly fill out this blank
carefully. Detach and send same with twenty-five cents to your State
Sunday School Association office.

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON THE ORGANIZED CLASS

International
Leaflets on Secondary Adult Classes (Free).

Pearce.--The Adult Bible
Class (.25).

IX

BIBLE STUDY FOR BOYS

The study of the Bible that
contributes to the boy's education is now generally accepted to be
that which is adjusted to the known characteristics of boys. At one
time, not so very far distant, all Scripture was supposed to be good
for a boy's moral and spiritual character-building. One part of the
Bible was held to be as good as any other, the important thing necessary
being to get the Bible into the life of the boy, somehow. It did not
matter much whether the boy understood all he read and was told, or
not. It would prepare him for some future crisis and enable him some
time to better meet a possible temptation. It was to be a sort of
preventive application, very much as vaccination now is administered
to ward off dreaded disease. And, to tell the exact truth, it often
did, and the treatment proved more efficacious than some of the present-day
Bible study methods, where mere knowledge is attempted. The mistake
was the misunderstanding (for misunderstanding it was, and not a desire
to merely plague the boy) of the fact that boys were developing creatures,
spiritually as well as physically, and that Bible study could be made
pleasant as well as profitable. Something
happened to the two people. They became ambitious. The American passion for getting up in the
world took possession of them.

It may have been that mother was responsible. Being a school-teacher she had no doubt read
books and magazines. She had, I presume, read of how Garfield, Lincoln, and other Americans
rose from poverty to fame and greatness and as I lay beside her--in the days of her lying-in--she
may have dreamed that I would some day rule men and cities. At any rate she induced father
to give up his place as a farm-hand, sell his horse and embark on an independent enterprise
of his own. She was a tall silent woman with a long nose and troubled grey eyes. For herself
she wanted nothing. For father and myself she was incurably ambitious.

The first venture into which the two people went turned out badly. They rented ten acres of
poor stony land on Griggs's Road, eight miles from Bidwell, and launched into chicken raising.
I grew into boyhood on the place and got my first impressions of life there. From the beginning
they were impressions of disaster and if, in my turn, I am a gloomy man inclined to see the
darker side of life, I attribute it to the fact that what should have been for me the happy
joyous days of childhood were spent on a chicken farm.

One unversed in such matters can have no notion of the many and tragic things that can happen
to a chicken. It is born out of an egg, lives for a few weeks as a tiny fluffy thing such as
you will see pictured on Easter cards, then becomes hideously naked, eats quantities of corn
and meal bought by the sweat of your father's brow, gets diseases called pip, cholera, and
other names, stands looking with stupid eyes at the sun, becomes sick and dies. A few hens,
and now and then a rooster, intended to serve God's mysterious ends, struggle through to maturity.
The hens lay eggs out of which come other chickens and the dreadful cycle is thus made complete.
It is all unbelievably complex. Most philosophers must have been raised on chicken farms. One
hopes for so much from a chicken and is so dreadfully disillusioned. Small chickens, just setting
out on the journey of life, look so bright and alert and they are in fact so dreadfully stupid.
They are so much like people they mix one up in one's judgments of life. If disease does not
kill them they wait until your expectations are thoroughly aroused and then walk under the
wheels of a wagon--to go squashed and dead back to their maker. Vermin infest their youth,
and fortunes must be spent for curative powders. In later life I have seen how a literature
has been built up on the subject of fortunes to be made out of the raising of chickens. It
is intended to be read by the gods who have just eaten of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil. It is a hopeful literature and declares that much may be done by simple ambitious
people who own a few hens. Do not be led astray by it. It was not written for you. Go hunt
for gold on the frozen hills of Alaska, put your faith in the honesty of a politician, believe
if you will that the world is daily growing better and that good will triumph over evil, but
do not read and believe the literature that is written concerning the hen. It was not written
for you.

I, however, digress. My tale does not primarily concern itself with the hen. If correctly told
it will centre on the egg. For ten years my father and mother struggled to make our chicken
farm pay and then they gave up that struggle and began another. They moved into the town of
Bidwell, Ohio and embarked in the restaurant business. After ten years of worry with incubators
that did not hatch, and with tiny--and in their own way lovely--balls of fluff that passed
on into semi-naked pullethood and from that into dead hen-hood, we threw all aside and packing
our belongings on a wagon drove down Griggs's Road toward Bidwell, a tiny caravan of hope looking
for a new place from which to start on our upward journey through life.

We must have been a sad looking lot, not, I fancy, unlike refugees fleeing from a battlefield.
Mother and I walked in the road. The wagon that contained our goods had been borrowed for the
day from Mr. Albert Griggs, a neighbor. Out of its sides stuck the legs of cheap chairs and
at the back of the pile of beds, tables, and boxes filled with kitchen utensils was a crate
of live chickens, and on top of that the baby carriage in which I had been wheeled about in
my infancy. Why we stuck to the baby carriage I don't know. It was unlikely other children
would be born and the wheels were broken. People who have few possessions cling tightly to
those they have. That is one of the facts that make life so discouraging.

Father rode on top of the wagon. He was then a bald-headed man of forty-five, a little fat
and from long association with mother and the chickens he had become habitually silent and
discouraged. All during our ten years on the chicken farm he had worked as a laborer on neighboring
farms and most of the money he had earned had been spent for remedies to cure chicken diseases,
on Wilmer's White Wonder Cholera Cure or Professor Bidlow's Egg Producer or some other preparations
that mother found advertised in the poultry papers. There were two little patches of hair on
father's head just above his ears. I remember that as a child I used to sit looking at him
when he had gone to sleep in a chair before the stove on Sunday afternoons in the winter. I
had at that time already begun to read books and have notions of my own and the bald path that
led over the top of his head was, I fancied, something like a broad road, such a road as Caesar
might have made on which to lead his legions out of Rome and into the wonders of an unknown
world. The tufts of hair that grew above father's ears were, I thought, like forests. I fell
into a half-sleeping, half-waking state and dreamed I was a tiny thing going along the road
into a far beautiful place where there were no chicken farms and where life was a happy eggless
affair.

One might write a book concerning our flight from the chicken farm into town. Mother and I
walked the entire eight miles--she to be sure that nothing fell from the wagon and I to see
the wonders of the world. On the seat of the wagon beside father was his greatest treasure.
I will tell you of that.

On a chicken farm where hundreds and even thousands of chickens come out of eggs surprising
things sometimes happen. Grotesques are born out of eggs as out of people. The accident does
not often occur--perhaps once in a thousand births. A chicken is, you see, born that has four
legs, two pairs of wings, two heads or what not. The things do not live. They go quickly back
to the hand of their maker that has for a moment trembled. The fact that the poor little things
could not live was one of the tragedies of life to father. He had some sort of notion that
if he could but bring into henhood or roosterhood a five-legged hen or a two-headed rooster
his fortune would be made. He dreamed of taking the wonder about to county fairs and of growing
rich by exhibiting it to other farm-hands.

At any rate he saved all the little monstrous things that had been born on our chicken farm.
They were preserved in alcohol and put each in its own glass bottle. These he had carefully
put into a box and on our journey into town it was carried on the wagon seat beside him. He
drove the horses with one hand and with the other clung to the box. When we got to our destination
the box was taken down at once and the bottles removed. All during our days as keepers of a
restaurant in the town of Bidwell, Ohio, the grotesques in their little glass bottles sat on
a shelf back of the counter. Mother sometimes protested but father was a rock on the subject
of his treasure. The grotesques were, he declared, valuable. People, he said, liked to look
at strange and wonderful things.

Did I say that we embarked in the restaurant business in the town of Bidwell, Ohio? I exaggerated
a little. The town itself lay at the foot of a low hill and on the shore of a small river.
The railroad did not run through the town and the station was a mile away to the north at a
place called Pickleville. There had been a cider mill and pickle factory at the station, but
before the time of our coming they had both gone out of business. In the morning and in the
evening busses came down to the station along a road called Turner's Pike from the hotel on
the main street of Bidwell. Our going to the out of the way place to embark in the restaurant
business was mother's idea. She talked of it for a year and then one day went off and rented
an empty store building opposite the railroad station. It was her idea that the restaurant
would be profitable. Special work done is recognized by placing a seal upon the certificate. Promotion
exercises should include some statement of the work accomplished.

Sunday School Spirit

In order to maintain a genuine spirit of Sunday school unity it is desirable to have the whole
school meet together from time to time for the common tie and uplift of worship in the mass.
The exercises of festival occasions also help to bring this about, and the common gatherings, regular
or special, of the school, tend to magnify the united leadership of officers and teachers.
These should never interfere with the work of instruction, the main objective of the school,
but should supplement it. Departments should be made to feel their partnership in the Sunday school
enterprise, and this may be brought about by the reading of the departmental and school minutes
in each department. Continued emphasis should be placed on the oneness of the school--"All one
body, we." Thus we may hope for Christian comradeship and loyalty.

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON BOYS' DEPARTMENT

Boys' Work Message.--(Men and Religion Movement) ($1.00).

Cope.--Efficiency in the Sunday School ($1.00).

Huse.--Boys' Department in Springvale, Maine (American Youth, February, 1911) (.20).

Stanley.--The Boys' Department in the Sunday School (American Youth, April, 1911) (.20).

Waite.--Boys' Department of the Sunday School (Free leaflet).

XII

INTER-SUNDAY SCHOOL EFFORT FOR BOYS

This volume so far has discussed nothing save the work among teen age boys in the local Sunday
school, in Organized Class or Boys' Department. This is as it should be, "beginning at Jerusalem"
and taking care first of the local school.

To magnify the church and church school, however, in the eye of the boy and to make it his
central interest or the center of his interests, it is necessary to view Sunday school effort in
a larger way than the work of the local school. The Sunday school
must become city-wide in its scope and effort. Common town-wide activity,
such as outings, athletics, camps, entertainments, lectures, campaigns,
etc., must be promoted jointly. Not only this, but the Christian boys
of the community must be taught the democracy of Christianity and
be led to work together in Christian service for each other and with
each other for all the boys of the city. Something of this has been
attempted in some places, but always under adult rule. Adult supervision--not
rule--is always necessary. Thus city camps and Sunday school athletic
leagues have flourished as adult effort for boys. That which is contemplated
in the following two chapters is distinctly work by boys for boys
in the Sunday school field. The need of adult help to organize and
set things going is recognized as necessary, good and the proper thing.
The value of the work will consist in the enlistment of the boys themselves
and the participation in and direction of the proposed work by the
boys. Boys are not as exclusive, limited or provincial as adults.
Their interests are wider than the local church. The task is to couple
those interests with the local church as the center of greater community-wide
activity, and to direct them to effective service.

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON
INTER-SUNDAY SCHOOL OR CHURCH WORK

Barbour (Editor).--Making Religion
Efficient (Boys' Work Chapter) ($1.00). When people, particularly young
people from the town of Bidwell, came into our place, as on very rare occasions they did, bright
entertaining conversation was to be made. From father's words I gathered that something of
the jolly inn- keeper effect was to be sought. Mother must have been doubtful from the first,
but she said nothing discouraging. It was father's notion that a passion for the company of
himself and mother would spring up in the breasts of the younger people of the town of Bidwell.
In the evening bright happy groups would come singing down Turner's Pike. They would troop
shouting with joy and laughter into our place. There would be song and festivity. I do not
mean to give the impression that father spoke so elaborately of the matter. He was as I have
said an uncommunicative man. "They want some place to go. I tell you they want some place to
go," he said over and over. That was as far as he got. My own imagination has filled in the blanks.

For two or three weeks this notion of father's invaded our house. We did not talk much, but
in our daily lives tried earnestly to make smiles take the place of glum looks. Mother smiled
at the boarders and I, catching the infection, smiled at our cat. Father became a little feverish
in his anxiety to please. There was no doubt, lurking somewhere in him, a touch of the spirit
of the showman. He did not waste much of his ammunition on the railroad men he served at night
but seemed to be waiting for a young man or woman from Bidwell to come in to show what he could
do. On the counter in the restaurant there was a wire basket kept always filled with eggs,
and it must have been before his eyes when the idea of being entertaining was born in his brain.
There was something pre-natal about the way eggs kept themselves connected with the development
of his idea. At any rate an egg ruined his new impulse in life. Late one night I was awakened
by a roar of anger coming from father's throat. Both mother and I sat upright in our beds.
With trembling hands she lighted a lamp that stood on a table by her head. Downstairs the front
door of our restaurant went shut with a bang and in a few minutes father tramped up the stairs.
He held an egg in his hand and his hand trembled as though he were having a chill. There was
a half insane light in his eyes. As he stood glaring at us I was sure he intended throwing
the egg at either mother or me. Then he laid it gently on the table beside the lamp and dropped
on his knees beside mother's bed. He began to cry like a boy and I, carried away by his grief,
cried with him. The two of us filled the little upstairs room with our wailing voices. It is
ridiculous, but of the picture we made I can remember only the fact that mother's hand continually
stroked the bald path that ran across the top of his head. I have forgotten what mother said
to him and how she induced him to tell her of what had happened downstairs. His explanation
also has gone out of my mind. I remember only my own grief and fright and the shiny path over
father's head glowing in the lamp light as he knelt by the bed.

As to what happened downstairs. For some unexplainable reason I know the story as well as though
I had been a witness to my father's discomfiture. One in time gets to know many unexplainable
things. On that evening young Joe Kane, son of a merchant of Bidwell, came to Pickleville to
meet his father, who was expected on the ten o'clock evening train from the South. The train
was three hours late and Joe came into our place to loaf about and to wait for its arrival.
The local freight train came in and the freight crew were fed. Joe was left alone in the restaurant
with father.

From the moment he came into our place the Bidwell young man must have been puzzled by my father's
actions. It was his notion that father was angry at him for hanging around. He noticed that
the restaurant keeper was apparently disturbed by his presence and he thought of going out.
However, it began to rain and he did not fancy the long walk to town and back. He bought a
five-cent cigar and ordered a cup of coffee. He had a newspaper in his pocket and took it out
and began to read. "I'm waiting for the evening train. It's late," he said apologetically.

For a long time father, whom Joe Kane had never seen before, remained silently gazing at his
visitor. He was no doubt suffering from an attack of stage fright. As so often happens in life
he had thought so much and so often of the situation that now confronted him that he was somewhat
nervous in its presence.

For one thing, he did not know what to do with his hands. He thrust one of them nervously over
the counter and shook hands with Joe Kane. "How- de-do," he said. Joe Kane put his newspaper
down and stared at him. Father's eye lighted on the basket of eggs that sat on the counter
and he began to talk. "Well," he began hesitatingly, "well, you have heard of Christopher Columbus,
eh?" He seemed to be angry. "That Christopher Columbus was a cheat," he declared emphatically.
"He talked of making an egg stand on its end. He talked, he did, and then he went and broke
the end of the egg."

My father seemed to his visitor to be beside himself at the duplicity of Christopher Columbus.
He muttered and swore. He declared it was wrong to teach children that Christopher Columbus
was a great man when, after all, he cheated at the critical moment. He had declared he would
make an egg stand on end and then when his bluff had been called he had done a trick. Still
grumbling at Columbus, father took an egg from the basket on the counter and began to walk
up and down. He rolled the egg between the palms of his hands. He smiled genially. He began
to mumble words regarding the effect to be produced on an egg by the electricity that comes
out of the human body. He declared that without breaking its shell and by virtue of rolling
it back and forth in his hands he could stand the egg on its end. He explained that the warmth
of his hands and the gentle rolling movement he gave the egg created a new centre of gravity,
and Joe Kane was mildly interested. "I have handled thousands of eggs," father said. "No one
knows more about eggs than I do."

He stood the egg on the counter and it fell on its side. He tried the trick again and again,
each time rolling the egg between the palms of his hands and saying the words regarding the
wonders of electricity and the laws of gravity. When after a half hour's effort he did succeed
in making the egg stand for a moment he looked up to find that his visitor was no longer watching.
By the time he had succeeded in calling Joe Kane's attention to the success of his effort the
egg had again rolled over and lay on its side.

Afire with the showman's passion and at the same time a good deal disconcerted by the failure
of his first effort, father now took the bottles containing the poultry monstrosities down
from their place on the shelf and began to show them to his visitor. "How would you like to
have seven legs and two heads like this fellow?" he asked, exhibiting the most remarkable of
his treasures. A cheerful smile played over his face. He reached over the counter and tried
to slap Joe Kane on the shoulder as he had seen men do in Ben Head's saloon when he was a young
farm-hand and drove to town on Saturday evenings. His visitor was made a little ill by the
sight of the body of the terribly deformed bird floating in the alcohol in the bottle and got
up to go. Coming from behind the counter father took hold of the young man's arm and led him
back to his seat. He grew a little angry and for a moment had to turn his face away and force
himself to smile. Then he put the bottles back on the shelf. In an outburst of generosity he
fairly compelled Joe Kane to have a fresh cup of coffee and another cigar at his expense. Then
he took a pan and filling it with vinegar, taken from a jug that sat beneath the counter, he
declared himself about to do a new trick. "I will heat this egg in this pan of vinegar," he
said. "Then I will put it through the neck of a bottle without breaking the shell. When the
egg is inside the bottle it will resume its normal shape and the shell will become hard again.
Then I will give the bottle with the egg in it to you. You can take it about with you wherever
you go. People will want to know how you got the egg in the bottle. Don't tell them. Keep them
guessing. That is the way to have fun with this trick."

Father grinned and winked at his visitor. Joe Kane decided that the man who confronted him
was mildly insane but harmless. He drank the cup of coffee that had been given him and began
to read his paper again. When the egg had been heated in vinegar father carried it on a spoon
to the counter and going into a back room got an empty bottle. He was angry because his visitor
did not watch him as he began to do his trick, but nevertheless went cheerfully to work. For
a long time he struggled, trying to get the egg to go through the neck of the bottle. He put
the pan of vinegar back on the stove, intending to reheat the egg, then picked it up and burned
his fingers. After a second bath in the hot vinegar the shell of the egg had been softened
a little but not enough for his purpose. He worked and worked and a spirit of desperate determination
took possession of him. When he thought that at last the trick was about to be consummated
the delayed train came in at the station and Joe Kane started to go nonchalantly out at the
door. Father made a last desperate effort to conquer the egg and make it do the thing that
would establish his reputation as one who knew how to entertain guests who came into his restaurant.
He worried the egg. He attempted to be somewhat rough with it. He swore and the sweat stood
out on his forehead. The egg broke under his hand. When the contents spurted over his clothes,
Joe Kane, who had stopped at the door, turned and laughed.

A roar of anger rose from my father's throat. He danced and shouted a string of inarticulate
words. Grabbing another egg from the basket on the counter, he threw it, just missing the head
of the young man as he dodged through the door and escaped.

Father came upstairs to mother and me with an egg in his hand. I do not know what he intended
to do. I imagine he had some idea of destroying it, of destroying all eggs, and that he intended
to let mother and me see him begin. When, however, he got into the presence of mother something
happened to him. He laid the egg gently on the table and dropped on his knees by the bed as
I have already explained. He later decided to close the restaurant for the night and to come
upstairs and get into bed. When he did so he blew out the light and after much muttered conversation
both he and mother went to sleep. I suppose I went to sleep also, but my sleep was troubled.

I awoke at dawn and for a long time looked at the egg that lay on the table. I wondered why
eggs had to be and why from the egg came the hen who again laid the egg. The question got into
my blood. It has stayed there, I imagine, because I am the son of my father. At any rate, the
problem remains unsolved in my mind. And that, I conclude, is but another evidence of the complete
and final triumph of the egg--at least as far as my family is concerned.

                            UNLIGHTED LAMPS

Mary Cochran went out of the rooms where she lived with her father, Doctor Lester Cochran,
at seven o'clock on a Sunday evening. It was June of the year nineteen hundred and eight and
Mary was eighteen years old. She walked along Tremont to Main Street and across the railroad
tracks to Upper Main, lined with small shops and shoddy houses, a rather quiet cheerless place
on Sundays when there were few people about. She had told her father she was going to church
but did not intend doing anything of the kind. She did not know what she wanted to do. "I'll
get off by myself and think," she told herself as she walked slowly along. The night she thought
promised to be too fine to be spent sitting in a stuffy church and hearing a man talk of things
that had apparently nothing to do with her own problem. Her own affairs were approaching a
crisis and it was time for her to begin thinking seriously of her future.

The thoughtful serious state of mind in which Mary found herself had been induced in her by
a conversation had with her father on the evening before. Without any preliminary talk and
quite suddenly and abruptly he had told her that he was a victim of heart disease and might
die at any moment. He had made the announcement as they stood together in the Doctor's office,
back of which were the rooms in which the father and daughter lived.

It was growing dark outside when she came into the office and found him sitting alone. The
office and living rooms were on the second floor of an old frame building in the town of Huntersburg,
Illinois, and as the Doctor talked he stood beside his daughter near one of the windows that
looked down into Tremont Street. The hushed murmur of the town's Saturday night life went on
in Main Street just around a corner, and the evening train, bound to Chicago fifty miles to
the east, had just passed. The hotel bus came rattling out of Lincoln Street and went through
Tremont toward the hotel on Lower Main. A cloud of dust kicked up by the horses' hoofs floated
on the quiet air. A straggling group of people followed the bus and the row of hitching posts
on Tremont Street was already lined with buggies in which farmers and their wives had driven
into town for the evening of shopping and gossip.

After the station bus had passed three or four more buggies were driven into the street. From
one of them a young man helped his sweetheart to alight. He took hold of her arm with a certain
air of tenderness, and a hunger to be touched thus tenderly by a man's hand, that had come
to Mary many times before, returned at almost the same moment her father made the announcement
of his approaching death.

As the Doctor began to speak Barney Smithfield, who owned a livery barn that opened into Tremont
Street directly opposite the building in which the Cochrans lived, came back to his place of
business from his evening meal. He stopped to tell a story to a group of men gathered before
the barn door and a shout of laughter arose. One of the loungers in the street, a strongly
built young man in a checkered suit, stepped away from the others and stood before the liveryman.
Having seen Mary he was trying to attract her attention. He also began to tell a story and
as he talked he gesticulated, waved his arms and from time to time looked over his shoulder
to see if the girl still stood by the window and if she were watching.

Doctor Cochran had told his daughter of his approaching death in a cold quiet voice. To the
girl it had seemed that everything concerning her father must be cold and quiet. "I have a
disease of the heart," he said flatly, "have long suspected there was something of the sort
the matter with me and on Thursday when I went into Chicago I had myself examined. The truth
is I may die at any moment. I would not tell you but for one reason--I will leave little money
and you must be making plans for the future."

The Doctor stepped nearer the window where his daughter stood with her hand on the frame. The
announcement had made her a little pale and her hand trembled. In spite of his apparent coldness
he was touched and wanted to reassure her. "There now," he said hesitatingly, "it'll likely
be all right after all. Don't worry. I haven't been a doctor for thirty years without knowing
there's a great deal of nonsense about these pronouncements on the part of experts. In a matter
like this, that is to say when a man has a disease of the heart, he may putter about for years." The
problem is a universal one.

The teen age represents the most important period of life. Ideals and standards are set up, habits
formed and decisions made that will make or mar a life. The high-water mark of conversion is reached
at fifteen, and between the ages of thirteen and eighteen more definite stands are made for
the Christian life than in all the other combined years of a lifetime.

It

marks the period of adolescence, when the powers and passions of manhood enter into the life
of the boy, and when the will is not strong enough to control these great forces. Powers must
be unfolded before ability to use them can develop, and instincts must be controlled while these
are in the process of development. The importance of systematic adult leadership during this
period of storm and stress cannot be too strongly emphasized.

The teen age boy is naturally religious. Opportunity, however, must be given him to express his
religion in forms that appeal to and are understood by him. In other words, his religion, like
his nature, is a positive quantity, and will be carried by him throughout the day, to dominate
all of the activities in which he engages.

       

The problem also reaches through the entire teen years and must be regarded as a whole, rather
than as a series of successive stages, each stage being separate and complete in itself.

The great problem, then, which confronts us is to keep the boys in the church and Sunday school during
the critical years of adolescence and to bring to their support the strength which comes from
God's Word and true Christian friendship, to the end that they may be related to the Son of God
as Saviour and Lord through personal faith and loyal service.

GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY

Alexander, Editor.--Boy Training (.75). The Sunday School and the Teens. (The Report of the International
Commission on Adolescence) ($1.00).

Alexander, Editor.--The Teens and the Rural Sunday School. (The Report of the International
Commission on Rural Adolescence.) In preparation.

Boys' Work Message (Men and Religion Movement) ($1.00).

Fiske.--Boy Life and Self-Government ($1.00).

Hall.--Developing into Manhood (Sex Education Series) (.25)

Hall.--Life's Beginnings (Sex Education Series) (.25)

Secondary Division Leaflets, International Sunday School Association (Free).

1. Secondary Division Organization.

2. The Organized Class.

3. State and County Work.

4. Through-the-week Activities.

5. The Secondary Division Crusade.

Swift--Youth and the Race ($1.50).

THE BOY AND HIS EDUCATION

Three institutions are responsible for the education of the adolescent boy. By "education" is
meant not merely the acquisition of certain forms of related knowledge, but the symmetrical
adaptation of the life to the community in which it lives.

The three institutions that cooperate in the community for this purpose are: the home, the school,
and the church. There are many organizations and orders that have a large place in the life of
the growing boy, but these must be viewed solely in the light of auxiliaries to the home, school
and church in the production of efficient boyhood and trained manhood.

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON EDUCATION

Draper.--American Education ($2.00).

Payot.--Education of the Will ($1.50).

I

THE HOME AND THE BOY

The greatest of the three institutions affecting boy life, from the very fact that it is the
primary one, is the home. The home is the basis of the community, the community merely being
the aggregation of a large number of well-organized or ill-organized homes. The first impressions
the boy receives are through his home life, and the bent of his whole
career is often determined by the home relationships.

The large majority of homes today are merely places in which a boy may eat and sleep. The original
prerogatives of the father and mother, so far as they pertain to the physical, social, mental
and moral development of boyhood, have been farmed out to other organizations in the community.
The home life of today greatly differs from that of previous generations. This is very largely due
to social and economic conditions. Our social and economic revolution has made vast inroads
upon our normal home life, with the result that the home has been seriously weakened and the
boy has been deprived of his normal home heritage.

To give the home at least some of the old power that it used to have over the boy life, there
must needs be recognized the very definite place a boy must have in the family councils. The
general tendency today, as far as the boy is concerned, is an utter disregard on the part of the
father and mother of the importance of the boy as a partner in the family. He is merely the son
of his father and mother, and their obligations to him seemingly end in providing him with
wholesome food, warm clothing, a place to sleep and a room in which
to study and play in common with other members of the household.

Very little thought is given on the part of the father and mother to the real part the boy
should play in the direction of the family life. Family matters are never determined with the help
of his judgment. They are even rarely discussed in his presence. Instead of being a partner in
the family life, doing his share of the family work and being recognized as a necessary part
of its welfare, he is only recognized as a dependent member, to be cared for until he is old
enough to strike out and make a place for himself. This sometimes is modified when the boy comes
to the wage-earning age, when he is required to assist in the support of the family, but even
then his place in the family councils to determine the policy of the family is usually a very small
one.

In the home of today few fathers and mothers seem to realize the claim that the boy has upon them
in the matter of comradeship.

The parent looks upon himself very largely in the light of the provider, and but very little
attention is paid to the companionship call that is coming from the life of his boy. After a strenuous
day's work the father is often physically incapacitated for such comradeship and only the strongest
effort of will on his part can force him to recognize this fundamental need of his boy's life.
It is just as necessary that the father should play with and be the companion of his boy as
it is for him to see that he has good food, warm clothing, and a comfortable bed to sleep
in. The father generally is the boy's hero up to a certain age. This seems to be an unwritten, natural
law of the boy's life, and the father often forfeits this worship
and respect of his boy by failing to afford him the natural companionship
necessary to keep it alive.

In addition to a place and a voice in the councils of the family, it is necessary that the
boy should have steady parental companionship to bring out the best that is in him.

The ownership of personal property and its recognition by the parent in the life of the boy is
fundamental to the boy's later understanding of the home and community life. Comparatively few
fathers and mothers ever recognize the deep call of the boy life to own things, and frequently
the boy's property is taken from him and he is deprived of its use
as a means of punishment for some breach of home discipline.

In many families the boy grows up altogether without any adequate idea of what the right of private
property really is, with the result that when he reaches the adolescent
years and is swayed by the gang spirit, whatever comes in his way,
as one of the gang, is appropriated by him to the gang use.

This means that the boy, because of his ignorance, becomes a ward of the Juvenile Court and
a breaker of community laws. The tendency, however, today in legal procedure is to hold the parents
of such a boy liable for the offenses which may be committed. Instead of talking about juvenile
delinquency today we are beginning to comprehend the larger meaning of parental and community
delinquency. Out of nearly six hundred cases which came before the Juvenile Court in San Francisco
last year only nineteen, by the testimony of the judge, were due to delinquency on the part
of the offender himself.

The majority of the remaining cases were due to parental delinquency, or neglect of the father
and mother. A real part in the home life may be given to the boy by recognizing his individual
and sole claim to certain things in the home life.

Failure on the part of the father and mother to recognize the growth of the boy likewise tends
to interfere with normal relationships in the home.

Many a father and mother fail to see and appreciate the fact that their boy really ceases to
be a child. Because of this, parents very often fail to show the proper respect for the personality
of the boy, riding rough-shod over his feelings and will. There follows in matters of this kind
a natural resentment on the part of the boy which sometimes makes him moody and reticent. This,
in its turn, causes the parents to try to curb what they consider
a disagreeable disposition on the part of the boy.

Sometimes this takes the form of resentment at the fact that the boy wishes at times to be alone,
and so fathers and mothers are continually on the watch to prevent the boy from really having any
time of his own. All of these things put together have but one logical result, the ultimate
break between the boy and the home, and the departure of the boy at the first real opportunity
to strike out for himself, thus sundering all the home relationships.

Perhaps one of the saddest things in the home life today is the neglect of the father to see that his
boy receives the necessary knowledge concerning sex, that his life may be safeguarded from
the moral perils of the community. This is not always a willful breach of duty on the part
of the father, but usually comes from ignorance as to how to broach
this subject to the boy.

       A great many growing lives would be saved from moral taint and become
a blessing instead of a curse if the father discharged his whole duty
to his growing son, by putting at his disposal the knowledge which
is necessary to an understanding of the functions of the sex life.

To recapitulate, several things are necessary to bring about real relationships in the home life
between the parents and the boy. These are: a place for the boy in the family councils as
a partner in the home life, the boy's right to companionship with his parents, the privilege
and responsibility of private ownership, the right a boy has to his personality and privacy,
and tactful and timely instruction in matters of sex.

This might be enlarged by the parents' privilege of caring for and developing social life
for the boy in the home, a carefully planned participation in its working life, instructions in
thrift and saving, and a general cooperation with the school and the church, as well as the
auxiliary organizations with which the boy may be connected, so that the physical, social,
mental and spiritual life of the boy may become well balanced and symmetrical. Add to this the
Christian example of the father and mother, as expressed in the everyday
life of the home, and especially through family worship and a recognition
of the Divine Being at meal time, and without any cant or undue pressure
there will be produced such a wholesome home environment as to assure
the boy of an intelligent appreciation of not only his father and
mother, but of his home privileges in general, and of the value of
real religion.

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON THE HOME

Allen.--Making the Best of Our Children. Two vols. ($1.00 each).

Field.--Finger-posts to Children's Reading ($1.00).

Fiske.--Boy Life and Self-Government ($1.00).

Kirkpatrick.--Fundamentals of Child Study ($1.25).

Putnam.--Education for Parenthood (.65).

II

THE PUBLIC SCHOOL AND THE BOY

Of the primary institutions that are
cooperating in the life of the boy today, without a doubt the public
school is the most efficient and most serviceable.

Today the school offers and compels a boy to get certain related courses of study which will
make him a better citizen by fitting him in a measure for the procuring of an intelligent and
adequate livelihood. The school by no means is perfect in this matter, and as long as over
fifty per cent. of the boys fail to graduate even from the eighth grade in the grammar school,
and but one per cent. go to college, there will be great need of a reconstruction of its methods
of work. Without question, the curricula of the public school should be modified so as to
meet the needs of all the boys in the community and vocational and industrial training should
have larger place in our educational plans. The boy who is to earn his livelihood by his hands
and head should receive as much attention and intelligent instruction
as the boy who aims at a professional career.

However, with all its limitations, the public school is the only institution which has a definite
policy in the education of the boy. The leaders of the public school system know whither they
are going and the road they must travel to reach the goal.

Perhaps the greatest weakness of our public school system today is the inability, because of
our division between church and state, to give the boy any religious instruction in connection
with what is styled "secular education." For the first time in the history of the world has religious
instruction been barred from the public school, and that in our free America. Most intelligent
Christian men now realize that, because of the division between church and state in our country,
religious instruction in the public school is impossible, as the school is the instrument of
the state in the production of wealth-producing citizenship. The men who with clear vision see
these things also see this limitation of the public school system and recognize that the church
has a larger mission to fulfill in America than in any other country,
it the education of the boy is to be symmetrical and well balanced.

Perhaps the problem of our public school system of education which has not yet been solved is the
vast possibility of the directed play life of our boys. It is well known by students of boy
life that the character of the boy is very largely determined by
the informal education which comes from his part in sports and play.

       In some cities the public school has sought to give partial direction
to the play life of the boy through public school athletic leagues,
but even these leagues touch but a small part of the boy life of any
community.

Besides the injection of industrial and vocational training in large quantity in public school
curricula, more thought and place will have to be given to the expression of the boy life
in play than is now provided for.

In addition to this, the home and the church must render a united
cooperation to make the school life of the boy what it ought to be.

The Parents' and Teachers' Association in the public school is doing much to bring this about
between the home and the school, and it may be that a Teachers' Association,
consisting of officials and teachers of the public school and the
officials and teachers of the Sunday school, might bring about a closer
cooperation in the secular and religious education of the boyhood
of the community. Both these associations, if fostered, would certainly
tend to create a wholesome school atmosphere, which would render a
tremendous service in safeguarding the moral life of the boy.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
ON PUBLIC SCHOOL

Baldwin.--Industrial-social Education ($1.50).

Bloomfield.--Vocational
Guidance of Youth (.60).

Brown.--The American High School ($1.40).

Crocker,--Religious
Freedom in American Education ($1.00).

--Religious Education (.65).

III

THE
CHURCH AND THE BOY

If the foregoing facts considering the home and
school life are absolutely true, and the consensus of opinion of the
students of boy life would have it so, it means that the church has
a larger opportunity than formerly supposed to influence the boy life
of the community.

The investigator into the life of boyhood has revealed
to us the fact that a boy's life is not only fourfold--physical, social,
mental and spiritual--but is also unified in its process of development.
If this be so, there must be a common center for the boy's life, and
neither the home nor the school can, because of social or economic
or political conditions, become this center. The only remaining place
where the boy's life can be unified is the church.

The life of the
church, generally speaking, is largely manipulated in the services
of worship, the Sunday school, and such auxiliary organizations as
the Brotherhood, Christian Endeavor, Missionary societies, and other
like organizations. At the present time the church organization itself
is but little adapted to the needs of the growing boy, the church
being a splendidly organized body for mature life. On the other hand,
until lately, the Sunday school has been recognized as a place for
children under twelve years of age. With the Adult Bible Class movement
of the past few years, there has come a revival in the Sunday school
in adult life, so that the place of adults and children in the Sunday
school has been magnified. There still remains, however, the need
of a modification of Sunday school organization to meet the need of
the adolescent boy.

The opportunity that faces the church and the
Sunday school in this adaptation is tremendous. Investigations of
the past few years have demonstrated beyond a doubt that the time
to let loose impulses in the life for the development of character
is between the ages of fourteen and twenty, or the plastic years of
early and middle adolescence. Recent studies have shown that the break
in school life occurs at about fourteen and a half or fifteen years,
and that the majority of cases in the juvenile courts fall in the
same period. More souls are born into the Kingdom of God in the early
years of adolescence than at all other ages of life put together,
and the vantage ground of the church lies at these ages, the effort
necessary being the minimum and the results being the maximum that
can be attained.

The problem of the church in touching these adolescent
years is to make the right use of all the facts of boy life. Too long
has the church looked upon the boy as a mere field of operation. Too
long has she considered the boy as a dual personality and regarded
life as both secular and spiritual. Today she is beginning to understand
that all boyhood life is spiritual; that there are no secular activities
in boyhood, but that every activity that a boy enters into has tremendous
spiritual value, either for good or for bad. It is especially true
in a boy's life that the spiritual finds expression through the physical.
It should be true of all life, but a boy especially lives by physical
expression.

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON THE CHURCH

Foster.--The Boy and the
Church (.75).

Gray.--Non-Church Going, Its Reasons, and Remedies
($1.00).

Hodges.--Training of Children in Religion ($1.50).

Hulbert.--The
Church and Her Children ($1.00).

IV

THE SUNDAY SCHOOL OR CHURCH
SCHOOL

The Sunday school is the biggest force of the church in the
life of the boy. His illness had struck deeper than he had
admitted even to himself and his mind had an inclination to float out of his body. Often when
he sat thus his hands lay in his lap and he looked at them with a child's absorption. It seemed
to him they must belong to someone else. He grew philosophic. "It's an odd thing about my body.
Here I've lived in it all these years and how little use I have had of it. Now it's going to
die and decay never having been used. I wonder why it did not get another tenant." He smiled
sadly over this fancy but went on with it. "Well I've had thoughts enough concerning people
and I've had the use of these lips and a tongue but I've let them lie idle. When my Ellen was
here living with me I let her think me cold and unfeeling while something within me was straining
and straining trying to tear itself loose."

He remembered how often, as a young man, he had sat in the evening in silence beside his wife
in this same office and how his hands had ached to reach across the narrow space that separated
them and touch her hands, her face, her hair.

Well, everyone in town had predicted his marriage would turn out badly! His wife had been an
actress with a company that came to Huntersburg and got stranded there. At the same time the
girl became ill and had no money to pay for her room at the hotel. The young doctor had attended
to that and when the girl was convalescent took her to ride about the country in his buggy.
Her life had been a hard one and the notion of leading a quiet existence in the little town
appealed to her.

And then after the marriage and after the child was born she had suddenly found herself unable
to go on living with the silent cold man. There had been a story of her having run away with
a young sport, the son of a saloon keeper who had disappeared from town at the same time, but
the story was untrue. Lester Cochran had himself taken her to Chicago where she got work with
a company going into the far western states. Then he had taken her to the door of her hotel,
had put money into her hands and in silence and without even a farewell kiss had turned and
walked away.

The Doctor sat in his office living over that moment and other intense moments when he had
been deeply stirred and had been on the surface so cool and quiet. He wondered if the woman
had known. How many times he had asked himself that question. After he left her that night
at the hotel door she never wrote. "Perhaps she is dead," he thought for the thousandth time.

A thing happened that had been happening at odd moments for more than a year. In Doctor Cochran's
mind the remembered figure of his wife became confused with the figure of his daughter. When
at such moments he tried to separate the two figures, to make them stand out distinct from
each other, he was unsuccessful. Turning his head slightly he imagined he saw a white girlish
figure coming through a door out of the rooms in which he and his daughter lived. The door
was painted white and swung slowly in a light breeze that came in at an open window. The wind
ran softly and quietly through the room and played over some papers lying on a desk in a corner.
There was a soft swishing sound as of a woman's skirts. The doctor arose and stood trembling.
"Which is it? Is it you Mary or is it Ellen?" he asked huskily.

On the stairway leading up from the street there was the sound of heavy feet and the outer
door opened. The doctor's weak heart fluttered and he dropped heavily back into his chair.

A man came into the room. He was a farmer, one of the doctor's patients, and coming to the
centre of the room he struck a match, held it above his head and shouted. "Hello!" he called.
When the doctor arose from his chair and answered he was so startled that the match fell from
his hand and lay burning faintly at his feet.

The young farmer had sturdy legs that were like two pillars of stone supporting a heavy building,
and the little flame of the match that burned and fluttered in the light breeze on the floor
between his feet threw dancing shadows along the walls of the room. The doctor's confused mind
refused to clear itself of his fancies that now began to feed upon this new situation.

He forgot the presence of the farmer and his mind raced back over his life as a married man.
The flickering light on the wall recalled another dancing light. One afternoon in the summer
during the first year after his marriage his wife Ellen had driven with him into the country.
They were then furnishing their rooms and at a farmer's house Ellen had seen an old mirror,
no longer in use, standing against a wall in a shed. Because of something quaint in the design
the mirror had taken her fancy and the farmer's wife had given it to her. On the drive home
the young wife had told her husband of her pregnancy and the doctor had been stirred as never
before. He sat holding the mirror on his knees while his wife drove and when she announced
the coming of the child she looked away across the fields.

How deeply etched, that scene in the sick man's mind! The sun was going down over young corn
and oat fields beside the road. The prairie land was black and occasionally the road ran through
short lanes of trees that also looked black in the waning light.

The mirror on his knees caught the rays of the departing sun and sent a great ball of golden
light dancing across the fields and among the branches of trees. Now as he stood in the presence
of the farmer and as the little light from the burning match on the floor recalled that other
evening of dancing lights, he thought he understood the failure of his marriage and of his
life. On that evening long ago when Ellen had told him of the coming of the great adventure
of their marriage he had remained silent because he had thought no words he could utter would
express what he felt. There had been a defense for himself built up. "I told myself she should
have understood without words and I've all my life been telling myself the same thing about
Mary. I've been a fool and a coward. I've always been silent because I've been afraid of expressing
myself--like a blundering fool. I've been a proud man and a coward.

"Tonight I'll do it. If it kills me I'll make myself talk to the girl," he said aloud, his
mind coming back to the figure of his daughter.

"Hey! What's that?" asked the farmer who stood with his hat in his hand waiting to tell of
his mission.

The doctor got his horse from Barney Smithfield's livery and drove off to the country to attend
the farmer's wife who was about to give birth to her first child. She was a slender narrow-hipped
woman and the child was large, but the doctor was feverishly strong. He worked desperately
and the woman, who was frightened, groaned and struggled. Her husband kept coming in and going
out of the room and two neighbor women appeared and stood silently about waiting to be of service.
It was past ten o'clock when everything was done and the doctor was ready to depart for town.

The farmer hitched his horse and brought it to the door and the doctor drove off feeling strangely
weak and at the same time strong. How simple now seemed the thing he had yet to do. Perhaps
when he got home his daughter would have gone to bed but he would ask her to get up and come
into the office. Then he would tell the whole story of his marriage and its failure sparing
himself no humiliation. "There was something very dear and beautiful in my Ellen and I must
make Mary understand that. It will help her to be a beautiful woman," he thought, full of confidence
in the strength of his resolution.

He got to the door of the livery barn at eleven o'clock and Barney Smithfield with young Duke
Yetter and two other men sat talking there. The liveryman took his horse away into the darkness
of the barn and the doctor stood for a moment leaning against the wall of the building. The
town's night watchman stood with the group by the barn door and a quarrel broke out between
him and Duke Yetter, but the doctor did not hear the hot words that flew back and forth or
Duke's loud laughter at the night watchman's anger. A queer hesitating mood had taken possession
of him.

There was something he passionately desired to do but could not remember. Did it have to do
with his wife Ellen or Mary his daughter? The figures of the two women were again confused
in his mind and to add to the confusion there was a third figure, that of the woman he had
just assisted through child birth. Everything was confusion. He started across the street toward
the entrance of the stairway leading to his office and then stopped in the road and stared
about. Barney Smithfield having returned from putting his horse in the stall shut the door
of the barn and a hanging lantern over the door swung back and forth. It threw grotesque dancing
shadows down over the faces and forms of the men standing and quarreling beside the wall of
the barn.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mary sat by a window in the doctor's office awaiting his return. So absorbed was she in her
own thoughts that she was unconscious of the voice of Duke Yetter talking with the men in the
street.

When Duke had come into the street the hot anger of the early part of the evening had returned
and she again saw him advancing toward her in the orchard with the look of arrogant male confidence
in his eyes but presently she forgot him and thought only of her father. An incident of her
childhood returned to haunt her. One afternoon in the month of May when she was fifteen her
father had asked her to accompany him on an evening drive into the country. The doctor went
to visit a sick woman at a farmhouse five miles from town and as there had been a great deal
of rain the roads were heavy. It was dark when they reached the farmer's house and they went
into the kitchen and ate cold food off a kitchen table. For some reason her father had, on
that evening, appeared boyish and almost gay. On the road he had talked a little. Even at that
early age Mary had grown tall and her figure was becoming womanly. After the cold supper in
the farm kitchen he walked with her around the house and she sat on a narrow porch. For a moment
her father stood before her. He put his hands into his trouser pockets and throwing back his
head laughed almost heartily. "It seems strange to think you will soon be a woman," he said.
"When you do become a woman what do you suppose is going to happen, eh? What kind of a life
will you lead? What will happen to you?"

The doctor sat on the porch beside the child and for a moment she had thought he was about
to put his arm around her. Then he jumped up and went into the house leaving her to sit alone
in the darkness.

As she remembered the incident Mary remembered also that on that evening of her childhood she
had met her father's advances in silence. It seemed to her that she, not her father, was to
blame for the life they had led together. The farm laborer she had met on the bridge had not
felt her father's coldness. That was because he had himself been warm and generous in his attitude
toward the man who had cared for him in his hour of sickness and misfortune. Her father had
said that the laborer knew how to be a father and Mary remembered with what warmth the two
boys fishing by the creek had called to her as she went away into the darkness. "Their father
has known how to be a father because his children have known how to give themselves," she thought
guiltily. She also would give herself. Before the night had passed she would do that. On that
evening long ago and as she rode home beside her father he had made another unsuccessful effort
to break through the wall that separated them. The heavy rains had swollen the streams they
had to cross and when they had almost reached town he had stopped the horse on a wooden bridge.
The horse danced nervously about and her father held the reins firmly and occasionally spoke
to him. Beneath the bridge the swollen stream made a great roaring sound and beside the road
in a long flat field there was a lake of flood water. At that moment the moon had come out
from behind clouds and the wind that blew across the water made little waves. The lake of flood
water was covered with dancing lights. "I'm going to tell you about your mother and myself,"
her father said huskily, but at that moment the timbers of the bridge began to crack dangerously
and the horse plunged forward. When her father had regained control of the frightened beast
they were in the streets of the town and his diffident silent nature had reasserted itself.

Mary sat in the darkness by the office window and saw her father drive into the street. When
his horse had been put away he did not, as was his custom, come at once up the stairway to
the office but lingered in the darkness before the barn door. Once he started to cross the
street and then returned into the darkness.

Among the men who for two hours had been sitting and talking quietly a quarrel broke out. Jack
Fisher the town nightwatchman had been telling the others the story of a battle in which he
had fought during the Civil War and Duke Yetter had begun bantering him. The nightwatchman
grew angry. Grasping his nightstick he limped up and down. The loud voice of Duke Yetter cut
across the shrill angry voice of the victim of his wit. "You ought to a flanked the fellow,
I tell you Jack. Yes sir 'ee, you ought to a flanked that reb and then when you got him flanked
you ought to a knocked the stuffings out of the cuss. That's what I would a done," Duke shouted,
laughing boisterously. "You would a raised hell, you would," the night watchman answered, filled
with ineffectual wrath.

The old soldier went off along the street followed by the laughter of Duke and his companions
and Barney Smithfield, having put the doctor's horse away, came out and closed the barn door.
A lantern hanging above the door swung back and forth. Doctor Cochran again started across
the street and when he had reached the foot of the stairway turned and shouted to the men.
"Good night," he called cheerfully. A strand of hair was blown by the light summer breeze across
Mary's cheek and she jumped to her feet as though she had been touched by a hand reached out
to her from the darkness. A hundred times she had seen her father return from drives in the
evening but never before had he said anything at all to the loiterers by the barn door. She
became half convinced that not her father but some other man was now coming up the stairway.

The heavy dragging footsteps rang loudly on the wooden stairs and Mary heard her father set
down the little square medicine case he always carried. The strange cheerful hearty mood of
the man continued but his mind was in a confused riot. Mary imagined she could see his dark
form in the doorway. "The woman has had a baby," said the hearty voice from the landing outside
the door. "Who did that happen to? Was it Ellen or that other woman or my little Mary?"

A stream of words, a protest came from the man's lips. "Who's been having a baby? I want to
know. Who's been having a baby? Life doesn't work out. Why are babies always being born?" he asked.

A laugh broke from the doctor's lips and his daughter leaned forward and gripped the arms of
her chair. "A babe has been born," he said again. "It's strange eh, that my hands should have
helped a baby be born while all the time death stood at my elbow?"

Doctor Cochran stamped upon the floor of the landing. "My feet are cold and numb from waiting
for life to come out of life," he said heavily. "The woman struggled and now I must struggle."

Silence followed the stamping of feet and the tired heavy declaration from the sick man's lips.
From the street below came another loud shout of laughter from Duke Yetter.

And then Doctor Cochran fell backward down the narrow stairs to the street. There was no cry
from him, just the clatter of his shoes upon the stairs and the terrible subdued sound of the
body falling.

Mary did not move from her chair. With closed eyes she waited. Her heart pounded. A weakness
complete and overmastering had possession of her and from feet to head ran little waves of
feeling as though tiny creatures with soft hair-like feet were playing upon her body.

It was Duke Yetter who carried the dead man up the stairs and laid him on a bed in one of the
rooms back of the office. One of the men who had been sitting with him before the door of the
barn followed lifting his hands and dropping them nervously. Between his fingers he held a
forgotten cigarette the light from which danced up and down in the darkness.

                              SENILITY

He was an old man and he sat on the steps of the railroad station in a small Kentucky town.

A well dressed man, some traveler from the city, approached and stood before him.

The old man became self-conscious.

His smile was like the smile of a very young child. His face was all sunken and wrinkled and
he had a huge nose.

"Have you any coughs, colds, consumption or bleeding sickness?" he asked. In his voice there
was a pleading quality.

The stranger shook his head. The old man arose.

"The sickness that bleeds is a terrible nuisance," he said. His tongue protruded from between
his teeth and he rattled it about. He put his hand on the stranger's arm and laughed.

"Bully, pretty," he exclaimed. "I cure them all--coughs, colds, consumption and the sickness
that bleeds. I take warts from the hand--I cannot explain how I do it--it is a mystery--I charge
nothing--my name is Tom--do you like me?"

The stranger was cordial. He nodded his head. The old man became reminiscent. "My father was
a hard man," he declared. "He was like me, a blacksmith by trade, but he wore a plug hat. When
the corn was high he said to the poor, 'go into the fields and pick' but when the war came
he made a rich man pay five dollars for a bushel of corn."

"I married against his will. He came to me and he said, 'Tom I do not like that girl.'"

"'But I love her,' I said.

"'I don't,' he said.

"My father and I sat on a log. He was a pretty man and wore a plug hat. 'I will get the license,'
I said.

"'I will give you no money,' he said.

"My marriage cost me twenty-one dollars--I worked in the corn--it rained and the horses were
blind--the clerk said, 'Are you over twenty- one?' I said 'yes' and she said 'yes.' We had
chalked it on our shoes. My father said, 'I give you your freedom.' We had no money. My marriage
cost twenty-one dollars. She is dead."

The old man looked at the sky. It was evening and the sun had set. The sky was all mottled
with grey clouds. "I paint beautiful pictures and give them away," he declared. "My brother
is in the penitentiary. He killed a man who called him an ugly name."

The decrepit old man held his hands before the face of the stranger. He opened and shut them.
They were black with grime. "I pick out warts," he explained plaintively. "They are as soft
as your hands."

"I play on an accordion. You are thirty-seven years old. I sat beside my brother in the penitentiary.
He is a pretty man with pompadour hair. 'Albert' I said, 'are you sorry you killed a man?'
'No,' he said, 'I am not sorry. I would kill ten, a hundred, a thousand!'"

The old man began to weep and to wipe his hands with a soiled handkerchief. He attempted to
take a chew of tobacco and his false teeth became displaced. He covered his mouth with his
hands and was ashamed.

"I am old. You are thirty-seven years old but I am older than that," he whispered.

"My brother is a bad man--he is full of hate--he is pretty and has pompadour hair, but he would
kill and kill. I hate old age--I am ashamed that I am old.

"I have a pretty new wife. I wrote her four letters and she replied. She came here and we married--I
love to see her walk--O, I buy her pretty clothes.

"Her foot is not straight--it is twisted--my first wife is dead--I pick warts off the hand
with my fingers and no blood comes--I cure coughs, colds, consumption and the sickness that
bleeds--people can write to me and I answer the letters--if they send me no money it is no
matter--all is free."

Again the old man wept and the stranger tried to comfort him. "You are a happy man?" the stranger
asked.

"Yes," said the old man, "and a good man too. Ask everywhere about me-- my name is Tom, a blacksmith--my
wife walks prettily although she has a twisted foot--I have bought her a long dress--she is
thirty and I am seventy-five--she has many pairs of shoes--I have bought them for her, but
her foot is twisted--I buy straight shoes--

"She thinks I do not know--everybody thinks Tom does not know--I have bought her a long dress
that comes down to the ground--my name is Tom, a blacksmith--I am seventy-five and I hate old
age--I take warts off the hands and no blood comes--people may write to me and I answer the
letters--all is free."

                    THE MAN IN THE BROWN COAT

           Napoleon went down into a battle riding on a horse.
           Alexander went down into a battle riding on a horse.
           General Grant got off a horse and walked in a wood.
           General Hindenburg stood on a hill.
           The moon came up out of a clump of bushes.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am writing a history of the things men do. I have written three such histories and I am but
a young man. Already I have written three hundred, four hundred thousand words.

My wife is somewhere in this house where for hours now I have been sitting and writing. She
is a tall woman with black hair, turning a little grey. Listen, she is going softly up a flight
of stairs. All day she goes softly about, doing the housework in our house.

I came here to this town from another town in the state of Iowa. My father was a workman, a
house painter. He did not rise in the world as I have done. I worked my way through college
and became an historian. We own this house in which I sit. This is my room in which I work.
Already I have written three histories of peoples. I have told how states were formed and battles
fought. You may see my books standing straight up on the shelves of libraries. They stand up
like sentries.

I am tall like my wife and my shoulders are a little stooped. Although I write boldly I am
a shy man. I like being at work alone in this room with the door closed. There are many books
here. Nations march back and forth in the books. It is quiet here but in the books a great
thundering goes on.

       *       *       *       *       *

           Napoleon rides down a hill and into a battle.
           General Grant walks in a wood.
           Alexander rides down a hill and into a battle.

       *       *       *       *       *

My wife has a serious, almost stern look. Sometimes the thoughts I have concerning her frighten
me. In the afternoon she leaves our house and goes for a walk. Sometimes she goes to stores,
sometimes to visit a neighbor. There is a yellow house opposite our house. My wife goes out
at a side door and passes along the street between our house and the yellow house.

The side door of our house bangs. There is a moment of waiting. My wife's face floats across
the yellow background of a picture.

       *       *       *       *       *

           General Pershing rode down a hill and into a battle.
           Alexander rode down a hill and into a battle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Little things are growing big in my mind. The window before my desk makes a little framed place
like a picture. Every day I sit staring. I wait with an odd sensation of something impending.
My hand trembles. The face that floats through the picture does something I don't understand.
The face floats, then it stops. It goes from the right hand side to the left hand side, then
it stops.

The face comes into my mind and goes out--the face floats in my mind. The pen has fallen from
my fingers. The house is silent. The eyes of the floating face are turned away from me.

My wife is a girl who came here to this town from another town in the state of Ohio. We keep
a servant but my wife often sweeps the floors and she sometimes makes the bed in which we sleep
together. We sit together in the evening but I do not know her. I cannot shake myself out of
myself. I wear a brown coat and I cannot come out of my coat. I cannot come out of myself.
My wife is very gentle and she speaks softly but she cannot come out of herself.

My wife has gone out of the house. She does not know that I know every little thought of her
life. I know what she thought when she was a child and walked in the streets of an Ohio town.
I have heard the voices of her mind. I have heard the little voices. I heard the voice of fear
crying when she was first overtaken with passion and crawled into my arms. Again I heard the
voices of fear when her lips said words of courage to me as we sat together on the first evening
after we were married and moved into this house.

It would be strange if I could sit here, as I am doing now, while my own face floated across
the picture made by the yellow house and the window. It would be strange and beautiful if I
could meet my wife, come into her presence.

The woman whose face floated across my picture just now knows nothing of me. I know nothing
of her. She has gone off, along a street. The voices of her mind are talking. I am here in
this room, as alone as ever any man God made.

It would be strange and beautiful if I could float my face across my picture. If my floating
face could come into her presence, if it could come into the presence of any man or any woman--that
would be a strange and beautiful thing to have happen.

       *       *       *       *       *

           Napoleon went down into a battle riding on a horse.
           General Grant went into a wood.
           Alexander went down into a battle riding on a horse.

       *       *       *       *       *

I'll tell you what--sometimes the whole life of this world floats in a human face in my mind.
The unconscious face of the world stops and stands still before me.

Why do I not say a word out of myself to the others? Why, in all our life together, have I
never been able to break through the wall to my wife?

Already I have written three hundred, four hundred thousand words. Are there no words that
lead into life? Some day I shall speak to myself. Some day I shall make a testament unto myself.

                              BROTHERS

I am at my house in the country and it is late October. It rains. Back of my house is a forest
and in front there is a road and beyond that open fields. The country is one of low hills,
flattening suddenly into plains. Some twenty miles away, across the flat country, lies the
huge city Chicago.

On this rainy day the leaves of the trees that line the road before my window are falling like
rain, the yellow, red and golden leaves fall straight down heavily. The rain beats them brutally
down. They are denied a last golden flash across the sky. In October leaves should be carried
away, out over the plains, in a wind. They should go dancing away.

Yesterday morning I arose at daybreak and went for a walk. There was a heavy fog and I lost
myself in it. I went down into the plains and returned to the hills, and everywhere the fog
was as a wall before me. Out of it trees sprang suddenly, grotesquely, as in a city street
late at night people come suddenly out of the darkness into the circle of light under a street
lamp. Above there was the light of day forcing itself slowly into the fog. The fog moved slowly.
The tops of trees moved slowly. Under the trees the fog was dense, purple. It was like smoke
lying in the streets of a factory town.

An old man came up to me in the fog. I know him well. The people here call him insane. "He
is a little cracked," they say. He lives alone in a little house buried deep in the forest
and has a small dog he carries always in his arms. On many mornings I have met him walking
on the road and he has told me of men and women who are his brothers and sisters, his cousins,
aunts, uncles, brothers-in-law. It is confusing. He cannot draw close to people near at hand
so he gets hold of a name out of a newspaper and his mind plays with it. On one morning he
told me he was a cousin to the man named Cox who at the time when I write is a candidate for
the presidency. On another morning he told me that Caruso the singer had married a woman who
was his sister-in-law. "She is my wife's sister," he said, holding the little dog close. His
grey watery eyes looked appealing up to me. He wanted me to believe. "My wife was a sweet slim
girl," he declared. "We lived together in a big house and in the morning walked about arm in
arm. Now her sister has married Caruso the singer. He is of my family now."

As someone had told me the old man had never married, I went away wondering. One morning in
early September I came upon him sitting under a tree beside a path near his house. The dog
barked at me and then ran and crept into his arms. At that time the Chicago newspapers were
filled with the story of a millionaire who had got into trouble with his wife because of an
intimacy with an actress. The old man told me that the actress was his sister. He is sixty
years old and the actress whose story appeared in the newspapers is twenty but he spoke of
their childhood together. "You would not realize it to see us now but we were poor then," he
said. "It's true. We lived in a little house on the side of a hill. Once when there was a storm,
the wind nearly swept our house away. How the wind blew! Our father was a carpenter and he
built strong houses for other people but our own house he did not build very strong!" He shook
his head sorrowfully. "My sister the actress has got into trouble. Our house is not built very
strongly," he said as I went away along the path.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a month, two months, the Chicago newspapers, that are delivered every morning in our village,
have been filled with the story of a murder. A man there has murdered his wife and there seems
no reason for the deed. The tale runs something like this--

The man, who is now on trial in the courts and will no doubt be hanged, worked in a bicycle
factory where he was a foreman and lived with his wife and his wife's mother in an apartment
in Thirty-second Street. He loved a girl who worked in the office of the factory where he was
employed. She came from a town in Iowa and when she first came to the city lived with her aunt
who has since died. To the foreman, a heavy stolid looking man with grey eyes, she seemed the
most beautiful woman in the world. Her desk was by a window at an angle of the factory, a sort
of wing of the building, and the foreman, down in the shop had a desk by another window. He
sat at his desk making out sheets containing the record of the work done by each man in his
department. When he looked up he could see the girl sitting at work at her desk. The notion
got into his head that she was peculiarly lovely. He did not think of trying to draw close
to her or of winning her love. He looked at her as one might look at a star or across a country
of low hills in October when the leaves of the trees are all red and yellow gold. "She is a
pure, virginal thing," he thought vaguely. "What can she be thinking about as she sits there
by the window at work."

In fancy the foreman took the girl from Iowa home with him to his apartment in Thirty-second
Street and into the presence of his wife and his mother-in-law. All day in the shop and during
the evening at home he carried her figure about with him in his mind. As he stood by a window
in his apartment and looked out toward the Illinois Central railroad tracks and beyond the
tracks to the lake, the girl was there beside him. Down below women walked in the street and
in every woman he saw there was something of the Iowa girl. One woman walked as she did, another
made a gesture with her hand that reminded of her. All the women he saw except his wife and
his mother-in-law were like the girl he had taken inside himself.

The two women in his own house puzzled and confused him. They became suddenly unlovely and
commonplace. His wife in particular was like some strange unlovely growth that had attached
itself to his body.

In the evening after the day at the factory he went home to his own place and had dinner. He
had always been a silent man and when he did not talk no one minded. After dinner he with his
wife went to a picture show. There were two children and his wife expected another. They came
into the apartment and sat down. The climb up two flights of stairs had wearied his wife. She
sat in a chair beside her mother groaning with weariness.

The mother-in-law was the soul of goodness. She took the place of a servant in the home and
got no pay. When her daughter wanted to go to a picture show she waved her hand and smiled.
"Go on," she said. "I don't want to go. I'd rather sit here." She got a book and sat reading.
The little boy of nine awoke and cried. He wanted to sit on the po-po. The mother-in-law attended
to that.

After the man and his wife came home the three people sat in silence for an hour or two before
bed time. The man pretended to read a newspaper. He looked at his hands. Although he had washed
them carefully grease from the bicycle frames left dark stains under the nails. He thought
of the Iowa girl and of her white quick hands playing over the keys of a typewriter. He felt
dirty and uncomfortable.

The girl at the factory knew the foreman had fallen in love with her and the thought excited
her a little. Since her aunt's death she had gone to live in a rooming house and had nothing
to do in the evening. Although the foreman meant nothing to her she could in a way use him.
To her he became a symbol. Sometimes he came into the office and stood for a moment by the
door. His large hands were covered with black grease. She looked at him without seeing. In
his place in her imagination stood a tall slender young man. Of the foreman she saw only the
grey eyes that began to burn with a strange fire. The eyes expressed eagerness, a humble and
devout eagerness. In the presence of a man with such eyes she felt she need not be afraid.

She wanted a lover who would come to her with such a look in his eyes. Occasionally, perhaps
once in two weeks, she stayed a little late at the office, pretending to have work that must
be finished. Through the window she could see the foreman waiting. When everyone had gone she
closed her desk and went into the street. At the same moment the foreman came out at the factory
door.

They walked together along the street a half dozen blocks to where she got aboard her car.
The factory was in a place called South Chicago and as they went along evening was coming on.
The streets were lined with small unpainted frame houses and dirty faced children ran screaming
in the dusty roadway. They crossed over a bridge. Two abandoned coal barges lay rotting in
the stream.

He went by her side walking heavily and striving to conceal his hands. He had scrubbed them
carefully before leaving the factory but they seemed to him like heavy dirty pieces of waste
matter hanging at his side. Their walking together happened but a few times and during one
summer. "It's hot," he said. He never spoke to her of anything but the weather. "It's hot,"
he said. "I think it may rain."

She dreamed of the lover who would some time come, a tall fair young man, a rich man owning
houses and lands. The workingman who walked beside her had nothing to do with her conception
of love. She walked with him, stayed at the office until the others had gone to walk unobserved
with him because of his eyes, because of the eager thing in his eyes that was at the same time
humble, that bowed down to her. In his presence there was no danger, could be no danger. He
would never attempt to approach too closely, to touch her with his hands. She was safe with him.

In his apartment in the evening the man sat under the electric light with his wife and his
mother-in-law. In the next room his two children were asleep. In a short time his wife would
have another child. He had been with her to a picture show and in a short time they would get
into bed together.

He would lie awake thinking, would hear the creaking of the springs of a bed where, in another
room, his mother-in-law was crawling between the sheets. Life was too intimate. He would lie
awake eager, expectant --expecting, what?

Nothing. Presently one of the children would cry. It wanted to get out of bed and sit on the
po-po. Nothing strange or unusual or lovely would or could happen. Life was too close, intimate.
Nothing that could happen in the apartment could in any way stir him; the things his wife might
say, her occasional half-hearted outbursts of passion, the goodness of his mother-in-law who
did the work of a servant without pay--

He sat in the apartment under the electric light pretending to read a newspaper--thinking.
He looked at his hands. They were large, shapeless, a working-man's hands.

The figure of the girl from Iowa walked about the room. With her he went out of the apartment
and walked in silence through miles of streets. It was not necessary to say words. He walked
with her by a sea, along the crest of a mountain. The night was clear and silent and the stars
shone. She also was a star. It was not necessary to say words.

Her eyes were like stars and her lips were like soft hills rising out of dim, star lit plains.
"She is unattainable, she is far off like the stars," he thought. "She is unattainable like
the stars but unlike the stars she breathes, she lives, like myself she has being."

One evening, some six weeks ago, the man who worked as foreman in the bicycle factory killed
his wife and he is now in the courts being tried for murder. Every day the newspapers are filled
with the story. On the evening of the murder he had taken his wife as usual to a picture show
and they started home at nine. In Thirty-second Street, at a corner near their apartment building,
the figure of a man darted suddenly out of an alleyway and then darted back again. The incident
may have put the idea of killing his wife into the man's head.

They got to the entrance to the apartment building and stepped into a dark hallway. Then quite
suddenly and apparently without thought the man took a knife out of his pocket. The Superintendents
not present at this meeting should be seen and written to at once, urging upon them the importance
of the work, apprising them of the results of the Superintendents' Conference and showing them the
necessity of their schools being included in this city-wide campaign
for the adolescent boy.

Other plans of promotion may be adopted by the Committee, as warranted by local conditions.

Meetings of General Committee.--The General Conference Committee should arrange to meet at least
once a week, for a month prior to the Conference, and all plans of
the sub-committees should be submitted to this Committee for their
approval before being put into operation.

=The Conference Program=

Conference Theme--Training and Service.

Temporary Chairman--President or Vice-President of Sunday School Association, or acceptable
substitute.

2:00 Registration of Delegates. 2:30 Devotional and Music. 3:00 Address, "The Biggest Thing in
the World." 3:20 Secondary Division Organization--The Bible Class. 4:15 Group Conferences (City
divided into districts).

5:45 Recreation. 7:00 Banquet to Delegates. (a) Music--Orchestra. (b) Toasts--Two Older Boys.
(1) Our Country. (2) Our City. (c) Address, "The Crusade." 8:45 Devotional 9:00 Question Box
and Conference. 9:20 Address, "In Training" (Inspirational). 10:00 Adjournment.

=The Banquet Seating Plan=

The delegates from each Sunday school should sit together, and when practicable be also grouped
by denominations. At the close of the address on the Crusade the Inter-Sunday School Council
should be formed.

This shall consist of two older boys and one man from each participating
Sunday school.

       The Council is subject to the call of the Chairman of the Secondary
Division Committee.

Method of Enrollment

1. After the presentation of the Crusade, pass a colored card to each delegation, asking them to
confer and to write on the card the names and addresses of the two older boys they may choose
to represent their school, the name of school, also the names and addresses of the teachers of
the chosen delegates.

The Adult representative from each school should be selected later by the committee in charge of the
Crusade Conference.

2. Pass white cards, as soon as the colored ones have been properly filled; or, better yet,
place a white card in each banqueter's program and challenge to service and training.

3. Write to each chosen representative before the first called meeting, enclosing credential
card to be signed by the superintendent of the school, the pastor of the church, and write to
each of these men enclosing the plan of the Crusade.

=First Meeting of Council=

Do not allow more than two weeks to pass until the Council meets to lay its plans. Strike,
and keep on striking while the iron is hot.

The Follow-Up.--Call at once a meeting of the older-boy representatives
on the Inter-Sunday School Council.

Do not call in the men until later. This is an =Older Boy Movement=, and you are going to get
the Older Fellows in the Sunday school to go after the Older Fellows out of the Sunday school.
Impress upon the Council that this is their job and whatever success is achieved will be due
to their efforts. Let a clean-cut spiritual atmosphere prevail at these meetings. You will find
that the boys are there for business.

It is suggested that the meetings be held Saturday evening, beginning at 5:30 with supper, to cost
not more than fifteen cents per plate.

First Meeting.--Don't rush things. You will gain much by making the fellows feel that you are
all working this problem out together and that the prayerful cooperation
of every member is necessary.

       Don't stampede the meeting with a lot of elaborate plans.

If you have any plans, turn them over to the Council by way of suggestion, and let that body
use its own judgment. Everything that is done by the Council should emanate from its members.
It is suggested that the purpose and program of this meeting should be somewhat as follows:

(a)
Statement of purpose of Council.

                          (b) Trace connection of Council to International work (i.e., Council,
City Secondary Division Committee, City Secondary Division Superintendent,
County Secondary Division Superintendent, State or Provincial Secondary
Division Committee, State or Provincial Secondary Division Superintendent,
International Secondary Division Committee, International Secondary
Division Superintendent, etc.--this to show them that they are officially
related to a world-wide movement).

(c) Fellowship and "Get Together."

Be sure to have Adult members at this meeting.

Second Meeting (two weeks after first).--

At this meeting discuss:

(a) Importance of class organization--each member urged to get to
work at once in his local school.

(b) Age limit of classes now in the organization.

(c) Outline possibilities of Council for promotion and all-round physical, mental, social and
spiritual activities of teen age fellows of the Sunday schools of the city.

(d) Discuss the idea of the census survey.

These two meetings will pave the way for the third and following meetings. Don't meet simply
for the sake of holding a meeting. Let your fellows feel that when a call to meeting is received
it is important.

Third and Subsequent Meetings

1. Lay your plans carefully for the census-taking, then complete the
job quickly.

2. Analyze the cards and distribute to the organized classes. Their work then begins. Encourage
regular reports on the work of the classes at each meeting of the Council, the school representatives
reporting.

3. Plan for the execution of the Missionary, Purity and Temperance Programs.

4. Extend the Council's field until it covers the common physical, social, mental and spiritual
activities of the community teen age boys.

5. Plan for regular Conference or Banquet Programs.

6. Ultimately the entire common Sunday school athletic and social life of the community would
center in the Inter-Sunday School Council.

Meeting of Superintendents

It is suggested that at this juncture a meeting of Sunday school Superintendents
be called for the purpose of thoroughly acquainting them with the
plans of the Council.

This will secure the cooperation of the Superintendents, which is most essential. The effort
to get the Superintendents behind the work will be more successful if the city be divided into
sections and a Superintendents' meeting be held in each section. These meetings can be made
very helpful.

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON BOYS' CRUSADE

High School Student Christian Movement Series:

Bulletin No. 1. The Local Organization (.05).

Bulletin No. 2. Typical Constitution (.05).

Bulletin No. 3. The Inner Circle (.05).

International Secondary Division Leaflet, No. 5 (Free).

XV

SEX EDUCATION FOR BOYS AND THE SUNDAY SCHOOL[10]

There can be no adequate comprehension of the physical side of boyhood if the sex element be left
out. In fact, we have discovered for ourselves that this is the very element that constitutes
the real problem of boyhood; for until the idea of sex enters into the boy's consciousness we
are only dealing with an infant. It is the gift and power of self-reproduction that changes the
selfish, individual existence into the larger, altruistic life. It is this that compels gangs
and team-work and the instinctive desire to negate self in service for others. It is this that
forms the basis for the tribal or community desire; and on it, understood or not, is built all
further achievement. The real value of a brave to his tribe begins with the support of his squaw,
and the modern boy gets his importance among us, when, because of bodily function, he awakens
to the consciousness of the meaning of the home. This comes gradually at puberty or adolescence
with the knowledge of the sex purpose. And it is the quality of this knowledge, its purity
and fear and regard, that makes the lad a worthy member of the larger
whole, or a peril.

Knowing this as we do, is it not a matter of some wonder that we have never really made any systematic
effort to instruct the boy concerning his wonderful power?

Very few fathers give their sons any guidance along this line, although they do so quite freely
on every other subject. Of course, it is a sacred, delicate subject from which we naturally shrink,
but it is overmodesty to allow a lad to fall into the abuse of his manhood, either alone or in
twos, when a wise word, spoken in time, would save the smirch on two lives or more. In fact, we
are beginning really to understand that it is just as imperative for us to teach a boy how to
live his life with the utmost happiness as to show him how to procure
the wherewithal to feed his body.

For this reason it is being advocated today that the boy should be given explicit instruction
as to the care of the organs of reproduction and detailed information as to the functions
of these organs, and many are doing this.

Our boys today are eating freely of "the knowledge of good and evil," and they are not as innocent
as we could wish them to be. They are not ignorant of the processes of life because we have
said nothing concerning them, but their knowledge is partial and faulty and clouded with misinformation.

A
few years ago a body of men were discussing this very thing in New
York City, and one of them suggested that every one present write
on a piece of paper the age at which he had his first sex knowledge
and pass it to the head of the table.

The average age named by this group of interested men was six and a half years. Not one of these
men, either, had ever had a single word spoken to him on this all-important subject by any
adult. Their knowledge was of the street.

Is it any wonder, then, that boys stray, mar their own lives, betray confidences and innocence
and become moral lepers, feeding like parasites on the fairest of our communities?

Instruction in the processes of the function of reproduction would help many a boy to a clean
participation in and a happy understanding of the home.

The divorce evil and the necessity of a large number of surgical
operations among women, to say nothing of the so-called social evil,
would be greatly lessened by such instruction.

The father, of course, is the proper person to deal with this question.

=Parents and the Sex Problem=

When parents understand sex influence they will more than half meet the problems of the teen
age. To rightly instruct along sex lines and so prepare boys and girls to meet the teen period is
almost completely to meet the teen problem.

Social and economic changes have moved this generation a full hundred
years ahead of our fathers.

The change, however, has a moral menace in it, for the slow but sure ways of the old-fashioned
home with its genuinely moral atmosphere have nearly slipped us. Today boys and girls are herded
together by the compulsion of the times and moral ideas are in danger of being warped and
twisted.

Everything about us today is more complex than formerly, and the more complex things become
the more we herd together. Mass life is common and growing--in education, in the schools and
in play life, in the big public playgrounds.

Religious activity, in spite of the group tendency toward the small group, is still in the
mass--Christian Endeavor, Sunday school groupings, etc. With the growing assumption of week-day
activities on the part of the church, the moral peril increases.

To offset this increasing social danger sex instruction is an insistent necessity. Boys and
girls must be taught to see themselves as members of society with
all that that implies.

To do so means a knowledge of self and sex and their functions and
responsibilities. The sources and processes of life must be intelligently
understood and thus respected. Ignorance of life does not beget purity,
respect and honor. A boy's regard for a girl cannot proceed from lack
of knowledge, although this lack may be termed innocence. A girl's
love for the best for self and others is impossible unless she has
knowledge tinged with the awe of God's purposes. Too often have our
boys and girls been merely innocent, such innocence causing their
fall. The tree of knowledge sometimes demands a high price for its
fruit. To safeguard lives unblighted, the purity and processes of
life's mystery must be imparted through instruction to our growing
youth.

This can best be done by the parents--father or mother--for
since children (boys or girls) ripen and come to puberty, individually
and independently, the parent is God's choice for this task. To group
boys and girls together for this instruction is terribly wrong, as
the group must contain those whose need for information varies. To
talk on these matters in mixed groups of boys and girls is to incite
wrong impulses and is criminal. The parent is God's instructor in
these things--a father to the son and a mother to the daughter. Anything
else is second or third best and only to be done under great necessity.
Under unusual conditions a Christian physician may instruct small
groups of like physiological age, but the parental way is best, because
it is both natural and permanent and we seek both.

=Sunday School
and Sex=

Parents must be trained for this high duty. To this end
Fathers' and Mothers' Meetings should be promoted separately by the
Sunday school. Not one merely but a series, so that every father and
mother may be able to attend. It would be well to promote these in
small groups by invitation and acceptance until every father and mother
was reached. A regular course of education might be arranged, viz.:

First
Lecture--How to meet the questions of children.

Second Lecture--How
to prepare the boy and girl for the understanding of puberty.

Third
Lecture--Adolescence: The Physiology and Anatomy of the Sex Organs
and Methods of Sex Instruction.

Fourth Lecture--Hygiene: Personal,
Public, Home, School and Church.

These might be preceded by an address
on the conditions that today make the above necessary; such might
be a Sunday evening sermon or week-night address by the pastor of
the church.

The lectures should be delivered and instruction given
by a Christian Physician.

Meetings should be held for fathers by
themselves and for mothers likewise; however, in either or both meetings
the whole field--boys and girls--should be discussed.

The whole campaign
should be carried out quietly without fuss, feathers or publicity.
Shun the spectacular and remember it is the morality of the boy and
girl that is in question. Keep away from muck-raking, be constructive
and pure and business-like in the whole matter.

The need is great,
for the sources of our life must be kept clean if we desire social
health among our boys and girls. The land is full of the plague, of
open moral sewers and unholy cesspools. The street reeks with the
smut and filth of wrong sex knowledge, and our boys and girls are
getting experience in the laboratory of the immoral. The Sunday school
can help our common, public health by helping the parent. It should
major on parental instruction and keep it up until the parents have
been helped to the adequate fulfillment of their task.

=Sex Instruction
for Boys=

Great care should be exercised in the giving of sex instruction
to boys of any age. In the first place, no one without expert knowledge
has a right to approach the boy on the subject. Even a father should
make it his business to master the problem by extensive and wise reading
before he becomes his boy's teacher. In the second place, books or
pamphlets on the subject are poor mediums for instruction on the sex
functions. Nearly every one that I have seen so far is either too
technical or too sentimental. There are a great many books on the
market which had been better left unpublished as far as their helpful
influence is concerned. The treatment of this problem should be oral
instead of in written form, and should be a straight, business-like
talk, such as a father would have with his son about his studies or
work. The gush of sentiment plays havoc with the emotions of the boy
and lures him to the edge of the precipice, just to look over. First,
there should be the spoken word concerning the function of the sex
organs; and then, if the need is urgent, a choice book to guide him
a little farther on the way. The less a boy thinks about these things
the better. The instruction should be for the purpose of teaching
him the knowledge of himself in order that he may see these things
in their proper light and live purely, and not for the purpose of
giving him expert advice.

Another thing is necessary for good sex
instruction. Up till a little while ago it was the custom of workers
with boys to caution the lads against self-abuse. They used all kinds
of colored slides and fearful examples to impress on the boy the horror
of the act, and very often inflamed the boy to exactly the thing they
were shooing him from. But today we are learning the fact that the
positive is of more force than the negative, and that the "thou shalt"
is better than the "thou shalt not." There is a real reason why the
later adolescent boy should give no attention to the "thou shalt not,"
and so fall into the snare of the negative; for it is the law of his
being to "prove all things." Hugh felt miserable. For
several days he thought about the girl who had quite accidentally attracted his attention.
"I'll get acquainted with her. I'll find out about her," he thought.

It was not an unusual thing for professors in the college at Union Valley to take students
home to their houses. Hugh decided he would take the girl to his home. He thought about it
several days and late one afternoon saw her going down the college hill ahead of him.

The girl's name was Mary Cochran and she had come to the school but a few months before from
a place called Huntersburg, Illinois, no doubt just such another place as Union Valley. He
knew nothing of her except that her father was dead, her mother too, perhaps. He walked rapidly
down the hill to overtake her. "Miss Cochran," he called, and was surprised to find that his
voice trembled a little. "What am I so eager about?" he asked himself. A new life began in
Hugh Walker's house. It was good for the man to have some one there who did not belong to him,
and Winifred Walker and the children accepted the presence of the girl. Winifred urged her
to come again. She did come several times a week.

To Mary Cochran it was comforting to be in the presence of a family of children. On winter
afternoons she took Hugh's two sons and a sled and went to a small hill near the house. Shouts
arose. Mary Cochran pulled the sled up the hill and the children followed. Then they all came
tearing down together.

The girl, developing rapidly into womanhood, looked upon Hugh Walker as something that stood
completely outside her own life. She and the man who had become suddenly and intensely interested
in her had little to say to each other and Winifred seemed to have accepted her without question
as an addition to the household. Often in the afternoon when the two negro women were busy
she went away leaving the two older children in Mary's charge.

It was late afternoon and perhaps Hugh had walked home with Mary from the college. In the spring
he worked in the neglected garden. It had been plowed and planted, but he took a hoe and rake
and puttered about. The children played about the house with the college girl. Hugh did not
look at them but at her. "She is one of the world of people with whom I live and with whom
I am supposed to work here," he thought. "Unlike Winifred and these children she does not belong
to me. I could go to her now, touch her fingers, look at her and then go away and never see
her again."

That thought was a comfort to the distraught man. In the evening when he went out to walk the
sense of distance that lay all about him did not tempt him to walk and walk, going half insanely
forward for hours, trying to break through an intangible wall.

He thought about Mary Cochran. She was a girl from a country town. She must be like millions
of American girls. He wondered what went on in her mind as she sat in his class-room, as she
walked beside him along the streets of Union Valley, as she played with the children in the
yard beside his house.

In the winter, when in the growing darkness of a late afternoon Mary and the children built
a snow man in the yard, he went upstairs and stood in the darkness to look out a window. The
tall straight figure of the girl, dimly seen, moved quickly about. "Well, nothing has happened
to her. She may be anything or nothing. Her figure is like a young tree that has not borne
fruit," he thought. He went away to his own room and sat for a long time in the darkness. That
night when he left the house for his evening's walk he did not stay long but hurried home and
went to his own room. He locked the door. Unconsciously he did not want Winifred to come to
the door and disturb his thoughts. Sometimes she did that.

All the time she read novels. She read the novels of Robert Louis Stevenson. When she had read
them all she began again.

Sometimes she came upstairs and stood talking by his door. She told some tale, repeated some
wise saying that had fallen unexpectedly from the lips of the children. Occasionally she came
into the room and turned out the light. There was a couch by a window. She went to sit on the
edge of the couch. Something happened. It was as it had been before their marriage. New life
came into her figure. He also went to sit on the couch and she put up her hand and touched
his face.

Hugh did not want that to happen now. He stood within the room for a moment and then unlocked
the door and went to the head of the stairs. "Be quiet when you come up, Winifred. I have a
headache and am going to try to sleep," he lied.

When he had gone back to his own room and locked the door again he felt safe. He did not undress
but threw himself on the couch and turned out the light.

He thought about Mary Cochran, the school girl, but was sure he thought about her in a quite
impersonal way. She was like the woman going to milk cows he had seen across hills when he
was a young fellow and walked far and wide over the country to cure the restlessness in himself.
In his life she was like the man who threw the stone at dog.

"Well, she is unformed; she is like a young tree," he told himself again. "People are like
that. They just grow up suddenly out of childhood. It will happen to my own children. My little
Winifred that cannot yet say words will suddenly be like this girl. I have not selected her
to think about for any particular reason. For some reason I have drawn away from life and she
has brought me back. It might have happened when I saw a child playing in the street or an
old man going up a stairway into a house. She does not belong to me. She will go away out of
my sight. Winifred and the children will stay on and on here and I will stay on and on. We
are imprisoned by the fact that we belong to each other. This Mary Cochran is free, or at least
she is free as far as this prison is concerned. No doubt she will, after a while make a prison
of her own and live in it, but I will have nothing to do with the matter."

By the time Mary Cochran was in her third year in the college at Union Valley she had become
almost a fixture in the Walker household. Still she did not know Hugh. She knew the children
better than he did, perhaps better than their mother. In the fall she and the two boys went
to the woods to gather nuts. In the winter they went skating on a little pond near the house.

Winifred accepted her as she accepted everything, the service of the two negroes, the coming
of the children, the habitual silence of her husband.

And then quite suddenly and unexpectedly Hugh's silence, that had lasted all through his married
life, was broken up. He walked homeward with a German who had the chair of modern languages
in the school and got into a violent quarrel. He stopped to speak to men on the street. When
he went to putter about in the garden he whistled and sang.

One afternoon in the fall he came home and found the whole family assembled in the living room
of the house. The children were playing on the floor and the negress sat in the chair by the
window with his youngest child in her arms, crooning one of the negro songs. Mary Cochran was
there. She sat reading a book.

Hugh walked directly toward her and looked over her shoulder. At that moment Winifred came
into the room. He reached forward and snatched the book out of the girl's hands. She looked
up startled. With an oath he threw it into the fire that burned in an open grate at the side
of the room. A flood of words ran from him. He cursed books and people and schools. "Damn it
all," he said. "What makes you want to read about life? What makes people want to think about
life? Why don't they live? Why don't they leave books and thoughts and schools alone?"

He turned to look at his wife who had grown pale and stared at him with a queer fixed uncertain
stare. The old negro woman got up and went quickly away. The two older children began to cry.
Hugh was miserable. He looked at the startled girl in the chair who also had tears in her eyes,
and at his wife. His fingers pulled nervously at his coat. To the two women he looked like
a boy who had been caught stealing food in a pantry. "I am having one of my silly irritable
spells," he said, looking at his wife but in reality addressing the girl. "You see I am more
serious than I pretend to be. I was not irritated by your book but by something else. I see
so much that can be done in life and I do so little."

He went upstairs to his own room wondering why he had lied to the two women, why he continually
lied to himself.

Did he lie to himself? He tried to answer the question but couldn't. He was like one who walks
in the darkness of the hallway of a house and comes to a blank wall. The old desire to run
away from life, to wear himself out physically, came back upon him like a madness.

For a long time he stood in the darkness inside his own room. The children stopped crying and
the house became quiet again. He could hear his wife's voice speaking softly and presently
the back door of the house banged and he knew the schoolgirl had gone away.

Life in the house began again. Nothing happened. Hugh ate his dinner in silence and went for
a long walk. For two weeks Mary Cochran did not come to his house and then one day he saw her
on the college grounds. She was no longer one of his pupils. "Please do not desert us because
of my rudeness," he said. The girl blushed and said nothing. When he got home that evening
she was in the yard beside the house playing with the children. He went at once to his own
room. A hard smile came and went on his face. "She isn't like a young tree any more. She is
almost like Winifred. She is almost like a person who belongs here, who belongs to me and my
life," he thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mary Cochran's visits to the Walker household came to an end very abruptly. One evening when
Hugh was in his room she came up the stairway with the two boys. She had dined with the family
and was putting the two boys into their beds. It was a privilege she claimed when she dined
with the Walkers.

Hugh had hurried upstairs immediately after dining. He knew where his wife was. She was downstairs,
sitting under a lamp, reading one of the books of Robert Louis Stevenson.

For a long time Hugh could hear the voices of his children on the floor above. Then the thing
happened.

Mary Cochran came down the stairway that led past the door of his room. She stopped, turned
back and climbed the stairs again to the room above. Hugh arose and stepped into the hallway.
The schoolgirl had returned to the children's room because she had been suddenly overtaken
with a hunger to kiss Hugh's oldest boy, now a lad of nine. She crept into the room and stood
for a long time looking at the two boys, who unaware of her presence had gone to sleep. Then
she stole forward and kissed the boy lightly. When she went out of the room Hugh stood in the
darkness waiting for her. He took hold of her hand and led her down the stairs to his own room.

She was terribly afraid and her fright in an odd way pleased him. "Well," he whispered, "you
can't understand now what's going to happen here but some day you will. I'm going to kiss you
and then I'm going to ask you to go out of this house and never come back."

He held the girl against his body and kissed her upon the cheeks and lips. When he led her
to the door she was so weak with fright and with new, strange, trembling desires that she could
with difficulty make her way down the stair and into his wife's presence. "She will lie now,"
he thought, and heard her voice coming up the stairs like an echo to his thoughts. "I have
a terrible headache. I must hurry home," he heard her voice saying. The voice was dull and
heavy. It was not the voice of a young girl.

"She is no longer like a young tree," he thought. He was glad and proud of what he had done.
When he heard the door at the back of the house close softly his heart jumped. A strange quivering
light came into his eyes. "She will be imprisoned but I will have nothing to do with it. She
will never belong to me. My hands will never build a prison for her," he thought with grim
pleasure.

                        THE NEW ENGLANDER

Her name was Elsie Leander and her girlhood was spent on her father's farm in Vermont. For
several generations the Leanders had all lived on the same farm and had all married thin women,
and so she was thin. The farm lay in the shadow of a mountain and the soil was not very rich.
From the beginning and for several generations there had been a great many sons and few daughters
in the family. The sons had gone west or to New York City and the daughters had stayed at home
and thought such thoughts as come to New England women who see the sons of their fathers' neighbors
slipping away, one by one, into the West.

Her father's house was a small white frame affair and when you went out at the back door, past
a small barn and chicken house, you got into a path that ran up the side of a hill and into
an orchard. The trees were all old and gnarled. At the back of the orchard the hill dropped
away and bare rocks showed.

Inside the fence a large grey rock stuck high up out of the ground. As Elsie sat with her back
to the rock, with a mangled hillside at her feet, she could see several large mountains, apparently
but a short distance away, and between herself and the mountains lay many tiny fields surrounded
by neatly built stone walls. Everywhere rocks appeared. Large ones, too heavy to be moved,
stuck out of the ground in the centre of the fields. The fields were like cups filled with
a green liquid that turned grey in the fall and white in the winter. The mountains, far off
but apparently near at hand, were like giants ready at any moment to reach out their hands
and take the cups one by one and drink off the green liquid. The large rocks in the fields
were like the thumbs of the giants.

Elsie had three brothers, born before her, but they had all gone away. Two of them had gone
to live with her uncle in the West and her oldest brother had gone to New York City where he
had married and prospered. All through his youth and manhood her father had worked hard and
had lived a hard life, but his son in New York City had begun to send money home, and after
that things went better. He still worked every day about the barn or in the fields but he did
not worry about the future. Elsie's mother did house work in the mornings and in the afternoons
sat in a rocking chair in her tiny living room and thought of her sons while she crocheted
table covers and tidies for the backs of chairs. She was a silent woman, very thin and with
very thin bony hands. She did not ease herself into a rocking chair but sat down and got up
suddenly, and when she crocheted her back was as straight as the back of a drill sergeant.

The mother rarely spoke to the daughter. Sometimes in the afternoons as the younger woman went
up the hillside to her place by the rock at the back of the orchard, her father came out of
the barn and stopped her. He put a hand on her shoulder and asked her where she was going.
"To the rock," she said and her father laughed. His laughter was like the creaking of a rusty
barn door hinge and the hand he had laid on her shoulders was thin like her own hands and like
her mother's hands. The father went into the barn shaking his head. "She's like her mother.
She is herself like a rock," he thought. At the head of the path that led from the house to
the orchard there was a great cluster of bayberry bushes. The New England farmer came out of
his barn to watch his daughter go along the path, but she had disappeared behind the bushes.
He looked away past his house to the fields and to the mountains in the distance. He also saw
the green cup-like fields and the grim mountains. There was an almost imperceptible tightening
of the muscles of his half worn-out old body. For a long time he stood in silence and then,
knowing from long experience the danger of having thoughts, he went back into the barn and
busied himself with the mending of an agricultural tool that had been mended many times before.

The son of the Leanders who went to live in New York City was the father of one son, a thin
sensitive boy who looked like Elsie. The son died when he was twenty-three years old and some
years later the father died and left his money to the old people on the New England farm. The
two Leanders who had gone west had lived there with their father's brother, a farmer, until
they grew into manhood. Then Will, the younger, got a job on a railroad. He was killed one
winter morning. It was a cold snowy day and when the freight train he was in charge of as conductor
left the city of Des Moines, he started to run over the tops of the cars. His feet slipped
and he shot down into space. That was the end of him.

Of the new generation there was only Elsie and her brother Tom, whom she had never seen, left
alive. Her father and mother talked of going west to Tom for two years before they came to
a decision. Then it took another year to dispose of the farm and make preparations. During
the whole time Elsie did not think much about the change about to take place in her life.

The trip west on the railroad train jolted Elsie out of herself. In spite of her detached attitude
toward life she became excited. Her mother sat up very straight and stiff in the seat in the
sleeping car and her father walked up and down in the aisle. After a night when the younger
of the two women did not sleep but lay awake with red burning cheeks and with her thin fingers
incessantly picking at the bed clothes in her berth while the train went through towns and
cities, crawled up the sides of hills and fell down into forest-clad valleys, she got up and
dressed to sit all day looking at a new kind of land. The train ran for a day and through another
sleepless night in a flat land where every field was as large as a farm in her own country.
Towns appeared and disappeared in a continual procession. The whole land was so unlike anything
she had ever known that she began to feel unlike herself. In the valley where she had been
born and where she had lived all her days everything had an air of finality. Nothing could
be changed. The tiny fields were chained to the earth. They were fixed in their places and
surrounded by aged stone walls. The fields like the mountains that looked down at them were
as unchangeable as the passing days. She had a feeling they had always been so, would always be so.

Elsie sat like her mother, upright in the car seat and with a back like the back of a drill
sergeant. The train ran swiftly along through Ohio and Indiana. Her thin hands like her mother's
hands were crossed and locked. One passing casually through the car might have thought both
women prisoners handcuffed and bound to their seats. Night came on and she again got into her
berth. Again she lay awake and her thin cheeks became flushed, but she thought new thoughts.
Her hands were no longer gripped together and she did not pick at the bed clothes. Twice during
the night she stretched herself and yawned, a thing she had never in her life done before.
The train stopped at a town on the prairies, and as there was something the matter with one
of the wheels of the car in which she lay the trainsmen came with flaming torches to tinker
it. There was a great pounding and shouting. When the train went on its way she wanted to get
out of her berth and run up and down in the aisle of the car. The fancy had come to her that
the men tinkering with the car wheel were new men out of the new land who with strong hammers
had broken away the doors of her prison. They had destroyed forever the programme she had made
for her life.

Elsie was filled with joy at the thought that the train was still going on into the West. She
wanted to go on forever in a straight line into the unknown. She fancied herself no longer
on a train and imagined she had become a winged thing flying through space. Her long years
of sitting alone by the rock on the New England farm had got her into the habit of expressing
her thoughts aloud. Her thin voice broke the silence that lay over the sleeping car and her
father and mother, both also lying awake, sat up in their berth to listen.

Tom Leander, the only living male representative of the new generation of Leanders, was a loosely
built man of forty inclined to corpulency. At twenty he had married the daughter of a neighboring
farmer, and when his wife inherited some money she and Tom moved into the town of Apple Junction
in Iowa where Tom opened a grocery. The venture prospered as did Tom's matrimonial venture.
When his brother died in New York City and his father, mother, and sister decided to come west
Tom was already the father of a daughter and four sons.

On the prairies north of town and in the midst of a vast level stretch of cornfields, there
was a partly completed brick house that had belonged to a rich farmer named Russell who had
begun to build the house intending to make it the most magnificent place in the county, but
when it was almost completed he had found himself without money and heavily in debt. The farm,
consisting of several hundred acres of corn land, had been split into three farms and sold.
No one had wanted the huge unfinished brick house. For years it had stood vacant, its windows
staring out over the fields that had been planted almost up to the door.

In buying the Russell house Tom was moved by two motives. He had a notion that in New England
the Leanders had been rather magnificent people. His memory of his father's place in the Vermont
valley was shadowy, but in speaking of it to his wife he became very definite. "We had good
blood in us, we Leanders," he said, straightening his shoulders. "We lived in a big house.
We were important people."

Wanting his father and mother to feel at home in the new place, Tom had also another motive.
He was not a very energetic man and, although he had done well enough as keeper of a grocery,
his success was largely due to the boundless energy of his wife. She did not pay much attention
to her household and her children, like little animals, had to take care of themselves, but
in any matter concerning the store her word was law.

To have his father the owner of the Russell place Tom felt would establish him as a man of
consequence in the eyes of his neighbors. "I can tell you what, they're used to a big house,"
he said to his wife. "I tell you what, my people are used to living in style."

       *       *       *       *       *

The exaltation that had come over Elsie on the train wore away in the presence of the grey
empty Iowa fields, but something of the effect of it remained with her for months. In the big
brick house life went on much as it had in the tiny New England house where she had always
lived. The Leanders installed themselves in three or four rooms on the ground floor. After
a few weeks the furniture that had been shipped by freight arrived and was hauled out from
town in one of Tom's grocery wagons. There were three or four acres of ground covered with
great piles of boards the unsuccessful farmer had intended to use in the building of stables.
Tom sent men to haul the boards away and Elsie's father prepared to plant a garden. They had
come west in April and as soon as they were installed in the house ploughing and planting began
in the fields nearby. The habit of a lifetime returned to the daughter of the house. In the
new place there was no gnarled orchard surrounded by a half-ruined stone fence. All of the
fences in all of the fields that stretched away out of sight to the north, south, east, and
west were made of wire and looked like spider webs against the blackness of the ground when
it had been freshly ploughed.

There was however the house itself. It was like an island rising out of the sea. In an odd
way the house, although it was less than ten years old, was very old. Its unnecessary bigness
represented an old impulse in men. Elsie felt that. At the east side there was a door leading
to a stairway that ran into the upper part of the house that was kept locked. Two or three
stone steps led up to it. Elsie could sit on the top step with her back against the door and
gaze into the distance without being disturbed. Almost at her feet began the fields that seemed
to go on and on forever. The fields were like the waters of a sea. Men came to plough and plant.
Giant horses moved in a procession across the prairies. A young man who drove six horses came
directly toward her. She was fascinated. The breasts of the horses as they came forward with
bowed heads seemed like the breasts of giants. The soft spring air that lay over the fields
was also like a sea. The horses were giants walking on the floor of a sea. With their breasts
they pushed the waters of the sea before them. They were pushing the waters out of the basin
of the sea. The young man who drove them also was a giant.

       *       *       *       *       *

Elsie pressed her body against the closed door at the top of the steps. In the garden back
of the house she could hear her father at work. He was raking dry masses of weeds off the ground
preparatory to spading it for a family garden. He had always worked in a tiny confined place
and would do the same thing here. In this vast open place he would work with small tools, doing
little things with infinite care, raising little vegetables. In the house her mother would
crochet little tidies. She herself would be small. She would press her body against the door
of the house, try to get herself out of sight. Only the feeling that sometimes took possession
of her, and that did not form itself into a thought would be large.

The six horses turned at the fence and the outside horse got entangled in the traces. The driver
swore vigorously. Then he turned and started at the pale New Englander and with another oath
pulled the heads of the horses about and drove away into the distance. The field in which he
was ploughing contained two hundred acres. Elsie did not wait for him to return but went into
the house and sat with folded arms in a room. The house she thought was a ship floating in
a sea on the floor of which giants went up and down.

May came and then June. In the great fields work was always going on and Elsie became somewhat
used to the sight of the young man in the field that came down to the steps. Sometimes when
he drove his horses down to the wire fence he smiled and nodded.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the month of August, when it is very hot, the corn in Iowa fields grows until the corn stalks
resemble young trees. The corn fields become forests. The time for the cultivating of the corn
has passed and weeds grow thick between the corn rows. The men with their giant horses have
gone away. Over the immense fields silence broods.

When the time of the laying-by of the crop came that first summer after Elsie's arrival in
the West her mind, partially awakened by the strangeness of the railroad trip, awakened again.
She did not feel like a staid thin woman with a back like the back of a drill sergeant, but
like something new and as strange as the new land into which she had come to live. For a time
she did not know what was the matter. In the field the corn had grown so high that she could
not see into the distance. The corn was like a wall and the little bare spot of land on which
her father's house stood was like a house built behind the walls of a prison. For a time she
was depressed, thinking that she had come west into a wide open country, only to find herself
locked up more closely than ever.

An impulse came to her. She arose and going down three or four steps seated herself almost
on a level with the ground.

Immediately she got a sense of release. She could not see over the corn but she could see under
it. The corn had long wide leaves that met over the rows. The rows became long tunnels running
away into infinity. Out of the black ground grew weeds that made a soft carpet of green. From
above light sifted down. The corn rows were mysteriously beautiful. They were warm passageways
running out into life. She got up from the steps and, walking timidly to the wire fence that
separated her from the field, put her hand between the wires and took hold of one of the corn
stalks. For some reason after she had touched the strong young stalk and had held it for a
moment firmly in her hand she grew afraid. Running quickly back to the step she sat down and
covered her face with her hands. Her body trembled. She tried to imagine herself crawling through
the fence and wandering along one of the passageways. The thought of trying the experiment
fascinated but at the same time terrified. She got quickly up and went into the house.

       *       *       *       *       *

One Saturday night in August Elsie found herself unable to sleep. Thoughts, more definite than
any she had ever known before, came into her mind. It was a quiet hot night and her bed stood
near a window. Her room was the only one the Leanders occupied on the second floor of the house.
At midnight a little breeze came up from the south and when she sat up in bed the floor of
corn tassels lying below her line of sight looked in the moonlight like the face of a sea just
stirred by a gentle breeze.

A murmuring began in the corn and murmuring thoughts and memories awoke in her mind. The long
wide succulent leaves had begun to dry in the intense heat of the August days and as the wind
stirred the corn they rubbed against each other. A call, far away, as of a thousand voices
arose. She imagined the voices were like the voices of children. They were not like her brother
Tom's children, noisy boisterous little animals, but something quite different, tiny little
things with large eyes and thin sensitive hands. One after another they crept into her arms.
She became so excited over the fancy that she sat up in bed and taking a pillow into her arms
held it against her breast. The figure of her cousin, the pale sensitive young Leander who
had lived with his father in New York City and who had died at the age of twenty-three, came
into her mind. It was as though the young man had come suddenly into the room. She dropped
the pillow and sat waiting, intense, expectant.

Young Harry Leander had come to visit his cousin on the New England farm during the late summer
of the year before he died. He had stayed there for a month and almost every afternoon had
gone with Elsie to sit by the rock at the back of the orchard. One afternoon when they had
both been for a long time silent he began to talk. "I want to go live in the West," he said.
"I want to go live in the West. I want to grow strong and be a man," he repeated. Tears came
into his eyes.

They got up to return to the house, Elsie walking in silence beside the young man. The moment
marked a high spot in her life. A strange trembling eagerness for something she had not realized
in her experience of life had taken possession of her. They went in silence through the orchard
but when they came to the bayberry bush her cousin stopped in the path and turned to face her.
"I want you to kiss me," he said eagerly, stepping toward her.

A fluttering uncertainty had taken possession of Elsie and had been transmitted to her cousin.
After he had made the sudden and unexpected demand and had stepped so close to her that his
breath could be felt on her cheek, his own cheeks became scarlet and his hand that had taken
her hand trembled. "Well, I wish I were strong. I only wish I were strong," he said hesitatingly
and turning walked away along the path toward the house.

And in the strange new house, set like an island in its sea of corn, Harry Leander's voice
seemed to arise again above the fancied voices of the children that had been coming out of
the fields. Elsie got out of bed and walked up and down in the dim light coming through the
window. Her body trembled violently. "I want you to kiss me," the voice said again and to quiet
it and to quiet also the answering voice in herself she went to kneel by the bed and taking
the pillow again into her arms pressed it against her face.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tom Leander came with his wife and family to visit his father and mother on Sundays. The family
appeared at about ten o'clock in the morning. When the wagon turned out of the road that ran
past the Russell place Tom shouted. There was a field between the house and the road and the
wagon could not be seen as it came along the narrow way through the corn. After Tom had shouted,
his daughter Elizabeth, a tall girl of sixteen, jumped out of the wagon. All five children
came tearing toward the house through the corn. A series of wild shouts arose on the still
morning air.

The groceryman had brought food from the store. When the horse had been unhitched and put into
a shed he and his wife began to carry packages into the house. The four Leander boys, accompanied
by their sister, disappeared into the near-by fields. Three dogs that had trotted out from
town under the wagon accompanied the children. Two or three children and occasionally a young
man from a neighboring farm had come to join in the fun. Elsie's sister-in-law dismissed them
all with a wave of her hand. With a wave of her hand she also brushed Elsie aside. Fires were
lighted and the house reeked with the smell of cooking. Elsie went to sit on the step at the
side of the house. The corn fields that had been so quiet rang with shouts and with the barking
of dogs.

Tom Leander's oldest child, Elizabeth, was like her mother, full of energy. She was thin and
tall like the women of her father's house but very strong and alive. In secret she wanted to
be a lady but when she tried her brothers, led by her father and mother, made fun of her. "Don't
put on airs," they said. When she got into the country with no one but her brothers and two
or three neighboring farm boys she herself became a boy. With the boys she went tearing through
the fields, following the dogs in pursuit of rabbits. Sometimes a young man came with the children
from a near-by farm. Then she did not know what to do with herself. She wanted to walk demurely
along the rows through the corn but was afraid her brothers would laugh and in desperation
outdid the boys in roughness and noisiness. She screamed and shouted and running wildly tore
her dress on the wire fences as she scrambled over in pursuit of the dogs. When a rabbit was
caught and killed she rushed in and tore it out of the grasp of the dogs. The blood of the
little dying animal dripped on her clothes. She swung it over her head and shouted.

The farm hand who had worked all summer in the field within sight of Elsie became enamoured
of the young woman from town. When the groceryman's family appeared on Sunday mornings he also
appeared but did not come to the house. When the boys and dogs came tearing through the fields
he joined them. He also was self-conscious and did not want the boys to know the purpose of
his coming and when he and Elizabeth found themselves alone together he became embarrassed.
For a moment they walked together in silence. In a wide circle about them, in the forest of
the corn, ran the boys and dogs. The young man had something he wanted to say, but when he
tried to find words his tongue became thick and his lips felt hot and dry. "Well," he began,
"let's you and me--"

Words failed him and Elizabeth turned and ran after her brothers and for the rest of the day
he could not manage to get her out of their sight. When he went to join them she became the
noisiest member of the party. A frenzy of activity took possession of her. With hair hanging
down her back, with clothes torn and with cheeks and hands scratched and bleeding she led her
brothers in the endless wild pursuit of the rabbits.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Sunday in August that followed Elsie Leander's sleepless night was hot and cloudy. In the
morning she was half ill and as soon as the visitors from town arrived she crept away to sit
on the step at the side of the house. The children ran away into the fields. An almost overpowering
desire to run with them, shouting and playing along the corn rows took possession of her. She
arose and went to the back of the house. Her father was at work in the garden, pulling weeds
from between rows of vegetables. Inside the house she could hear her sister-in-law moving about.
On the front porch her brother Tom was asleep with his mother beside him. Elsie went back to
the step and then arose and went to where the corn came down to the fence. She climbed awkwardly
over and went a little way along one of the rows. Putting out her hand she touched the firm
stalks and then, becoming afraid, dropped to her knees on the carpet of weeds that covered
the ground. For a long time she stayed thus listening to the voices of the children in the
distance.

An hour slipped away. Presently it was time for dinner and her sister- in-law came to the back
door and shouted. There was an answering whoop from the distance and the children came running
through the fields. They climbed over the fence and ran shouting across her father's garden.
Elsie also arose. She was about to attempt to climb back over the fence unobserved when she
heard a rustling in the corn. Young Elizabeth Leander appeared. Beside her walked the ploughman
who but a few months earlier had planted the corn in the field where Elsie now stood. She could
see the two people coming slowly along the rows. An understanding had been established between
them. The man reached through between the corn stalks and touched the hand of the girl who
laughed awkwardly and running to the fence climbed quickly over. In her hand she held the limp
body of a rabbit the dogs had killed.

The farm hand went away and when Elizabeth had gone into the house Elsie climbed over the fence.
Her niece stood just within the kitchen door holding the dead rabbit by one leg. The other
leg had been torn away by the dogs. At sight of the New England woman, who seemed to look at
her with hard unsympathetic eyes, she was ashamed and went quickly into the house. She threw
the rabbit upon a table in the parlor and then ran out of the room. Its blood ran out on the
delicate flowers of a white crocheted table cover that had been made by Elsie's mother.

The Sunday dinner with all the living Leanders gathered about the table was gone through in
a heavy lumbering silence. When the dinner was over and Tom and his wife had washed the dishes
they went to sit with the older people on the front porch. Presently they were both asleep.
Elsie returned to the step at the side of the house but when the desire to go again into the
cornfields came sweeping over her she got up and went indoors. 

Muncie.--Four Epochs of Life (Chapters 7-12) ($1.50).

Thresher.--Story of Life for Little Children (Free).

--When and How to Tell Children. (Oregon State Board of Health.)

2. THE PHYSIOLOGICAL PERIOD (TWELVE TO FIFTEEN YEARS).

Hall.--From Youth Into Manhood (.50).

How My Uncle, the Doctor, Instructed Me in Matters of Sex (.10).

Lowry.--Truths (.50).

--The Secret of Strength (Social Hygiene Society of Portland, Oregon)
(Free).

--Virility and Physical Development (Social Hygiene Society
of Portland, Oregon) (Free).

--Address the Secretary of the Social
Hygiene Society, 311 Young Men's Christian Association Building, Portland,
Oregon.

3. THE PATHOLOGICAL PERIOD (OVER FIFTEEN YEARS).

Educational Pamphlets, Nos. 1 and 6 (American Society of Sanitary and Moral Prophylaxis) (.10
each).

--Four Sex Lies (Oregon State Board of Health) (Free).

Hall.--From Youth Into Manhood (Chapter on Sexual Hygiene) (.50).

Health and the Hygiene of Sex (.10).

The Young Man's Problem (.10).

=A Word of Caution=

Let it be repeated that sex instruction should be undertaken with great tact and thoughtfulness.
The one who gives the instruction--whether parent or teacher--should post himself thoroughly and
he should be practical, go slow, not forcing the lad's development by unnecessary knowledge, avoiding
gush and sentiment. He should not seek confession or allow the boy to confess to him, for confession
will raise a barrier between the two later on; he should help the
boy without invading the lad's innermost life, his soul; he should
learn that there are recesses in the boy's self that are his own and
that bear no invasion, and he should respect this right of privacy.

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON SEX

Alexander, Editor.--Sunday School and the Teens.

(Chapter 14.) This is the official utterance of the Commission on Adolescence, authorized by
the International Sunday School Association in convention at San Francisco, and contains a
complete, classified bibliography. ($1.00.)

American Youth (April, 1913. This entire magazine number deals with Sex Education) (.20).

XVI

THE TEEN BOY AND MISSIONS

No more difficult subject faces the Sunday school today than that of really vitally interesting the
teen age boy in the missionary enterprises of the church. Missionary enthusiasts, here and
there, have doubtless had success in interesting numbers of boys,
but, in spite of this, the average, red-blooded, everyday, wide-awake
fellow that inhabits our homes, fills our streets, and honors our
Sunday schools, has little or no conception of missions, or even cares
enough to make any effort to discover what missions really signify.

To the average boy missions spell heathen and a collection and little more. There is no real
life interest, or even contact enough to develop an interest in the subject. This is a Hunt, harsh
analysis of the situation, but it is both honest and true.

Giving money is not a genuine criterion of interest. I have known lots of boys who contributed
two cents a week to help the other fellow, not because it was a conviction, but because it was a
necessary thing to keep in good standing on the posted bulletin, and thus to maintain the
regard and esteem of leader and comrades.

Business men and social leaders have been known to hesitate in subscribing to funds until the
subscription list had been perused by them, when the list of names already secured has caused
them to make generous additions to the fund. The Sunday school offering is a poor index of Sunday
school enthusiasm. Giving money--even more than one can afford to give--is not always real
self-sacrifice. Sometimes it is self-saving. At any rate, it is not the reliable guide of a
boy's interest.

Maybe we shall never get boys to understand the word Missions. Perhaps it is hopelessly confused
with heathen--a poor, unfortunate, know-nothing, worth-little crowd
of black or yellow people--who can never amount to anything, unless
money be given to put grit enough into them to get them to try to
live right--a pretty doubtful investment, after all.

Yes, this is the logic of the average boy, due to the information of the non-christian's degradation,
lack of initiative, low ideals, and poor morals, as set forth by the returned missionary. Even the
fact that one or two folks, by reason of the missionary's work, have been raised to better things,
affords no promise of rejoicing on the part of the boy. The American teen age boy shuns "kids,"
"dagoes," "hunkies," and everything that seems to him to be inferior. He may occasionally give
them a little pity, but he associates himself in thought and interest
and conduct only with his peers.

His gang is as exclusive as the traditions of Sons of the Revolution. The non-christians of other
lands, like the non-christians of North America, somehow or other, have got to get as good as
he is--not in morals, but in genuine worth-whileness. If they can "pull off a couple of stunts"
that are beyond him, watch his real admiration and interest grow. Maybe, after a while, we will
drop the word Missions and substitute another word--Extension.

Perhaps! Then the fellow whom he teaches to "throw a curve" in the vacant lot, or the foreign-speaking
boy, who can "shoot a basket," to whom he gives a half-hour lesson in English, or the Hindoo
lad, who easily swims the Ganges, and who is being sent to school by his gang, will all command
his interest, because they are partners with him in the common things of his everyday life.
The boy grows by ever-widening circles of interest; first, the self, then the gang, then the school
life, then his city, then the state, then the nation, and so on--out
to humanity.

And all of it must be on a par with his highest ideals. That which falls below meets his contempt.
Interest, then, in non-christian folks in foreign lands, will become the boy's interest only
when it reaches his admiration and the level of the worth-while. The pity and love that burns to
help another is a mature passion, and is only in germ in boyhood.

It is capable, however, of great development.

The interest of the early adolescent is primarily physical. Most of his life centers in his play
and games. Wise educators are using the play instinct as a medium for his education. Manual
training is increasing, the formal work of the class-room is taking on the nature of competition
and music, even music with its old-time monotony and routine of running
scales in the practice period under parental persuasion, has ceased
to be a thing of dread, and has become a delightful thing of play--a
building of houses, a planting of seeds, etc.

The heart of missions
is a genuine regard for the highest welfare of the non-christian,
a real interest in the lives of others.

Now interest is the act of being caught and held by something. It is also temporary, as well
as permanent. This depends wholly on how much one is caught and held. This fact is as true
in boyhood as in manhood. Further, interests are matters of association--one interest is the
path to another. Perhaps, then, the boy's play may widen to embrace China.

A group of boys, some time ago, were playing games in a church basement, and the time began to
lag just a little. A young man, who happened to be present, was appealed to for a new game,
and he taught them to "skin the snake."

                                It "caught on" immediately, and the group of boys grew hilarious
in their enjoyment.

After a while, however, they stopped to rest, and one of the boys turned to the man who had taught
the game, and said, "Where did you get that dandy stunt?" The reply was, "Oh, that's one of
the games that the fellows play over in China." There was silence for a moment or two, and
then one of the older fellows said, "Gee, do the Chinks over there
know enough to play a game like that?"

Questions followed thick and fast for a little while about the boys of China, and the admiration
of the boys increased with their knowledge. The boys of China are a little closer, too, to
the American boys of this particular group whenever "skin the snake" is played. It is altogether
too bad that the play-life of the adolescent in non-christian lands is so meager, for here
in physical prowess is a real contact for the American boy.

The bigness of life is the sum of its contacts.

A boy between sixteen and twenty years is essentially social in his interests. It is then that
the call of the community, business life, vocation, etc., to say
nothing of the sex and the home voice--make their big appeal.

It is his own personal relation to these that makes them real, and the closer his relation the deeper
is his interest. The social appeal stirs his thought and leads him to investigation. The similarity
of problems at home and abroad gives him contact with other lands, and makes for him "all the
world akin." The best approach to China's need is the need of the
homeland.

Good government here is a link of Manchuria and Mongolia. The underpaid woman in the shop, store
and factory of America is the introduction to the limitations of the womanhood of India and the
Orient.

The problem of Africa is real only through the economic, social and moral demands of Pennsylvania,
Illinois, or California. The value of all of these in his thought is the relation which he holds
individually to any one. The circle of his interests grows by the
widening of his knowledge.

The law of his being is to accept nothing on hearsay. He must prove all things and cleave only
to that which he finds true. This, however, is the path to missionary and all other interests.

How,
then, shall all this be worked out in Bible class and through-the-week activity? The missionary
lesson must not be just fact, but related fact. The through-the-week meeting that contemplates
the deepening of interest in other lands must be recreational and social. The contacts must
be real, vital, and individual--expressed in the concrete interests of the now. This is the
principle. The method must be the work of the lesson writer and the missionary expert, and,
until this is achieved, missions must still be but two uninteresting facts for the teen age boy--Heathen
and Collection.

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON THE TEEN BOY AND MISSIONS

Fahs.--Uganda's White Man of Work (.50).

Hall.--Children at Play in Many Lands (.75).

Johnston.--Famine and the Bread ($1.00).

Matthews.--Livingstone, the Pathfinder (.50).

Speer.--Servants of the King (.50).

Steiner.--On the Trail of the Immigrant ($1.50).

XVII

TEMPERANCE AND THE TEEN AGE

Temperance embraces the abstaining from everything that challenges self-control. The two deadliest foes
of young life today are admittedly alcoholic drinks and the cigarette, and any crusade against these
for the conservation of the boy in his teens should be welcomed. It is well, however, to keep in
mind that profane language, the suggestive story, undue sex familiarity,
athletic overindulgence, excessive attendance at the moving picture
shows, or entertainment places, the public dance, and other things
of like ilk in the community, exert a doubtful influence on boy life.

Liquor is the greatest plague in a community, and does more to curse the community than any
other one thing. It breaks up homes, causes divorces, deprives children of their legitimate sustenance,
ruins the life of the drinker, increases taxation, lowers the tone
and morals of the community, and is a detriment to our American life.

Cigarette smoking is bad for anybody. It harms the growing tissue, dulls the conscience, stunts
the growth, and steals the brainpower of growing boys. In dealing with these facts in the Sunday
school let us recognize then, that they exist, that they are true;
and then let us cease merely to rehearse them from time to time.

The day of exhortation is past. Temperance education today consists in the presentation of
absolute, scientific fact. Sentimentality and the multiplication of words no longer mean anything.
In dealing with the teen age boy, spare your words, but pile up the
scientific, concrete, "seeing-is-believing" data.

By proved experiment let him discover through the investigation of himself and others--through
books, pictures, slides, etc.--that everything we take for granted is scientific truth. You do
not need today to prove to a boy that liquor is bad. Physiology in the public school and the everyday
occurrences about him have already furnished him with that knowledge. Furnish him now with the actual
facts of the effects of alcohol on the heart centers, lung centers, locomotion centers, knowledge
centers, and inhibitory or control centers. Make no statement that is not absolutely scientific.
You cannot afford to lie, even to keep the boy from the drink habit. Show concretely--better
yet through the investigation of the boy himself--the economic and moral waste of the liquor habit,
but, in everything, let the hard, cold facts speak for themselves. Let the boy discover for
himself that liquor not only would rob him of his best development,
if he should become a victim of the habit, but is lowering the tone
of his community and country now.

In the matter of pledge-signing be sure the boy knows what he is doing. A written pledge may
mean a different thing to you than to the boy.

It is better to discuss the subject minutely with the boy, then let him write his promise in his
own language, without any written guide. Do not let the boy be anything but true to himself.
Be scientific and educational in all your methods.

When you approach tobacco and cigarettes, do not assume that the boy regards these as bad. He
will readily admit that liquor is harmful, but will likely to refuse to recognize that the pipe,
cigar, or cigarette are immoral. Your education along this line must be absolutely scientific.
The appeal must be to the self and self-interest. They are not good for an athlete; the best
scholarship is threatened by them; growing tissue is harmed by indulgence.

The appeal must be accurate and must apply now. Do not quote what will happen forty years hence.
Boys do not fear old age and its frailties. Present enjoyment is too keen. Do not say that the habit
is filthy, etc. Lay the emphasis on health, physical fitness, the joy of present living. The
appeal must be one of best development. Economic opportunity also may play a part. If business
opportunity is lessened by the habit, prove it.

                             Do not, however, say anything that cannot be supported with incontrovertible
evidence.

Stick to the scientific facts and the appeal to self-interest.

One thing more! Little good comes from denouncing tobacco in general. A lot of good men, influential
men, strong Christian men, use it.

If you have facts concerning the bad effects of smoking on mature men that are reliable, make use
of them, but be sure you are right about it. Ignorance multiplied by forty or one hundred
does not mean wisdom. It is still ignorance. Keep yourself out of the crank army. Do not be
so intemperate yourself in thought, speech, and action as to lessen
your influence.

Temporizing will not do the work, but let us be wise in our approach to the subject before
boys, whose viewpoint cannot be expected to be that of adults.

Liquor and the cigarette are national perils, and both of them, for
the sake of the teen age boy, must be banished from the land.

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON TEMPERANCE AND THE TEEN AGE

Chappel.--Evils of Alcohol (.60).

Horsely.--Alcohol and the Human Body ($1.00).

Jewett.--Control of Body and Mind (Concerning Cigarettes) (.60).

       

Scientific Temperance Journal (Monthly) (.60 per year).

Towns.--Injury of Tobacco (Pamphlet, $1.50 per hundred).

XVIII

BUILDING UP THE BOY'S SPIRITUAL LIFE

       

The business of the Sunday school is the letting loose of moral and
religious impulses for life--the raising of the life, by information,
inspiration and opportunity, to its highest possible attainment. The
very highest reach that any boy's life can attain is the ideal of
life that Jesus has set forth. Nothing less than this can be the aim
of the Sunday school. Analyzing this ideal, we find that this means
that the boy must physically, socially, mentally, and religiously
find the best, build it into his life, and attain unto the "measure
of the stature of the fullness of Christ." Anything that does not
contribute to this end, in the principle or method of the Sunday school,
is wrong. Likewise, anything, tradition or prejudice, that keeps the
school from reaching the boy for the Christ-ideal is a positive affront
to the Lord of the Church. The Sunday school deals with a living,
breathing boy--not a theory, but a real combination of flesh, bone,
muscle, nerve and blood. It must minister to the needs of this combination
in a generous way, with physical, through-the-week activities, not
to induce it to attend Sunday school for worship and Bible study,
but because the highest good of the combination demands these things.
The school also should see that this living, breathing boy, who, by
God's law of life, thinks and moves by his thought, should receive
the best opportunity to develop his mind by supporting the state institutions
in the community for that purpose, and also in providing culture,
recreation-education within the confines of its own particular sphere.
In addition to this, recognizing that the boy belongs to the social
life of the community, and "that no man liveth unto himself or dieth
unto himself," the Sunday school must recognize its obligation to
the community, as well as to the boy, and furnish him an opportunity
for the best social adjustment. The Kingdom of God is a saved community
of saved lives. It is best represented in the Scriptures as a city,
a golden city, without death, crying, or sorrow, all of them intensely
social things, as are their opposites, also. Every lesson the school
gives the boy socially, every chance it affords him to learn by contact
with his fellows of either sex, means just one more effort for the
Kingdom. Moreover, the Kingdom is a community of saved bodies, saved
minds, saved social relations and saved spirits, or a place or group
where the best dominates--the will of God rules over all lesser things,
changing and making them over into the best. Thus the Kingdom is where
life appreciates, enjoys, respects, and honors all of God's gifts,
whether it be body, mind, social relations, or material or spiritual
things. The task of the Sunday school, then, is to reach out unswervingly,
enthusiastically after these ends for the adolescent boy. Like the
commandments, he that transgresseth in one fails in all, in the largest,
truest sense.

The work of the Sunday school, summed up briefly, is
to round out the boy by all good things that he may see and know and
acknowledge Jesus Christ, the Master of Men, as the Master and Lord
of his life, too. Any step less than the joyous acceptance of the
Son of God as Saviour of his life is to miss the mark entirely. This
is the end of all Sunday school principle and method.

Further, Jesus
Christ, as Saviour of Life, is not an idea, a theory, a belief, but
a practical, everyday, every-minute influence. "For me to live is
Christ." From this time forth everything in life is done in the Christ-spirit.
The boy does not cease to be a boy in the acceptance. He is now a
Christian boy, not a mature, Christian man. He still loves play, but
play is not marred now by the tricks that minister to self. Play ministers
now both to self and others. It does not nor cannot leave out self,
however. It saves self. So, with all things else in life, real life
that is lived seven days in the week, twenty-four hours in the day
among his fellows--and one week following without break the other.
Saviour of Life means saviour of body, of mind, of social contacts,
of spirit. It means more than formal religion, the attendance of services,
the saying of prayers, the observance of customs--these are all excellent
and necessary, but to be saved by the Saviour of Men means new life,
or life with a new, saved meaning: "I come that they might have life
and that they might have it more abundantly" (overflowingly). This
is the great objective of the Sunday school.

As soon as a life knows
Jesus as Saviour, it asks the question, "What wilt thou have me to
do, Lord?" In the spring when the warm nights
came and when she was big with him she went to the fields. The heads of little stones stuck
out of the ground like the heads of buried children. The field, washed with moonlight, sloped
gradually downward to a murmuring brook. A few sheep went among the stones nibbling the sparse
grass.

A thousand children were buried in the barren field. They struggled to come out of the ground.
They struggled to come to her. The brook ran over stones and its voice cried out. For a long
time she stayed in the field, shaken with sorrow.

She arose from her seat on a large stone and went to the farmhouse. The voices of the darkness
cried to her as she went along a lane and past a silent barn.

Within herself only the one child struggled. When she got into bed his heels beat upon the
walls of his prison. She lay still and listened. Only one small voice seemed coming to her
out of the silence of the night.

                     OUT OF NOWHERE INTO NOTHING.

                                   I

Rosalind Wescott, a tall strong looking woman of twenty-seven, was walking on the railroad
track near the town of Willow Springs, Iowa. It was about four in the afternoon of a day in
August, and the third day since she had come home to her native town from Chicago, where she
was employed.

At that time Willow Springs was a town of about three thousand people. It has grown since.
There was a public square with the town hall in the centre and about the four sides of the
square and facing it were the merchandising establishments. The public square was bare and
grassless, and out of it ran streets of frame houses, long straight streets that finally became
country roads running away into the flat prairie country.

Although she had told everyone that she had merely come home for a short visit because she
was a little homesick, and although she wanted in particular to have a talk with her mother
in regard to a certain matter, Rosalind had been unable to talk with anyone. Indeed she had
found it difficult to stay in the house with her mother and father and all the time, day and
night, she was haunted by a desire to get out of town. As she went along the railroad tracks
in the hot afternoon sunshine she kept scolding herself. "I've grown moody and no good. If
I want to do it why don't I just go ahead and not make a fuss," she thought.

For two miles the railroad tracks, eastward out of Willow Springs, went through corn fields
on a flat plain. Then there was a little dip in the land and a bridge over Willow Creek. The
Creek was altogether dry now but trees grew along the edge of the grey streak of cracked mud
that in the fall, winter and spring would be the bed of the stream. Rosalind left the tracks
and went to sit under one of the trees. Her cheeks were flushed and her forehead wet. When
she took off her hat her hair fell down in disorder and strands of it clung to her hot wet
face. She sat in what seemed a kind of great bowl on the sides of which the corn grew rank.
Before her and following the bed of the stream there was a dusty path along which cows came
at evening from distant pastures. A great pancake formed of cow dung lay nearby. It was covered
with grey dust and over it crawled shiny black beetles. They were rolling the dung into balls
in preparation for the germination of a new generation of beetles.

Rosalind had come on the visit to her home town at a time of the year when everyone wished
to escape from the hot dusty place. No one had expected her and she had not written to announce
her coming. One hot morning in Chicago she had got out of bed and had suddenly begun packing
her bag, and on that same evening there she was in Willow Springs, in the house where she had
lived until her twenty-first year, among her own people. She had come up from the station in
the hotel bus and had walked into the Wescott house unannounced. Her father was at the pump
by the kitchen door and her mother came into the living room to greet her wearing a soiled
kitchen apron. Everything in the house was just as it always had been. "I just thought I would
come home for a few days," she said, putting down her bag and kissing her mother.

Ma and Pa Wescott had been glad to see their daughter. On the evening of her arrival they were
excited and a special supper was prepared. After supper Pa Wescott went up town as usual, but
he stayed only a few minutes. "I just want to run to the postoffice and get the evening paper,"
he said apologetically. Rosalind's mother put on a clean dress and they all sat in the darkness
on the front porch. There was talk, of a kind. "Is it hot in Chicago now? I'm going to do a
good deal of canning this fall. I thought later I would send you a box of canned fruit. Do
you live in the same place on the North Side? It must be nice in the evening to be able to
walk down to the park by the lake."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rosalind sat under the tree near the railroad bridge two miles from Willow Springs and watched
the tumble bugs at work. Her whole body was hot from the walk in the sun and the thin dress
she wore clung to her legs. It was being soiled by the dust on the grass under the tree.

She had run away from town and from her mother's house. All during the three days of her visit
she had been doing that. She did not go from house to house to visit her old schoolgirl friends,
the girls who unlike herself had stayed in Willow Springs, had got married and settled down
there. When she saw one of these women on the street in the morning, pushing a baby carriage
and perhaps followed by a small child, she stopped. There was a few minutes of talk. "It's
hot. Do you live in the same place in Chicago? My husband and I hope to take the children and
go away for a week or two. It must be nice in Chicago where you are so near the lake." Rosalind
hurried away.

All the hours of her visit to her mother and to her home town had been spent in an effort to
hurry away.

From what? Rosalind defended herself. There was something she had come from Chicago hoping
to be able to say to her mother. Did she really want to talk with her about things? Had she
thought, by again breathing the air of her home town, to get strength to face life and its
difficulties?

There was no point in her taking the hot uncomfortable trip from Chicago only to spend her
days walking in dusty country roads or between rows of cornfields in the stifling heat along
the railroad tracks.

"I must have hoped. There is a hope that cannot be fulfilled," she thought vaguely.

Willow Springs was a rather meaningless, dreary town, one of thousands of such towns in Indiana,
Illinois, Wisconsin, Kansas, Iowa, but her mind made it more dreary.

She sat under the tree by the dry bed of Willow Creek thinking of the street in town where
her mother and father lived, where she had lived until she had become a woman. It was only
because of a series of circumstances she did not live there now. Her one brother, ten years
older than herself, had married and moved to Chicago. He had asked her to come for a visit
and after she got to the city she stayed. Her brother was a traveling salesman and spent a
good deal of time away from home. "Why don't you stay here with Bess and learn stenography,"
he asked. "If you don't want to use it you don't have to. Dad can look out for you all right.
I just thought you might like to learn."

       *       *       *       *       *

"That was six years ago," Rosalind thought wearily. "I've been a city woman for six years."
Her mind hopped about. Thoughts came and went. In the city, after she became a stenographer,
something for a time awakened her. She wanted to be an actress and went in the evening to a
dramatic school. In an office where she worked there was a young man, a clerk. They went out
together, to the theatre or to walk in the park in the evening. They kissed.

Her thoughts came sharply back to her mother and father, to her home in Willow Springs, to
the street in which she had lived until her twenty- first year.

It was but an end of a street. From the windows at the front of her mother's house six other
houses could be seen. How well she knew the street and the people in the houses! Did she know
them? From her eighteenth and until her twenty-first year she had stayed at home, helping her
mother with the housework, waiting for something. Other young women in town waited just as
she did. They like herself had graduated from the town high school and their parents had no
intention of sending them away to college. There was nothing to do but wait. Some of the young
women--their mothers and their mothers' friends still spoke of them as girls--had young men
friends who came to see them on Sunday and perhaps also on Wednesday or Thursday evenings.
Others joined the church, went to prayer meetings, became active members of some church organization.
They fussed about.

Rosalind had done none of these things. All through those three trying years in Willow Springs
she had just waited. In the morning there was the work to do in the house and then, in some
way, the day wore itself away. In the evening her father went up town and she sat with her
mother. Nothing much was said. After she had gone to bed she lay awake, strangely nervous,
eager for something to happen that never would happen. The noises of the Wescott house cut
across her thoughts. What things went through her mind!

There was a procession of people always going away from her. Sometimes she lay on her belly
at the edge of a ravine. Well it was not a ravine. It had two walls of marble and on the marble
face of the walls strange figures were carved. Broad steps led down--always down and away.
People walked along the steps, between the marble walls, going down and away from her.

What people! Who were they? Where did they come from? Where were they going? She was not asleep
but wide awake. Her bedroom was dark. The walls and ceiling of the room receded. She seemed
to hang suspended in space, above the ravine--the ravine with walls of white marble over which
strange beautiful lights played.

The people who went down the broad steps and away into infinite distance--they were men and
women. Sometime a young girl like herself but in some way sweeter and purer than herself, passed
alone. The young girl walked with a swinging stride, going swiftly and freely like a beautiful
young animal. Her legs and arms were like the slender top branches of trees swaying in a gentle
wind. She also went down and away.

Others followed along the marble steps. Young boys walked alone. A dignified old man followed
by a sweet faced woman passed. What a remarkable man! One felt infinite power in his old frame.
There were deep wrinkles in his face and his eyes were sad. One felt he knew everything about
life but had kept something very precious alive in himself. It was that precious thing that
made the eyes of the woman who followed him burn with a strange fire. They also went down along
the steps and away.

Down and away along the steps went others--how many others, men and women, boys and girls,
single old men, old women who leaned on sticks and hobbled along.

In the bed in her father's house as she lay awake Rosalind's head grew light. She tried to
clutch at something, understand something.

She couldn't. The noises of the house cut across her waking dream. Her father was at the pump
by the kitchen door. He was pumping a pail of water. In a moment he would bring it into the
house and put it on a box by the kitchen sink. A little of the water would slop over on the
floor. There would be a sound like a child's bare foot striking the floor. Then her father
would go to wind the clock. The day was done. Presently there would be the sound of his heavy
feet on the floor of the bedroom above and he would get into bed to lie beside Rosalind's mother.

The night noises of her father's house had been in some way terrible to the girl in the years
when she was becoming a woman. After chance had taken her to the city she never wanted to think
of them again. Even in Chicago where the silence of nights was cut and slashed by a thousand
noises, by automobiles whirling through the streets, by the belated footsteps of men homeward
bound along the cement sidewalks after midnight, by the shouts of quarreling men drunk on summer
nights, even in the great hubbub of noises there was comparative quiet. The insistent clanging
noises of the city nights were not like the homely insistent noises of her father's house.
Certain terrible truths about life did not abide in them, they did not cling so closely to
life and did not frighten as did the noises in the one house on the quiet street in the town
of Willow Springs. How often, there in the city, in the midst of the great noises she had fought
to escape the little noises! Her father's feet were on the steps leading into the kitchen.
Now he was putting the pail of water on the box by the kitchen sink. Upstairs her mother's
body fell heavily into bed. The visions of the great marble-lined ravine down along which went
the beautiful people flew away. There was the little slap of water on the kitchen floor. It
was like a child's bare foot striking the floor. Rosalind wanted to cry out. Her father closed
the kitchen door. Now he was winding the clock. In a moment his feet would be on the stairs--

There were six houses to be seen from the windows of the Wescott house. In the winter smoke
from six brick chimneys went up into the sky. There was one house, the next one to the Wescott's
place, a small frame affair, in which lived a man who was thirty-five years old when Rosalind
became a woman of twenty-one and went away to the city. The man was unmarried and his mother,
who had been his housekeeper, had died during the year in which Rosalind graduated from the
high school. After that the man lived alone. He took his dinner and supper at the hotel, down
town on the square, but he got his own breakfast, made his own bed and swept out his own house.
Sometimes he walked slowly along the street past the Wescott house when Rosalind sat alone
on the front porch. He raised his hat and spoke to her. Their eyes met. He had a long, hawk-like
nose and his hair was long and uncombed.

Rosalind thought about him sometimes. It bothered her a little that he sometimes went stealing
softly, as though not to disturb her, across her daytime fancies.

As she sat that day by the dry creek bed Rosalind thought about the bachelor, who had now passed
the age of forty and who lived on the street where she had lived during her girlhood. His house
was separated from the Wescott house by a picket fence. Sometimes in the morning he forgot
to pull his blinds and Rosalind, busy with the housework in her father's house, had seen him
walking about in his underwear. It was-- uh, one could not think of it.

The man's name was Melville Stoner. He had a small income and did not have to work. On some
days he did not leave his house and go to the hotel for his meals but sat all day in a chair
with his nose buried in a book.

There was a house on the street occupied by a widow who raised chickens. Two or three of her
hens were what the people who lived on the street called 'high flyers.' They flew over the
fence of the chicken yard and escaped and almost always they came at once into the yard of
the bachelor. The neighbors laughed about it. It was significant, they felt. When the hens
had come into the yard of the bachelor, Stoner, the widow with a stick in her hand ran after
them. Melville Stoner came out of his house and stood on a little porch in front. The widow
ran through the front gate waving her arms wildly and the hens made a great racket and flew
over the fence. They ran down the street toward the widow's house. For a moment she stood by
the Stoner gate. In the summer time when the windows of the Wescott house were open Rosalind
could hear what the man and woman said to each other. In Willow Springs it was not thought
proper for an unmarried woman to stand talking to an unmarried man near the door of his bachelor
establishment. The widow wanted to observe the conventions. Still she did linger a moment,
her bare arm resting on the gate post. What bright eager little eyes she had! "If those hens
of mine bother you I wish you would catch them and kill them," she said fiercely. "I am always
glad to see them coming along the road," Melville Stoner replied, bowing. Rosalind thought
he was making fun of the widow. She liked him for that. "I'd never see you if you did not have
to come here after your hens. Don't let anything happen to them," he said, bowing again.

For a moment the man and woman lingered looking into each other's eyes. From one of the windows
of the Wescott house Rosalind watched the woman. Nothing more was said. There was something
about the woman she had not understood--well the widow's senses were being fed. The developing
woman in the house next door had hated her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rosalind jumped up from under the tree and climbed up the railroad embankment. She thanked
the gods she had been lifted out of the life of the town of Willow Springs and that chance
had set her down to live in a city. "Chicago is far from beautiful. People say it is just a
big noisy dirty village and perhaps that's what it is, but there is something alive there,"
she thought. In Chicago, or at least during the last two or three years of her life there,
Rosalind felt she had learned a little something of life. She had read books for one thing,
such books as did not come to Willow Springs, books that Willow Springs knew nothing about,
she had gone to hear the Symphony Orchestra, she had begun to understand something of the possibility
of line and color, had heard intelligent, understanding men speak of these things. In Chicago,
in the midst of the twisting squirming millions of men and women there were voices. One occasionally
saw men or at least heard of the existence of men who, like the beautiful old man who had walked
away down the marble stairs in the vision of her girlhood nights, had kept some precious thing
alive in themselves.

And there was something else--it was the most important thing of all. For the last two years
of her life in Chicago she had spent hours, days in the presence of a man to whom she could
talk. The talks had awakened her. She felt they had made her a woman, had matured her.

"I know what these people here in Willow Springs are like and what I would have been like had
I stayed here," she thought. She felt relieved and almost happy. She had come home at a crisis
of her own life hoping to be able to talk a little with her mother, or if talk proved impossible
hoping to get some sense of sisterhood by being in her presence. She had thought there was
something buried away, deep within every woman, that at a certain call would run out to other
women. Now she felt that the hope, the dream, the desire she had cherished was altogether futile.
Sitting in the great flat bowl in the midst of the corn lands two miles from her home town
where no breath of air stirred and seeing the beetles at their work of preparing to propagate
a new generation of beetles, while she thought of the town and its people, had settled something
for her. Her visit to Willow Springs had come to something after all.

Rosalind's figure had still much of the spring and swing of youth in it. Her legs were strong
and her shoulders broad. She went swinging along the railroad track toward town, going westward.
The sun had begun to fall rapidly down the sky. Away over the tops of the corn in one of the
great fields she could see in the distance to where a man was driving a motor along a dusty
road. The wheels of the car kicked up dust through which the sunlight played. The floating
cloud of dust became a shower of gold that settled down over the fields. "When a woman most
wants what is best and truest in another woman, even in her own mother, she isn't likely to
find it," she thought grimly. "There are certain things every woman has to find out for herself,
there is a road she must travel alone. It may only lead to some more ugly and terrible place,
but if she doesn't want death to overtake her and live within her while her body is still alive
she must set out on that road."

Rosalind walked for a mile along the railroad track and then stopped. A freight train had gone
eastward as she sat under the tree by the creek bed and now, there beside the tracks, in the
grass was the body of a man. It lay still, the face buried in the deep burned grass. At once
she concluded the man had been struck and killed by the train. The body had been thrown thus
aside. All her thoughts went away and she turned and started to tiptoe away, stepping carefully
along the railroad ties, making no noise. Then she stopped again. The man in the grass might
not be dead, only hurt, terribly hurt. It would not do to leave him there. She imagined him
mutilated but still struggling for life and herself trying to help him. She crept back along
the ties. The man's legs were not twisted and beside him lay his hat. It was as though he had
put it there before lying down to sleep, but a man did not sleep with his face buried in the
grass in such a hot uncomfortable place. She drew nearer. "O, you Mister," she called, "O,
you--are you hurt?"

The man in the grass sat up and looked at her. He laughed. It was Melville Stoner, the man
of whom she had just been thinking and in thinking of whom she had come to certain settled
conclusions regarding the futility of her visit to Willow Springs. He got to his feet and picked
up his hat. "Well, hello, Miss Rosalind Wescott," he said heartily. He climbed a small embankment
and stood beside her. "I knew you were at home on a visit but what are you doing out here?"
he asked and then added, "What luck this is! Now I shall have the privilege of walking home
with you. You can hardly refuse to let me walk with you after shouting at me like that."

They walked together along the tracks he with his hat in his hand. Rosalind thought he looked
like a gigantic bird, an aged wise old bird, "perhaps a vulture" she thought. For a time he
was silent and then he began to talk, explaining his lying with his face buried in the grass.
There was a twinkle in his eyes and Rosalind wondered if he was laughing at her as she had
seen him laugh at the widow who owned the hens.

He did not come directly to the point and Rosalind thought it strange that they should walk
and talk together. At once his words interested her. He was so much older than herself and
no doubt wiser. How vain she had been to think herself so much more knowing than all the people
of Willow Springs. Here was this man and he was talking and his talk did not sound like anything
she had ever expected to hear from the lips of a native of her home town. "I want to explain
myself but we'll wait a little. For years I've been wanting to get at you, to talk with you,
and this is my chance. You've been away now five or six years and have grown into womanhood.

"You understand it's nothing specially personal, my wanting to get at you and understand you
a little," he added quickly. "I'm that way about everyone. Perhaps that's the reason I live
alone, why I've never married or had personal friends. I'm too eager. It isn't comfortable
to others to have me about."

Rosalind was caught up by this new view point of the man. She wondered. In the distance along
the tracks the houses of the town came into sight. Melville Stoner tried to walk on one of
the iron rails but after a few steps lost his balance and fell off. His long arms whirled about.
A strange intensity of mood and feeling had come over Rosalind. In one moment Melville Stoner
was like an old man and then he was like a boy. Being with him made her mind, that had been
racing all afternoon, race faster than ever.

When he began to talk again he seemed to have forgotten the explanation he had intended making.
"We've lived side by side but we've hardly spoken to each other," he said. "When I was a young
man and you were a girl I used to sit in the house thinking of you. We've really been friends.
What I mean is we've had the same thoughts."

He began to speak of life in the city where she had been living, condemning it. "It's dull
and stupid here but in the city you have your own kind of stupidity too," he declared. "I'm
glad I do not live there."

In Chicago when she had first gone there to live a thing had sometimes happened that had startled
Rosalind. She knew no one but her brother and his wife and was sometimes very lonely. When
she could no longer bear the eternal sameness of the talk in her brother's house she went out
to a concert or to the theatre. Once or twice when she had no money to buy a theatre ticket
she grew bold and walked alone in the streets, going rapidly along without looking to the right
or left. As she sat in the theatre or walked in the street an odd thing sometimes happened.
Someone spoke her name, a call came to her. The thing happened at a concert and she looked
quickly about. All the faces in sight had that peculiar, half bored, half expectant expression
one grows accustomed to seeing on the faces of people listening to music. In the entire theatre
no one seemed aware of her. On the street or in the park the call had come when she was utterly
alone. It seemed to come out of the air, from behind a tree in the park.

And now as she walked on the railroad tracks with Melville Stoner the call seemed to come from
him. He walked along apparently absorbed with his own thoughts, the thoughts he was trying
to find words to express. His legs were long and he walked with a queer loping gait. The idea
of some great bird, perhaps a sea-bird stranded far inland, stayed in Rosalind's mind but the
call did not come from the bird part of him. There was something else, another personality
hidden away. Rosalind fancied the call came this time from a young boy, from such another clear-eyed
boy as she had once seen in her waking dreams at night in her father's house, from one of the
boys who walked on the marble stairway, walked down and away. A thought came that startled
her. "The boy is hidden away in the body of this strange bird-like man," she told herself.
The thought awoke fancies within her. It explained much in the lives of men and women. An expression,
a phrase, remembered from her childhood when she had gone to Sunday School in Willow Springs,
came back to her mind. "And God spoke to me out of a burning bush." She almost said the words
aloud.

Melville Stoner loped along, walking on the railroad ties and talking. He seemed to have forgotten
the incident of his lying with his nose buried in the grass and was explaining his life lived
alone in the house in town. Rosalind tried to put her own thoughts aside and to listen to his
words but did not succeed very well. "I came home here hoping to get a little closer to life,
to get, for a few days, out of the company of a man so I could think about him. I fancied I
could get what I wanted by being near mother, but that hasn't worked. It would be strange if
I got what I am looking for by this chance meeting with another man," she thought. Her mind
went on recording thoughts. She heard the spoken words of the man beside her but her own mind
went on, also making words. Something within herself felt suddenly relaxed and free. Ever since
she had got off the train at Willow Springs three days before there had been a great tenseness.
Now it was all gone. She looked at Melville Stoner who occasionally looked at her. There was
something in his eyes, a kind of laughter--a mocking kind of laughter. His eyes were grey,
of a cold greyness, like the eyes of a bird.

"It has come into my mind--I have been thinking--well you see you have not married in the six
years since you went to live in the city. It would be strange and a little amusing if you are
like myself, if you cannot marry or come close to any other person," he was saying.

Again he spoke of the life he led in his house. "I sometimes sit in my house all day, even
when the weather is fine outside," he said. "You have no doubt seen me sitting there. Sometimes
I forget to eat. I read books all day, striving to forget myself and then night comes and I
cannot sleep.

"If I could write or paint or make music, if I cared at all about expressing what goes on in
my mind it would be different. However, I would not write as others do. I would have but little
to say about what people do. What do they do? In what way does it matter? Well you see they
build cities such as you live in and towns like Willow Springs, they have built this railroad
track on which we are walking, they marry and raise children, commit murders, steal, do kindly
acts. What does it matter? You see we are walking here in the hot sun. In five minutes more
we will be in town and you will go to your house and I to mine. You will eat supper with your
father and mother. Then your father will go up town and you and your mother will sit together
on the front porch. There will be little said. Your mother will speak of her intention to can
fruit. Then your father will come home and you will all go to bed. Your father will pump a
pail of water at the pump by the kitchen door. He will carry it indoors and put it on a box
by the kitchen sink. A little of the water will be spilled. It will make a soft little slap
on the kitchen floor--"

"Ha!"

Melville Stoner turned and looked sharply at Rosalind who had grown a little pale. Her mind
raced madly, like an engine out of control. There was a kind of power in Melville Stoner that
frightened her. By the recital of a few commonplace facts he had suddenly invaded her secret
places. It was almost as though he had come into the bedroom in her father's house where she
lay thinking. He had in fact got into her bed. He laughed again, an unmirthful laugh. "I'll
tell you what, we know little enough here in America, either in the towns or in the cities,"
he said rapidly. "We are all on the rush. We are all for action. I sit still and think. If
I wanted to write I'd do something. I'd tell what everyone thought. It would startle people,
frighten them a little, eh? I would tell you what you have been thinking this afternoon while
you walked here on this railroad track with me. I would tell you what your mother has been
thinking at the same time and what she would like to say to you."

Rosalind's face had grown chalky white and her hands trembled. They got off the railroad tracks
and into the streets of Willow Springs. A change came over Melville Stoner. Of a sudden he
seemed just a man of forty, a little embarrassed by the presence of the younger woman, a little
hesitant. "I'm going to the hotel now and I must leave you here," he said. His feet made a
shuffling sound on the sidewalk. "I intended to tell you why you found me lying out there with
my face buried in the grass," he said. A new quality had come into his voice. It was the voice
of the boy who had called to Rosalind out of the body of the man as they walked and talked
on the tracks. "Sometimes I can't stand my life here," he said almost fiercely and waved his
long arms about. "I'm alone too much. I grow to hate myself. I have to run out of town."

The man did not look at Rosalind but at the ground. His big feet continued shuffling nervously
about. "Once in the winter time I thought I was going insane," he said. "I happened to remember
an orchard, five miles from town where I had walked one day in the late fall when the pears
were ripe. A notion came into my head. It was bitter cold but I walked the five miles and went
into the orchard. The ground was frozen and covered with snow but I brushed the snow aside.
I pushed my face into the grass. In the fall when I had walked there the ground was covered
with ripe pears. A fragrance arose from them. They were covered with bees that crawled over
them, drunk, filled with a kind of ecstacy. I had remembered the fragrance. That's why I went
there and put my face into the frozen grass. The bees were in an ecstasy of life and I had
missed life. I have always missed life. It always goes away from me. I always imagined people
walking away. In the spring this year I walked on the railroad track out to the bridge over
Willow Creek. Violets grew in the grass. At that time I hardly noticed them but today I remembered.
The violets were like the people who walk away from me. A mad desire to run after them had
taken possession of me. I felt like a bird flying through space. A conviction that something
had escaped me and that I must pursue it had taken possession of me."

Melville Stoner stopped talking. His face also had grown white and his hands also trembled.
Rosalind had an almost irresistible desire to put out her hand and touch his hand. She wanted
to shout, crying--"I am here. I am not dead. I am alive." Instead she stood in silence, staring
at him, as the widow who owned the high flying hens had stared. Melville Stoner struggled to
recover from the ecstasy into which he had been thrown by his own words. He bowed and smiled.
"I hope you are in the habit of walking on railroad tracks," he said. "I shall in the future
know what to do with my time. When you come to town I shall camp on the railroad tracks. No
doubt, like the violets, you have left your fragrance out there." Rosalind looked at him. He
was laughing at her as he had laughed when he talked to the widow standing at his gate. She
did not mind. When he had left her she went slowly through the streets. The phrase that had
come into her mind as they walked on the tracks came back and she said it over and over. "And
God spoke to me out of a burning bush." She kept repeating the phrase until she got back into
the Wescott house.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rosalind sat on the front porch of the house where her girlhood had been spent. Her father
had not come home for the evening meal. He was a dealer in coal and lumber and owned a number
of unpainted sheds facing a railroad siding west of town. There was a tiny office with a stove
and a desk in a corner by a window. The desk was piled high with unanswered letters and with
circulars from mining and lumber companies. Over them had settled a thick layer of coal dust.
All day he sat in his office looking like an animal in a cage, but unlike a caged animal he
was apparently not discontented and did not grow restless. He was the one coal and lumber dealer
in Willow Springs. When people wanted one of these commodities they had to come to him. There
was no other place to go. He was content. In the morning as soon as he got to his office he
read the Des Moines paper and then if no one came to disturb him he sat all day, by the stove
in winter and by an open window through the long hot summer days, apparently unaffected by
the marching change of seasons pictured in the fields, without thought, without hope, without
regret that life was becoming an old worn out thing for him.

In the Wescott house Rosalind's mother had already begun the canning of which she had several
times spoken. She was making gooseberry jam. Rosalind could hear the pots boiling in the kitchen.
Her mother walked heavily. With the coming of age she was beginning to grow fat.

The daughter was weary from much thinking. It had been a day of many emotions. She took off
her hat and laid it on the porch beside her. Melville Stoner's house next door had windows
that were like eyes staring at her, accusing her. "Well now, you see, you have gone too fast,"
the house declared. It sneered at her. "You thought you knew about people. After all you knew
nothing." Rosalind held her head in her hands. It was true she had misunderstood. The man who
lived in the house was no doubt like other people in Willow Springs. He was not, as she had
smartly supposed, a dull citizen of a dreary town, one who knew nothing of life. Had he not
said words that had startled her, torn her out of herself?

Rosalind had an experience not uncommon to tired nervous people. Her mind, weary of thinking,
did not stop thinking but went on faster than ever. A new plane of thought was reached. Her
mind was like a flying machine that leaves the ground and leaps into the air.

It took hold upon an idea expressed or implied in something Melville Stoner had said. "In every
human being there are two voices, each striving to make itself heard."

A new world of thought had opened itself before her. After all human beings might be understood.
It might be possible to understand her mother and her mother's life, her father, the man she
loved, herself. There was the voice that said words. Words came forth from lips. They conformed,
fell into a certain mold. For the most part the words had no life of their own. They had come
down out of old times and many of them were no doubt once strong living words, coming out of
the depth of people, out of the bellies of people. The words had escaped out of a shut-in place.
They had once expressed living truth. Then they had gone on being said, over and over, by the
lips of many people, endlessly, wearily.

She thought of men and women she had seen together, that she had heard talking together as
they sat in the street cars or in apartments or walked in a Chicago park. Her brother, the
traveling salesman, and his wife had talked half wearily through the long evenings she had
spent with them in their apartment. It was with them as with the other people. A thing happened.
The lips said certain words but the eyes of the people said other words. Sometimes the lips
expressed affection while hatred shone out of the eyes. Sometimes it was the other way about.
What a confusion!

It was clear there was something hidden away within people that could not get itself expressed
except accidentally. One was startled or alarmed and then the words that fell from the lips
became pregnant words, words that lived. 

Authority will still continue to settle the boys' disputes, but it will be the authority that gives
reasons for its action. Boys between the ages of sixteen and eighteen years can only be handled
on the basis of cooperation. They have passed from the stage of blindly following what they are told.
They have experience enough to know that they are able to do things themselves, and they have
discovered enough things to give them a basis of doing things on their own account. The way to
handle boys rightly in this group will be by tactful suggestion and cooperation on the part
of the teacher. There will be very little difficulty with the groupings if the Sunday school
superintendent or teacher respects the natural, group "ganging" of the boys. The boys themselves
group, not according to mental efficiency tests, but according to physiological development.
Thus we find boys of various chronological ages in the same gang. A little common sense will
prevent many blunders.

=Securing Teen Age Teachers=

As soon as Sunday school teaching becomes a dignified, worth-while job, men will be attracted
to the task and privilege. The unemployed male members of the church will then be led to see
that there is something real to be achieved. The vision of a symmetrically developed boy is
all that is needed to get most men. Of course, they demand a plan, and the organized Sunday
school class with through-the-week activities will supply that.

Sometimes it is a good thing to send the boys themselves after the teachers. This has been found
to be of great profit in several places.

The request coming from the boys means a lot more than coming from the superintendent. The following
extracts from two letters of a teen age superintendent give point to this idea.

"On Sunday a bunch of the younger boys came to Mr. Ball, and said, 'We have no teacher; will
you get one for us?' Mr. Ball looked at them, and said, 'Who do you want, fellows?' They looked
at each other--this was something new. 'Who do we want?' and the leader turned around and said to
the fellows, 'Say, fellows, who do we want?' A hurried consultation revealed the fact that they
wanted, of course, one of the prominent men of the church. Mr. Ball said, 'All right; get hold of
my coat-tail'; and the crew got hold, and formed a snake line, and
out of the school they went, upstairs to one of the class-rooms, in
search of Mr. B. They found that he had left for home, and the boys
looked at Mr. Ball and said, 'Now, what shall we do?' Mr. Ball said,
'Well, fellows, you know where he lives.

I can't go with you, but you fellows go to his home and camp there until he says yes.' Off
they started. Several men were telling me this story, and one is a neighbor of Mr. B's. He said
that when he got home from Sunday school last Sunday--a bitter cold day--he went out into
his back yard, and, glancing over the fences, he saw a bunch of twelve boys lined up on Mr. B's
back porch, stamping their feet. He called across to them, 'Say, fellows, what's the matter?' 'We're
looking for a Sunday school teacher,' they yelled back.

He said he thought he'd drop.

"The next morning Mr. Ball met Mr. B. in the street car, and he grinned
across at him and said, 'Did a group of boys call on you yesterday,
Mr. B.?' 'They certainly did,' he replied, with a broad grin.

'Well, did they get you?' 'Did they get me? Yes, they sure got me, and from now on I'm going
to teach their class; there was nothing else for me to do.'"

The story of another teacher acquired in this way reads as follows:

"Before the boys got to his house the man was getting ready for bed. He had fixed the furnace, and
had his bath robe on when the door-bell rang. He had just said to his wife that he did not
think any one would call that night, and it was then about nine-thirty. When the bell rang
his wife snickered,' as he put it. He went down stairs, turned the gas on low, and opened the door.
Three older fellows stood on the porch. He looked at them and they at him and then he asked
them in. They filed in--fellows 17 and 18 years of age. He led the way into the library, like a
monk in flowing robes, and the three fellows followed.

                                Seating themselves solemnly they stated the cause of their visit,
and he started to remonstrate, etc. They settled themselves comfortably
in their chairs, and said they had come to camp there until he 'saw
it.' This is the man's own story.

He said that when he saw they were in earnest he told them he would like to teach a class of
fellows such as they, and that he would take the class if they would get on the job."

=The Teen Age Older Boy as Teacher=

Increasing attention is being given in some places to the training of older boys for the teaching
of younger groups in the Sunday school. On "Decision Day" volunteers are being asked to enter
a Training Class, and choice Christian boys are in this way being
interested in the teaching work of the school.

In other places older boys are being put in charge of younger boys' classes, and are meeting,
either on Sunday or on a week-night, for training. This latter plan affords real laboratory work,
without which teacher-training courses are pure theory. We learn by doing.

The teen age boy as teacher will ultimately solve the problem of the teen age teaching force.
As Japan, Corea, India and China must eventually be Christianized by native Christian forces,
so the teen age in the Sunday school will, of necessity, in principle and practice, be led by
the teen age. The duty of the missionary in non-christian lands is to train the native forces for
the task of Christianizing these lands; likewise, the men of this Sunday school generation must lead
and train the older adolescent in the Secondary Division of the school
for the leading of the teen age into the service of the church.

PREPARATION FOR TEACHING

The really great task of the Christian adult and older boy in the Sunday school is a real training
for service. Stopping the leak from the teen age in the Sunday school will never be accomplished
until workers are willing to prepare and equip themselves to a point where their wisdom, ability
and consecration will attract the active minds of the teen boys. Every teacher should be an International
Standard Teacher Training graduate. Information concerning this course can be obtained from any Sunday
School Association.

PATIENCE NECESSARY IN THE TEACHER

Things cannot happen in a day. Christianity itself is a growing, developing thing. "First the
seed, then the blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear." Have patience! Maybe you
will have to win the boys yourself first, before you can win them for Him. Read this letter
from a man who has the vision, the plan and a lot of common-sense
patience, and think it over:

"Very recently I came across your card,
and it brought to mind the promise I made to report progress with
my class of boys.

"You see so many people in the course of a week, to say nothing of a couple of months, that it may
be well to remind you that I am the chap who came to your room in ----, and afterward stuck
to you all the way to ---- when you were leaving town.

"When I saw you I was having an average attendance of three, if one is allowed to stretch a fraction
of a boy into a whole one, and a membership in the class of four. These boys had lost all interest
in the Sunday school, and it was only that 'Dad said you must' that any of them came at all
to the service.

"Today I have done as well as the faithful servants, and behold my four talents have gained other
four.

There is no longer a membership and average attendance, for they
all come when they are not sick or out of town; and one thing which
is a wonder to me is that a good many of the boys from other schools
come to us whenever there is no service in their own churches.

"I have not said 'now boys' to this class once, but we have gone hunting
caves and are going again next Thursday, and we are all going camping
if we can arrange a time during the summer.

"These boys, who used to come to the church with a lurching walk and
underlip stuck out, now come in like men.

They have covered the class room walls with pictures from magazines, have brought rocking
chairs from home and use their room as the place to plan the fun for the following week. They
have, after some pretty violent pushing from the teacher, petitioned the powers to give the
basement of the church over to them and the other classes of intermediate grade for the purpose
of having a social evening once each week. The petition has been granted and we will probably
open up about May 16th.

"None of my class show any violent signs of getting converted yet, but when one considers that
this is a class who could not keep a teacher over three or four Sundays;
who used to start a rough-house on all proper and improper occasions,
and who had been known to throw books or any other handy article when
they got sick of hearing any more Bible, I think I can report progress.

"The

                                most of my boys were arrested a couple of months ago for breaking
into summer camps and looking around.

Today three of them came to my office with one of their friends who had cut his foot and told me
all about their trouble, owning up to the whole business and ending by saying that if I would
take their Boy Scout society they would cut all that kind of business out. I wish to God I
had the time to take up this Boy Scout job, but I have not; but I will do the next best thing
by taking them hiking on Thursday, which is my day of rest.

"One can't teach boys like these the beauties of religion any more than he can teach Greek to
a puppy. They are not up to this kind of thing, so I am trying to teach them to be men, and
when we get that lesson we will try the higher one. Of course, I give them the moral side of
every lesson and point out how God has worked through some mighty mean material.

"We still have a fight once in a while during class hours, and I call time when they get too near
the stove, but this is to be expected in a class which is entirely self-governing. I never
have said one word about anything they have done in the class, except to impress upon them that
they should be men and the lesson is working slowly.

"Now, my good sir, don't try to reply to this letter. I know you get a good many just like it,
and I am writing just to give you my experience in the hope that it may help some one else; also
because I promised to let you know what progress the class was making.

"If you will drop into ---- in a year from now I hope to be able to
point to a much larger class than the first six months has shown and
to show you the majority in the church.

"Thanking you for reading this far and with kindest wishes, I am "Very truly yours."

=The Boy the Main Issue=

The idea that must continually be kept in mind is the boy's good and the boy. A lot of our teachers
in the public schools are trying to teach the subject-matter of the book when they ought to
be teaching the boy. They employ static methods. You can get up a goal for attainment and
the boy will reach the goal. Generally, however, he will go no higher than you point. Your
teaching should be dynamic rather than static.

Aim to secure balanced, symmetrical activities for your class.

Remember your boy is four-sided, that he is physical, mental, social and religious in his nature.
Do not neglect any one side of him, but get the proper agencies to cooperate with you for these
ends. Let the boys do whatever they can. Merely insist on adequate adult supervision. Above
all be patient, practical and business-like and remember that old heads never grow on young shoulders.
The Sunday school Teacher should take his place in the community by the side of the teacher
of secular instruction. He is an educator, and is dealing with the most plastic and most valuable
asset in the community--boyhood. Let him take his task seriously, look upon his privilege with
a desire to accomplish great things, and always remember that the good of the boy is his ultimate
aim.

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON THE TEEN AGE TEACHER

Brumbaugh.--The Making of a Teacher ($1.00).

Foster.--Starting to Teach (.40).

James.--Talks to Teachers ($1.50).

Kirkpatrick.--Individual in the Making ($1.25).

McElfresh.--Training of Sunday-school Teachers (in preparation).

Schauffler.--Lamoreaux-Brumbaugh-Lawrance. Training the Teacher ($1.00).

XX

DANGER POINTS

A real danger lies in boys' groups which are seemingly organized, yet which really have no organization.
A few Bible classes have officers, such as president, secretary, and treasurer, and a few standing
committees, all of whom take no real part in the class life, the teacher doing everything himself
and attempting to deceive the boys by giving them a show of organization. Such classes are detrimental
to the spirit of boys' work, and should not be tolerated.

The teacher who cannot retire his leadership to the rear of the class, instead of posing at the front,
is another serious damper to organized work with boys in the Sunday
school.

A leader should have a strong Christian character, have the quality of commanding the respect
of boys, have the ability to direct boys in doing things, be keen in his sympathy, have patience
and persistence, and be absolutely natural in his bearing. He encourages freedom of thought
on the part of the boys, believes that a boy has brains enough of his own to think on any point
that may be discussed, is open and above-board in his teaching, has a strong grip upon the practical
truths of life, and tries to lead his boys out of doubt and difficulty
by the path of service.

If dangers such as these be eliminated from boys' work in connection with the Sunday school, and
if the spirit of sincerity and earnestness pervades the work of the leaders, there should be
little difficulty in raising the boy through the physical, social and mental to the larger
spiritual expression for which the church stands. Every week hundreds of boys of the adolescent
years are lining up for Christian service all over our land, and
if the ideas and directions given these boys are of the right sort,
within one generation there will be no boy problem, for the boy problem
of this generation is not the problem of the boys, but the problem
of the men who are leading boys.

BIBLIOGRAPHY ON DANGER POINTS

The Older Boy Sunday School Superintendent (American Youth, October, 1912). (.20).

Statten.--Danger Lines in Using Boys (American Youth, June, 1912) (.20).

XXI

THE RURAL SUNDAY SCHOOL

The problem of the rural Sunday school is
its size and equipment.

The average number in the school is around eighty, and the building is nearly always a single
room. Some very small villages, near great cities, and even some struggling mission Sunday schools
in these cities have to contend with the same problem. Some of this volume will apply to the
rural Sunday school, and some will not. It is the province of this
chapter to point out the parts that apply.

Everything that has to deal with the Organized Class or group is applicable. The Organized Class
is the unit and beginning of all organization. The boy gang, or group, is common to both city
and rural district. There is no problem in either place, if there is no group of boys. The
Departmental groupings may not be feasible. Usually they are not.

There may not be enough groups of boys to form a club or Boy Scout Troop or a chapter of a
boy order. Generally this is true.

And, after all, it is a distinct gain to the Sunday school, as the grouping that is made by
force of compulsion is the Organized Class or group. The chapter on the Organized Sunday School
Bible Class will apply itself to the rural school, wherever there
is a half dozen boys and it is given a chance.

The chapter on Bible
Study will likewise fit into the rural situation. No matter whether
the boys be urban or rural, they demand Bible Study that will fit
into their religious, developing needs. Perhaps Bible Study courses
with rural application need to be arranged, and I am led to believe
that the illustrative material should be vastly different from that
used for city boys, and of a rural character. However, there has been
too much written and spoken of the difference between rural and urban
boys. The differences discovered by the writer seem to be all in favor
of the country boy--more wholesome surroundings, more quiet and less
nerve-destroying interests, and more time, because of fewer commercial
amusements to really discover things for themselves. The average rural
boy has read more and knows more about current events than the city-bred
lad. The country boy should not be provincialized by his Bible Study,
or anything else. He should be given as large a touch with the world
of men and letters as any one else. The illustrations used in Lesson
Helps, etc., should have some bearing on the life he leads, that the
application of the study may germinate in his daily life, else the
study will have little meaning, but he needs no separate, distinct
courses. It is not a different selection of material, but a different
treatment that is needed. The Denominational Leaders will sooner or
later be forced to heed this cry from the largest section of the Sunday
school field. Until they do Graded Lessons will not gain materially
in the open country.

On the other hand, where there is only one group
of adolescent boys in the Sunday school, Graded Lessons are practicable,
as well as necessary to the best religious development of boyhood.
The grading is cut down to a minimum, and it merely means fewer classes
studying the same lesson. It would mean just the one group, with a
new course each year. The difficulty is not with the lessons, but
with the school officials and the teacher.

The chapter on Through-the-Week
Activities is very applicable. The gang will get together some time,
on Saturday night, if not at another time. The Young Men's Christian
Association County Work Secretaries are getting the boys of the open
country together for week-night meetings without trouble. "Get something
doing" and see how quickly the rural boys will get together. These
activities again will differ greatly from those of city boys. There
will be great emphasis on the Social and Mental as against the Out-of-Door
doings of the urban adolescents. The principle already laid down,
to let the boys themselves decide the activity, will settle this difficulty
at the start.

So as to the chapter on the Teen Age Teacher! Boys
and men are the same pretty much, wherever they live. They may be
more deliberate, less showy, and steadier in some places than others,
but we cannot admit inferiority or lack of interest on the part of
the splendid rural boy. He is filling the big jobs in our cities today,
and will as long as the cities last. The teen age teacher in the rural
school needs to master himself for his task. He is doing a bigger
piece of work than his brother of the city school. He is preparing
men for urban leadership.

To make a long story short, the parts of
this book that deal with the small group are applicable to the rural
Sunday school. The teen age teacher in the rural school should begin
with these, and maybe after a while he will see opportunities for
larger groupings. The Young Men's Christian Association County Work
Secretary certainly is. Inter-Sunday school work is possible by the
Sunday school forces themselves.

A fitting close to this chapter
is the challenge to the teen age teachers of the rural schools, which
Mr. Preston G. Orwig has hurled at North America:

"Every rural school
has its quota of workers who are, perhaps unconsciously, limiting
their own usefulness, as well as retarding the progress of the school,
by meeting every new plan of work proposed with the statement that,
'That plan is all right for the city, but it won't work here because
we have so few members and our people live so far apart.' With the
exception of the man who constantly reminds us that 'we did not do
it this way thirty years ago,' and who, in some cases, is really a
menace to the work, there is no greater obstacle confronting workers
in rural schools. Why should a weed that is
to be destroyed pretend to a vegetable existence? As for puttering about with a camera--was
it not a form of cheating? He did not want to be a photographer. He had once wanted to be a singer.

He arose and walked along the hillside, still watching the shadows play over the plains below.
At night--in bed with his wife--well, was she not sometimes with him as she was in the garden?
Something was plucked out of him and another thing grew in its place--something she wanted
to have grow. Their love making was like his puttering with a camera--to make the weekends
pass. She came at him a little too determinedly-- sure. She was plucking delicate weeds in
order that things she had determined upon--"vegetables," he exclaimed in disgust--in order
that vegetables might grow. Love was a fragrance, the shading of a tone over the lips, out
of the throat. It was like the afternoon light on the burned grass. Keeping a garden and making
flowers grow had nothing to do with it.

Walter Sayers' fingers twitched. The camera hung by a strap over his shoulder. He took hold
of the strap and walked to a tree. He swung the box above his head and brought it down with
a thump against the tree trunk. The sharp breaking sound--the delicate parts of the machine
being broken--was sweet to his ears. It was as though a song had come suddenly from between
his lips. Again he swung the box and again brought it down against the tree trunk.

                               IV

Rosalind at work in Walter Sayers' office was from the beginning something different, apart
from the young woman from Iowa who had been drifting from office to office, moving from rooming
house to rooming house on Chicago's North Side, striving feebly to find out something about
life by reading books, going to the theatre and walking alone in the streets. In the new place
her life at once began to have point and purpose, but at the same time the perplexity that
was later to send her running to Willow Springs and to the presence of her mother began to
grow in her.

Walter Sayers' office was a rather large room on the third floor of the factory whose walls
went straight up from the river's edge. In the morning Rosalind arrived at eight and went into
the office and closed the door. In a large room across a narrow hallway and shut off from her
retreat by two thick, clouded-glass partitions was the company's general office. It contained
the desks of salesmen, several clerks, a bookkeeper and two stenographers. Rosalind avoided
becoming acquainted with these people. She was in a mood to be alone, to spend as many hours
as possible alone with her own thoughts.

She got to the office at eight and her employer did not arrive until nine-thirty or ten. For
an hour or two in the morning and in the late afternoon she had the place to herself. Immediately
she shut the door into the hallway and was alone she felt at home. Even in her father's house
it had never been so. She took off her wraps and walked about the room touching things, putting
things to rights. During the night a negro woman had scrubbed the floor and wiped the dust
off her employer's desk but she got a cloth and wiped the desk again. Then she opened the letters
that had come in and after reading arranged them in little piles. She wanted to spend a part
of her wages for flowers and imagined clusters of flowers arranged in small hanging baskets
along the grey walls. "I'll do that later, perhaps," she thought.

The walls of the room enclosed her. "What makes me so happy here?" she asked herself. As for
her employer--she felt she scarcely knew him. He was a shy man, rather small--

She went to a window and stood looking out. Near the factory a bridge crossed the river and
over it went a stream of heavily loaded wagons and motor trucks. The sky was grey with smoke.
In the afternoon, after her employer had gone for the day, she would stand again by the window.
As she stood thus she faced westward and in the afternoon saw the sun fall down the sky. It
was glorious to be there alone during the late hours of the afternoon. What a tremendous thing
this city in which she had come to live! For some reason after she went to work for Walter
Sayers the city seemed, like the room in which she worked, to have accepted her, taken her
into itself. In the late afternoon the rays of the departing sun fell across great banks of
clouds. The whole city seemed to reach upwards. It left the ground and ascended into the air.
There was an illusion produced. Stark grim factory chimneys, that all day were stiff cold formal
things sticking up into the air and belching forth black smoke, were now slender upreaching
pencils of light and wavering color. The tall chimneys detached themselves from the buildings
and sprang into the air. The factory in which Rosalind stood had such a chimney. It also was
leaping upward. She felt herself being lifted, an odd floating sensation was achieved. With
what a stately tread the day went away, over the city! The city, like the factory chimneys
yearned after it, hungered for it.

In the morning gulls came in from Lake Michigan to feed on the sewage floating in the river
below. The river was the color of chrysoprase. The gulls floated above it as sometimes in the
evening the whole city seemed to float before her eyes. They were graceful, living, free things.
They were triumphant. The getting of food, even the eating of sewage was done thus gracefully,
beautifully. The gulls turned and twisted in the air. They wheeled and floated and then fell
downward to the river in a long curve, just touching, caressing the surface of the water and
then rising again.

Rosalind raised herself on her toes. At her back beyond the two glass partitions were other
men and women, but there, in that room, she was alone. She belonged there. What an odd feeling
she had. She also belonged to her employer, Walter Sayers. She scarcely knew the man and yet
she belonged to him. She threw her arms above her head, trying awkwardly to imitate some movement
of the birds.

Her awkwardness shamed her a little and she turned and walked about the room. "I'm twenty-five
years old and it's a little late to begin trying to be a bird, to be graceful," she thought.
She resented the slow stupid heavy movements of her father and mother, the movements she had
imitated as a child. "Why was I not taught to be graceful and beautiful in mind and body, why
in the place I came from did no one think it worth while to try to be graceful and beautiful?"
she whispered to herself.

How conscious of her own body Rosalind was becoming! She walked across the room, trying to
go lightly and gracefully. In the office beyond the glass partitions someone spoke suddenly
and she was startled. She laughed foolishly. For a long time after she went to work in the
office of Walter Sayers she thought the desire in herself to be physically more graceful and
beautiful and to rise also out of the mental stupidity and sloth of her young womanhood was
due to the fact that the factory windows faced the river and the western sky, and that in the
morning she saw the gulls feeding and in the afternoon the sun going down through the smoke
clouds in a riot of colors.

                                 V

On the August evening as Rosalind sat on the porch before her father's house in Willow Springs,
Walter Sayers came home from the factory by the river and to his wife's suburban garden. When
the family had dined he came out to walk in the paths with the two children, boys, but they
soon tired of his silence and went to join their mother. The young negro came along a path
by the kitchen door and joined the party. Walter went to sit on a garden seat that was concealed
behind bushes. He lighted a cigarette but did not smoke. The smoke curled quietly up through
his fingers as it burned itself out.

Closing his eyes Walter sat perfectly still and tried not to think. The soft evening shadows
began presently to close down and around him. For a long time he sat thus motionless, like
a carved figure placed on the garden bench. He rested. He lived and did not live. The intense
body, usually so active and alert, had become a passive thing. It was thrown aside, on to the
bench, under the bush, to sit there, waiting to be reinhabited.

This hanging suspended between consciousness and unconsciousness was a thing that did not happen
often. There was something to be settled between himself and a woman and the woman had gone
away. His whole plan of life had been disturbed. Now he wanted to rest. The details of his
life were forgotten. As for the woman he did not think of her, did not want to think of her.
It was ridiculous that he needed her so much. He wondered if he had ever felt that way about
Cora, his wife. Perhaps he had. Now she was near him, but a few yards away. It was almost dark
but she with the negro remained at work, digging in the ground--somewhere near--caressing the
soil, making things grow.

When his mind was undisturbed by thoughts and lay like a lake in the hills on a quiet summer
evening little thoughts did come. "I want you as a lover--far away. Keep yourself far away."
The words trailed through his mind as the smoke from the cigarette trailed slowly upwards through
his fingers. Did the words refer to Rosalind Wescott? She had been gone from him three days.
Did he hope she would never come back or did the words refer to his wife?

His wife's voice spoke sharply. One of the children in playing about, had stepped on a plant.
"If you are not careful I shall have to make you stay out of the garden altogether." She raised
her voice and called, "Marian!" A maid came from the house and took the children away. They
went along the path toward the house protesting. Then they ran back to kiss their mother. There
was a struggle and then acceptance. The kiss was acceptance of their fate--to obey. "O, Walter,"
the mother's voice called, but the man on the bench did not answer. Tree toads began to cry.
"The kiss is acceptance. Any physical contact with another is acceptance," he reflected.

The little voices within Walter Sayers were talking away at a great rate. Suddenly he wanted
to sing. He had been told that his voice was small, not of much account, that he would never
be a singer. It was quite true no doubt but here, in the garden on the quiet summer night,
was a place and a time for a small voice. It would be like the voice within himself that whispered
sometimes when he was quiet, relaxed. One evening when he had been with the woman, Rosalind,
when he had taken her into the country in his car, he had suddenly felt as he did now. They
sat together in the car that he had run into a field. For a long time they had remained silent.
Some cattle came and stood nearby, their figures soft in the night. Suddenly he had felt like
a new man in a new world and had begun to sing. He sang one song over and over, then sat in
silence for a time and after that drove out of the field and through a gate into the road.
He took the woman back to her place in the city.

In the quiet of the garden on the summer evening he opened his lips to sing the same song.
He would sing with the tree toad hidden away in the fork of a tree somewhere. He would lift
his voice up from the earth, up into the branches, of trees, away from the ground in which
people were digging, his wife and the young negro.

The song did not come. His wife began speaking and the sound of her voice took away the desire
to sing. Why had she not, like the other woman, remained silent?

He began playing a game. Sometimes, when he was alone the thing happened to him that had now
happened. His body became like a tree or a plant. Life ran through it unobstructed. He had
dreamed of being a singer but at such a moment he wanted also to be a dancer. That would have
been sweetest of all things--to sway like the tops of young trees when a wind blew, to give
himself as grey weeds in a sunburned field gave themself to the influence of passing shadows,
changing color constantly, becoming every moment something new, to live in life and in death
too, always to live, to be unafraid of life, to let it flow through his body, to let the blood
flow through his body, not to struggle, to offer no resistance, to dance.

Walter Sayers' children had gone into the house with the nurse girl Marian. It had become too
dark for his wife to dig in the garden. It was August and the fruitful time of the year for
farms and gardens had come, but his wife had forgotten fruitfulness. She was making plans for
another year. She came along the garden path followed by the negro. "We will set out strawberry
plants there," she was saying. The soft voice of the young negro murmured his assent. It was
evident the young man lived in her conception of the garden. His mind sought out her desire
and gave itself.

The children Walter Sayers had brought into life through the body of his wife Cora had gone
into the house and to bed. They bound him to life, to his wife, to the garden where he sat,
to the office by the riverside in the city.

They were not his children. Suddenly he knew that quite clearly. His own children were quite
different things. "Men have children just as women do. The children come out of their bodies.
They play about," he thought. It seemed to him that children, born of his fancy, were at that
very moment playing about the bench where he sat. Living things that dwelt within him and that
had at the same time the power to depart out of him were now running along paths, swinging
from the branches of trees, dancing in the soft light.

His mind sought out the figure of Rosalind Wescott. She had gone away, to her own people in
Iowa. There had been a note at the office saying she might be gone for several days. Between
himself and Rosalind the conventional relationship of employer and employee had long since
been swept quite away. It needed something in a man he did not possess to maintain that relationship
with either men or women.

At the moment he wanted to forget Rosalind. In her there was a struggle going on. The two people
had wanted to be lovers and he had fought against that. They had talked about it. "Well," he
said, "it will not work out. We will bring unnecessary unhappiness upon ourselves."

He had been honest enough in fighting off the intensification of their relationship. "If she
were here now, in this garden with me, it wouldn't matter. We could be lovers and then forget
about being lovers," he told himself.

His wife came along the path and stopped nearby. She continued talking in a low voice, making
plans for another year of gardening. The negro stood near her, his figure making a dark wavering
mass against the foliage of a low growing bush. His wife wore a white dress. He could see her
figure quite plainly. In the uncertain light it looked girlish and young. She put her hand
up and took hold of the body of a young tree. The hand became detached from her body. The pressure
of her leaning body made the young tree sway a little. The white hand moved slowly back and
forth in space.

Rosalind Wescott had gone home to tell her mother of her love. In her note she had said nothing
of that but Walter Sayers knew that was the object of her visit to the Iowa town. It was on
odd sort of thing to try to do--to tell people of love, to try to explain it to others.

The night was a thing apart from Walter Sayers, the male being sitting in silence in the garden.
Only the children of his fancy understood it. The night was a living thing. It advanced upon
him, enfolded him. "Night is the sweet little brother of Death," he thought.

His wife stood very near. Her voice was soft and low and the voice of the negro when he answered
her comments on the future of the garden was soft and low. There was music in the negro's voice,
perhaps a dance in it. Walter remembered about him.

The young negro had been in trouble before he came to the Sayers. He had been an ambitious
young black and had listened to the voices of people, to the voices that filled the air of
America, rang through the houses of America. He had wanted to get on in life and had tried
to educate himself. The black had wanted to be a lawyer.

How far away he had got from his own people, from the blacks of the African forests! He had
wanted to be a lawyer in a city in America. What a notion!

Well he had got into trouble. He had managed to get through college and had opened a law office.
Then one evening he went out to walk and chance led him into a street where a woman, a white
woman, had been murdered an hour before. The body of the woman was found and then he was found
walking in the street. Mrs. Sayers' brother, a lawyer, had saved him from being punished as
a murderer and after the trial, and the young negro's acquittal, had induced his sister to
take him as gardener. His chances as a professional man in the city were no good. "He has had
a terrible experience and has just escaped by a fluke" the brother had said. Cora Sayers had
taken the young man. She had bound him to herself, to her garden.

It was evident the two people were bound together. One cannot bind another without being bound.
His wife had no more to say to the negro who went away along the path that led to the kitchen
door. He had a room in a little house at the foot of the garden. In the room he had books and
a piano. Sometimes in the evening he sang. He was going now to his place. By educating himself
he had cut himself off from his own people.

Cora Sayers went into the house and Walter sat alone. After a time the young negro came silently
down the path. He stopped by the tree where a moment before the white woman had stood talking
to him. He put his hand on the trunk of the young tree where her hand had been and then went
softly away. His feet made no sound on the garden path.

An hour passed. In his little house at the foot of the garden the negro began to sing softly.
He did that sometimes in the middle of the night. What a life he had led too! He had come away
from his black people, from the warm brown girls with the golden colors playing through the
blue black of their skins and had worked his way through a Northern college, had accepted the
patronage of impertinent people who wanted to uplift the black race, had listened to them,
had bound himself to them, had tried to follow the way of life they had suggested.

Now he was in the little house at the foot of the Sayers' garden. Walter remembered little
things his wife had told him about the man. The experience in the court room had frightened
him horribly and he did not want to go off the Sayers' place. Education, books had done something
to him. He could not go back to his own people. In Chicago, for the most part, the blacks lived
crowded into a few streets on the South Side. "I want to be a slave," he had said to Cora Sayers.
"You may pay me money if it makes you feel better but I shall have no use for it. I want to
be your slave. I would be happy if I knew I would never have to go off your place."

The black sang a low voiced song. It ran like a little wind on the surface of a pond. It had
no words. He had remembered the song from his father who had got it from his father. In the
South, in Alabama and Mississippi the blacks sang it when they rolled cotton bales onto the
steamers in the rivers. They had got it from other rollers of cotton bales long since dead.
Long before there were any cotton bales to roll black men in boats on rivers in Africa had
sung it. Young blacks in boats floated down rivers and came to a town they intended to attack
at dawn. There was bravado in singing the song then. It was addressed to the women in the town
to be attacked and contained both a caress and a threat. "In the morning your husbands and
brothers and sweethearts we shall kill. Then we shall come into your town to you. We shall
hold you close. We shall make you forget. With our hot love and our strength we shall make
you forget." That was the old significance of the song.

Walter Sayers remembered many things. On other nights when the negro sang and when he lay in
his room upstairs in the house, his wife came to him. There were two beds in their room. She
sat upright in her bed. "Do you hear, Walter?" she asked. She came to sit on his bed, sometimes
she crept into his arms. In the African villages long ago when the song floated up from the
river men arose and prepared for battle. The song was a defiance, a taunt. That was all gone
now. The young negro's house was at the foot of the garden and Walter with his wife lay upstairs
in the larger house situated on high ground. It was a sad song, filled with race sadness. There
was something in the ground that wanted to grow, buried deep in the ground. Cora Sayers understood
that. It touched something instinctive in her. Her hand went out and touched, caressed her
husband's face, his body. The song made her want to hold him tight, possess him.

The night was advancing and it grew a little cold in the garden. The negro stopped singing.
Walter Sayers arose and went along the path toward the house but did not enter. Instead he
went through a gate into the road and along the suburban streets until he got into the open
country. There was no moon but the stars shone brightly. For a time he hurried along looking
back as though afraid of being followed, but when he got out into a broad flat meadow he went
more slowly. For an hour he walked and then stopped and sat on a tuft of dry grass. For some
reason he knew he could not return to his house in the suburb that night. In the morning he
would go to the office and wait there until Rosalind came. Then? He did not know what he would
do then. "I shall have to make up some story. In the morning I shall have to telephone Cora
and make up some silly story," he thought. It was an absurd thing that he, a grown man, could
not spend a night abroad, in the fields without the necessity of explanations. The thought
irritated him and he arose and walked again. Under the stars in the soft night and on the wide
flat plains the irritation soon went away and he began to sing softly, but the song he sang
was not the one he had repeated over and over on that other night when he sat with Rosalind
in the car and the cattle came. It was the song the negro sang, the river song of the young
black warriors that slavery had softened and colored with sadness. On the lips of Walter Sayers
the song had lost much of its sadness. He walked almost gaily along and in the song that flowed
from his lips there was a taunt, a kind of challenge.

                                  VI

At the end of the short street on which the Wescotts lived in Willow Springs there was a cornfield.
When Rosalind was a child it was a meadow and beyond was an orchard.

On summer afternoons the child often went there to sit alone on the banks of a tiny stream
that wandered away eastward toward Willow Creek, draining the farmer's fields on the way. The
creek had made a slight depression in the level contour of the land and she sat with her back
against an old apple tree and with her bare feet almost touching the water. Her mother did
not permit her to run bare footed through the streets but when she got into the orchard she
took her shoes off. It gave her a delightful naked feeling.

Overhead and through the branches the child could see the great sky. Masses of white clouds
broke into fragments and then the fragments came together again. The sun ran in behind one
of the cloud masses and grey shadows slid silently over the face of distant fields. The world
of her child life, the Wescott household, Melville Stoner sitting in his house, the cries of
other children who lived in her street, all the life she knew went far away. To be there in
that silent place was like lying awake in bed at night only in some way sweeter and better.
There were no dull household sounds and the air she breathed was sweeter, cleaner. The child
played a little game. All the apple trees in the orchard were old and gnarled and she had given
all the trees names. There was one fancy that frightened her a little but was delicious too.
She fancied that at night when she had gone to bed and was asleep and when all the town of
Willow Springs had gone to sleep the trees came out of the ground and walked about. The grasses
beneath the trees, the bushes that grew beside the fence--all came out of the ground and ran
madly here and there. They danced wildly. The old trees, like stately old men, put their heads
together and talked. As they talked their bodies swayed slightly--back and forth, back and
forth. The bushes and flowering weeds ran in great circles among the little grasses. The grasses
hopped straight up and down.

Sometimes when she sat with her back against the tree on warm bright afternoons the child Rosalind
had played the game of dancing-life until she grew afraid and had to give it up. Nearby in
the fields men were cultivating corn. The breasts of the horses and their wide strong shoulders
pushed the young corn aside and made a low rustling sound. Now and then a man's voice was raised
in a shout. "Hi, there you Joe! Get in there Frank!" The widow of the hens owned a little woolly
dog that occasionally broke into a spasm of barking, apparently without cause, senseless, eager,
barking. Rosalind shut all the sounds out. She closed her eyes and struggled, trying to get
into the place beyond human sounds. After a time her desire was accomplished. There was a low
sweet sound like the murmuring of voices far away. Now the thing was happening. With a kind
of tearing sound the trees came up to stand on top of the ground. They moved with stately tread
toward each other. Now the mad bushes and the flowering weeds came running, dancing madly,
now the joyful grasses hopped. Rosalind could not stay long in her world of fancy. It was too
mad, too joyful. She opened her eyes and jumped to her feet. Everything was all right. The
trees stood solidly rooted in the ground, the weeds and bushes had gone back to their places
by the fence, the grasses lay asleep on the ground. She felt that her father and mother, her
brother, everyone she knew would not approve of her being there among them. The world of dancing
life was a lovely but a wicked world. She knew. Sometimes she was a little mad herself and
then she was whipped or scolded. The mad world of her fancy had to be put away. It frightened
her a little. Once after the thing appeared she cried, went down to the fence crying. A man
who was cultivating corn came along and stopped his horses. "What's the matter?" he asked sharply.
She couldn't tell him so she told a lie. "A bee stung me," she said. The man laughed. "It'll
get well. Better put on your shoes," he advised.

The time of the marching trees and the dancing grasses was in Rosalind's childhood. Later when
she had graduated from the Willow Springs High School and had the three years of waiting about
the Wescott house before she went to the city she had other experiences in the orchard. Then
she had been reading novels and had talked with other young women. She knew many things that
after all she did not know. In the attic of her mother's house there was a cradle in which
she and her brother had slept when they were babies. One day she went up there and found it.
Bedding for the cradle was packed away in a trunk and she took it out. She arranged the cradle
for the reception of a child. Then after she did it she was ashamed. Her mother might come
up the attic stairs and see it. She put the bedding quickly back into the trunk and went down
stairs, her cheeks burning with shame.

What a confusion! One day she went to the house of a schoolgirl friend who was about to be
married. Several other girls came and they were all taken into a bedroom where the bride's
trousseau was laid out on a bed. What soft lovely things! All the girls went forward and stood
over them, Rosalind among them. Some of the girls were shy, others bold. There was one, a thin
girl who had no breasts. Her body was flat like a door and she had a thin sharp voice and a
thin sharp face. She began to cry out strangely. "How sweet, how sweet, how sweet," she cried
over and over. The voice was not like a human voice. It was like something being hurt, an animal
in the forest, far away somewhere by itself, being hurt. Then the girl dropped to her knees
beside the bed and began to weep bitterly. She declared she could not bear the thought of her
schoolgirl friend being married. "Don't do it! O, Mary don't do it!" she pleaded. The other
girls laughed but Rosalind couldn't stand it. He develops natural religious notions, has strong impulses to do big
things, has definite convictions as to his belief in God and Heaven
and the understanding of traditional religious terms, shows a noticeable
lack of interest in the forms of worship, but a keen appreciation
of the spiritual, and is passing through a period when great resolves
are most often made.

CHARACTERISTICS OF LATER ADOLESCENCE

During the period of later adolescence from fifteen to eighteen years of age, the body nearly
attains its maximum growth, the mind begins to show its dominance
over the body, and all the bodily impulses grow stronger and more
vigorous.

Altruism steadily increases; the consciousness of society grows; an appreciation of individual
worth and thought develops; the call of sex and the love emotion grows in strength; sentiment
is inclined to become strong; boundless enthusiasm manifests itself; and organization and cooperation
begin to appeal and be appreciated more and more. There is a growth in logic, independent thought,
alertness in thinking, and quickness of receptive powers. The boy at this age is in the period
of highest resolves and greatest endeavor, is apt to show religious skepticism, and reason
often takes the place of his faith.

=Classes of Boys or Boy Types=

In talking about boys either in the aggregate or as individuals it is best to consider them
as representative of certain definite types. Boy life can be more easily considered in this
way by making special study of particular boy types. In the first place there are the psychological
types--the choleric, the sanguine, the phlegmatic, and the hybrid. There are also the types
of real life with which we are most familiar--the masterful, the weak, the mischievous, the
backward, the shy, the bully, the joker, the "smartie," the echo or shadow, the quiet or reticent,
the girl-struck, the self-conscious, the unconscious, and the forgetful. Lastly, we should
also consider the different types of the unfortunate boys, including the deficient, the delinquent,
the criminal, the dependent, the neglected, the foreign born, the wage-earner, the poverty-stricken,
boys of very wealthy parents, overambitious boys who have overambitious parents, and street
boys who are either loafers or engaged in street trades, or are compelled to use the street
as a playground.

THE CHOLERIC BOY

The choleric fellow who is always
off at "half-cock," running his head into danger whenever he can,
and who is extremely hectic in his make-up, is always a problem.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rosalind had gone away from the Wescott house and from Willow Springs, Iowa, feeling that life
was essentially ugly. In a way she hated life and people. In Chicago sometimes it was unbelievable
how ugly the world had become. She tried to shake off the feeling but it clung to her. She
walked through the crowded streets and the buildings were ugly. A sea of faces floated up to
her. They were the faces of dead people. The dull death that was in them was in her also. They
too could not break through the walls of themselves to the white wonder of life. After all
perhaps there was no such thing as the white wonder of life. It might be just a thing of the
mind. There was something essentially dirty about life. The dirt was on her and in her. Once
as she walked at evening over the Rush Street bridge to her room on the North Side she looked
up suddenly and saw the chrysoprase river running inland from the lake. Near at hand stood
a soap factory. The men of the city had turned the river about, made it flow inland from the
lake. Someone had erected a great soap factory there near the river's entrance to the city,
to the land of men. Rosalind stopped and stood looking along the river toward the lake. Men
and women, wagons, automobiles rushed past her. They were dirty. She was dirty. "The water
of an entire sea and millions of cakes of soap will not wash me clean," she thought. The dirtiness
of life seemed a part of her very being and an almost overwhelming desire to climb upon the
railing of the bridge and leap down into the chrysoprase river swept over her. Her body trembled
violently and putting down her head and staring at the flooring of the bridge she hurried away.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now Rosalind, a grown woman, was in the Wescott house at the supper table with her father
and mother. None of the three people ate. They fussed about with the food Ma Wescott had prepared.
Rosalind looked at her mother and thought of what Melville Stoner had said. What did mothers
think in regard to the lives led by their daughters? Had mothers something of importance to
say to daughters and if they did when did the time come when they were ready to say it?

She looked at her mother sharply. The older woman's face was heavy and sagging. She had grey
eyes like Rosalind's but they were dull like the eyes of a fish lying on a slab of ice in the
window of a city meat market. The daughter was a little frightened by what she saw in her mother's
face and something caught in her throat. There was an embarrassing moment. A strange sort of
tenseness came into the air of the room and all three people suddenly got up from the table.

Rosalind went to help her mother with the dishes and her father sat in a chair by a window
and read a paper. The daughter avoided looking again into her mother's face. "I must gather
myself together if I am to do what I want to do," she thought. It was strange--in fancy she
saw the lean bird-like face of Melville Stoner and the eager tired face of Walter Sayers floating
above the head of her mother who leaned over the kitchen sink, washing the dishes. Both of
the men's faces sneered at her. "You think you can but you can't. You are a young fool," the
men's lips seemed to be saying.

Rosalind's father wondered how long his daughter's visit was to last. After the evening meal
he wanted to clear out of the house, go up town, and he had a guilty feeling that in doing
so he was being discourteous to his daughter. While the two women washed the dishes he put
on his hat and going into the back yard began chopping wood. Rosalind went to sit on the front
porch. The dishes were all washed and dried but for a half hour her mother would putter about
in the kitchen. She always did that. She would arrange and rearrange, pick up dishes and put
them down again. She clung to the kitchen. It was as though she dreaded the hours that must
pass before she could go upstairs and to bed and asleep, to fall into the oblivion of sleep.

When Henry Wescott came around the corner of the house and confronted his daughter he was a
little startled. He did not know what was the matter but he felt uncomfortable. For a moment
he stopped and looked at her. Life radiated from her figure. A fire burned in her eyes, in
her grey intense eyes. Her hair was yellow like cornsilk. She was, at the moment, a complete,
a lovely daughter of the cornlands, a being to be loved passionately, completely by some son
of the cornlands--had there been in the land a son as alive as this daughter it had thrown
aside. The father had hoped to escape from the house unnoticed. "I'm going up town a little
while," he said hesitatingly. Still he lingered a moment. Some old sleeping thing awoke in
him, was awakened in him by the startling beauty of his daughter. A little fire flared up among
the charred rafters of the old house that was his body. "You look pretty, girly," he said sheepishly
and then turned his back to her and went along the path to the gate and the street.

Rosalind followed her father to the gate and stood looking as he went slowly along the short
street and around a corner. The mood induced in her by her talk with Melville Stoner had returned.
Was it possible that her father also felt as Melville Stoner sometimes did? Did loneliness
drive him to the door of insanity and did he also run through the night seeking some lost,
some hidden and half forgotten loveliness?

When her father had disappeared around the corner she went through the gate and into the street.
"I'll go sit by the tree in the orchard until mother has finished puttering about the kitchen,"
she thought.

Henry Wescott went along the streets until he came to the square about the court house and
then went into Emanuel Wilson's Hardware Store. Two or three other men presently joined him
there. Every evening he sat among these men of his town saying nothing. It was an escape from
his own house and his wife. The other men came for the same reason. This may be accomplished
through two methods:

(a) Census and Survey. The city should be divided into districts and mapped out by squares. Then
the teen age campaigners should go two and two for the purpose of a census-taking. The two-by-two
system will result in more thorough work, and it gives the opportunity of helping the more timid
boys by linking them with the bolder ones. An entire square should be worked by the partners,
both making the same call, and every teen age boy in the town, whether a Sunday school attendant
or not, can be located this way. For this purpose an ordinary filing card may be used, printed
as follows:

Date

Name

Address

Religion (Catholic, Jew, Protestant)?

Attend Sunday school (yes or no)?

If yes, where?

Information gathered by

NOTE.--Once this information is gathered it can be kept up-to-date by arrangement with the moving
companies and the water, gas and electric light companies. A monthly report from these companies,
or a stock of post-cards kept with them, will do the work. Another method is an annual checking
up with the city directory.

(b) Home Visitation for Enlistment. This is best accomplished by personal invitation, letter, attractive
advertising, etc. Assign to teen age worker.

Training Classes

3. A training class or training classes, central or by districts, should be arranged to specialize
for teen age leadership.

(a) Adolescent Leadership Course (50 lessons) according to International Standard.

(b) Demonstration Course in physical, social, mental and outdoor activities.

Service Programs

4. Practical programs should be prepared and offered to schools and organized classes to stimulate
the membership of the Crusade.

"For none of us liveth to himself." "For unto every one which hath
shall be given, and from him that hath not, even that which he hath
shall be taken away from him." "Service" is the magic word around
which real life swings. By giving, one gets. The investment of service,
as individuals, and as a class, will bring big dividends in the development
of one's personal life.

Missions Program

Promote (a) a course of
study of "live" home and foreign mission material; (b) systematic
giving to missions; (c) the study of the foreign population of your
city, particularly of your own neighborhood; (d) teaching non-English
speaking men and boys to read and write; (e) the investigation, and,
when possible, the handling of needy cases in your community. Anything
going out from the class to the other fellow comes under this head.

Temperance
Program

Get information along the lines of: (a) bodily self-control;
(b) the injury of tobacco on the growing tissue; (c) the inroads of
alcohol on the growing and mature body; and (d) the economic, material
and moral waste of intemperance of every kind.

Purity Program

Hit
hard for (a) clean speech, clean thoughts, clean sports; (b) for a
single sex standard; (c) chivalry and cleanliness among the sexes;
and (d) adequate education on sex matters.

Programs along these three
lines will be furnished on application to the State and Provincial
Sunday School Association offices.

=Preliminary Plans For Crusade=

To
get things in motion, two lines of action are suggested: First, plan
for a conference of older boys and workers with boys for the community
which you desire to cover. The program should aim to lay before the
conference the plan of the Organized Secondary Division Class; methods
of work should be discussed at group conferences; the Crusade Challenge
presented at the banquet; and the session should close with a rousing
inspirational address. Second, formation of an Inter-Sunday School
Council, the purpose of which is to plan and promote work for Secondary
Division Classes in the city.

Promotion of Conference

The Secondary
Division Committee, headed by the Secondary Division Superintendent
of the city, township or county, in which the conference is planned,
should head the work, and representative men and older boys should
be chosen to form a Conference Committee.

First Steps. Call a meeting
of the General Conference Committee. State clearly the objective of
the Conference and Crusade, then appoint the following sub-committees:
Program, Printing and Advertising, Banquet, Registration, Recreation
and Promotion.
She felt that. It was as though they were beside her, sitting beside her on the grass in the
orchard. She was quite certain that Melville Stoner had come back to his house and was now
sitting within sound of her voice, did she raise her voice to call. What did they want her
of her? Had she suddenly begun to love two men, both older than herself? The shadows of the
branches of trees made a carpet on the floor of the orchard, a soft carpet spun of some delicate
material on which the footsteps of men could make no sound. The two men were coming toward
her, advancing over the carpet. Melville Stoner was near at hand and Walter Sayers was coming
from far away, out of the distance. The spirit of him was creeping toward her. The two men
were in accord. They came bearing some male knowledge of life, something they wanted to give her.

She arose and stood by the tree, trembling. Into what a state she had got herself! How long
would it endure? Into what knowledge of life and death was she being led? She had come home
on a simple mission. She loved Walter Sayers, wanted to offer herself to him but before doing
so had felt the call to come home to her mother. She had thought she would be bold and would
tell her mother the story of her love. She would tell her and then take what the older woman
offered. If her mother understood and sympathized, well that would be a beautiful thing to
have happen. If her mother did not understand--at any rate she would have paid some old debt,
would have been true to some old, unexpressed obligation.

The two men--what did they want of her? What had Melville Stoner to do with the matter? She
put the figure of him out of her mind. In the figure of the other man, Walter Sayers, there
was something less aggressive, less assertive. She clung to that.

She put her arm about the trunk of the old apple tree and laid her cheek against its rough
bark. Within herself she was so intense, so excited that she wanted to rub her cheeks against
the bark of the tree until the blood came, until physical pain came to counteract the tenseness
within that had become pain.

Since the meadow between the orchard and the street end had been planted to corn she would
have to reach the street by going along a lane, crawling under a wire fence and crossing the
yard of the widowed chicken raiser. A profound silence reigned over the orchard and when she
had crawled under the fence and reached the widow's back yard she had to feel her way through
a narrow opening between a chicken house and a barn by running her fingers forward over the
rough boards.

Her mother sat on the porch waiting and on the narrow porch before his house next door sat
Melville Stoner. She saw him as she hurried past and shivered slightly. "What a dark vulture-like
thing he is! He lives off the dead, off dead glimpses of beauty, off dead old sounds heard
at night," she thought. When she got to the Wescott house she threw herself down on the porch
and lay on her back with her arms stretched above her head. Her mother sat on a rocking chair
beside her. There was a street lamp at the corner at the end of the street and a little light
came through the branches of trees and lighted her mother's face. How white and still and death-like
it was. When she had looked Rosalind closed her eyes. "I mustn't. I shall lose courage," she
thought.

There was no hurry about delivering the message she had come to deliver. It would be two hours
before her father came home. The silence of the village street was broken by a hubbub that
arose in the house across the street. Two boys playing some game ran from room to room through
the house, slamming doors, shouting. A baby began to cry and then a woman's voice protested.
"Quit it! Quit it!" the voice called. "Don't you see you have wakened the baby? Now I shall
have a time getting him to sleep again."

Rosalind's fingers closed and her hands remained clenched. "I came home to tell you something.
I have fallen in love with a man and can't marry him. He is a good many years older than myself
and is already married. He has two children. I love him and I think he loves me--I know he
does. I want him to have me too. I wanted to come home and tell you before it happened," she
said speaking in a low clear voice. She wondered if Melville Stoner could hear her declaration.

Nothing happened. The chair in which Rosalind's mother sat had been rocking slowly back and
forth and making a slight creaking sound. The sound continued. In the house across the street
the baby stopped crying. The words Rosalind had come from Chicago to say to her mother were
said and she felt relieved and almost happy. The silence between the two women went on and
on. Rosalind's mind wandered away. Presently there would be some sort of reaction from her
mother. She would be condemned. Perhaps her mother would say nothing until her father came
home and would then tell him. She would be condemned as a wicked woman, ordered to leave the
house. It did not matter.

Rosalind waited. Like Walter Sayers, sitting in his garden, her mind seemed to float away,
out of her body. It ran away from her mother to the man she loved.

One evening, on just such another quiet summer evening as this one, she had gone into the country
with Walter Sayers. Before that he had talked to her, at her, on many other evenings and during
long hours in the office. He had found in her someone to whom he could talk, to whom he wanted
to talk. What doors of life he had opened for her! The talk had gone on and on. In her presence
the man was relieved, he relaxed out of the tenseness that had become the habit of this body.
He had told her of how he had wanted to be a singer and had given up the notion. "It isn't
my wife's fault nor the children's fault," he had said. "They could have lived without me.
The trouble is I could not have lived without them. I am a defeated man, was intended from
the first to be a defeated man and I needed something to cling to, something with which to
justify my defeat. I realize that now. I am a dependent. I shall never try to sing now because
I am one who has at least one merit. I know defeat. I can accept defeat."

That is what Walter Sayers had said and then on the summer evening in the country as she sat
beside him in his car he had suddenly begun to sing. He had opened a farm gate and had driven
the car silently along a grass covered lane and into a meadow. The lights had been put out
and the car crept along. When it stopped some cattle came and stood nearby.

Then he began to sing, softly at first and with increasing boldness as he repeated the song
over and over. Rosalind was so happy she had wanted to cry out. "It is because of myself he
can sing now," she had thought proudly. How intensely, at the moment she loved the man, and
yet perhaps the thing she felt was not love after all. There was pride in it. It was for her
a moment of triumph. He had crept up to her out of a dark place, out of the dark cave of defeat.
It had been her hand reached down that had given him courage.

She lay on her back, at her mother's feet, on the porch of the Wescott house trying to think,
striving to get her own impulses clear in her mind. She had just told her mother that she wanted
to give herself to the man, Walter Sayers. Having made the statement she already wondered if
it could be quite true. She was a woman and her mother was a woman. What would her mother have
to say to her? What did mothers say to daughters? The male element in life--what did it want?
Her own desires and impulses were not clearly realized within herself. Perhaps what she wanted
in life could be got in some sort of communion with another woman, with her mother. What a
strange and beautiful thing it would be if mothers could suddenly begin to sing to their daughters,
if out of the darkness and silence of old women song could come.

Men confused Rosalind, they had always confused her. On that very evening her father for the
first time in years had really looked at her. He had stopped before her as she sat on the porch
and there had been something in his eyes. A fire had burned in his old eyes as it had sometimes
burned in the eyes of Walter. Was the fire intended to consume her quite? Was it the fate of
women to be consumed by men and of men to be consumed by women?

In the orchard, an hour before she had distinctly felt the two men, Melville Stoner and Walter
Sayers coming toward her, walking silently on the soft carpet made of the dark shadows of trees.

They were again coming toward her. In their thoughts they approached nearer and nearer to her,
to the inner truth of her. The street and the town of Willow Springs were covered with a mantle
of silence. Was it the silence of death? Had her mother died? Did her mother sit there now
a dead thing in the chair beside her?

The soft creaking of the rocking chair went on and on. Of the two men whose spirits seemed
hovering about one, Melville Stoner, was bold and cunning. He was too close to her, knew too
much of her. He was unafraid. The spirit of Walter Sayers was merciful. He was gentle, a man
of understanding. She grew afraid of Melville Stoner. He was too close to her, knew too much
of the dark, stupid side of her life. She turned on her side and stared into the darkness toward
the Stoner house remembering her girlhood. The man was too physically close. The faint light
from the distant street lamp that had lighted her mother's face crept between branches of trees
and over the tops of bushes and she could see dimly the figure of Melville Stoner sitting before
his house. She wished it were possible with a thought to destroy him, wipe him out, cause him
to cease to exist. He was waiting. When her mother had gone to bed and when she had gone upstairs
to her own room to lie awake he would invade her privacy. Her father would come home, walking
with dragging footsteps along the sidewalk. He would come into the Wescott house and through
to the back door. He would pump the pail of water at the pump and bring it into the house to
put it on the box by the kitchen sink. Then he would wind the clock. He would--

Rosalind stirred uneasily. Life in the figure of Melville Stoner had her, it gripped her tightly.
She could not escape. He would come into her bedroom and invade her secret thoughts. There
was no escape for her. She imagined his mocking laughter ringing through the silent house,
the sound rising above the dreadful commonplace sounds of everyday life there. She did not
want that to happen. The sudden death of Melville Stoner would bring sweet silence. She wished
it possible with a thought to destroy him, to destroy all men. She wanted her mother to draw
close to her. That would save her from the men. Surely, before the evening had passed her mother
would have something to say, something living and true.

Rosalind forced the figure of Melville Stoner out of her mind. It was as though she had got
out of her bed in the room upstairs and had taken the man by the arm to lead him to the door.
She had put him out of the room and had closed the door.

Her mind played her a trick. Melville Stoner had no sooner gone out of her mind than Walter
Sayers came in. In imagination she was with Walter in the car on the summer evening in the
pasture and he was singing. The cattle with their soft broad noses and the sweet grass-flavored
breaths were crowding in close.

There was sweetness in Rosalind's thoughts now. She rested and waited, waited for her mother
to speak. In her presence Walter Sayers had broken his long silence and soon the old silence
between mother and daughter would also be broken.

The singer who would not sing had begun to sing because of her presence. Song was the true
note of life, it was the triumph of life over death.

What sweet solace had come to her that time when Walter Sayers sang! Coach younger boys in baseball.

Coach
younger boys in basket-ball.

Coach younger boys in football.

Coach younger boys in track athletics.

Coach younger boys in tennis.

Train younger boys in free-hand gymnastics.

Train younger boys in life-saving drills.

Assist in the running of inter-class athletics.

Assist in the running of inter-school athletics.

Lead gymnastic groups for the local school.

Teach boys to swim.

Assist in the running of aquatic meets.

Leaders to encourage boys to get into athletics.

Leaders to encourage boys in outdoor life.

Leaders to encourage boys in camps and hikes.

Leaders to encourage boys in woodcraft and scouting.

Lead a gymnastic class in Social Settlement.

       Manage and coach athletics in Social Settlements.

Assist as Play Leader in public playground.

                    
                    Organize, manage, and umpire Boys' Twilight Ball League.

                    
                    Assist in sport carnival, circus, exhibits, etc.

Make a specialty
of some form of camp life and teach it to boys.

Social Service--

Become responsible for some boy.

Plan a social time.

Assist in planning an entertainment.

Manage and coach musical activity.

Teach games to backward boy.

Assist in exhibit.

Manage celebration.

Promote class and school picnics.

Secure home
for boy from country.

Take boys home for meal and social time.

Promote
musical and dramatic entertainments in settlements and orphanages.

Visit
sick boys in hospital.

Arrange outings for needy mothers, and children,
crippled and unfortunate boys.

Automobile party for above.

Play
Santa Claus to poor families.

Lead in keeping school and shop morally
clean.

Stand for clean thoughts, clean speech, clean sport.

Seek
leadership in public school clubs.

Get interested in the boy life
of the community.

Help boys to find employment.

Help enforce minor
laws.

Take an interest in the delinquent boy.

Mental Service.--

Secure
speakers for practical talks.

Secure speakers for life-work talks.

Lead
in some mental activity.

Promote an educational trip.

Teach elementary
arts and crafts.

Conduct discussion of practical citizenship.

Lead
discussion of current topics.

Lead younger boys as suggested under
class activities--Mental.

Teach English to foreign-speaking boys.

Help
wage-earning boys in elementary subjects, arithmetic, geography, etc.

Encourage
grade boys to stay at school by coaching them in studies.

Organize
civic nights.

Organize debates.

Organize camera trips and photo
study.

Organize Around-the-Fire and story nights.

Lend books and
guide the reading of boys.

Edit class or school paper.

Be foreman
in printing room of above paper.

Lead observation trips.

Spiritual
Service.--

Lead a Boys' Bible Class.

Take part in Boys' Conferences.

Lead
Boys' Meetings.

Teach in extension Sunday school.

Serve on Sunday
school Committees.

Serve on Church Committees.

Take an interest
in every church organization.

Promote systematic giving among boys.

Lead
a Mission Biography group.

Lead an inner circle for prayer and Bible
study.

Promote a census of non-church boys.

Visit homes to invite
fellows to church services.

Join a training class.

Lead campaign
to increase Sunday school membership.

Promote inter-class relationships.

Lead
prayer groups or circles.

Help in Home Department.

Serve on Reception
Committee at Church or Sunday school.

Visit teen age Shut-ins.

Visit
prisoners in jails.

Do chores for sick folks.

Help the aged to and
from church services.

Support a bed in a hospital.

The Organized
Class, its officers, teacher and committees ought to find enough to
do in the above long list. The service activities have been listed
without any idea of order or grading. They are also for individuals
and the class as a whole. They are merely suggestive. The class and
the teacher should do things as a real part of the class life.

ORGANIZED
CLASS ACTIVITIES

BOYS' BIBLE CLASSES

JOHN L. ALEXANDER,

Secondary
Division Superintendent, International Sunday School Association.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
ON THROUGH-THE-WEEK ACTIVITIES

Adams.--Harper's Outdoor Book for
Boys ($1.75).

Alexander.--Opportunity for Extension of Boys' Work
to a Summer Camp Headquarters (American Youth, June, 1911), (.20).

--Using
Nature's Equipment--God's Out-of-Doors (American Youth, August, 1911).
Single copies out of print, but bound volume for 1911 may be obtained
for $1.50.

Baker.--Indoor Games and Socials for Boys (.75).

Bond.--Scientific
American Boy at School ($2.00).

Boys' Handbook. (Boy Scouts of America)
(.30).

Brunner.--Tracks and Tracking (.70).

Burr.--Around the Fire
(.75).

Camp.--Fishing Kits and Equipment ($1.00).

Chesley.--Social
Activities for Men and Boys ($1.00).

Clarke.--Astronomy from a Dipper
(.60).

Corsan.--At Home in the Water (.75).

How much she had wanted Rosalind to keep clear and clean! Once she also had been a young woman,
proud, upstanding. Could anyone think she had ever wanted to become Ma Wescott, fat, heavy
and old? All through her married life she had stayed in her own house, in the kitchen of her
own house, but in her own way she had watched, she had seen how things went with women. Her
man had known how to make money, he had always housed her comfortably. He was a slow, silent
man but in his own way he was as good as any of the men of Willow Springs. Men worked for money,
they ate heavily and then at night they came home to the woman they had married.

Before she married, Ma Wescott had been a farmer's daughter. She had seen things among the
beasts, how the male pursued the female. There was a certain hard insistence, cruelty. Life
perpetuated itself that way. The time of her own marriage was a dim, terrible time. Why had
she wanted to marry? She tried to tell Rosalind about it. "I saw him on the Main Street of
town here, one Saturday evening when I had come to town with father, and two weeks after that
I met him again at a dance out in the country," she said. She spoke like one who has been running
a long distance and who has some important, some immediate message to deliver. "He wanted me
to marry him and I did it. He wanted me to marry him and I did it."

She could not get beyond the fact of her marriage. Did her daughter think she had no vital
thing to say concerning the relationship of men and women? All through her married life she
had stayed in her husband's house, working as a beast might work, washing dirty clothes, dirty
dishes, cooking food.

She had been thinking, all through the years she had been thinking. There was a dreadful lie
in life, the whole fact of life was a lie.

She had thought it all out. There was a world somewhere unlike the world in which she lived.
It was a heavenly place in which there was no marrying or giving in marriage, a sexless quiet
windless place where mankind lived in a state of bliss. For some unknown reason mankind had
been thrown out of that place, had been thrown down upon the earth. It was a punishment for
an unforgivable sin, the sin of sex.

The sin had been in her as well as in the man she had married. She had wanted to marry. Why
else did she do it? Men and women were condemned to commit the sin that destroyed them. Except
for a few rare sacred beings no man or woman escaped.

What thinking she had done! When she had just married and after her man had taken what he wanted
of her he slept heavily but she did not sleep. She crept out of bed and going to a window looked
at the stars. The stars were quiet. With what a slow stately tread the moon moved across the
sky. The stars did not sin. They did not touch one another. Each star was a thing apart from
all other stars, a sacred inviolate thing. On the earth, under the stars everything was corrupt,
the trees, flowers, grasses, the beasts of the field, men and women. They were all corrupt.
They lived for a moment and then fell into decay. She herself was falling into decay. Life
was a lie. Life perpetuated itself by the lie called love. The truth was that life itself came
out of sin, perpetuated itself only by sin.

"There is no such thing as love. The word is a lie. The man you are telling me about wants
you for the purpose of sin," she said and getting heavily up went into the house.

Rosalind heard her moving about in the darkness. She came to the screen door and stood looking
at her daughter lying tense and waiting on the porch. The passion of denial was so strong in
her that she felt choked. To the daughter it seemed that her mother standing in the darkness
behind her had become a great spider, striving to lead her down into some web of darkness.
"Men only hurt women," she said, "they can't help wanting to hurt women. They are made that
way. The thing they call love doesn't exist. It's a lie."

"Life is dirty. Letting a man touch her dirties a woman." Ma Wescott fairly screamed forth
the words. They seemed torn from her, from some deep inner part of her being. X

THROUGH-THE-WEEK ACTIVITIES FOR BOYS' ORGANIZED CLASSES[5]

The Sunday school has at last begun to realize that a boy demands more than spiritual activity to
round out his life into symmetrical development. It also comprehends that religion is more
than a set of beliefs--that religion is a life at work among its fellows. "For to me to live
is Christ"--to live, play, love, and work.

Because of these two reasons, the Sunday school assumes its obligation to direct and foster
the through-the-week life of its boys, as well as the Bible period of the Sunday session of the
school.

Contact.--Of course, for a long time the leaders and teachers of Boys' Organized Bible Classes
have felt the need of a through-the-week contact with the members
of the class.

The school period of one hour or an hour and a half has been found by most teachers to be too
meager for a healthy class life. Then, too, most teachers are realizing that really to touch the
life of the boy more contact than the teaching of the Bible lesson is necessary. Some teachers are
taking an interest in the school or working conditions of the teen
boy.

Quite a few teachers are now deeply interested in the leisure time
of their pupils, and have begun to direct the physical, social and
mental activities of the teen years, as well as the spiritual.

                       They have realized that the teen
                       age is not made up of disjointed and disconnected activities, but
is in a continual process of development, and that its growth is normally
symmetrical and its activities intertwined.

The Organized Class.--The great majority of Sunday school teachers
have no desire to try any auxiliary organization in combination with
their classes.

They are somewhat dubious of the machinery, ritual, etc., which are
concomitants of these schemes.

                       Again and again they have voiced
                       a demand, not for new organizations, but for activities to deepen
interest in the organization that the teacher understands--the Bible
Class.

The Organized Boys' Bible Classes operate in the Secondary Division or teen years of the Sunday
school, from 13 to 20, and include both the younger and older boys. The earlier and later adolescent
periods are separate and distinct groups.

Plans and activities that have proven successful with one group will prove to be ineffectual
with the other. All things should be planned to meet the development of the group. In the following
list of activities the group interests have not been separated as
they intermingle with each other. If the class be allowed to choose
and voice its sentiment, the right activity will always be selected.
Besides, if the members make their own choice, there can be little
complaint at results, and they will work harder for the success of
their own plans. Outside in the darkness before his house sat Melville Stoner, the male,
the man who knew of all that had passed between mother and daughter. Rosalind thought of the
bridge over the river near the factory in the city and of the gulls floating in the air high
above the river. She wished herself there, standing on the bridge. "It would be sweet now to
throw my body down into the river," she thought. She imagined herself falling swiftly and the
swifter fall of the birds down out of the sky. They were swooping down to pick up the life
she was ready to drop, sweeping swiftly and beautifully down. That was what the song Walter
had sung was about.

       *       *       *       *       *

Henry Wescott came home from his evening at Emanuel Wilson's store. He went heavily through
the house to the back door and the pump. There was the slow creaking sound of the pump working
and then he came into the house and put the pail of water on the box by the kitchen sink. A
little of the water spilled. There was a soft little slap--like a child's bare feet striking
the floor--

Rosalind arose. The dead cold weariness that had settled down upon her went away. Cold dead
hands had been gripping her. Now they were swept aside. Her bag was in a closet but she had
forgotten it. Quickly she took off her shoes and holding them in her hands went out into the
hall in her stockinged feet. Her father came heavily up the stairs past her as she stood breathless
with her body pressed against the wall in the hallway.

How quick and alert her mind had become! There was a train Eastward bound toward Chicago that
passed through Willow Springs at two in the morning. She would not wait for it. She would walk
the eight miles to the next town to the east. That would get her out of town. It would give
her something to do. "I need to be moving now," she thought as she ran down the stairs and
went silently out of the house.

She walked on the grass beside the sidewalk to the gate before Melville Stoner's house and
he came down to the gate to meet her. He laughed mockingly. "I fancied I might have another
chance to walk with you before the night was gone," he said bowing. Rosalind did not know how
much of the conversation between herself and her mother he had heard. It did not matter. He
knew all Ma Wescott had said, all she could say and all Rosalind could say or understand. The
thought was infinitely sweet to Rosalind. It was Melville Stoner who lifted the town of Willow
Springs up out of the shadow of death. Words were unnecessary. With him she had established
the thing beyond words, beyond passion--the fellowship in living, the fellowship in life.

They walked in silence to the town's edge and then Melville Stoner put out his hand. "You'll
come with me?" she asked, but he shook his head and laughed. "No," he said, "I'll stay here.
My time for going passed long ago. I'll stay here until I die. I'll stay here with my thoughts."

He turned and walked away into the darkness beyond the round circle of light cast by the last
street lamp on the street that now became a country road leading to the next town to the east.
Rosalind stood to watch him go and something in his long loping gait again suggested to her
mind the figure of a gigantic bird. "He is like the gulls that float above the river in Chicago,"
she thought. "His spirit floats above the town of Willow Springs. When the death in life comes
to the people here he swoops down, with his mind, plucking out the beauty of them."

She walked at first slowly along the road between corn fields. The night was a vast quiet place
into which she could walk in peace. A little breeze rustled the corn blades but there were
no dreadful significant human sounds, the sounds made by those who lived physically but who
in spirit were dead, had accepted death, believed only in death. The corn blades rubbed against
each other and there was a low sweet sound as though something was being born, old dead physical
life was being torn away, cast aside. Perhaps new life was coming into the land.

Rosalind began to run. She had thrown off the town and her father and mother as a runner might
throw off a heavy and unnecessary garment. She wished also to throw off the garments that stood
between her body and nudity. She wanted to be naked, new born. Two miles out of town a bridge
crossed Willow Creek. It was now empty and dry but in the darkness she imagined it filled with
water, swift running water, water the color of chrysoprase. She had been running swiftly and
now she stopped and stood on the bridge her breath coming in quick little gasps.

After a time she went on again, walking until she had regained her breath and then running
again. Her body tingled with life. She did not ask herself what she was going to do, how she
was to meet the problem she had come to Willow Springs half hoping to have solved by a word
from her mother. She ran. Before her eyes the dusty road kept coming up to her out of darkness.
She ran forward, always forward into a faint streak of light. The darkness unfolded before
her. There was joy in the running and with every step she took she achieved a new sense of
escape. A delicious notion came into her mind. As she ran she thought the light under her feet
became more distinct. In over two hundred conferences he has never yet been disappointed in the choice
of the boys.

The program should be distinctly a Sunday school one. The conference is in the interests of
the Sunday school. Keep it to the purpose intended. Hundreds of good causes might be discussed,
but the objective of the conference would be missed. Below are three
different length programs used at different places. They may prove
suggestive to those intending to conduct such meetings.

A. Afternoon
and Evening Conference (One Day).

I stated it as definitely as I could. I was in a room with them.

They had tongues like me, and hair and eyes.

I got up out of my chair and said it as definitely as I could.

Their eyes wavered. Something slipped out of their grasp. Had I been white and strong and young
enough I might have plunged through walls, gone outward into nights and days, gone into prairies,
into distances-- gone outward to the doorstep of the house of God, gone to God's throne room
with their hands in mine.

What I am trying to say is this--

By God I made their minds flee out of them.

Their minds came out of them as clear and straight as anything could be.

I said they might build temples to their lives.

I threw my words at faces floating in a street.

I threw my words like stones, like building stones.

I scattered words in alleyways like seeds.

I crept at night and threw my words in empty rooms of houses in a street.

I said that life was life, that men in streets and cities might build temples to their souls.

I whispered words at night into a telephone. 

Boy activities, then, must group themselves to minister to the needs
of each separate stage in order to work effectively.

But psychology has also shown us that the activities of any one stage
must also be graded to meet the needs of that one stage.

