Uncle Isham pushed his stool back and started to his feet with a noise which woke Plez, who
had been soundly sleeping on the other side of the fireplace; and striding to the door, the
old man went out into the open air. Returning in less than a minute, he put his head into the
doorway and addressed the astonished woman who had turned around to look after him. "Look h'yar,
you Letty, I don' want to hear no sech fool talk 'bout ole miss. You dunno ole miss, nohow.
You only come h'yar seben year ago when dat Plez was trottin' roun' wid nuffin but a little
meal bag for clothes. Mahs' John had been dead a long time den; you nebber knowed Mahs' John.
You nebber was woke up at two o'clock in the mawnin wid de crack ob a pistol, an' run out 'spectin'
'twas somebody stealin' chickens an' Mahs' John firin' at 'em, an' see ole miss a cuttin' for
de road gate wid her white night-gown a floppin' in de win' behind her, an' when we got out
to de gate dar we see Mahs' John a stannin' up agin de pos', not de pos' wid de hinges on,
but de pos' wid de hook on, an' a hole in de top ob de head which he made hese'f wid de pistol.
One-eyed Jim see de whole thing. He war stealin' cohn in de fiel' on de udder side de road.
He see Mahs' John come out wid de pistol, an' he lay low. Not dat it war Mahs' John's cohn
dat he was stealin', but he knowed well 'nuf dat Mahs' John take jes' as much car' o' he neighbus
cohn as he own. An' den he see Mahs' John stan' up agin de pos' an' shoot de pistol, an' he
see Mahs' John's soul come right out de hole in de top ob his head an' go straight up to heben
like a sky-racket."

"Wid a whizz?" asked the open-eyed Letty."

"Like a sky-racket, I tell you," continued the old man, "an' den me an' ole miss come up. She
jes' tuk one look at him and then she said in a wice, not like she own wice, but like Mahs'
John's wice, wot had done gone forebber: 'You Jim, come out o' dat cohn and help carry him
in!' And we free carried him in. An' you dunno ole miss, nohow, an' I don' want to hear no
fool talk from you, Letty, 'bout her. Jes' you 'member dat!"

And with this Uncle Isham betook himself to the solitude of his own cabin.

"Well," said Letty to herself, as she rose and approached the bed in the corner of the room,
"Ise pow'ful glad dat somebody's gwine to take de key bahsket, for I nebber goes inter dat
sto'-room by myse'f widout tremblin' all froo my back bone fear ole miss come back, an' fin'
me dar 'lone."

CHAPTER V.

When Lawrence Croft now took his afternoon walks in the city, he was very glad to wear a light
overcoat, and to button it, too. But, although the air was getting a little nipping in New
York, he knew that it must still be balmy and enjoyable in Virginia. He had never been down
there at this season, but he had heard about the Virginia autumns, and, besides he had seen
a lady who had had a letter from Roberta March. In this letter Miss March had written that
as her father intended making a trip to Texas, and, therefore, would not come to New York as
early as usual, she would stay at least a month longer with her Uncle Brandon; and she was
glad to do it, for the weather was perfectly lovely, and she could stay out-of-doors all day
if she wanted to.

Lawrence's walks, although very invigorating on account of the fine, sharp air, were not entirely
cheering, for they gave him an opportunity to think that he was making no progress whatever
in his attempt to study the character of Junius Keswick. He had entrusted the search for that
gentleman's address to Mr Candy's cashier, who had informed him, most opportunely, that she
was about to set out on a wedding tour, and that she had possessed herself of clues of much
value which could be readily followed up in connection with the projected journey. But a fortnight
or more had elapsed without his hearing anything from her, and he had come to the conclusion
that hymeneal joys must have driven all thoughts of business out of her little head.

After hearing that Roberta March intended protracting her stay in the country the desire came
to him to go down there himself. He would like to have the novel experience of that region
in autumn, and he would like to see Roberta, but he could not help acknowledging to himself
that the proceeding would scarcely be a wise one, especially as he must go without the desired
safeguard of knowing what kind of man Miss March had once been willing to accept. He felt that
if he went down to the neighborhood of Midbranch one of the battles of his life would begin,
and that when he held up before him his figurative shield, he would see in its inner mirror
that, on account of his own disposition toward the lady, he was in a condition of great peril.
But, for all that, he wanted very much to go, and no one will be surprised to learn that he did go.

He was a little embarrassed at first in regard to the pretext which he should make to himself
for such a journey. Whatever satisfactory excuse he could make to himself in this case would,
of course, do for other people. Although he was not prone to make excuses for his conduct to
other people in general, he knew he would have to give some reason to Mr Brandon and Miss Roberta
for his return to Virginia so soon after having left it. He determined to make a visit to the
mountains of North Carolina, and as Midbranch would lie in his way, of course he would stop
there. This he assured himself was not a subterfuge. It was a very sensible thing to do. He
had a good deal of time on his hands before the city season, at least for him, would begin,
and he had read that the autumn was an admirable time to visit the country of the French Broad.
How long a stop he would make at Midbranch would be determined by circumstances. He was sorry
that he would not be able to look upon Miss Roberta with the advantage of knowing her former
lover, but it was something to know that she had had a lover. With this fact in his mind he
would be able to form a better estimate of her than he had formed before.

The man who lived in the cottage at the Green Sulphur Springs was somewhat surprised when Mr
Croft arrived there, and desired to make arrangements, as before, for board, and the use of
a saddle horse. But, although it was not generally conceded, this man knew very well that there
was no water in the world so suitable to remedy the wear and tear of a city life as that of
the Green Sulphur Springs, and therefore nobody could consider the young gentleman foolish
for coming back again while the season permitted.

Lawrence arrived at his cottage in the morning; and early in the afternoon of the same day
he rode over to Midbranch. He found the country a good deal changed, and he did not like the
changes. His road, which ran for much of its distance through the woods, was covered with leaves,
some green, and some red and yellow, and he did not fancy the peculiar smell of these leaves,
which reminded him, in some way, of that gathering together of the characters in old-fashioned
comedies shortly before the fall of the curtain. In many places where there used to be a thick
shade, the foliage was now quite thin, and through it he could see a good deal of the sky.
The Virginia creepers, or "poison oaks," whichever they were, were growing red upon the trunks
of the trees as if they had been at table too long and showed it, and when he rode out of the
woods he saw that the fields, which he remembered as wide, swelling slopes of green, with cattle
and colts feeding here and there, were now being ploughed into corrugated stretches of monotonous
drab and brown. If he had been there through all the gradual changes of the season, he, probably,
would have enjoyed them as much as people ordinarily do; but coming back in this way, the altered
landscape slightly shocked him.

When he had turned into the Midbranch gate, but was still a considerable distance from the
house, he involuntarily stopped his horse. He could see the broad steps which crossed the fence
of the lawn, and on one side of the platform on the top sat a lady whom he instantly recognized
as Miss Roberta; and on the other side of the platform sat a gentleman. These two occupied
very much the same positions as Lawrence, himself, and Miss March had occupied when we first
became acquainted with them. Lawrence looked very sharply and earnestly at the gentleman. Could
it be Mr Brandon? No, it was a much younger person.

His first impulse was to turn and ride away, but this would be silly and unmanly, and he continued
his way to the stile. His disposition to treat the matter with contempt made him feel how important
the matter was to him. The gentleman on the platform first saw Lawrence, and announced to the
lady that some one was coming. Miss March turned around, and then rose to her feet.

"Upon my word!" she exclaimed, elevating her eyebrows a good deal more than was usual with
her, "if that isn't Mr Croft!"

"Who is he?" asked the other, also rising.

"He is a New York gentleman whom I know very well. He was down here last summer, but I can't
imagine what brings him here again."

Lawrence dismounted, tied his horse, and approached the steps. Miss Roberta welcomed him cordially,
coming down a little way to shake hands with him. Then she introduced the two gentlemen.

"Mr Croft," she said, "let me make you acquainted with Mr Keswick."

The afternoon, or the portion of it that was left, was spent on the porch, Mr Brandon joining
the party. It was to him that Lawrence chiefly talked, for the most part about the game and
scenery of North Carolina, with which the old gentleman was quite familiar. But Lawrence had
sufficient regard for himself and his position in the eyes of this family, to help make a good
deal of general conversation. What he said or heard, however, occupied only the extreme corners
of his mind, the main portion of which was entirely filled with the chilling fear that that
man might be the Keswick he was looking for. Of course, there was a bare chance that it was
not, for there might be a numerous family, but even this little stupid glimmer of comfort was
extinguished when Mr Brandon familiarly addressed the gentleman as "Junius."

Lawrence took a good look at the man he was anxious to study, and as far as outward appearances
were concerned he could find no fault with Roberta for having accepted him. He was taller than
Croft, and not so correctly dressed. He seemed to be a person whom one would select as a companion
for a hunt, a sail, or a talk upon Political Economy. There was about him an air of present
laziness, but it was also evident that this was a disposition that could easily be thrown off.

Lawrence's mind was not only very much occupied, but very much perturbed. It must have been
all a mistake about the engagement having been broken off. If this had been the case, the easy
friendliness of the relations between Keswick and the old gentleman and his niece would have
been impossible. Once or twice the thought came to Lawrence that he should congratulate himself
for not having avowed his feelings toward Miss Roberta when he had an opportunity of doing
so; but his predominant emotion was one of disgust with his previous mode of action. If he
had not weighed and considered the matter so carefully, and had been willing to take his chances
as other men take them, he would, at least, have known in what relation he stood to Roberta,
and would not have occupied the ridiculous position in which he now felt himself to be.

When he took his leave, Roberta went with him to the stile. As they walked together across
the smooth, short grass, a new set of emotions arose in Lawrence's mind which drove out every
other. They were grief, chagrin, and even rage, at not having won this woman. As to actual
speech, there was nothing he could say, although his soul boiled and bubbled within him in
his desire to speak. But if he had anything to say, now was his chance, for he had told them
that he would proceed with his journey the next day.

Miss Roberta had a way of looking up, and looking down at the same time, particularly when
she had asked a question and was waiting for the answer. Her face would be turned a little
down, but her eyes would look up and give a very charming expression to those upturned eyes;
and if she happened to allow the smile, with which she ceased speaking, to remain upon her
pretty lips, she generally had an answer of some sort very soon. If for no other reason, it
would be given that she might ask another question. It was in this manner she said to Lawrence:
"Do you really go away from us to-morrow?"

"Yes," said he, "I shall push on."

"Do you not find the country very beautiful at this season?" asked Miss Roberta, after a few
steps in silence.

"I don't like autumn," answered Lawrence. "Everything is drying up and dying. I would rather
see things dead."

Roberta looked at him without turning her head. "But it will be just as bad in North Carolina,"
she said.

"There is an autumn in ourselves," he answered, "just as much as there is in Nature. I won't
see so much of that down there."

"In some cases," said Roberta, slowly, "autumn is impossible."

They had reached the bottom of the steps, and Lawrence turned and looked toward her. "Do you
mean," he asked, "when there has been no real summer?"

Roberta laughed. "Of course," said she, "if there has been no summer there can be no autumn.
But you know there are places where it is summer all the time. Would you like to live in such
a clime?"

Lawrence Croft put one foot on the step, and then he drew it back. "Miss March," said he, "my
train does not leave until the afternoon, and I am coming over here in the morning to have
one more walk in the woods with you. May I?"

"Certainly," she said, "I shall be delighted; that is, if you can overlook the fact that it
is autumn."

When Miss Roberta returned to the house she found Junius Keswick sitting on a bench on the
porch. She went over to him, and took a seat at the other end of the bench.

"So your gentleman is gone," he said.

"Yes," she answered, "but only for the present. He is coming back in the morning."

"What for?" asked Keswick, a little abruptly.

Miss Roberta took off her hat, for there was no need of a hat on a shaded porch, and holding
it by the ribbons, she let it gently slide down toward her feet. "He is coming," she said,
speaking rather slowly, "to take a walk with me, and I know very well that when we have reached
some place where he is sure there is no one to hear him, he is going to tell me that he loves
me; that he did not intend to speak quite so soon, but that circumstances have made it impossible
for him to restrain himself any longer, and he will ask me to be his wife."

"And what are you going to say to him?" asked Keswick.

"I don't know," replied Roberta, her eyes fixed upon the hat which she still held by its long
ribbons.

The next morning Junius Keswick, who had been up a long, long time before breakfast, sat, after
that meal, looking at Roberta who was reading a book in the parlor. "She is a strange girl,"
thought he. "I cannot understand her. How is it possible that she can sit there so placidly
reading that volume of Huxley, which I know she never saw before and which she has opened just
about the middle, on a morning when she is expecting a man who will say things to her which
may change her whole life. I could almost imagine that she has forgotten all about it."

Peggy, who had just entered the room to inform her mistress that Aunt Judy was ready for her,
stood in rigid uprightness, her torpid eyes settled upon the lady. "I reckon," so ran the thought
within the mazes of her dark little interior, "dat Miss Rob's wuss disgruntled dan she was
dat ebenin' when I make my cake, fur she got two dif'ent kinds o' shoes on."

The morning went on, and Keswick found that he must go out again for a walk, although he had
rambled several miles before breakfast. After her household duties had been completed, Miss
Roberta took her book out to the porch; and about noon when her uncle came out and made some
remarks upon the beauty of the day, she turned over the page at which she had opened the volume
just after breakfast. An hour later Peggy brought her some luncheon, and felt it to be her
duty to inform Miss Rob that she still wore one old boot and a new one. When Roberta returned
to the porch after making a suitable change, she found Keswick there looking a little tired.

"Has your friend gone?" he asked, in a very quiet tone.

"He has not come yet," she answered.

"Not come!" exclaimed Keswick. "That's odd! However, there are two hours yet before dinner."

The two hours passed and no Lawrence Croft appeared; nor came he at all that day. About dusk
the man at the Green Sulphur Springs rode over with a note from Mr Croft. The note was to Miss
March, of course, and it simply stated that the writer was very sorry he could not keep the
appointment he had made with her, but that it had suddenly become necessary for him to return
to the North without continuing the journey he had planned; that he was much grieved to be
deprived of the opportunity of seeing her again; but that he would give himself the pleasure,
at the earliest possible moment, of calling on Miss March when she arrived in New York.

When Miss Roberta had read this note she handed it to Keswick, who, when he returned it, asked:
"Does that suit you?"

"No," said she, "it does not suit me at all."

CHAPTER VI.

It was mail day at the very small village known as Howlett's, and to the fence in front of
the post-office were attached three mules and a horse. Inside the yard, tied to the low bough
of a tree, was a very lean and melancholy horse, on which had lately arrived Wesley Green,
the negro man who, twice a week, brought the mail from Pocohontas, a railway station, twenty
miles away. There was a station not six miles from Howlett's, but, for some reason, the mail
bag was always brought from and carried to Pocohontas; Wesley Green requiring a whole day for
a deliberate transit between the two points.

In the post-office, which was the front room of a small wooden house approached by a high flight
of steps, was the postmistress, Miss Harriet Corvey, who sat on the floor in one corner, while
before her extended a semicircle of men and boys. In this little assemblage certain elderly
men occupied seats which were considered to belong to them quite as much as if they had been
hired pews in a church, and behind them stood up a row of tall young men and barefooted boys
of the neighborhood, while, farthest in the rear, were some quiet little darkies with mail
bags slung across their shoulders.

On a chair to the right, and most convenient to

Miss Harriet, sat old Madison Chalkley, the biggest and most venerable citizen of the neighborhood.
Mr Chalkley never, by any chance, got a letter, the only mail matter he received being, "The
Southern Baptist Recorder," which came on Saturdays, but, like most of the people present,
he was at the post-office every mail day to see who got anything. Next to him sat Colonel Iston,
a tall, lean, quiet old gentleman, who had, for a long series of years, occupied the position
of a last apple on a tree. He had no relatives, no friends with whom he corresponded, no business
that was not conducted by word of mouth. In the last fifteen years he had received but one
letter, and that had so surprised him that he carried it about with him three days before he
opened it, and then he found that it was really intended for a gentleman of the same name in
another county. And yet everybody knew that if Colonel Iston failed to appear in his place
on mail day, it would be because he was dead or prostrated by sickness.

With the mail bag on the floor at her left, Miss Harriet, totally oblivious of any law forbidding
the opening of the mails in public, would put her hand into its open mouth, draw forth a letter
or a paper, hold it up in front of her spectacles, and call out the name of its owner. Most
of the letters went to the black boys with the mail bags who came from country houses in the
neighborhood, but whoever received letter, journal, or agricultural circular, received also
at the same time the earnest gaze of everybody else in the room. Sometimes there was a letter
for which there was no applicant present and then Miss Harriet would say: "Is anybody going
past Mrs Willis Summerses?" And if anybody was, he would take the letter, and it is to be hoped
he remembered to deliver it in the course of a week.

In spite of the precautions of the postmistress uncalled for letters would gradually accumulate,
and there was a little bundle of these in one of the few pigeon holes in a small desk in the
corner of the room, in the drawer of which the postage stamps were kept. Now and then a registered
letter would arrive, and this always created considerable sensation in the room, and if the
legal recipient did not happen to be present, Miss Harriet never breathed a quiet breath until
he or she had been sent for, had taken the letter, and given her a receipt. Sometimes she sat
up as late as eleven o'clock at night on mail days, hoping that some one who had been sent
for would arrive to relieve her of a registered letter.

All the mail matter had been distributed, everybody but Mr Madison Chalkley had left the room;
and when the old gentleman, as was his wont on the first day of the month, had gone up to the
desk, untied the bundle of uncalled-for letters, the outer ones permanently rounded by the
tightness of the cord, and after carefully looking over them, one by one, had made his usual
remark about the folly of people who wouldn't stay in a place until their letters could get
to them, had tied up the bundle and taken his departure; then Miss Harriet put the empty mail
bag under the desk, and went up-stairs where an old lady sat by the window, sewing in the fading
light.

"No letters for you to-day, Mrs Keswick," said she.

"Of course not," was the answer, "I didn't expect any."

"Don't you think," said Miss Harriet, taking a seat opposite the old lady, "that it is about
time for you to go home and attend to your affairs?"

"Well, upon my word!" said Mrs Keswick, letting her hands and her work fall in her lap, "that's
truly hospitable. I didn't expect it of you, Harriet Corvey."

"I wouldn't have said it," returned the postmistress, "if I hadn't felt dead certain that you
knew you were always welcome here. But Tony Miles told me, just before the mail came in, that
the lady who's at your place is running it herself, and that she's going to use pickle brine
for a fertilizer."

"Very likely," said Mrs Keswick, her face totally unmoved by this intelligence--"very likely.
That's the way they used to do in ancient times, or something of the same kind. They used to
sow salt over their enemy's land so that nothing would ever grow there. That woman's family
has sowed salt over the lands of me and mine for three generations, and it's quite natural
she should come here to finish up."

There was a little silence after this, and then Miss

Harriet remarked: "Your people must know where you are. Why don't they come and tell you about
these things?"

"They know better," answered Mrs Keswick, with a grim smile. "I went away once before, and
Uncle Isham hunted me up, and he got a lesson that he'll never forget. When I want them to
know where I am, I'll tell them."

"But really and truly"--said Miss Harriet "and you know I only speak to you for your own good,
for you pay your board here, and if you didn't you'd be just as welcome--do you intend to keep
away from your own house as long as that lady chooses to stay there?"

"Exactly so long," answered the old lady. "I shall not keep them out of my house if they choose
to come to it. No member of my family ever did that. There is the house, and they are free
to enter it, but they shall not find me there. If there was any reason to believe that everything
was dropped and done with, I would be as glad to see him as anybody could be, but I knew from
his letter just what he was going to say when he came, and as things have turned out, I see
that it was all worse than I expected. He and Roberta March were both coming, and they thought
that together they could talk me down, and make me forgive and be happy, and all that stuff.
But as I wasn't there, of course he wouldn't stay, and so there she is now by herself. She
thinks I must come home after a while, and the minute I do that, back he'll come, and then
they'll have just what they wanted. But I reckon she'll find that I can stick it out just as
long as she can. If Roberta March turns things upside down there, it'll be because she can't
keep her hands out of mischief, and that proves that she belongs to her own family. If there's
any harm done, it don't matter so much to me, and it will be worse for him in the end. And
now, Harriet Corvey, if you've got to make up the mail to go away early in the morning, you'd
better have supper over and get about it."

Meanwhile, at Mrs Keswick's house Mrs Null was acting just as conscientiously as she knew how.
She had had some conversations with Freddy on the subject, and she had assured him, and at
the same time herself, that what she was doing was the only thing that could be done. "It was
dreadfully hard for me to get the money to come down here," she said to him,--"you not helping
me a bit, as ordinary husbands do--and I can't afford to go back until I have accomplished
something. It's very strange that she stays away so long, without telling anybody where she
has gone to, but I know she is queer, and I suppose she has her own reasons for what she does.
She can't be staying away on my account, for she doesn't know who I am, and wouldn't have any
objections to me if she did know. I suspect it is something about Junius which keeps her away,
and I suppose she thinks he is still here. But one of them must soon come back, and if I can
see him, or find out from her where he is, it will be all right. It seems to me, Freddy, that
if I could have a good talk with Junius things would begin to look better for you and me. And
then I want to put him on his guard about this gentleman who is looking for him. By the way,
I suppose I ought to write a letter to Mr Croft, or he'll think I have given up the job, and
will set somebody else on the track, and that is what I don't want him to do. I can't say that
I have positively anything to report, but I can say that I have strong hopes of success, considering
where I am. As soon as I found that Junius had really left the North, I concluded that this
would be the best place to come to for him. And now, Freddy, there's nothing for us to do but
to wait, and if we can make ourselves useful here I'm sure we will be glad to do it. We both
hate being lazy, and a little housekeeping and farm managing will be good practice for us during
our honeymoon."

Putting on her hat, she went down into the garden where uncle Isham was at work. She could
find little to do there, for he was merely pulling turnips, and she could see nothing to suggest
in regard to his method of work. She had found, too, that the old negro had not much respect
for her agricultural opinions. He attended to his work as if his mistress had been at home,
and although, in regard to the ploughing, he had carried out the orders of Mrs Null, he had
done it because it ought to be done, and because he was very glad for some one else to take
the responsibility.

"Uncle Isham," said she, after she had watched the process of turnip pulling for a few minutes,
"if you haven't anything else to do when you get through with this, you might come up to the
house, and I will talk to you about the flower beds, I suppose they ought to be made ready
for the winter."

"Miss Null," said the old man, slowly unbending his back, and getting himself upright, "dar's
allus sumfin' else to do. Eber sence I was fus' bawn dar was sumfin else to do, an' I spec's
it'll keep on dat ar way till de day I dies."

"Of course there will be nothing else to do then but to die," observed Mrs Null; "but I hope
that day is far off, Uncle Isham."

"Dunno 'bout dat, Miss Null," said he. "But den some people do lib dreffle long. Look at ole
Aun' Patsy. Ise got to live a long time afore I's as ole as Aun' Patsy is now."

"You don't mean to say," exclaimed Mrs Null, "that Aunt Patsy is alive yet!"

"Ob course she is. Miss Null," said Uncle Isham. "If she'd died sence you've been here we'd
a tole you, sartin. She was gwine to die las' week, but two or free days don' make much dif'rence
to Aun' Patsy, she done lib so long anyhow."

"Aunt Patsy alive!" exclaimed Mrs Null again. "I'm going straight off to see her."

When she had reached the house, and had informed Letty where she was going, the rotund maid
expressed high approbation of the visit, and offered to send Plez to show Miss Null the way.

"I don't need any one to go with me," said that lady, and away she started.

"She don' neber want nobody to show her nowhar," said Plez, returning with looks of much disapprobation
to his business of peeling potatoes for dinner.

When Mrs Null reached the cabin of Aunt Patsy, after about fifteen minutes' walk, she entered
without ceremony, and found the old woman sitting on a very low chair by the window, with the
much-talked-of, many-colored quilt in her lap. Her white woolly head was partially covered
with a red and yellow handkerchief, and an immense pair of iron-bound spectacles obstructed
the view of her small black face, lined and seamed in such a way that it appeared to have shrunk
to half its former size. In her long, bony fingers, rusty black on the outside, and a very
pale tan on the inside, she held a coarse needle and thread and a corner of the quilt. Near
by, in front of a brick-paved fireplace, was one of her great-granddaughters, a girl about
eighteen years old, who was down upon her hands and knees, engaged with lungs, more powerful
than ordinary bellows, in blowing into flame a coal upon the hearth.

"How d'ye Aunt Patsy?" said Mrs Null. "I didn't expect to see you looking so well."

"Dat's Miss Null," said the girl, raising her eyes from the fire, and addressing her ancestor.

The old woman stuck her needle into the quilt, and reached out her hand to her visitor, who
took it cordially.

"How d'ye, miss?" said Aunt Patsy, in a thin but quite firm voice, while the young woman got
up and brought Mrs Null a chair, very short in the legs, very high in the back, and with its
split-oak bottom very much sunken.

"How are you feeling to-day, Aunt Patsy?" asked Mrs Null, gazing with much interest on the
aged face.

"'Bout as common," replied the old woman. "I didn't spec' to be libin' dis week, but I ain't
got my quilt done yit, an' I can't go 'mong de angels wrop in a shroud wid one corner off."

"Certainly not," answered Mrs Null. "Haven't you pieces enough to finish it?"

"Oh, yaas, I got bits enough, but de trouble is to sew 'em up. I can't sew very fas' nowadays."

"It's a pity for you to have to do it yourself," said Mrs Null. "Can't this young person, your
daughter, do it for you?"

"Dat's not my darter," said the old woman. "Dat's my son Tom's yaller boy Bob's chile. Bob's
dead. She can't do no sewin' for me. I'm 'not gwine ter hab folks sayin', Aun' Patsy done got
so ole she can't do her own sewin'."

"If you are not going to die till you get your quilt finished, Aunt Patsy," said Mrs Null,
"I hope it won't be done for a long time."

"Don' do to be waitin' too long, Miss. De fus' thing you know some udder culled pusson'll be
dyin' wrop up in a quilt like dis, and git dar fus'."

Mrs Null now looked about her with much interest, and asked many questions in regard to the
old woman's comfort and ailments. To these the answers, though on the whole satisfactory, were
quite short, Aunt Patsy, apparently, much preferring to look at her visitor than to talk to
her. And a very pretty young woman she was to look at, with a face which had grown brighter
and plumper during every day of her country sojourn.

When Mrs Null had gone, promising to send Aunt Patsy something nice to eat, the old woman turned
to her great-grand-daughter, and said, "Did anybody come wid her?"

"Nobody comed," said the girl. "Reckon' she done git herse'f los' some o' dese days."

The old woman made no answer, but folding up the maniac coverlid, she handed it to the girl,
and told her to put it away.

That night Uncle Isham, by Mrs Null's orders, carried to Aunt Patsy a basket, containing various
good things considered suitable for an aged colored woman without teeth.

"Miss Annie sen' dese h'yar?" asked the old woman, taking the basket and lifting the lid.

"Miss Annie!" exclaimed Uncle Isham. "Who she?"

"Git out, Uncle Isham!" said Aunt Patsy, somewhat impatiently. "She was h'yar dis mawnin'."

"Dat was Miss Null," said Isham.

"Miss Annie all de same," said Aunt Patsy, "on'y growed up an' married. D'ye mean to stan'
dar, Uncle Isham, an' tell me you don' know de little gal wot Mahs' John use ter carry in he
arms ter feed de tukkies?"

"She and she mudder dead long ago," said Isham. "You is pow'ful ole, Aun' Patsy, an' you done
forgit dese things."

"Done forgit nuffin," curtly replied the old woman. "Don' tell me no moh' fool stuff. Dat Miss
Annie, growed up an' married."

"Did she tell you dat?" asked Isham.

"She didn't tell me nuffin'. She kep' her mouf shet 'bout dat, an' I kep' my mouf shet. Don'
talk to me! Dat's Miss Annie, shuh as shootin'. Ef she hadn't fotch nuffin' 'long wid her but
her eyes I'd a knowed dem; same ole eyes dey all had. An' 'sides dat, you fool Isham, ef she
not Miss Annie, wot she come down h'yar fur?"

"Neber thinked o' dat!" said Uncle Isham, reflectively. "Ef you's so pow'ful shuh, Aun' Patsy,
I reckon dat is Miss Annie. Couldn't 'spec me to 'member her. I wasn't much up at de house
in dem times, an' she was took away 'fore I give much 'tention ter her."

"Don' ole miss know she dar?" asked Aunt Patsy.

'"She dunno nuffin' 'bout it," answered Isham. "She's stayin' away cos she think Mahs' Junius
dar yit."

"Why don' you tell her, now you knows it's Miss Annie wot's dar?"

"You don' ketch me tellin her nuffin'," replied the old man shaking his head. "Wish you was
spry 'nuf ter go, Aun' Patsy. She'd b'lieve you; an' she couldn't rar an' charge inter a ole
pusson like you, nohow."

"Ain't dar nobody else in dis h'yar place to go tell her?" asked Aunt Patsy.

"Not a pusson," was Isham's decided answer.

"Well den I is spry 'nuf!" exclaimed Aunt Patsy, with a vigorous nod of her head which sent
her spectacles down to her mouth, displaying a pair of little eyes sparkling with a fire, long
thought to be extinct. "Ef you'll carry me dar, to Miss Harriet Corvey's, I'll tell ole miss
myse'f. I didn't 'spec to go out dat dohr till de fun'ral, but I'll go dis time. I spected
dar was sumfin' crooked when Miss Annie didn't tole me who she was. Ise not 'feared to tell
ole miss, an' you jes' carry me up dar, Uncle Isham."

"I'll do dat," said the old man, much delighted with the idea of doing something which he supposed
would remove the clouds which overhung the household of his mistress. "I'll fotch de hoss an'
de spring waggin an' dribe you ober dar."

"No, you don' do no sech thing!" exclaimed Aunt Patsy, angrily. "I ain't gwine to hab no hosses
to run away, an' chuck me out on de road. Ef you kin fotch de oxen an' de cart, I go 'long
wid you, but I don' want no hosses."

"Dat's fus' rate," said Isham. "I'll fotch de ox cart, an' carry you ober. When you want ter go?"

"Dunno jes' now," said Aunt Patsy, pushing away a block of wood which served for a footstool,
and making elaborate preparations to rise from her chair. "I'll sen' fur you when I's ready."

The next morning was a very busy one for Aunt Patsy's son Tom's yellow boy Bob's child; and
by afternoon it was necessary to send for two colored women from a neighboring cabin to assist
in the preparations which Aunt Patsy was making for her projected visit. An old hair covered
trunk, which had not been opened for many years, was brought out, and the contents exposed
to the unaccustomed light of day; two coarse cotton petticoats were exhumed and ordered to
be bleached and ironed; a yellow flannel garment of the same nature was put aside to be mended
with some red pieces which were rolled up in it; out of several yarn stockings of various ages
and lengths two were selected as being pretty much alike, and laid by to be darned; an old
black frock with full "bishop sleeves," a good deal mended and dreadfully wrinkled, was given
to one of the neighbors, expert in such matters, to be ironed; and the propriety of making
use of various other ancient duds was eagerly and earnestly discussed. Aunt Patsy, whose vitality
had been wonderfully aroused, now that there was some opportunity for making use of it, spent
nearly two hours turning over, examining, and reflecting upon a pair of old-fashioned corsets,
which, although they had been long cherished, she had never worn. She now hoped that the occasion
for their use had at last arrived but the utter impossibility of getting herself into them
was finally made apparent to her, and she mournfully returned them to the trunk.

Washing, starching, ironing, darning, patching, and an immense deal of talk and consultation,
occupied that and a good deal of the following day, the rest of which was given up to the repairing
of an immense pair of green baize shoes, without which Aunt Patsy could not be persuaded to
go into the outer air. It was Saturday morning when she began to dress for the trip, and although
Isham, wearing a high silk hat, and a long black coat which had once belonged to a clergyman,
arrived with the ox cart about noon, the old woman was not ready to start till two or three
hours afterward. Her assistants, who had increased in number, were active and assiduous. Aunt
Patsy was very particular as to the manner of her garbing, and gave them a great deal of trouble.
It had been fifteen years since she had set foot outside of her house, and ten more since she
had ridden in any kind of vehicle. This was a great occasion, and nothing concerning it was
to be considered lightly.

"'Tain't right," she said to Uncle Isham when he arrived, "fur a pow'ful ole pusson like me
to set out on a jarney ob dis kin' 'thout 'ligious sarvices. 'Tain't 'spectable."

Uncle Isham rubbed his head a good deal at this remark. "Dunno wot we gwine to do 'bout dat,"
he said. "Brudder Jeemes lib free miles off, an' mos' like he's out ditchin'. Couldn't git
him h'yar dis ebenin', nohow."

"Well den," said Aunt Patsy, "you conduc' sarvices yourse'f, Uncle Isham, an' we kin have prar
meetin', anyhow."

Uncle Isham having consented to this, he put his oxen under the care of a small boy, and collecting
in Aunt Patsy's room the five colored women and girls who were in attendance upon her, he conducted
"prars," making an extemporaneous petition which comprehended all the probable contingencies
of the journey, even to the accident of the right wheel of the cart coming off, which the old
man very reverently asserted that he would have lynched with a regular pin instead of a broken
poker handle, if he could have found one. After the prayer, with which Aunt Patsy signified
her entire satisfaction by frequent Amens, the company joined in the vigorous singing of a
hymn, in which they stated that they were "gwine down to Jurdun, an' tho' the road is rough,
when once we shuh we git dar, we all be glad enough; de rocks an' de stones, an' de jolts to
de bones will be nuffin' to de glory an' de jiy."

The hymn over, Uncle Isham clapped on his hat, and hurried menacingly after the small boy,
who had let the oxen wander along the roadside until one wheel of the cart was nearly in the
ditch. Aunt Patsy now partook of a collation, consisting of a piece of hoe-cake dipped in pork
fat, and a cup of coffee, which having finished, she declared herself ready to start. A chair
was put into the cart, and secured by ropes to keep it from slipping; and then, with two women
on one side and Uncle Isham on the other, while another woman stood in the cart to receive
and adjust her, she was placed in position.

Once properly disposed she presented a figure which elicited the lively admiration of her friends,
whose number was now increased by the arrival of a couple of negro boys on mules, who were
going to the post-office, it being Saturday, and mail day. Around Aunt Patsy's shoulders was
a bright blue worsted shawl, and upon her head a voluminous turban of vivid red and yellow.
Since their emancipation, the negroes in that part of the country had discarded the positive
and gaudy colors that were their delight when they were slaves, and had transferred their fancy
to delicate pinks, pale blues, and similar shades. But Aunt Patsy's ideas about dress were
those of by-gone days, and she was too old now to change them, and her brightest handkerchief
had been selected for her head on this important day. Above her she held a parasol, which had
been graciously loaned by her descendant of the fourth generation. It was white, and lined
with pink, and on the edges still lingered some fragments of cotton lace.

Uncle Isham now took his position by the side of his oxen, and started them; and slowly creaking,
Aunt Patsy's vehicle moved off, followed by the two boys on mules, three colored women and
two girls on foot, and by two little black urchins who were sometimes on foot, but invariably
on the tail of the cart when they could manage to evade the backward turn of Uncle Isham's eye.

"Ef I should go to glory on de road, Uncle Isham," said Aunt Patsy, as the right wheel of the
cart emerged from a rather awkward rut, "I don' want no fuss made 'bout me. You kin jes' bury
me in de clothes. I got on, 'cep'n de pararsol, ob course, which is Liza's. Jes' wrop de quilt
all roun' me, an' hab a extry size coffin. You needn't do nuffin' more'n dat."

"Oh, you's not gwine to glory dis time, Aun' Patsy," replied Uncle Isham, who did not want
to encourage the idea of the old woman's departure from life while in his ox cart. But after
this remark of the old woman he was extraordinarily careful in regard to jolts and bumps.

When the procession reached the domain of Miss Harriet Corvey, there was gathered inside the
yard quite a number of the usual attendants on mail days, awaiting the arrival of Wesley Green
with his waddling horse and leather bag. But all interest in the coming of the mail was lost
in the surprise and admiration excited by the astounding apparition of old Aunt Patsy in the
ox cart, attended by her retinue. As the oxen, skilfully guided by Uncle Isham's long prod,
turned into the yard, everybody came forward to find out the reason of this unlooked-for occurrence.
Even old Madison Chalkley, his stout legs swaddled in home-made overalls, dismounted from his
horse, and Colonel Iston raised his tall form from the porch step where he had been sitting,
and approached the cart.

"Upon my word," said a young fellow, with high boots, slouched hat, and a riding whip, "if
here ain't old Aunt Patsy come after a letter! Where do you expect a letter from, Aunt Patsy?"

The old woman fixed her spectacles on him for an instant, and then said in a clear voice which
could be heard by all the little crowd: "'Tain't from nobody dat I owes any money to, nohow,
Mahs' Bill Trimble."

A general laugh followed this rejoinder, and Uncle Isham grinned with gratified pride in the
enduring powers of his charge. The old woman now put down her parasol, and made as if she would
descend from the cart.

"You needn't git out, Aun' Patsy," said several negro boys at once. "We'll fotch your letters
to you."

"Git 'long wid you!" said the old woman angrily. "I didn't come here fur no letters. Ef I wanted
letters I'd sen' 'Liza fur 'em. Git out de way."

A chair was now brought, and placed near the cart; a woman mounted into the vehicle to assist
her; Uncle Isham and another colored man stood ready to receive her, and Aunt Patsy began her
descent. This, to her mind, was a much more difficult and dangerous proceeding than getting
into the cart, and she was very slow and cautious about it. First, one of her great green baize
feet was put over the tail of the cart, and resting her weight upon the two men, Aunt Patsy
allowed it to descend to the chair, where it was gradually followed by the other foot. Having
safely accomplished this much, the old woman ejaculated: "Bress de Lor'!" When, in the same
prudent manner, she had reached the ground, she heaved a sigh of relief, and fervently exclaimed:
"De Lor' be bressed!"

Supported by Uncle Isham, and the other man, Aunt Patsy now approached the steps. She was so
old, so little, so bowed, and so apparently feeble, that several persons remonstrated with
her for attempting to go into the house when anything she wanted would be gladly done for her.
"Much 'bliged," said the old woman, "but I don' want no letters nor nuffin'. I's come to make
a call on de white folks, an' I's gwine in."

This announcement was received with a laugh, and she was allowed to proceed without further
hindrance. She got up the porch steps without much difficulty, her supporters taking upon themselves
most of the necessary exertion; but when she reached the top, she dispensed with their assistance.
Shuffling to the front door, she there met Miss Harriet Corvey, who greeted the old woman with
much surprise, but shook hands with her very cordially.

"Ebenin', Miss Har'et," said Aunt Patsy. And then, lowering her voice she asked: "Is ole miss
h'yar?"

Miss Harriet hesitated a moment, and then she answered: "Yes, she is, but I don't believe she'll
come down to see you."

"Oh, I'll go up-stars," said Aunt Patsy. "Whar she?"

"She's in the spare chamber," said Miss Harriet; and Aunt Patsy, with a nod of the head signifying
that she knew all about that room, crossed the hall, and began, slowly but steadily, to ascend
the stairs. Miss Harriet gazed upon her with amazement, for Aunt Patsy had been considered
chair-ridden when the postmistress was a young woman. Arrived at the end of her toilsome ascent,
Aunt Patsy knocked at the door of the spare chamber, and as the voice of her old mistress said,
"Come in!" she went in.

CHAPTER VII.

When Lawrence Croft reached the Green Sulphur Springs, after his interview with Miss March,
his soul was still bubbling and boiling with emotion, and it continued in that condition all
night, at least during that great part of the night of which he was conscious. The sight of
the lady he loved, under the new circumstances in which he found her, had determined him to
throw prudence and precaution to the winds, and to ask her at once to be his wife.

But the next morning Lawrence arose very late. His coffee had evidently been warmed over, and
his bacon had been cooked for a long, long time. The world did not appear to him in a favorable
light, and he was obliged to smoke two cigars before he was at all satisfied with it. While
he was smoking he did a good deal of thinking, and it was then that he came to the conclusion
that he would not go over to Midbranch and propose to Roberta March. Such precipitate action
would be unjust to himself and unjust to her. In her eyes it would probably appear to be the
act of a man who had been suddenly spurred to action by the sight of a rival, and this, if
Roberta was the woman he believed her to be, would prejudice her against him. And yet he knew
very well that these reasons would avail nothing if he should see her as he intended. He had
found that he was much more in love with her than he had supposed, and he felt positively certain
that the next time he was alone with her he would declare his passion.

Another thing that he felt he should consider was that the presence of Keswick, if looked upon
with a philosophic eye, was not a reason for immediate action. If the old engagement had positively
been broken off, he was at the house merely as a family friend; while, on the other hand, if
the rupture had not been absolute, and if Roberta really loved this tall Southerner and wished
to marry him, there was a feeling of honor about Lawrence which forbade him to interfere at
this moment. When she came to New York he would find out how matters really stood, and then
he would determine on his own action.

And yet he would have proposed to Roberta that moment if he had had the opportunity. Her personal
presence would have banished philosophy, and even honor.

Lawrence was a long time in coming to these conclusions, and it was late in the afternoon when
he despatched his note. Having now given up his North Carolina trip--one object of which had
been still another visit to Midbranch on his return--he was obliged to wait until the next
day for a train to the North; and, consequently, he had another evening to devote to reflections.
These, after a time, became unsatisfactory. He had told the exact truth in his note to Roberta,
for he felt that it was necessary for him to leave that part of the country in order to make
impossible an interview for which he believed the proper time had not arrived. He was consulting
his best interests, and also, no doubt, those of the lady. And yet, in spite of this reasoning,
he was not satisfied with himself. He felt that his note was not entirely honest and true.
There was subterfuge about it, and something of duplicity. This he believed was foreign to
his nature, and he did not like it.

Lawrence had scarcely finished his breakfast the next morning when Mr Junius Keswick arrived
at the door of his cottage. This gentleman had walked over from Midbranch and was a little
dusty about his boots and the lower part of his trousers. Lawrence greeted him politely, but
was unable to restrain a slight indication of surprise. It being more pleasant on the porch
than in the house, Mr Croft invited his visitor to take a seat there, and the latter very kindly
accepted the cigar which was offered him, although he would have preferred the pipe he had
in his pocket.

"I thought it possible," said Keswick, as soon as the two had fairly begun to smoke, "that
you might not yet have left here, and so came over in the hope of seeing you."

"Very kind," said Lawrence.

Keswick smiled. "I must admit," said he, "that it was not solely for the pleasure of meeting
you again that I came, although I am very glad to have an opportunity for renewing our acquaintance.
I came because I am quite convinced that Miss March wished very much to see you at the time
arranged between you, and that she was annoyed and discomposed by your failure to keep your
engagement. Considering that you did not, and probably could not, know this, I deemed I would
do you a service by informing you of the fact."

"Did Miss March send you to tell me this?" exclaimed Lawrence.

"Miss March knows nothing whatever of my coming," was the answer.

"Then I must say, sir," exclaimed Lawrence, "that you have taken a great deal upon yourself."

Keswick leaned forward, and after knocking off the ashes of his cigar on the outside of the
railing, he replied in a tone quite unmoved by the reproach of his companion: "It may appear
so on the face of it, but, in fact I am actuated only by a desire to serve Miss March, for
whom I would do any service that I thought she desired. And, looking at it from your side,
I am sure that I would be very much obliged to any one who would inform me, if I did not know
it, that a lady greatly wished to see me."

"Why does she want to see me?" asked Croft. "What has she to say to me?"

"I do not know," said Keswick. "I only know that she was very much disappointed in not seeing
you yesterday."

"If that is the case, she might have written to me," said Lawrence.

"I do not think you quite understand the situation," observed his companion. "Miss March is
not a lady who would even intimate to a gentleman that she wished him to come to her when it
was obvious that such was not his desire. But it seemed to me that if the gentleman should
become aware of the lady's wishes through the medium of a third party, the matter would arrange
itself without difficulty."

"By the gentleman going to her, I suppose," remarked Croft.

"Of course," said Keswick.

"There is no 'of course' about it," was Lawrence's rather quick reply.

At that moment some letters were brought to him from a little post-office near by, to which
he had ordered his mail to be forwarded. As the address on one of these letters caught his
eye, the somewhat stern expression on his face gave place to a smile, and begging his visitor
to excuse him, he put his other letters into his pocket, and opened this one. It was very short,
and was from Mr Candy's cashier. It was written from Howlett's, Virginia, a place unknown to
him, and stated that the writer expected in a very short time to give him some accurate information
in regard to Mr Keswick, and expressed the hope that he would allow the affair to remain entirely
in her hands until she should write again. It was quite natural that, under the circumstances,
Lawrence should smile broadly as he folded up this note. The man in question was sitting beside
him, and, in a measure, was turning the tables upon him. Lawrence had been very anxious to
find out what sort of a man was Keswick, and the latter now seemed in the way of making some
discoveries in the same line in regard to Lawrence. One thing he must certainly do; he must
write as soon as possible to his enterprising agent, and tell her that her services were no
longer needed. She must have pushed the matter with a great deal of energy to have brought
her down to Virginia, and he could not help hoping that her discretion was equal to her investigative
capacity.

When, after this little interruption, Lawrence again addressed Junius Keswick his manner was
so much more affable that the other could not fail but notice it.

"Mr Keswick," he said, "as our conversation seems to be based upon personalities, perhaps you
will excuse me if I ask you if I am mistaken in believing that you were once engaged to be
married to Miss March?"

"You are entirely correct," said Junius. "I was engaged to her, and I hope to be engaged to
her again."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Croft, turning in his chair with a start.

"Yes," continued Keswick, "our engagement was dissolved in consequence of a certain family
complication, and as I said before, I hope in time to be able to renew it."

Lawrence threw away his cigar, and sat for a few moments in thought. The engagement, then,
did not exist. Roberta was free. Recollections came to him of his own intercourse with her
during the past summer, and his heart gave a bound. "Mr Keswick," said he, "upon consideration
of the matter I think I will call upon Miss March this morning."

If Keswick had expressed himself entirely satisfied with this decision he would have done injustice
to his feelings. The service he had taken upon himself to perform for Miss March he had considered
a duty, but if his mission had failed he would have been better pleased than with its success.
He made, however, a courteous reply to Croft's remark, and rose to depart. But this the other
would not allow.

"You told me," said Croft, "that you walked over here; but it is much warmer now, and you must
not think of such a thing as walking back. The man here has a horse and buggy. I will get him
to harness up, and I will drive you over to Midbranch."

As there was no good reason why he should decline this offer, Junius accepted it, and in half
an hour the two were on their way.

CHAPTER VIII.

Old Mr Brandon of Midbranch was not in a very happy frame of mind, and he had good reasons
for dissatisfaction. He was an ardent supporter of a marriage between his niece and Junius
Keswick; and when the engagement had been broken off he had considered that both these young
people had acted in a manner very foolish and contrary to their best interests. There was no
opposition to the match except from old Mrs Keswick, who was the aunt of Junius, but who considered
herself as occupying the position of a mother. Junius was the son of a sister who had also
married into the Keswick family, and his parents having died while he was a boy, his aunt had
taken him under her charge, and her house had then became his home; although of late years
some of his absences had been long ones. Mrs Keswick had no personal objections to Roberta,
never having seen that lady, and knowing little of her; but an alliance between her Junius
and any member of that branch of the Brandons, "which," to use the old lady's own words, "had
for four generations cheated, stripped, and scornfully used my people, scattering their atoms
over the face of three counties," was monstrous. Nothing could make her consent to such an
enormity, and she had informed Junius that if he married that March girl three of them should
live together--himself, his wife, and her undying curse. In order that Miss March might not
fail to hear of this post-connubial arrangement, she had been informed of it by letter. Of
course this had broken off the engagement, for Roberta would not live under a curse, nor would
she tear a man from the only near relative he had in the world. Keswick himself, like most
men, would have been willing to have this tearing take place for the sake of uniting himself
to such a charming creature as Roberta March. But the lady on one side was as inflexible as
the lady on the other, and the engagement was definitely and absolutely ended.

Mr Brandon considered all this as stuff and nonsense. He could not deny that his branch of
the Brandons had certainly got a good deal out of Mrs Keswick's family. But here was a chance
to make everything all right again, and he would be delighted to see Junius, a relative, although
a distant one, come into possession of Midbranch. As for the old lady's opposition, that should
not be considered at all, he thought. It was his opinion that her mind had been twisted by
her bad temper, and nothing she could say could hurt anybody.

Of late Mr Brandon had been much encouraged by the fact that Junius had begun to resume his
position as a friend of the family. This was all very well. If the young people, by occasional
meetings, could keep alive their sentiments toward each other, the time would come when all
opposition would cease, and the marriage would become an assured fact. He did not believe either
of the young people would care enough for a post-mortem curse, if there should be one, to keep
themselves separated from each other on its account for the rest of their lives.

But the recent quite unexpected return of Lawrence Croft to Midbranch, combined with the evident
discomposure into which Roberta had been thrown by his failure to come the next day, had given
the old gentleman some unpleasant ideas. His niece had mentioned that she expected Mr Croft
that day, and although she said nothing in regard to her subsequent disappointment and vexation,
his mind was quite acute enough to perceive it. Exactly what it all meant he knew not, but
it augured danger. For the first time he began to look upon Mr Croft in the light of a suitor
for Roberta. If a jealous feeling at finding another person on the ground was the cause of
his not coming again, it showed that he was in earnest, and this, added to the evident disturbance
of mind of both Roberta and Junius, was enough to give Mr Brandon most serious fears that an
obstacle to his cherished plan was arising. Roberta was fond of city life, of society, of travel,
and if she had really made up her mind that her union with Junius was no longer to be thought
of, the advent of a man like Croft, who had been making her acquaintance all summer, and who
had now returned to Virginia, no doubt for the sole purpose of seeing her again was, to say
the least, exceedingly ominous. One thing only could correct this deplorable state of affairs.
The absurd bar to the union of Junius and Roberta should be removed, and they should be allowed
to enter upon the happiness that was their right.

Above all, the estate of Midbranch should not be suffered to go into the possession of an outsider,
who might be good enough, but who was of no earthly moment or interest to the Brandons. He
would go himself, and see the widow Keswick, and talk her out of her nonsense. It was a long
time since he had met the old wild cat, as he termed her, and his recollection of the last
interview was not pleasant, but he was not afraid of her, and he hoped that the common sense
of what he would say would bring her to reason.

Mr Brandon made up his mind during the night; and when he came down to breakfast he was very
glad to find that Junius had already gone out for a walk. The distance to the widow Keswick's
house was about fifteen miles, a pleasant day's ride for the old gentleman, and as he did not
expect to return until the next day, he felt obliged to inform Roberta of his destination,
although, of course, he said nothing about the object of his visit. He told his niece that
he was obliged to see the widow Keswick on business, to which remark she listened without reply.

Soon after breakfast he mounted his good horse, Albemarle, and early in the afternoon he arrived
at the widow Keswick's gate. He had looked for a stormy reception, in which the thunder-bolts
of rage should burst around him, and he was surprised, therefore, to be received with the frigidity
of the North Pole.

"I never expected," she said, without any previous courtesy, "to see one of your people under
my roof, and it is not very long ago since I would have gone away from it the moment any one
of you came near it."

"I am happy, madam," said Mr Brandon, in his most courteous manner, "that that day is past."

"My staying won't do you any good," said the old lady, whose purple sun-bonnet seemed to heave
with the uprisal of her hair, "except, perhaps, to get you a better meal than the servants
would have given you. But I want a lawyer, and I can't afford to pay for one either, and when
I saw you coming I just made up my mind to get something out of you, and if I do it, it'll
be the first red mark for my side of the family."

Mr Brandon assured her that nothing would give him more pleasure than to assist her in any
way in his power.

"Very well, then," said Mrs Keswick, "just sit down on that bench, and, when we have got through,
your horse can be taken, and you can rest a while, though it seems a very curious thing that
you should want to stop here to rest."

"Well, madam," said Mr Brandon, seating himself as comfortably as possible on a wooden bench,
"I shall be happy to hear anything you have to say."

The old lady did not sit down, but stood up in front of him, leaning on her umbrella, with
which faithful companion she had been about to set out on her walk. "When my son Junius came
home a while ago--" she began.

"Do you still call him your son?" interrupted Mr Brandon.

"Indeed I do!" was the very prompt answer. "That's just what he is. And, as I was going to
say, when he wrote me a short time ago that he was coming here, I believed, from his letter,
that he had some scheme on hand in regard to your niece, and I made up my mind I wouldn't stay
in the house to hear anything more said on that subject. I had told him that I never wanted
him to say another word about it; and it made my blood boil, sir, to think that he had come
again to try to cozen me into the vile compact."

"Madam!" exclaimed Mr Brandon.

"The next day," continued Mrs Keswick, "a lady arrived; and as soon as I saw her drive into
the gate I felt sure it was Roberta March, and that the two had hatched up a plot to come and
work on my feelings, and so I wouldn't come near the house."

"Madam!" exclaimed Mr Brandon, "how could you dream such a thing of my niece? You don't know
her, madam."

"No," said the old lady, "I don't know her, but I knew she belonged to your family, and so
I was not to be surprised at anything she did. But I found out I was mistaken. An old negro
woman recognized this young person as the daughter of my younger sister you know there were
three of us. The child was born and raised here, but I have not seen and have scarcely heard
of her since she was eight years old."

"That's very extraordinary, madam," said Mr Brandon.

"No, it isn't, when you consider the stubbornness, the obstinacy, and the wickedness of some
people. My sister sickened when the child was about six years old, and her husband, Harvey
Peyton--"

"I have frequently heard of him, madam," said Mr Brandon.

"And I wish I never had," said she. "Well, he was travelling most of the time, a thing my sister
couldn't do; but he came here then and stayed, off and on, till she died. And not long afterward,
just because I told him that I intended to consider the child as my child, and that she should
have the name of Keswick instead of his name, and should know me as her mother, and live with
me always, he got angry and flared up, and actually took the child away. I gave it to him hot,
I can tell you, before he left, and I never saw him again. He was so eaten up with rage because
I wanted to take the little Annie for my own, that he filled her mind with such prejudices
against me that when he died a year or two ago, she actually went to work to get her own living
instead of applying to me for help. But now she has come down here, and I was really filled
with joy to have her again and carry out the plan on which my heart had long been set--that
is to marry her to her cousin Junius, and let them have this farm when I am gone,----?"

At this Mr Brandon raised his eyebrows, and lowered the corners of his mouth.

"But I suddenly discover," continued the old, lady, "that the little wretch is married--actually
married."

At this Mr Brandon lowered his eyebrows and raised the corners of his mouth. "Did her husband
come with her?" he asked, pleasantly. And he gave a few long, free breaths as if he had just
passed in safety a very dangerous and unsuspected rock.

"No, he didn't," replied the old lady. "I don't know where he is, and, from what I can make
out, he is an utterly good-for-nothing fellow, allowing his wife to go where she pleases, and
take care of herself. Now this abominable marriage stands square in the way of the plan which
again rose up in my mind the moment I heard that the girl was in my house. If Junius and she
should marry, there would be no more dangers for me to look out for."

"But the existence of a husband," said Mr Brandon blandly, "puts an end to all thoughts of
such an alliance."

"No it don't," said the old lady, bringing her umbrella down with force on the porch. "Not
a bit of it. Such an outrageous marriage should not be suffered to exist. They should be divorced.
He does nothing for her, and neglects and deserts her absolutely. There's every ground for
a divorce, or enough grounds, at any rate. All that's necessary is for a lawyer to take it
up. I don't know any lawyers, and when I saw you riding up from the road gate I said to myself:
'Here's the very man I want,--and it's full time I should get something from people who have
taken nearly everything from me.'"

Mr Brandon bowed.

"And now," continued the old lady, "I am going to put the case into your hands. The man is,
evidently, a good-for-nothing scoundrel, and has probably spent the little money that her miserable
father left her. It's a clear case of desertion, and there should be no trouble at all in getting
the divorce."

Mr Brandon looked down upon the floor of the porch, and smiled. This was a pretty case, he
thought, to put into his hands. Here was a marriage which was the strongest protection in the
promotion of his own plan, and he was asked to annul it. "Very good," thought Mr Brandon, "very
good." And he smiled again. But he was an old-fashioned gentleman, and not used to refuse requests
made to him by ladies. "I will look into it, madam," said he. "I will look into it, and see
what can be done."

"Something must be done," said the old lady; "and the right thing too. How long do you intend
to stay here?"

"I thought of spending the night, madam, as my horse and myself are scarcely in condition to
continue our journey to-day."

"Stay as long as you like," said Mrs Keswick. "I turn nobody from my doors, even if they belong
to the Brandon family. I want you to talk to my niece, and get all you can out of her about
this thing, and then you can go to work and blot out this contemptible marriage as soon as
possible."

"The first thing," said Mr Brandon, "will be to talk to the lady."

This reply being satisfactory to Mrs Keswick, Uncle Isham was called to take the horse and
attend to him, while the master was invited into the house.

Mr Brandon first met Mrs Null at supper time, and her appearance very much pleased him. "It
is not likely," he said to himself, "that the man lives who would willingly give up such a
charming young creature as this." They were obliged to introduce themselves to each other,
as the lady of the house had not yet appeared. After a while Letty, who was in attendance,
advised them to sit down as "de light bread an' de batter-bread was gittin' cole."

"We could not think of such a thing as sitting at table before Mrs Keswick arrives," said Mr
Brandon.

"Oh, dar's no knowin' when she'll come," said the blooming Letty. "She may be h'yar by breakfus
time, but dar ain't nobuddy in dis yere worl' kin tell. She's down at de bahn now, blowin'
up Plez fur gwine to sleep when he was a shellin' de cohnfiel' peas. An' when she's got froo
wid him she's got a bone to pick wid Uncle Isham 'bout de gyardin'. 'Tain't no use waitin'
fur ole miss. She nebber do come when de bell rings. She come when she git ready, an' not afore."

Mr Brandon now felt quite sure that it was the intention of his hostess not to break bread
with one of his family, and so he seated himself, Mrs Null taking the head of the table and
pouring out the tea and coffee.

"It has been a long time, madam, since you were in this part of the country," said the old
gentleman, as he drew the smoking batter-bread toward him and began to cut it.

"Yes," said Mrs Null, "not since I was a little girl. I suppose you have heard, sir, that Aunt
Keswick and my father were on very bad terms, and would not have anything to do with each other?"

"Oh, yes," said Mr Brandon, "I have heard that."

"But my father is not living now, and I am down here again."

"And your husband? He did not accompany you?" said Mr Brandon.

"No," replied Mrs Null, very quickly. "We were both very sorry that it was not possible for
him to come with me."

Mr Brandon's spirits began to rise. This did not look quite like desertion. "I have no doubt
you have a very good husband. I am sure you deserve such a one," he said with the air of a
father, and the purpose of a lawyer.

"Good!" exclaimed Mrs Null, her eyes sparkling.

"He couldn't be better if he tried! Will you have sweet milk, or buttermilk?"

"Buttermilk, if you please," said Mr Brandon. "Of course your aunt was delighted to have you
with her again."

"Oh," said Mrs Null, with a laugh, "she was not at home when I arrived, but when she returned
nothing could be too good for me. Why, she had been here scarcely half an hour, and hadn't
taken off her sun-bonnet, before she told me I was to marry Junius and we two were to have
this farm."

"A very pleasant plan, truly," said Mr Brandon.

"But then, you see," continued the young girl, "Mr Null stood dreadfully in the way of such
an arrangement; and when Aunt Keswick heard about him you can't imagine what a change came
over her."

"Oh, yes I can; yes I can," exclaimed Mr Brandon--"I can imagine it very well."

"But she didn't give up a bit," said Mrs Null. "I don't think she ever does give up."

"You are right, there," said Mr Brandon, "quite right. But what does she propose to do?"

"I don't know, I'm sure; but she said I had no right to marry without the consent of my surviving
relatives, and that she was going to look into it. I can't think what she means by that."

Mr Brandon made no immediate answer. He gave Mrs Null some damson preserves, and he took some
himself, and then he helped himself to a great hot roll, from a plate that Letty had just brought
in, and carefully opening it he buttered it on the inside, and covered one-half of it with
the damson preserves. This he began slowly to eat, drinking at times from the foaming glass
of buttermilk at the side of his plate, from which the coffee-cup had been removed. When he
had finished the half roll he again spoke. "I think, my dear young lady, that your aunt is
desirous of having your marriage set aside."

"How can she do that?" exclaimed the girl, her face flushing. "Has she been talking to you
about it?"

"I cannot deny that she has spoken to me on the subject," he answered, "I being a lawyer. But
I will say to you, in strict confidence, please, that if you and your husband are sincerely
attached to each other there is nothing on earth she can do to separate you."

"Attached!" exclaimed Mrs Null. "It would be impossible for us to be more attached than we
are. We never have had the slightest difference, even of opinion, since our wedding day. Why,
I believe that we are more like one person than any married couple in the world."

"I am very glad to hear it," said Mr Brandon, finishing his buttermilk--"very glad indeed.
And, feeling as you do, I am certain that nothing your aunt can say will make any impression
on you in regard to seeking a divorce."

"I should think not!" said Mrs Null, sitting up very straight. "Divorce indeed!"

"I fully uphold you in the stand you have taken," said Mr Brandon. "But I beg you will not
mention this conversation to your aunt. It would only annoy her. Is your cousin expected here
shortly?"

"I believe so," she said. "To be sure, my aunt left the house the last time he came, but she
has his address, and has written for him. I think she wants us to get acquainted as soon as
possible, so that no time will be lost in marrying us after poor Mr Null is disposed of."

"Very good, very good," said Mr Brandon with a laugh. "And now, my dear young friend, I want
to give you a piece of advice. Stay here as long as you can. Your aunt will soon perceive the
absurdity of her ideas in regard to your husband, and will cease to annoy you. Make a friend
of your cousin Junius, whom I know and respect highly; and he certainly will be of advantage
to you. Above all things, endeavor to thoroughly reconcile him and Mrs Keswick, so that she
will cease to oppose his wishes, and to interfere with his future fortune. If you can bring
back good feeling between these two, you will be the angel of the family."

"Thank you," said Mrs Null, as they rose from the table.

The next morning, after Mr Brandon and Mrs Null had breakfasted together, the mistress of the
house, having apparently finished the performance of the duties which had kept her from the
breakfast-table, had some conversation with her visitor. In this he repeated very little of
what he had said to the younger lady the night before, but he assured Mrs Keswick that he had
discovered that it would be a very delicate thing to propose to her niece a divorce from her
husband, a thing to which she was not at all inclined, as he had found.

"Of course not! of course not!" exclaimed Mrs Keswick. "She can't be expected to see what a
wretched plight she has got herself into by marrying this straggler from nobody knows where."

"But, madam," said Mr Brandon, "if you worry her about it, she will leave you, and then all
will be at an end. Now, let me advise you as your lawyer. Keep her here as long as you can.
Do everything possible to foster friendship and good feeling between her and Junius; and to
do this you must forget as far as possible all that has gone by, and be friendly with both
of them yourself."

"Humph!" said the widow Keswick. "I didn't ask you for advice of that sort."

"It is all a part of the successful working of the case, madam," said Mr Brandon. "A thorough
good feeling must be established before anything else can be done."

"I suppose so," said the old lady. "She must learn to like us before she begins to hate him.
And how about your niece? Are you going to send her down here to help on in the good feeling?"

"I have not brought my niece into this affair," replied Mr Brandon, with dignity.

"Well, then, see that you don't," was the widow Keswick's reply. And the interview terminated.

When Mr Brandon rode away on his good horse Albemarle, he looked at the post of the road gate
from which he was lifting the latch by means of the long wooden handle arranged for the convenience
of riders, and said to himself: "John Keswick was a good man, but I don't wonder he came out
here and shot himself. It is a great pity though that it wasn't his wife who did it, instead
of him. That would have been a blessing to all of us. But," he added, contemplatively, as he
closed the gate, "the people in this world who ought to blow out their brains, never do."

Soon after he had gone, Mrs Null went up Pine Top Hill, and sat down on the rock to have a
"think." "Now, then, Freddy," she said, "everything depends on you. If you don't stand by me
I am lost--that is to say, I must go away from here before Junius comes; and you know I don't
want to do that. I want to see him on my account, and on his account too; but I don't want
him crammed down my throat for a husband the moment he arrives, and that is just what will
happen if you don't do your duty, Mr Null. Even if it wasn't for you, I don't want to look
at him from the husband point of view, because, of course, he is a very different person from
what he used to be, and is a total stranger to me.

"It is actually more than twelve years since I have seen him, and besides that, he is just
as good as engaged to that niece of Mr Brandon's, who is a horrible mixture of a she-wolf and
a female mule, if I am to believe Aunt Keswick, but I expect she is, truly, a very nice girl.
Though, to be sure, she can't have much spirit if she consented to break off her marriage just
on account of the back-handed benediction which Aunt Keswick told me she offered her as a wedding
gift. If I had wanted to marry a man I would have let the old lady curse the heels off her
boots before I would have paid any attention to her. Cursing don't hurt anybody but the curser.

"What I want of Junius is to make a friend of him, if he turns out to be the right kind of
a person, and to tell him about this Mr Croft who is so anxious to find him. The only person
I have met yet who seems like an ordinary Christian is old Mr Brandon, and he's a sly one,
I'm afraid. Aunt Keswick thinks he stopped here on his way somewhere, but I don't believe a
word of it. I believe he came for reasons of his own, and went right straight back again. You
are almost as much to him, Freddy, as you are to me. It would have made you laugh if you could
have seen how his face lighted up when he heard we were happy together, and that I would not
listen to a divorce. And yet I am sure he has promised Aunt Keswick to see what he can do about
getting one. He wants me to stay here and make friends of Aunt Keswick and Junius, but he wouldn't
like that if it were not for you, Mr Null. You make everything safe for him.

"And now, Freddy, I tell you again, that all depends upon you. If I'm to stay here--and I want
to do that, for a time any way, for although Aunt Keswick is so awfully queer, she's my own
aunt, and that's more than I can say for anybody else in the world--you must stiffen up, and
stand by me. It won't do to give way for a minute. If necessary you must take tonics, and have
a steel rod down your back, if you can't keep yourself erect without it. You must have your
legs padded, and your chest thrown out; and you must stand up very strong and sturdy, Freddy,
and not let them push you an inch this way or that. And now that we have made up our minds
on this subject, we'll go down, for it's getting a little cool on the top of this hill."

CHAPTER IX.

On the morning of her uncle's departure from Midbranch, Roberta came out on the porch, and
took her seat in a large wooden arm-chair, putting down her key basket on the floor beside
her. The day was bright and sunny, and the shadows of two or three turkey buzzards, who were
circling in the air, moved over the field in front of the house. In this field also moved,
not so fast, nor so gracefully as the shadows, two ploughs, one near by, and the other at quite
a distance. The woods which shut out a great part of the horizon showed many a bit of color,
but the scene, although bright enough in some of its tones, was not a cheering one to Roberta;
and she needed cheering.

Had it not been for the delay of her father in making his winter visit to New York, she would
now be in that city, but if things had gone on as she expected they would, she would have been
perfectly satisfied to remain several weeks longer at Midbranch. Junius Keswick, who had not
visited the house for a long time, had come to them again; and, now that the subject of love
and marriage had been set aside, it was charming to have him there as a friend. They not only
walked in the woods, but they took long rides over the country, Mr Brandon having waived his
objections in regard to his niece riding about with gentlemen. She had even been pleased with
the unexpected return of Lawrence Croft, for, for reasons of her own, she wished very much
to have a talk with him. But he had not fulfilled his promise to her, and had gone away in
a very unsatisfactory manner.

This morning she felt a little lonely, too, for Junius had left the place before breakfast,
and she did not know where he had gone; and her uncle had actually ridden away to see that
horrible widow Keswick, merely stating that his errand was a business one, and that he would
be back the next day. Roberta knew that there had been a great deal of business, particularly
that of an unpleasant kind, between the two families, but she did not believe that there was
any ordinary affair concerning dollars and cents which would require the presence of her uncle
at the house of his old enemy. She was very much afraid that he had gone there to try to smooth
up matters in regard to Junius and herself. The thought of this made her indignant. She did
not know what her uncle would say, and she did not want him to say anything. He could not make
the horrible old creature change her mind in regard to the marriage, and if this was not done,
there was no use discussing the matter at all, and she did not wish people to think she was
anxious for the match.

It was plain, however, that her uncle's desire for it had experienced a strong revival; and
the unexpected return of Lawrence Croft had probably had a great effect on him. He had not
objected to the visits of that gentleman during the summer, but he had never shown any strong
liking for him, and Roberta said to herself that she could not see, for her part, why this
should be; Mr Croft was a thorough gentleman, an exceedingly well educated and agreeable man.

As to Junius, she was afraid that he had not the spirit which she used to think he possessed.
There was something about him she could not understand. In former days, when Junius was in
New York, she compared him with the young men there, very much to his advantage, but now Mr
Croft seemed to throw him somewhat in the background. When Croft wanted to do anything he did
it; even his failure to come to her when he said he would do so showed strength of will. If
Junius had promised to come he would have come, even if he had not wanted to do so, and there
would have been something weak about that.

While she thus sat thinking, and gazing over the landscape, she saw afar off, on a portion
of the road which ran along-side the woods, a vehicle slowly making its way to the house. Roberta
had large and beautiful eyes, but they were not of the kind which would enable her to discover
at so great a distance what sort of vehicle this was, and who was in it. As the road led nowhere
but to Midbranch she was naturally desirous to know who was coming. She stepped into the hall,
and, taking a small bell, rang it vigorously, and in a moment her youthful handmaiden, Peggy,
appeared upon the scene. Peggy's habit of projecting her eyes into the far away could often
be turned to practical account for her vision was, in a measure, telescopic.

"What is that coming here along the road?" asked Miss Roberta, stepping upon the porch, and
pointing out the distant vehicle.

Peggy stood up straight, let her arms hang close to her sides, and looked steadfastly forth.
"Wot's comin', Miss Rob," said she, "is the buggy 'longin' to Mister Michaels, at de Springs,
an' his ole mud-colored hoss is haulin' it. Dem dat's in it is Mahs' Junius an' Mister Crof'."

"Are you sure of that?" exclaimed Miss Roberta in astonishment. "Look again."

"Yaas'm," replied Peggy. "I's sartin shuh. But dey jes gwine behin' de trees now."

The road was not again visible for some distance, but when the buggy reappeared Peggy gave
a start, and exclaimed: "Dar's on'y one pusson in it now, Miss Rob."

"Which is it?" exclaimed her mistress quickly, shading her eyes, and endeavoring to see for
herself.

"It's Mister Crof'," said Peggy. "Mahs' Junius mus' done gone back."

"It is too bad!" exclaimed Miss Roberta. "I will not see him. Peggy," she said, snatching up
the key basket, and stepping toward the hall door, "when that gentleman, Mr Croft, comes, you
must tell him that I am up-stairs lying down, that I am not well, and cannot see him, and that
your Master Robert is not at home."

"Ef Mahs' Junius come, does you want me to tell him de same thing?"

"But you said he was not in the buggy," said her mistress.

"No'm," answered Peggy, "but p'raps he done cut acrost de plough fiel', an' git h'yar fus'."

"If he comes first," said Miss Roberta, a shade of severity pervading her handsome features,
"I want to see him." And with this, she went up-stairs.

Peggy, with her shoes on, possessed the stolid steadiness of a wooden grenadier, for the heaviness
of the massive boots seemed to permeate her whole being, and communicated what might be considered
a slow and heavy footfall to her intellect. Peggy, without shoes, was a panther on two legs,
and her mind, like her body, was capable of enormous leaps. Slipping off her heavy brogans,
she made a single bound, and stood upon the railing of the porch, and, throwing her arm around
a post, gazed forth from this point of vantage.

"Bress my eberlastin' soul!" she exclaimed, "if Mister Crof ain't got ter de road gate, and
is a waitin' dar fur somebody to come open it! Does he think anybody gwine to see him all de
way from de house, and come open de gate? Reckin' he don' know dat ole mud-color hoss. He mought
git out and let down de whole fence, an' dat ole hoss ud nebber move. Bress my soul moh' p'intedly!
ef Mahs' Junius ain't comin' 'long ter open de gate!"

For a few moments Peggy stood and stared, her mind not capable of grasping this astounding
situation. "No, he ain't nudder!" she presently exclaimed with an air of relief. "Mahs' Junius
done tole him dat ef he want dat gate open he better git down and open it hese'f. Dat's right
Mahs' Junius! Stick up to dat! Dar go Mahs' Junius into de woods an' Mister Crof' he git out,
an' go after him. Dey's gwine to fight, sartin, shuh! Lordee! wot fur dey 'low dem bushes ter
grow 'long de fence to keep folks from seein' wot's gwine on!"

There was nothing now to be seen from the railing, and Peggy jumped down on the porch. Her
activity seemed to pervade her being. She ran down the front steps, crossed the lawn, and mounted
the stile. Here she could catch sight of the two men who seemed to be disputing. This was too
much for Peggy. If there was to be a fight she wanted to see it; and, apart from her curiosity,
she had a loyal interest in the event. Down the steps, and along the road she went at the top
of her speed, and soon reached the gate. Her arrival was not noticed by any one except the
mud-colored horse, who gazed at her inquiringly; and looking through the bars, without opening
the gate, Peggy had a good view of the gentlemen.

The situation was a more simple one than Peggy had imagined. The road, for the last half mile,
had been an up-hill one, and Keswick, as much to stretch his own legs as to save those of the
horse, had alighted to walk, while Lawrence, as in duty bound, had waited for him at the gate.
Here a little argument had arisen. Keswick, who did not wish to be at the house, or indeed
about the place while Roberta was having her conference with Mr Croft, had said that he had
concluded not to go up to the house at present, but would take a walk through the woods instead.
Lawrence, who thought he divined his reason, felt an honorable indisposition to accept this
advantage at the hands of a man who was, most indisputably, his rival. If they went together
it would not appear as if he had waited for Keswick's absence to return; and there would still
be no reason why he should not have his private walk and talk with Miss March.

At all events, it seemed to him unfair to leave Keswick at the gate while he went up to the
house by himself, and the notion of it did not please him at all. Keswick, however, was very
resolute in his opposition. He objected even to seeing Roberta and Croft together. He thought,
besides, if he and Croft came to the house at the same time it would appear very much as if
he, Junius, had brought the other, and this was an appearance he wished very much to avoid.
He had walked away, and Lawrence had jumped from the buggy to continue the friendly argument
which was not finished when Peggy arrived. Almost immediately after this event Keswick positively
insisted that he would go for a walk, and Lawrence reluctantly turned toward the vehicle.

Peggy's mind was filled with horror. Master Junius had been frightened away, and the other
man was coming up to the house! She could not stand there and allow such a catastrophe. Jerking
open the gate, she rushed into the road and confronted Keswick.

"Mahs' Junius," she exclaimed, "Miss Rob's orful sick wid her back an' her j'ints, an' she
say she can't see no kump'ny folks, an' Mahs' Robert he done gone away to see ole Miss Keswick.
I jes run down h'yar to tell you to hurry up."

Keswick started. "Where did you say your Master Robert had gone?"

"To ole Miss Keswick's. He went dis mawnin'."

Junius turned slightly pale, and addressing Mr Croft, said: "Something very strange must have
happened here! Miss March is ill, and Mr Brandon has gone to a place to which I think nothing
but a matter of the utmost importance could take him."

"In that case," said Mr Croft, "it will be highly improper for me to go to the house just now.
I am very glad that I heard the news before I got there. I will return to the Springs, and
will call to-morrow and inquire after Miss March's health. Do not let me detain you as your
presence is evidently much needed at the house."

"Thank you," said Keswick, hurriedly shaking hands with him. "I am afraid something very unexpected
has happened, and so beg you will excuse me. Good-morning." And passing through the gateway,
he rapidly strode toward the house, while Lawrence prepared to turn his horse's head toward
the Springs.

But, although Junius Keswick walked rapidly, Peggy, who had started first for the house, kept
well in advance of him. Away she went, skipping, running, dancing. Once she stopped and turned,
and saw that the buggy, with the mud-colored horse, was being driven away, and that Master
Junius was coming along the road to the house. Then she started off, and ran steadily, the
rapid show of the light-colored soles of her feet behind her suggestive of a steamer's wake.
Up the broad stile she went, two steps at a time, and down the other side in a couple of jumps;
a dozen skips took her across the lawn; and she bounded up to the porch as if each wooden step
had been a springing board. She rushed up-stairs, and stood at the open door of Miss Roberta's
room where that lady reclined upon a lounge.

"Hi', Miss Rob!" she exclaimed, involuntarily snapping her fingers as she spoke. "Mahs' Junius
comin', all by hese'f, an' I done sent de udder gemman clean off, kitin'!"

CHAPTER X.

Junius Keswick was received by Miss Roberta in the parlor. Her face was colder and sterner
than he had ever seen it before, and his countenance was very much troubled. Each wished to
speak first, and ask questions, but the lady went immediately to the front.

"How did it happen that you and Mr Croft were coming here together? Where had you been?"

"We came from the Green Sulphur Springs, where I called on him this morning."

"I thought he was obliged to return immediately to the North. What made him change his mind?"

"Perhaps it will be better not to discuss that now," said Junius.

"I wish to discuss it," was the reply. "What induced him not to go?"

"I did," answered Junius, looking steadfastly at her. "Did you not wish to see him?"

For a moment Miss Roberta did not answer, but her face grew pale, and she threw herself back
in the chair in which she was sitting. "Never in my life," she said, "have I been subjected
to such mortification! Of course I wished him to come, but to come of his own accord, and not
at my bidding. How do you suppose I would have felt if he had presented himself, and asked
me what I wished to say to him? It is an insult you have offered me."

"It is not an insult," said Keswick quietly. "It was a service of--of affection. I saw that
you were annoyed and troubled by Mr Croft's failure to keep his engagement, and what I did
was simply--"

"Stop!" said Roberta peremptorily. "I do not wish to talk of it any more."

Junius stood before her a moment in silence, and then he said: "Will you tell me if my Aunt
Keswick is ill or dead, and why did Mr Brandon go there?"

"She is neither;" answered Roberta, "and he went there on business." And with this she arose
and left the room.

Peggy, who had been in the hall, now made a bolt down the back stairs into the basement regions,
where was situated the kitchen. In this spacious apartment she found Aunt Judy, the cook, sitting
before a large wood fire, and holding in her hand a long iron ladle. There was nothing near
her which she could dip or stir with a ladle, and it was probably retained during her period
of leisure as a symbol of her position and authority.

Peggy squatted on her heels, close to Aunt Judy's side, and thus addressed her: "Aun' Judy,
ef I tell you sumfin', soul an' honor, hope o' glory, you'll neber tell?"

"Hope o' glory, neber!" said Aunt Judy, turning a look of interest on the girl.

"Well, den, look h'yar. You know Miss Rob she got two beaux; one is Mahs' Junius, an' de udder
is de gemman wid de speckle trousers from de Norf."

"Yes, I know dat," said Aunt Judy. "Has dey fit?"

"Not yit, but dey wos gwine to," said Peggy, "but I seed 'em, an' I tore down de road to de
gate whar dey wos gittin ready to fight, an' I jes' let dat dar Mister Crof' know wot low-down
white trash Miss Rob think he wos, an' den he said ef dat war so 'twant no use fur to come
in, an' he turn' roun' de buggy, an' cl'ar'd out. Den Mahs' Junius he come to de house, an'
dar Miss Rob in de parlor waitin' fur him. I stood jes' outside de doh', so's to be out de
way, but Mahs' Junius he kinder back agin de doh', an' shet it. But I clap'd my year ter de
crack, an' I hear eberything dey said."

"Wot dey say?" asked Aunt Judy, her mouth open, her eyes dilated, and the long ladle trembling
in her hand.

"Mahs' Junius he say to Miss Rob that he lub her better'n his own skin, or de clouds in de
sky, or de flowers in de fiel' wot perish, an' dat de udder man he done cut an' run, an' would
she be Miss Junius all de res' ob der libes foreber an' eber, amen?"

"Dat wos pow'ful movin'!" ejaculated Aunt Judy. "An' wot did Miss Rob say?"

"Miss Rob she say, 'I 'cept your kind offer, sah, wid pleasure.' An' den I hearn 'em comin',
an' I cut down h'yar."

"Glory! Hallelujah!" exclaimed Aunt Judy, bringing her ladle down upon the brick hearth. "Now
is I ready to die when my time comes, fur Mahs' Junius 'll have dis farm, an' de house, an'
de cabins, an' dey won't go to no strahnger from de Norf."

"Amen," said Peggy. "An' Aun' Judy, dat ar piece ob pie ain't no 'count to nobuddy."

"You kin hab it, chile," said Aunt Judy, rising, and taking from a shelf a large piece of cold
apple pie, "an' bressed be de foots ob dem wot fotch good tidin's."

Junius Keswick did not see Miss Roberta again that day, and early in the morning he borrowed
one of the Midbranch horses, and rode away. He did not wish to be at the house when Mr Croft
should come; and, besides, he was very anxious and disturbed in regard to matters at the Keswick
farm. Of all places in the world why should Mr Brandon go there?

It was not a very pleasant ride that Junius Keswick took that morning. He had anxieties in
regard to what he would meet with at his aunt's house, and he had even greater anxieties as
to what he was leaving behind him at Midbranch. It was quite evident that Roberta was angry
with him, and this was enough to sadden the soul of a man who loved her as he loved her, who
would have married her at any moment, in spite of all opposition, all threats, all curses.
He was not in the habit of looking at himself after the manner of Lawrence Croft, but on this
occasion he could not help a little self-survey.

Was it a purely disinterested motive he asked himself, that took him over to the Springs to
bring back Lawrence Croft? Did he not believe in his soul that Roberta would never have spoken
so freely to him in regard to what the gentleman from the North would probably say to her if
she had not intended to decline that gentleman's offer? And was there not a wish in his heart
that this matter might be definitely and satisfactorily settled before Roberta and Mr Croft
went to New York for the winter? He could not deny that this issue to the affair had been in
his mind; and yet he felt that he could conscientiously assure himself that if he had thought
things would turn out otherwise, he still would have endeavored to make the man perform the
duty expected of him by Roberta, in whose service Junius always felt himself to be. But, apparently,
he had not benefited himself or anybody else, except, perhaps, Croft, by this service which
he had performed.

It was late in the forenoon when Junius met Mr Brandon returning to Midbranch. In answer to
his expressions of surprise, Mr Brandon, who appeared in an exceptionally good humor, informed
Junius of his reasons for the visit to the widow Keswick, and what he had found when he arrived
there.

"Your little cousin," said he, "is a most charming young creature, and on interested motives
I should oppose your going to your aunt's house, were it not for the fact that she is married,
and, therefore, of no danger to you. I was very glad to find her there. Her influence over
your aunt will, I think, be highly advantageous, and the first fruit of it is that the old
lady will now welcome you with open arms. Would you believe it! she has already announced that
she wishes to make a match between you and this little cousin; and in order to do so, has actually
engaged me to endeavor to bring about a divorce between the young lady and her absent husband.
The widow Keswick has as many cranks and crotchets in her head as there are seeds in a tobacco
pod; but this is the queerest and the wildest of them all. The couple seem very much attached
to each other, and nothing can be said against the husband except that he did not accompany
his wife on her visit to her relatives; and if he knew anything about the old lady I don't
blame him a bit. Now your course, my dear boy, is perfectly plain. Let your aunt talk as much
as she pleases about this divorce, and your union with the little Annie. It won't hurt anybody,
and she must talk herself out in time. In the mean time take advantage of the present circumstances
to mollify and tone down, so to speak, the good old lady. Make her understand that we are all
her friends, and that there is no one in the connection who would wish to do her the slightest
harm. This would be our Christian duty at any time, but it is more particularly our duty now.
I would like you to bring your cousin over to see us before Roberta goes away. I invited her
to come, and told her that my niece would first call upon her were it not for the peculiar
circumstances. But if the families can be in a measure brought together--and I shall make it
a point to ride over there occasionally--if your aunt can be made to understand the kindly
feelings we really have toward her, and can be induced to set aside, even in a slight degree,
the violent prejudice she now holds against us, all may yet turn out well. Now go, my boy,
and may the best of success go with you. Don't trouble yourself about sending back the horse.
Keep him as long as you want him."

Mr Brandon rode on, leaving Junius to pursue his way. "It is very pleasant," thought the young
man, who had said scarcely a word during the interview, "to hear Mr Brandon talk about all
turning out well, but when he gets home he may discover that there is something to be done
at Midbranch as well as on the Keswick place."

Mr Brandon's reflections were very different from those of Junius. It appeared to him that
a reconciliation between the two families, even though it should be a partial one, was reasonably
to be expected. That newly arrived cousin was an angel. She was bound to do good. A marriage
between his niece and Junius Keswick was the great object of the old gentleman's heart, and
he longed to see the former engagement between them re-established before Roberta went to New
York, where her beauty and attractiveness would expose his cherished plan to many dangers.

The road he was on led directly north, and it was joined about a quarter of a mile above by
the road which ran through the woods to the Green Sulphur Springs. On this road, at a point
nearly opposite to him, he could see, through the foliage, a horseman riding toward the point
of junction. Something about this person attracted his attention, and Mr Brandon took out a
pair of eye-glasses and put them on. As soon as he had obtained another good view of the horseman
he recognized him as Mr Croft. The old gentleman took off his glasses and returned them to
his vest pocket, and his face began to flush. In his early acquaintance with Mr Croft he had
not objected to him, because he wished his niece to have company, and he had a firm belief
in the enduring quality of her affection for Junius. But, latterly, his ideas in regard to
the New York gentleman had changed. He had thought him somewhat too assiduous, and when he
had unexpectedly returned from the North, Mr Brandon had not been at all pleased, although
he had been careful not to show his displeasure. This condition of things made him feel uneasy,
and had prompted his visit to the widow Keswick. And now that everything looked so fair and
promising, here was that man, whom he had supposed to have left this part of the country, riding
toward his house.

Mr Brandon was an easy-going man, but he had a backbone which could be greatly stiffened on
occasion. He sat up very straight on his horse, and urged the animal to a better pace, so that
he arrived first at the point where the roads met. Here he awaited Mr Croft, who soon rode
up. The old gentleman's greeting was very courteous.

"You are on the way to my house, I presume," he said.

Mr Croft assured him that he was, and hoped that Miss March was quite well.

"I have been from home for a little while," said Mr Brandon, "but I believe my niece enjoys
her usual health. I have had a long ride this morning," he continued, "and feel a little tired.
Would it inconvenience you, sir, if we should dismount and sit for a time on yonder log by
the roadside? It would rest me, and I would like to have a little talk with you."

Lawrence wondered very much that the old gentleman should want to rest when he was not a mile
from his own house, but of course he consented to the proposed plan, and imitated Mr Brandon
by riding under a large tree, and fastening his bridle to a low-hanging bough. The two gentlemen
seated themselves on the log, and Mr Brandon, without preface, began his remarks.

"May I be pardoned for supposing, sir," he said, "that your present visit to my house is intended
for my niece?"

Lawrence looked at him a little earnestly, and replied that it was so intended.

"Then, sir, I think I have the right to ask, as my niece's present guardian, and almost indeed
as her father, whether or not your visit is connected in any way with matrimonial overtures
toward that lady?"

Not wishing to foolishly and dishonorably deny that such was his purpose in going to Midbranch;
and feeling that it would be as unwise to decline answering the question as it would be unmanly
to resort to subterfuge about it, Lawrence replied, that his object in visiting Miss March
that day was to make matrimonial overtures to her.

"I think," said Mr Brandon, "that you will be obliged to me if I make you acquainted with the
present condition of affairs between Miss March and Mr Junius Keswick."

"Has not their engagement been broken off?" interrupted Lawrence.

"Only conditionally," answered the old gentleman. "They love each other. They wish to be married.
With one exception, all their relatives desire that they should marry. It would be a union,
not only congenial in the highest degree to the parties concerned, but of the greatest advantage
to our family and our family fortunes. There is but a single obstacle to this most desirable
union, and that is the unwarrantable opposition of one person. But, I am happy to say that
this opposition is on the point of being removed. I consider it to be but a matter of days
when my niece and Mr Keswick, with the full approbation of the relatives on either side, will
renew in the eyes of the world that engagement which I consider still exists in fact."

"If this is so," said Lawrence, grinding his heel very deeply into the ground, "why was I not
told of it?"

"My dear sir!" exclaimed Mr Brandon, "have you ever intimated to me or to any of my family,
that your intentions in visiting Midbranch were other than those of an ordinary friend or acquaintance?"

Lawrence admitted that he had never made any such intimation.

"Then, sir," said Mr Brandon, "what reason could we have for mentioning this subject to you--a
subject that would not have been referred to now, had it not been for your admission of your
intended object in visiting my house?"

Lawrence had no answer to make to this, but it was not easy to turn him from his purpose. "Excuse
me, sir," he said, "but I think a matter of this sort should be left to the lady. If she is
not inclined to receive my addresses she will say so, and there is an end of it."

The face of Mr Brandon slightly reddened, but his voice remained as quiet and courteous as
before. "You do not comprehend, sir, the state of affairs, or you would see that a procedure
of that kind would be extremely ill-judged at this time. Were it known that at this critical
moment Miss March was addressed by another suitor, it would seriously jeopardize the success
of plans which we all have very much at heart."

Lawrence did not immediately reply to this crafty speech. His teeth were very firmly set, and
he looked steadfastly before him. "I do not understand all this," he said, presently, "nor
do I see that there is any need for my understanding it. In fact I have nothing to do with
it. I wish to propose marriage to Miss March. If she declines my offer there is an end of the
matter. If she accepts me, then it is quite proper that all your plans should fall to the ground.
She is the principal in the affair, and it is due to her and due to me that she should make
the decision in this case."

Mr Brandon had not quite so many teeth as his younger companion, but the very fair number which
remained with him were set together quite as firmly as those of Lawrence had been. He remarked,
speaking very distinctly but without any show of emotion: "I see, sir, that it is quite impossible
for us to think alike on this subject, and there is, therefore, nothing left for me to do but
to ask you--and I assure you, sir, that the request is as destitute of any intention of discourtesy
as if it were based upon the presence of sickness or family affliction--that you will not visit
my house at present."

Lawrence rose to his feet with a good deal of color in his face. "That settles the matter for
the present," he said. "Of course I shall not go to a house which is forbidden to me. I wish
you good-morning, sir." And he stalked to his horse, and endeavored to pull down the limb to
which its bridle was attached.

Mr Brandon followed him. "You must mount before you can unfasten your bridle," he said. "And
allow me to assure you, sir, that as soon as this little affair is settled I shall be very
happy indeed to see you again at my house."

Lawrence having succeeded in loosening his bridle from the tree, made answer with a bow, and
galloped away to the Green Sulphur Springs.

Mr Brandon now mounted and rode home. This was the first time in his life that he had ever
forbidden any one to visit Midbranch, and yet he did not feel that he had been either discourteous
or inhospitable. "There are times," he said to himself, "when a man must stand up for his own
interest; and this is one of the times."

CHAPTER XI.

In the little dining-room of the cottage at the Green Sulphur Springs sat that evening Lawrence
Croft, a perturbed and angry, but a resolute man. He had been quite a long time coming to the
conclusion to propose to Roberta March, and now that he had made up his mind to do so, even
in spite of certain convictions, it naturally aroused his indignation to find himself suddenly
stopped short by such an insignificant person as Mr Brandon, a gentleman to whom, in this affair,
he had given no consideration whatever. The fact that the lady wished to see him added much
to his annoyance and discomfiture. He had no idea what reason she had for desiring an interview
with him, but, whatever she should say to him, he intended to follow by a declaration of his
sentiments. He had not the slightest notion in the world of giving up the prosecution of his
suit; but, having been requested not to come to Midbranch, what was he to do? He might write
to Miss March, but that would not suit him. In a matter like this he would wish to adapt his
words and his manner to the moods and disposition of the lady, and he could not do this in
a letter. When he wooed a woman, he must see her and speak to her. To any clandestine approach,
any whispered conversation beneath her window, he would give no thought. Having been asked
by the master of the house not to go there, he would not go; but he would see her, and tell
his love. And, more than that, he would win her.

That morning, while waiting for the time to approach when it would be proper for him to go
to Midbranch, he had been reading in a bound volume of an old English magazine, which was one
of the five books the cottage possessed, an account of a battle which had interested him very
much. The commander of one army had massed his forces along and below the crest of a line of
low hills, the extreme right of his line being occupied by a strong force of cavalry. The army
opposed to him was much stronger than his own, and it was not long before the battle began
to go very much against him. His positions on the left were carried by the combined charge
of the larger portion of the enemy's forces, and, in spite of a vigorous resistance, his lines
were forced back, down the hill, and into the valley. It was quite evident he could make no
stand, and was badly beaten. Thereupon, he sent orders to his generals on the left to retreat,
in as good order as possible, across a small river in their rear. While this movement was in
progress, and the enemy was making the greatest efforts to prevent it, the commander put himself
at the head of his cavalry and led them swiftly from the scene of battle. He took them diagonally
over the crest of the hill, down the other side, and then charging with this fresh body of
horse upon the rear and camp of the enemy, he swiftly captured the general-in-chief, his staff,
and the Minister of War, who had come down to see how things were going on. With these important
prisoners he dashed away, leaving the acephalous enemy to capture his broken columns if he could.

This was the kind of thing Lawrence Croft would like to do. For an hour or more he puzzled
his brains as to how he should make such a cavalry charge, and at last he came to a determination;
he would ask Junius Keswick to assist him. There was something odd about this plan which pleased
Croft. Keswick was his rival, with the powerful backing of Mr Brandon and a whole tribe of
relatives, and it might naturally be supposed that he was the last man in the world of whom
he would ask assistance. But, looking at it from his point of view, Lawrence thought that not
only would he be taking no undue advantage of the other in asking him to help him in this matter,
but that Keswick ought not and would not object to it. If Miss March really preferred Croft,
Keswick should feel himself bound in honor to do everything he could to let the two settle
the affair between themselves. This was drawing the point very fine, but Lawrence persuaded
himself that if the case were reversed he would not marry a girl who had not chosen another
man, simply because she had had no opportunity of doing so. He had a strong belief that Keswick
was of his way of thinking, and before he went to bed he wrote his rival a note, asking him
to call upon him the following day.

Early the next morning the note was carried over to Midbranch by a messenger, who returned,
saying that Mr Keswick had gone away, and that his present address was Howlett's in the same
county. This piece of information caused Lawrence Croft to open his eyes very wide. A few days
before he had received a letter from Mrs Null, written at Howlett's, and now Keswick had gone
there. He had been very much surprised when he found that the cashier had so successfully carried
on the search for Keswick as to come into the very county in Virginia where he was; and he
intended to write to her that he had no further occasion for her services; but he had not done
so, and here were the pursuer and the pursued in the same town, or village, or whatever Howlett's
was. He gave Mrs Null credit for being one of the best detectives he had ever heard of; for,
apparently, she had not only been able to successfully track the man she was in search of,
but to find out where he was going, and had reached the place in question before he did. But
he also berated her soundly in his mind for her over-officiousness. He had not wished her to
swoop down upon the man, but only to inform him of his whereabouts. The next thing that would
probably happen would be the appearance of Mrs Null at the Green Sulphur Springs, holding Keswick
by the collar. He deeply regretted that he had ever intrusted this young woman with the investigation,
not because he had since met Keswick himself, but for the reason that she was entirely too
energetic and imprudent. If Keswick should find out from her that she had been in search of
him, and why, it might bring about a very unpleasant state of affairs.

Croft saw now, quite plainly, what he must do. He must go to Howlett's as quickly as possible.
Perhaps Keswick and the cashier had not yet met, and, in that case, all he would have to do
would be to remunerate the young woman and her husband--for she had informed him that she intended
to combine this business with a wedding tour--and send them off immediately. He could then
have his conference with Keswick there as well as at the Springs. If any mischief had already
been done, he did not know what course he might have to pursue, but it was highly necessary
for him to be on the spot as soon as possible. He greatly disliked to leave the neighborhood
of Roberta March, but his absence would only be temporary.

After an early dinner, he mounted the horse which he had hired from his host of the Springs,
and, with a valise strapped behind him, set out for Howlett's. He had made careful inquiries
in regard to the road, and after a ride somewhat tiresome to a man not used to such protracted
horseback exercise, arrived at his destination about sundown. When he reached the scattered
houses which formed, as he supposed, the outskirts of the village, for such he had been told
it was, he rode on, but soon found that he had left Howlett's behind him, and that those supposed
outskirts were the place itself. Hewlett's was nothing, in fact, but a collection of eight
or ten houses quite widely separated from each other, and the only one of them which exhibited
any public character whatever, was the store, a large frame building standing a little back
from the road. Turning his horse, Lawrence rode up to the store and inquired if there was any
house in the neighborhood where he could get lodging for the night.

The storekeeper, who came out to him, was a very little man whose appearance recalled to Croft
the fact that he had noticed, in this part of the State, a great many men who were extremely
tall, and a great many who were extremely small, which peculiarity, he thought, might assist
a physiologist in discovering the different effects of hot bread upon different organizations.
He was quite as cordial, however, as the biggest, burliest, and jolliest host who ever welcomed
a guest to his inn, as he informed Mr Croft that there was no house in the village which made
a business of entertaining strangers, but if he chose to stop with him he would keep him and
his horse for the night, and do what he could to make him comfortable.

Lawrence ate supper that night with the storekeeper, his wife, and five of his children; but
as he was very hungry, and the meal was a plentiful one, he enjoyed the experience.

"I suppose you're goin' on to Westerville in the mornin'?" said the little host.

"No," replied Croft, "I am not going any farther than this place. Do you know if a gentleman
named Keswick arrived here recently?"

"Why, yaas," said the man, "if you mean Junius Keswick."

"Certainly he did," said Mrs Storekeeper. "He rode through here yesterday, and he stopped at
the store to see if we had any of that Lynchburg tobacco he used to smoke when he lived here.
He's gone on to his aunt's."

"Where is that?" asked Croft.

"It's about two miles out on the Westerville road," said the little man. "If I'd knowed you
wanted to see him, I'd 'a told you to keep right on, and you could 'a stopped with Mrs Keswick
over night."

Lawrence wished to ask some questions about Mrs Null, but he was afraid to do so lest he might
excite suspicions by connecting her with Keswick. If the latter had gone two miles out of town,
perhaps she had not yet seen him.

The room in which Lawrence slept that night was to him a very odd one. It was a long apartment,
at one end of which was a clean, comfortable bed, a couple of chairs, and a table on which
was a basin and pitcher. At the other end were piles of new-looking boxes, containing groceries
of various kinds, rolls of cotton cloth and other dry goods, and, what attracted his attention
more than anything else, a vast number of bright tin cans, bearing on their sides brilliant
pictures of tomatoes, peaches, green corn, and other preservable eatables. These were evidently
the reserved stores of the establishment, and they were so different from the bedroom decorations
to which he was accustomed, that it quite pleased Lawrence to think that with all his experience
in life he was now lodged in a manner entirely novel to him. As he lay awake looking at the
moonlight glittering on the sides of the multitude of cans, the thought came into his mind
that this had probably been the room of the Nulls when they were here.

"As this is the only house in the place where travellers are entertained," he said to himself,
"of course they must have come to it. And as they are not here now, it is quite plain that
they must have gone away. I am very glad of it, especially if they left before Keswick arrived,
for their departure probably prevented an awkward situation. But I shall ask the storekeeper
no questions about these people. There is no better way of giving inquisitive folk the entrée
to your affairs than by asking questions. Of course there was no reason why they should stay
here after they had successfully traced Keswick to this part of the country; and every reason,
if they wanted to enjoy themselves, why they should go away. But I can't help being sorry that
I did not meet the young woman, and have an opportunity of paying her for her trouble, and
giving her a few words of advice in regard to her action, or, rather, non-action in this matter.
She has a fine head for business, but I should like to feel certain that she understands that
her business with me is over."

And he turned his eyes from the glittering cans, and slept.

The next morning, Lawrence Croft rode on to Mrs Keswick's house, and when he reached the second,
or inner gate, he saw, on the other side of it, an elderly female, wearing a purple sun-bonnet
and carrying a purple umbrella. There was something very eccentric about the garb of this elderly
personage, and many an inexperienced city man would have taken her for a retired nurse, or
some other domestic retainer of the family, but there was a steadfastness in her gaze, and
a fire in her eye, which indicated to Lawrence that she was one much more accustomed to give
orders than to take them. He raised his hat very politely, and asked if Mr Keswick was to be
found there.

If the commander of the army, about whom Mr Croft had recently been reading, had beheld in
the earlier stages of the battle a strong, friendly force advancing to his aid, he would not
have been more delighted than Lawrence would have been had he known what a powerful ally to
his cause stood beneath that purple sun-bonnet.

"Do you mean Junius Keswick?" said the old lady.

"Yes, madam," answered Croft.

"He is here, and you will find him at the house."

The gate was partly open, and Lawrence rode in. The old lady stepped aside to let him pass.

"Do you want to see him on business?" she said. "How did you know he was here?"

"I inquired at Howlett's, madam."

Mrs Keswick would have liked to ask some further questions, but there was something about Lawrence's
appearance that deterred her.

"You can tie your horse under that tree over there," she said, pointing to a spot more trampled
by hoofs than the old lady wished any other portion of her house-yard to be.

When Lawrence had tied his bridle to a hook suspended by a strap from one of the lower branches
of the indicated tree, he advanced to the house; and a very much astonished man was he to see,
sitting side by side on the porch, Junius Keswick and Mr Candy's cashier. They were seated
in the shade of a mass of honeysuckle vines, and were so busily engaged in conversation that
they had not perceived his approach. Even now Lawrence had time to look at them for a few moments
before they turned their eyes upon him.

Equally astonished were the two people on the porch, who now arose to their feet. Junius Keswick
naturally wondered very much why Mr Croft should come to see him here; and as for the young
lady, she was almost as much terrified as surprised. Had this man come down from New York to
swoop upon her cousin? Had it been possible that she could have given him any idea of the whereabouts
of Junius? In her last note to him she had been very careful to promise information, but not
to give any, hoping thus to gain time to get an insight into the matter, and to keep her cousin
out of danger, if, indeed, any danger threatened. But here the pursuer had found Junius in
less than a day after she had first met him herself. But when she saw Junius advance and shake
hands in a very friendly way with Mr Croft, her terror began to decrease, although her surprise
continued at the same high-water mark, and Keswick found himself in a flood of the same emotion
when Croft very politely saluted his cousin by name, which salutation was returned in a manner
which indicated that the parties were acquainted.

At first Croft had been prompted to ignore all knowledge of the cashier, and meet her as a
stranger, but his better sense prevented this, for how could he know what she had been saying
about him.

"I was about to introduce you to my cousin," said Keswick, "but I see that you already know
each other."

"I have had the pleasure of meeting Mrs Null in New York," said Lawrence, to whom the word
cousin gave what might be called a more important surprise than anything with which this three-sided
interview had yet furnished its participants. He gave a quick glance at the lady, and discovered
her very steadfastly gazing at him. "I hope," he said, "that you and your husband have had
a very pleasant trip."

"Mr Null did not come with me," she quietly replied.

Lawrence Croft was a man to whom it gave pleasure to deal with problematic situations, unexpected
developments, and the like; but this was too much of a conundrum for him. That the man, whose
address he had employed this girl to find out, should prove to be her cousin, and that she
should start on her bridal trip without her husband, were points on which his reason had no
power to work. One thing, however, he quickly determined upon. He would have an interview with
Madam Cashier, and have her explain these mysteries. She was, virtually, his agent, and had
no right to conceal from him what she had been doing, and why she had done it.

It was necessary, however, that he should waste no time in thoughts of this kind, but should
immediately state to Mr Keswick the reason of his visit; for it could not be supposed he had
called in a merely social way. "I wish to speak to you," he said, "on a little matter of business."

At these words Mrs Null excused herself, and went into the house. Her mind was troubled as
she wondered what the business was which had made this New York gentleman so extraordinarily
desirous to find her cousin. Was it anything that would injure Junius? She looked back as she
entered the door, but the object of her solicitude was sitting with a face so calm and composed
that it showed very plainly he did not expect any communication which would be harmful to him.

"It is a satisfaction," thought Mr Croft, "a very great satisfaction that I can enter upon
the object of my visit knowing that my affairs and my actions have not been discussed by this
gentleman and Mrs Null."

CHAPTER XII.

Old Mrs Keswick would willingly have followed the strange gentleman to the house in order to
know the object of his visit, but as he had come to see Junius she refrained, for she knew
her nephew would not like any appearance of curiosity on her part. Her reception of Junius
had been very different indeed from that she had previously accorded him when she declined
to be found under the same roof with him. Now he was here under very different auspices, and
for him the very plumpest poultry was slain, and everything was done to make him comfortable
and willing to stay and become acquainted with his cousin, Mrs Null. A match between these
two young people was the present object of the old lady's existence, and she set about making
it with as much determination and confidence as if there had been no such person as Mr Null.
Of this individual she had the most contemptible opinion. She had never asked many questions
about him, because, in her intercourse with her niece, she wished, as far as possible, to ignore
him. Having mentally pictured him in various mean conditions of life, she had finally settled
it in her mind that he was an agent for some patent fertilizer; a man of this kind being a
very obnoxious person to her. This avocation, however, constituted in the old lady's mind no
excusable reason for his protracted absence; and if ever a wife was deserted, she believed
that her niece Annie was such a wife.

"If he should stay away much longer," she said to herself, "we shall have no more trouble in
getting a divorce than to have his funeral sermon preached. And if there is any talk of his
coming here, or of her going to him, I'll put my foot down on that sort of thing, if I've a
foot left to do it with."

When she had first perceived the approach of Mr Croft, a fear had seized her that this might
be the recreant husband, but the gentlemanly appearance of the stranger soon dispelled this
idea from her prejudiced mind. Apart from the fact that she had no business at the house with
her nephew's visitor, she had positive business in the garden with old Uncle Isham, and there
she repaired. There was some work to be done in regard to a flower pit, in which some of her
choicest plants were to be domiciled during the winter, and this she wished personally to oversee.
Although the autumn was well advanced, the day was somewhat warm; and as the pair, whom Mr
Croft had seen on the porch, had been glad to shelter themselves in the shade of the honeysuckle
vines, so Mrs Keswick seated herself on a little bench behind a large arbor, still covered
by heavy vines, which stood on the boundary line between the garden and the front yard, and
opened on the latter. This bench, which was always shady in the morning, she had had placed
there that she might comfortably direct the labors of old Isham, the boy Plez, or whoever,
for the time being, happened to be her gardener.

Mr Croft did not immediately begin the statement of the business which had brought him to see
Junius Keswick. Several windows of the house opened on the porch, and he did not wish what
he had to say to be heard by any one except the person he was addressing. "I desire to talk
to you on some private matters," he said. "Could we not walk a little away from the house?"

"Certainly," said Junius, rising. "We will step over to that arbor by the garden. We shall
be quite comfortable and secluded there. This is the place," said Junius, as they seated themselves
in the arbor, "where, when a boy, I used to come to smoke. My aunt did not allow this diversion,
but I managed to do a good deal of puffing before I was found out."

"Then you used to live here?" asked Croft.

"Oh, yes," said Keswick, "my parents died when I was quite a little fellow, and my aunt had
charge of me until I had grown up."

"Was that your aunt whom I met at the gate? There was something about her bearing and general
appearance which greatly interested me."

"She is a most estimable lady," returned Junius. And not wishing further to discuss his relative,
he added: "And now, what is it, sir, that I can have the pleasure of doing for you?"

"The matter regards Miss March," said Croft.

"I presumed so," remarked the other. "I will state it as briefly as possible," continued Croft.
"In consequence of your visit to me at the the Springs, I set out, the day before yesterday,
to make another attempt to call on Miss March, the first one having been frustrated, as you
may remember, by the information we received at the gate in regard to Miss March's indisposition,
which, as I have heard nothing more of it, I hope was of no importance."

"Of none whatever," said Junius.

"When I was within a mile or so of Midbranch," continued Croft, "I met Mr Brandon, who requested
me not to come to his house, and, in fact, to cease my visits altogether."

"What!" cried Keswick, very much surprised. "That is not at all like Mr Brandon. What reason
could he have for treating you in such a manner?"

"The very best in the world," said Croft. "Having, as the guardian of his niece, asked me the
object of my visit to Miss March, and, having been informed by me that it was my intention
to propose matrimony to the lady, he requested that I would not visit at his house." "On what
ground did he base his objection to your visit?" asked Keswick.

"He made no objection to me; he simply stated that he did not desire me to come, because he
wished his niece to marry you."

"Quite plainly spoken," remarked Keswick.

"Nothing could be more so," replied Croft. "I could not expect any one to be franker with me
than he was. He went on to inform me that a match between the lady and yourself was greatly
desired by the whole family connection, with a single exception, which, however, he did not
name, and, while he gave me to understand that he had no reason to fear that, so far as the
lady was concerned, my proposal would interfere with your prospects, still, were it known that
there was another aspirant in the field, a very undesirable state of things might ensue. What
this state of affairs was he did not state, but I presume it had something to do with the exceptional
opposition to which he referred."

"And what did you say to all that?" asked Junius.

"I said very little. When a man asks me not to come to his house, I don't go. But, nevertheless,
I have fully made up my mind to propose to Miss March as soon as I can get an opportunity.
I have nothing to do with family arrangements or family opposition. You have told me that you
are not engaged to her, and I am going to try to be engaged to her. She is the one to decide
this matter. And now I have called upon you, Mr Keswick, to see if there is any way in which
you can assist me in obtaining an interview with Miss March."

"Don't you think," said Junius, "that it is rather cool in you to ask me to assist you in this
matter?"

"Not at all," replied the other. "If it had not been for you I should now be in New York, with
no thought of present proposals of marriage. But you came to me, and insisted that I should
see the lady." "That was simply because she had expressed a strong desire to see you."

"Very good," said Lawrence. "I tried to go to her, as you know, and was prevented. Now all
I ask of you is to help me to do what you so strongly urged me to do. There is nothing particularly
cool in that, I think."

Keswick did not immediately reply. "I am not sure," he said, "that Miss March still wishes
to see you."

"That may be," replied Croft, speaking a little warmly. "None of us exactly know what she thinks
or wishes. But I want to find out what she thinks about me by distinctly asking her. And I
should suppose you would consider it to your advantage, as well as mine, that I should do so."
"I have my own opinion on that point," said Keswick, "which it is not necessary to discuss
at present. If I were to assist you to an interview with Miss March it would be on the lady's
account, not on yours or mine. But apart from the fact that I do not know if she now desires
an interview, I would not do anything that would offend or annoy Mr Brandon."

"I don't ask that of you," said Croft, "but couldn't you use your influence with him to give
me a fair chance with the lady? That is all I ask, and, whether she accepts me or rejects me,
I am sure everybody ought to be satisfied."

Keswick smiled. "You don't leave any margin for sentiment," he said, "but I suppose it is just
as well to deal with this matter in a practical way. I do not think, however, that any influence
I can exert on Mr Brandon would induce him to allow you to address his niece if he is opposed
to it, and I am sure he would have a very strange opinion of me if I attempted such a thing.
At present I do not see that I can help you at all, but I will think over the matter, and we
will talk of it again."

"Thank you," said Croft, rising. "And when shall I call upon you to hear your decision?"

It was rather difficult for Junius Keswick to answer a question like this on the spur of the
moment. He arose and walked with Croft out of the arbor. His first impulse, as a Virginia gentleman,
was to invite his visitor to stay at the house until the matter should be settled, but he did
not know what extraordinary freak on the part of his aunt might be caused by such an invitation.
But before he had decided what to say, they were met by Mrs Keswick coming from the garden.
Junius thereupon presented Mr Croft, who was welcomed by the old lady with extended hand and
exceeding cordiality.

"I am very glad," she said, "to meet a friend of my nephew. But where are you going, Sir? Certainly
not toward your horse. You must stay and dine with us."

Lawrence hesitated. He had no claims on the hospitality of these people, but he wished very
much to have an opportunity to speak to Mrs Null. "Thank you," he said, "but I am staying down
here at the village, and it is but a short ride." "Staying at Hewlett's?" exclaimed Mrs Keswick.
"At which hotel, may I ask?"

Lawrence laughed. "I am stopping with the storekeeper," he said.

"That settles it!" said the old lady, giving her umbrella a jab into the ground. "Tom Peckett's
accommodations may be good enough for pedlers and travelling agents, but they are not fit for
gentlemen, especially one of my nephew's friends. You must stay with us, sir, as long as you
are in this neighborhood. I insist upon it." Junius was very much astonished at his aunt's
speech and manner. The old lady was not at all inhospitable; so far was it otherwise the case,
that, rather than deprive an objectionable visitor of the shelter of her roof, she would go
from under it herself; but he had never known her to "gush" in this manner upon a stranger.
He now felt at liberty, however, to obey his own impulses, and urged Mr Croft to stay with them.

"You are very kind, indeed," said Lawrence, "and I shall be glad to defer for the present my
return to my 'hotel.' This will give me the additional pleasure of renewing my acquaintance
with Mrs Null."

"What!" exclaimed Mrs Keswick, "do you know her, too? And to think of you stopping at Peckett's!
Your home, sir, while you stay in these parts, is here."

Before the three reached the house, Mrs Keswick had inquired how long Mr Croft had known her
niece; and had discovered, much to her disappointment, that he had never met Mr Null. Shortly
after the arrival at the house of the gentleman on horseback little Plez ran into the kitchen,
where Letty was engaged in preparing vegetables for dinner.

"Who d'ye think is done come?" he exclaimed. "Miss Annie's husband! Jes' rid up to de house."

"Dat so?" cried Letty, dropping into her lap the knife and the potato she was peeling. "Well,
truly, when things does happen in dis worl' dey comes all in a lump. None ob de fam'ly been
nigh de house for ebber so long; an' den, 'long comes Mahs' Junius hisse'f, an' Miss Annie
dat's been away sence she was a chile, an' ole Mr Brandon, wot Uncle Isham say ain't been h'yar
fur years and years, an' now Miss Annie's husband comes kitin' up! An' dar's ole Aun' Patsy
wot says dat if dat gemman ebber come h'yar she want to know it fus' thing. She was dreffle
p'inted about dat. An' now, look h'yar, you Plez, jus' you cut round to your Aun' Patsy's,
an' tell her Miss Annie's husband's done come."

"Whar ole Miss?" inquired Plez. "She 'sleep?"

"No, she mighty wide awake," said Letty. "But you take dem knives an' dat board an' brick,
an' run down to de branch to clean 'em. An', when you gits dar, you jus' slip along, 'hind
de bushes, till you's got ter de cohn fiel', an' den you cut 'cross dar to Aun' Patsy's. An'
don' you stop no time dar, fur if ole Miss finds you's done gone, she'll chop you up wid dem
knives."

Plez was quite ready for a reckless dash of this kind, and in less than twenty minutes old
Patsy was informed that Mr Null had arrived. The old woman was much affected by the information.
She was uneasy and restless, and talked a good deal to herself, occasionally throwing out a
moan or a lament in the direction of her "son Tom's yaller boy Bob's chile." The crazy quilt,
which was not yet finished, though several pieces had been added since we last saw it, was
laid aside; and by the help of the above mentioned great granddaughter the old hair trunk was
hauled out and opened. Over this hoard of treasures, Aunt Patsy spent nearly two hours, slowly
taking up the various articles it contained, turning them over, mumbling over them, and mentally
referring many of them to periods which had become historic. At length she pulled out from
one of the corners of the trunk a pair of very little blue morocco shoes tied together by their
strings. These she took into her lap, and, shortly afterward, had the trunk locked, and pushed
back into its place. The shoes, having been thoroughly examined through her great iron-bound
spectacles, were thrust under the mattress of her bed.

That evening, Uncle Isham stepped in to see the old woman, who was counteracting the effects
of the cool evening air by sitting as close as possible to the remains of the fire which had
cooked the supper. She was very glad to see him. She wanted somebody to whom she could unburden
her mind. "Wot you got to say 'bout Miss Annie's husband," she asked, "wot done come to-day?"

"Was dat him?" exclaimed the old man. "Nobody tole me dat."

This was true, for the good-natured Letty, having discovered the mistake that had been made,
had concluded to say nothing about it and to keep away from Aunt Patsy's for a few days, until
the matter should be forgotten.

"Well, I spec Miss Annie's mighty glad to git him back agin," continued the old man, after
a moment's reflection. "He's right much of a nice lookin' gemman. I seed him this ebenin' a
ridin' wid Mahs' Junius."

"P'raps Miss Annie is glad," said the ole woman, "coz she don' know. But I ain't."

"Wot's de reason fur dat?" inquired Isham.

"It's a pow'ful dreffle thing dat Miss Annie's husband's done come down h'yar. He don' know
ole miss."

"Wot's de matter wid ole miss?" asked Isham, in a quick tone.

"She done talk to me 'bout him," said the old woman. "She done tole me jus' wot she think of
him. She hate him from he heel up. I dunno wot she'll do to him now she got him. Mighty great
pity fur pore Miss Annie dat he ever come h'yar."

"Ole miss ain't gwine ter do nuffin' to him," said Isham, in a gruff and troubled tone.

"Don' you b'lieve dat," said Aunt Patsy. "When ole miss don' like a pusson, dat pusson had
better look out. But I ain't gwine to be sottin' h'yar an' see mis'ry comin' to Miss Annie."

"Wot you gwine to do?" asked Isham.

"I's gwine ter speak my min' to ole miss. I's gwine to tell her not to do no kunjerin' to Miss
Annie's husban'. She gwine to hurt dat little gal more'n she hurt anybody else."

Old Isham sat looking into the fire with a very worried and anxious expression on his face.
He was intensely loyal to his mistress, aware as he was of her short-comings, or rather her
long-goings. Although he felt a good deal of fear that there might be some truth in Aunt Patsy's
words, he was very sure that if she took it upon herself to give warning or reproof to old
Mrs Keswick, a storm would ensue; and where the lightning would strike he did not know. "You
better look out, Aun' Patsy," he said. "You an' ole miss been mighty good fren's fur a pow'ful
long time, an' now don' you go gittin' yourse'f in no fraction wid her, jus' as you' bout to die."

"Ain't gwine to die," said the old woman, "till I done tole her wot's on my min'."

"Aun' Patsy," said Uncle Isham, after gazing silently in the fire for a minute or two, "dar
was a brudder wot come up from 'Melia County to de las' big preachin', an' he tole in his sarment
a par'ble wot I b'lieve will 'ply fus rate to dis 'casion. I's gwine to tell you dat."

"Go 'long wid it," said Aunt Patsy.

"Well, den," said Isham, "dar was once a cullud angel wot went up to de gate ob heaben to git
in. He didn't know nuffin' 'bout de ways ob de place, bein' a strahnger, an' when he see all
de white angels a crowdin' in at de gate where Sent Peter was a settin', he sorter looked round
to see if dar warn't no gate wot he might go in at. Den ole Sent Peter he sings out: 'Look
h'yar, uncle, whar you gwine? Dar ain't no cullud gal'ry in dis 'stablishment. You's got to
come in dis same gate wid de udder folks.' So de cullud angel he come up to de gate, but he
kin' a hung back till de udders had got in. Jus' den 'long comes a white angel on hossback,
wot was in a dreffle hurry to git in to de gate. De cullud angel, he mighty p'lite, an' he
went up an' tuk de hoss, an' when de white angel had got down an' gone in, he went roun' lookin'
fur a tree to hitch him to. But when he went back agin to de gate, Sent Peter had jus' shet
it, and was lockin' it up wid a big padlock. He jus' looks ober de gate at de cullud angel
an' he says: 'No 'mittance ahfter six o'clock.' An' den he go in to his supper."

"An' wot dat cullud angel do den?" asked Eliza, who had been listening breathlessly to this
narrative.

"Dunno," said Isham, "but I reckin de debbil come 'long in de night an' tuk him off. Dar's
a lesson in dis h'yar par'ble wot 'ud do you good to clap to your heart, Aun' Patsy. Don' you
be gwine roun' tryin' to help udder people jus' as you is all ready to go inter de gate ob
heaben. Ef you try any ob dat dar foolishness, de fus' thing you know you'll find dat gate shet."

"Is dat your 'Melia County par'ble?" asked the old woman.

"Dat's it," answered Isham.

"Reckon dat country's better fur 'bacca dan fur par'bles," grunted Aunt Patsy.

CHAPTER XIII.

Lawrence Croft had no idea of leaving the neighborhood of Howlett's until Keswick had made
up his mind what he was going to do, and until he had had a private talk with Mrs Null; and,
as it was quite evident that the family would be offended if a visitor to them should lodge
at Peckett's store, he accepted the invitation to spend the night at the Keswick house; and
in the afternoon Junius rode with him to Howlett's, where he got his valise, and paid his account.

But no opportunity occurred that day for a tête-a-tête with Mrs Null. Keswick was with him
nearly all the afternoon; and in the evening the family sat together in the parlor, where the
conversation was a general one, occasionally very much brightened by some of the caustic remarks
of the old lady in regard to particular men and women, as well as society at large. Of course
he had many opportunities of judging, to the best of his capacity, of certain phases of character
appertaining to Mr Candy's cashier; and, among other things, he came to the conclusion that
probably she was a young woman who would get up early in the morning, and he, therefore, determined
to do that thing himself, and see if he could not have a talk with her before the rest of the
family were astir.

Early rising was not one of Croft's accustomed habits, but the next morning he arose a good
hour before breakfast time. He found the lower part of the house quite deserted, and when he
went out on the porch he was glad to button up his coat, for the morning air was very cool.
While walking up and down with his hands in his pockets, and looking in at the front door every
time he passed it, in hopes that he might see Mrs Null coming down the stairs, he was greeted
with a cheery "good morning," by a voice in the front yard. Turning hastily, he beheld Mrs
Keswick, wearing her purple sun-bonnet, but without her umbrella.

"Glad you like to be up betimes, sir," said she. "That's my way, and I find it pays. Nobody
works as well, and I don't believe the plants and stock grow as well, while we are asleep."

Lawrence replied that in the city he did not get up so early, but that the morning air in the
country was very fine.

"And pretty sharp, too," said Mrs Keswick. "Come down here in the sunshine, and you will find
it pleasanter. Step back a little this way, sir," she said, when Lawrence had joined her, "and
give me your opinion of that locust tree by the corner of the porch. I am thinking of having
it cut down. Locusts are very apt to get diseased inside, and break off, and I am afraid that
one will blow over some day and fall on the house." Lawrence said he thought it looked like
a very good tree, and it would be a pity to lose the shade it made.

"I might plant one of another sort," said the old lady, "but trees grow too slow for old people,
though plenty fast enough for young ones. I reckon I'll let it stand awhile yet. You were talking
last night of Midbranch, sir. There used to be fine trees there, though it's many years since
I've seen them. Have you been long acquainted with the family there?"

Lawrence replied that he had known Miss March a good while, having met her in New York.

"She is said to be a right smart young lady," said Mrs Keswick, "well educated, and has travelled
in Europe. I am told that she is not only a regular town lady, but that she makes a first-rate
house-keeper when she is down here in the country."

Lawrence replied that he had no doubt that all this was very true.

"I have never seen her," continued the old lady, "for there has not been much communication
between the two families of late years, although they used to be intimate enough. But my nephew
and niece have been away a great deal, and old people can't be expected to do much in the way
of visiting. But I have a notion," she said, after gazing a few moments in a reflective way
at the corner of the house, "that it would be well now to be a little more sociable again.
My niece has no company here of her own sex, except me, and I think it would do her good to
know a young lady like Miss March. Mr Brandon has asked me to let Annie come there, but I think
it would be a great deal better for his niece to visit us. Mrs Null is the latest comer."

Lawrence, speaking much more earnestly than when discussing the locust tree, replied that he
thought this would be quite proper.

"I think I may invite her to come here next week," said Mrs Keswick, still meditatively and
without apparent regard to the presence of Croft, "probably on Friday, and ask her to spend
a week. And, by the way, sir," she said, turning to her companion, "if you are still in this
part of the country I would be glad to have you ride over and stay a day or two while Miss
March is here. I will have a little party of young folks in honor of Mrs Null. I have done
nothing of the kind for her, so far."

Lawrence said he had no doubt that he would stay at the Green Sulphur a week or two longer,
and that he would be most happy to accept Mrs Keswick's kind invitation.

They then moved toward the house, but, suddenly stopping, as if she had just thought of something,
Mrs Keswick remarked: "I shall be obliged to you, sir, if you will not say anything about this
little plan of mine, just now. I have not spoken of it to any one, having scarcely made up
my mind to it, and I suppose I should not have mentioned it to you if we had not been talking
about Midbranch. There is nothing I hate so much as to have people hear I am going to give
them an invitation, or that I am going to do anything, in fact, before I have fully made up
my mind about it."

Lawrence assured her that he would say nothing on the subject, and she promised to send him
a note to the Green Sulphur, in case she finally determined on having the little company at
her house.

"Now," triumphantly thought Croft, "it matters not what Keswick decides to do, for I don't
need his assistance. An elderly angel in a purple sun-bonnet has come to my aid. She is about
to do ever so much more for me than I could expect of him, and I prefer her assistance to that
of my rival. Altogether it is the most unexpected piece of good luck."

After breakfast there came to Lawrence the opportunity of a private conference with Mrs Null.
He was standing alone on the porch when she came out of the door with her hat on and a basket
in her hand, and said she was going to see a very old colored woman who lived in the neighborhood,
who was considered a very interesting personage; and perhaps he would like to go there with
her. Nothing could suit Croft better than this, and off they started.

As soon as they were outside the yard gate the lady remarked: "I have been trying hard to give
you a chance to talk to me when the others were not by. I knew you must be perfectly wild to
ask me what this all meant; why I never told you that Mr Keswick was my cousin, and the rest
of it." "I can't say," said Lawrence, "that I am absolutely untamed and ferocious in regard
to the matter, but I do really wish very much that you would give me some explanation of your
very odd doings. In fact, that is the only thing that now keeps me here."

"I thought so," said Mrs Null. "As I supposed you had got through with your business with Junius,
I did not wish to detain you here any longer than was necessary."

"Thank you," said Lawrence.

"You are welcome," she said. "And when I saw you standing on the porch by yourself, the idea
of being generous to old Aunt Patsy came into my mind. And here we are. Now, what do you want
to know first?"

"Well," said Mr Croft, "I would like very much to know how a young lady like you came to be
Mr Candy's cashier."

"I supposed you would want to know that," she said. "It's a dreadfully long story, and as it
is a strictly family matter I had almost made up my mind last night that I ought not to tell
it to you at all, but as I don't know how much you are mixed up with the family, I afterward
thought it best, for my own sake, to explain the matter to you. So I will give you the principal
points. My mother was a sister of Mrs Keswick, and Junius' mother was another sister. Both
his parents died when he was a boy, and Aunt Keswick brought him up. My mother died here when
I was quite small, and I stayed until I was eight years old. Aunt Keswick and my father were
not very good friends, and when she came to look upon me as entirely her own child, and wished
to deprive him of all rights and privileges as a parent, he resented it very much, and, at
last, took me away. I don't remember exactly how this was done, but I know there was a tremendous
quarrel, and my father and aunt never met again.

"He took me to New York; and there we lived very happily until about two years ago, when my
father died. He was a lawyer by profession, but at that time held a salaried position in a
railroad company, and when he died, of course our income ceased. The money that was left did
not last very long, and then I had to decide what I was to do. It would have been natural for
me to go to my only relatives, Aunt Keswick and Junius. But my father had been so opposed to
my aunt having anything to do with me that I could not bear to go to her. He had really been
so much afraid that she would try to win me away from him, or in some way gain possession of
me, that he would not even let her know our address, and never answered the few letters from
her which reached him, and which he told me were nothing but demands that her sister's child
should be given back to her. Junius had written to me, how many times I do not know, but two
letters had come to me that were very good and affectionate, quite different from my aunt's,
but even these my father would not let me answer; it would be all the same thing, he said,
as if I opened communication with my Aunt Keswick. Therefore, out of respect to my father,
and also in accordance with my own wishes, I gave up all idea of coming down here, and went
to work to support myself. I tried several things, and, at last, through a friend of my father,
who was a regular customer of Mr Candy, I got the position of cashier in the Information Shop.
It was an awfully queer place, but the work was very easy, and I soon got used to it. Then
you came making inquiries for an address. At first I did not know that the person you wanted
was Junius Keswick and my cousin, but after I began to look into the matter I found that it
must be he who you were after. Then I became very much troubled, for I liked Junius, who was
the only one of my blood whom I had any reason to care for; and when one sees a person setting
a detective--for it is all the same thing--upon the track of another person, one is very apt
to think that some harm is intended to the person that is being looked up. I did not know what
business Junius was in, nor what his condition was, but even if he had been doing wrong, I
did not wish you to find him until I had first seen him, and then, if I found you could do
him any harm, I would warn him to keep out of your way."

"Do you think that was fair treatment of me?" asked Croft.

"You were nothing to me, and Junius was a great deal," she answered. "And yet I think I was
fair enough. The only money you paid was what Mr Candy charged; and when I spoke of receiving
money for my services when the affair was finished I only did it that it might all be more
business like, and that you should not drop me and set somebody else looking after Junius.
That was the great thing I was afraid of, so I did all I could to make you satisfied with me."

"I don't see how your conscience could allow you to do all this," said Croft.

"My conscience was very much pleased with me," was the answer. "What I did was a stratagem,
and perfectly fair too. If I had found that it was right for you to see Junius, I would have
done everything I could to help you communicate with him. But when I did at last see him, down
you swooped upon us before I had an opportunity of saying a word about you."

"Your marriage was a very fortunate thing for you," said Mr Croft, "for if it had not been
for that I should never have allowed you to go about the country looking up a gentleman in
my behalf. But how did you get over your repugnance to your aunt?"

"I didn't get over it," she said, "I conquered it, for I found that this was the most likely
place to meet Junius. And Aunt Keswick has certainly treated me in the kindest manner, although
she is very angry about Mr Null. But when I first came and she did not know who I was, she
behaved in the most extraordinary manner."

"What did she do?" asked Croft.

"Never you mind," she answered, with a little laugh. "You can't expect to know all the family
affairs."

They had now arrived at Aunt Patsy's cabin, and Mrs Null entered, followed at a little distance
by Croft. The old woman had seen them as they were walking along the road, and her little black
eyes sparkled with peculiar animation behind her great spectacles. Her granddaughter happened
not to be at home, but Aunt Patsy got up, and with her apron rubbed off the bottoms of two
chairs, which she placed in convenient positions for her expected visitors. When they came
in they found her in a very perturbed condition. She answered Mrs Null's questions with a very
few words and a great many grunts, and kept her eyes fixed nearly all the time upon Mr Croft,
endeavoring to find out, perhaps, if he had yet been subjected to any kind of conjuring.

When all the questions which young people generally put to old servants had been asked by Mrs
Null, and Croft had made as many remarks as might have been expected of him in regard to the
age and recollections of this interesting old negress, Aunt Patsy began to be much more disturbed,
fearing that the interview was about to come to an end. She actually got up and went to the
back door to look for Eliza.

"Do you want her?" anxiously inquired Mrs Null, going to the old woman's side.

"Yaas, I wants her," said Aunt Patsy. "I 'spec' she at Aggy's house--dat cabin ober dar--but
I can't holler loud 'nuf to make her h'yere me." "I'll run over there and tell her you want
her," said Mrs Null, stepping out of the door.

"Dat's a good chile," said Aunt Patsy, with more warmth than she had yet exhibited. "Dat's
your own mudder's good chile!" And then she turned quickly into the room.

Croft had risen as if he were about to follow Mrs Null, or, at least, to see where she had
gone. But Aunt Patsy stopped him. "Jus' you stay h'yar one little minute," she said, hurriedly.
"I got one word to say to you, sah." And she stood up before him as erect as she could, fixing
her great spectacles directly upon him. "You look out, sah, fur ole miss," she said, in a voice,
naturally shrill, but now heavily handicapped by age and emotion, "ole Miss Keswick, I means.
She boun' to do you harm, sah. She tole me so wid her own mouf."

"Mrs Keswick!" exclaimed Croft. "Why, you must be mistaken, good aunty. She can have no ill
feelings towards me."

"Don' you b'lieve dat!" said the old woman. "Don' you b'lieve one word ob dat! She hate you,
sah, she hate you! She not gwine to tell you dat. She make you think she like you fus' rate,
an' den de nex' thing you knows, she kunjer you, an' shribble up de siners ob your legs, an'
gib you mis'ry in your back, wot you neber git rid of no moh'. Can't tell you nuffin' else
now, for h'yar comes Miss Annie," she added hurriedly, and, stepping to the bedside, she drew
from under the mattrass a pair of little blue shoes, tied together by their strings. "Jes'
you take dese h'yar shoes," she said, "an' ef eber you think ole miss gwine ter kunjer you,
jes' you hol' up dem shoes right afore her face. Dar now, stuff 'em in your pocket. Don' you
tell Miss Annie wot I done say to you. 'Member dat, sah. It ud kill her, shuh."

At this moment Mrs Null entered, just as the shoes had been slipped into the side-pocket of
Mr Croft's coat by the old woman. And as she did so, she whispered, in a tone that could not
but have its effect upon him, "Now, nebber tell her, honey."

"Here is Eliza," said Mrs Null, as she came in, followed by the great granddaughter. "And I
think," she said to Mr Croft, "it is time for us to go. Good-bye, Aunt Patsy. You can send
back the basket by Eliza."

When the two left the cabin, Croft walked thoughtfully for a few moments, wondering what in
the world the old woman could have meant by her strange words and gift to him. Concluding,
however, that they could have been nothing but the drivelings of weak-minded old age, he dismissed
them from his mind and turned his attention to his companion. "We were speaking," he said,
"of Mr Null. Do you expect him shortly?"

"Well, no," said the lady. "I can't say that I do."

"That is odd," said Lawrence. "I thought this was your wedding journey."

"So it is, in a measure," said she, "but there is no necessity of his coming here. Didn't I
tell you that my aunt was opposed to the marriage?" "But she might as well make up her mind
to it now," he said.

"She is not in the habit of making up her mind to things she don't like. Do you know," she
added, looking around with a half smile, as if she took pleasure in astonishing him, "that
Aunt Keswick is going to try to have us divorced?"

"What!" exclaimed Croft. "Divorced! Is there any ground for it?"

"She has other matrimonial plans for me, that's all."

"What an extraordinary individual she must be!" he exclaimed. "But she can never carry out
such a ridiculous scheme as that."

"I don't know," she said. "She has already consulted Mr Brandon on the subject."

"What nonsense!" cried Croft. "If you and Mr Null are satisfied, nobody else has anything to
do with it."

"Mr Null and I are of one mind," said she, "and agree perfectly. But don't you think it is
a terrible thing to know you must always face an irritated aunt?"

"Oh," said Croft, looking around at her very coldly and sternly, "I begin to see. I suppose
a separation would improve your prospects in life. But it can't be done if your husband is
opposed to it."

"Mr Croft," said the lady, her face flushing a good deal, "you have no right to speak to me
in that way, and attribute such motives to me. No matter whom I had married, I would never
give him up for the sake of money, or a farm, or anything you think my aunt could give me."

"I beg your pardon," said Croft, "if I made a mistake, but I don't see what else I could infer
from your remarks."

"My remarks," said she, "were,--well, they have a different meaning from what you supposed."
She walked on in silence for a few moments, and then, looking up to her companion, she said:
"I have a great mind to tell you something, if you will promise, at least for the present,
not to breathe it to a living soul."

Instantly the lookout on the bow of Lawrence Croft's life action called out: "Breakers ahead!"
and almost instantly its engine was stopped, and every faculty of its commander was on the
alert. "I do not know," he said, "that I am entitled to your confidence. Would it be of any
advantage to you to tell me what you propose?"

"It would be of advantage, and you are entitled," she added quickly. "It is about Mr Null,
and you ought to know it, for you instigated my wedded life."

"I instigated!"--exclaimed Mr Croft. And then he stopped short, both in his speech and walk.

"Yes," said the lady, stopping also, and turning to face him, "you did, and you ought to remember
it. You said if I had a husband to travel about with me you would like very much to employ
me in the search for Mr Keswick, and it was solely on that account that I went and got married."
Observing the look of blank and utter amazement on his face, she smiled, and said: "Please
don't look so horribly astonished. Mr Null is void."

As she made this remark the lady looked up at her companion with a smile and an expression
of curiosity as to how he would take the announcement. Lawrence gazed blankly at her for a
moment, and then he broke into a laugh. "You don't mean to say," he exclaimed, "that Mr Null
is an imaginary being?"

"Entirely so," she replied. "My dear Freddy is nothing but a fanciful idea, with no attribute
whatever except the name."

"You are a most extraordinary young person," said Lawrence; "almost as extraordinary as your
aunt. What in the world made you think of doing such a thing? and why do you wish to keep up
the delusion among your relatives, even so far as to drive your aunt to the point of getting
you divorced from your airy husband?" And he laughed again. "I told you how I came to think
of it," she said, as they walked on again. "It was very plain that if I wanted to travel about
as your agent I must be married, and I have found a husband quite a protection and an advantage,
even when he doesn't go about with me; and as to keeping up the delusion, as you call it, in
my own family, I have found that to be absolutely necessary, at least for the present. My aunt,
even when I was a little girl, determined to take my marriage into her own hands; and since
I have returned to her, this desire has come up again in the most astonishing way. It is her
principal subject of conversation with me. Were it not for the protection which my dear Freddy
Null gives me I should be thrown bodily into the arms of the person whom my aunt has selected,
and he would be obliged to take me, whether he wanted to or not, or be cast forth forever.
So you see how important it is that my aunt should think I am married; and I do hope you will
not tell anybody about Mr Null."

"Of course I will keep your secret," said Croft. "You may rely upon that; but don't you think--do
you believe that this sort of thing is altogether right?"

She did not answer for a few moments, and then she said: "I suppose you must consider me a
very deceptive sort of person, but you should remember that these things were not done for
my own good, and, as far as I can see, they were the only things that could be done. Do you
suppose I was going to let you pounce down on my cousin and do him some injury, for, as you
kept your object such a secret, I did not suppose it could be anything but an injury you intended
him."

"A fine opinion of me!" said Croft.

"And then, do you suppose," she continued, "that I would allow my aunt to quarrel with Junius
and disinherit him, as she says she will, should he decline to marry me. I expected to drop
my married name when I came here, but I had not been with my aunt fifteen minutes before I
saw that it would never do for me to be a single woman while I stayed with her; and so I kept
my Freddy by me. I did not intend, at all, to tell you all these things about my cousin, and
I only did it because I did not wish you to think that I was a sly, mean creature, deceiving
others for my own good."

"Well," said Croft, "although I can't say you are right in making your relatives believe you
are married when you are not, still I see you had very fair reasons for what you did, and you
certainly showed a great deal of ingenuity and pluck in carrying out your remarkable schemes.
By-the-way," he continued, somewhat hesitatingly, "I am in your debt for your services to me."

"Not a bit of it!" she exclaimed quickly. "I never did a thing for you. It was all for myself,
or, rather, for my cousin. The only money due was that which you paid to Mr Candy before I
took charge of the matter." Lawrence felt that this was rather a sore subject with his companion,
and he dropped it. "Do you still hold the position of cashier in the Information Shop?"

"No," she said. "When I started out on my lonely wedding tour I gave up that, and if I should
go back to New York, I do not think I should want to take it again.".

"Do you propose soon to return to New York?" he asked.

"No; at least I have made no plans in regard to it. I think it would grieve my aunt very much
if I were to go away from her now, and as long as I have Mr Null to protect me from her matrimonial
schemes, I am glad to stay with her. She is very kind to me."

"I think you are entirely right in deciding to stay here," he said, looking around at her,
and contrasting in his mind the bright-faced, and somewhat plump young person walking beside
him with the thin-faced girl in black whom he had seen behind the cashier's desk.

"Now," said she, with a vivacious little laugh, "I have poured out my whole soul before you,
and, in return, I want you to gratify a curiosity which is fairly eating me up. Why were you
so anxious to find my Cousin Junius? And how did you happen to come here the very day after
he arrived? And, more than that, how was it that you had seen him at Midbranch so recently?
You were talking about it last night. It couldn't have been my letter from Howlett's that brought
you down here?"

"No," said Lawrence, "my meeting with Mr Keswick at Midbranch was entirely accidental. When
I arrived there, a few days ago, I had no reason to suppose that I should meet him. But I must
ask you to excuse me from giving my reasons for wishing to find your cousin, and for coming
to see him here. The matter between us has now become one of no importance, and will be dropped."

The lady's face flushed. "Oh, indeed!" she said. And during the short remainder of their walk
to the house she made no further remark.

CHAPTER XIV.

When Lawrence and his companion reached the house, they found on the porch Mrs Keswick and
her nephew; and, after a little general conversation, the latter remarked to Mr Croft that
he had found it would not be in his power to attend to that matter he had spoken of; to which
Croft replied that he was very much obliged to him for thinking of it, and that it was of no
consequence at all, as he would probably make other arrangements. He then stated that he would
be obliged to return to the Green Sulphur Springs that day, and that, as it was a long ride,
he would like to start as soon as his horse could be brought to him. But this procedure was
condemned utterly by the old lady, who insisted that Mr Croft should not leave until after
dinner, which meal should be served earlier than usual in order to give him plenty of time
to get to the Springs before dark, and as Lawrence had nothing to oppose to her very urgent
protest, he consented to stay. Before dinner was ready he found out why the protest was made.
The old lady took him aside and made inquiries of him in regard to Mr Null. He had already
informed her that he was not acquainted with that gentleman, but she thought, as Mr Croft seemed
to be going about the country a good deal, he might possibly meet with her niece's husband;
and, if he should do so, she would be very glad to have him become acquainted with him.

To this Lawrence replied with much gravity that he would be happy to do so.

"Mr Null has not yet come to my house," said Mrs Keswick, "and it is very natural that one
should desire to know the husband of her only niece who is, or should be, the same as a daughter
to her."

"A very natural wish indeed," said Lawrence.

"I am not quite sure in what business Mr Null is engaged," she continued, "and, although I
asked my niece about it, she answered in a very evasive way, which makes me think his occupation
is one she is not proud of. I have reason to suppose, however, that he is an agent for the
sale of some fertilizing compound."

At this Lawrence could not help smiling very broadly.

"It may appear very odd and ridiculous to you," she said, "that a person connected with my
family should be engaged in a business like that, for those fertilizers, as you ought to know,
are all humbugs of the vilest kind. The only time I bought any it took my whole wheat crop
to pay for it, and as for the clover I got afterward, a grasshopper could have eaten the whole
of it. I am afraid he didn't tell her his business before he married her, and I'm glad she's
ashamed of it. As far as I can find out, it does not seem as if Mr Null has any intention of
coming here for some time; and, as I said before, I do very much want to know something about
him--that is from a disinterested outsider. One cannot expect a recently married young woman
to give a correct account of her husband."

"I do not believe," said Mr Croft, "that there is any probability that I shall ever meet the
gentleman--our walks in life being so different."

"I should hope so, indeed!" interrupted Mrs Keswick. "But people of all sorts do run across
each other."

"But if I do meet with him," he continued, "I shall take great pleasure in giving you my impressions
by letter, or in person, of your nephew-in-law." "Don't call him that!" exclaimed the old lady
with much asperity. "I don't acknowledge the title. But I won't say any more about him," with
a grim smile, "or you may think I don't like him."

"Some of these days," he said, "you may come to be of the opinion that he is exactly the husband
you would wish your niece to have."

"Never!" she cried. "If he were an angel in broadcloth. But I mustn't talk about these things.
I mentioned Mr Null to you because you are the only person of my acquaintance who, I suppose,
is likely to meet with him. In regard to that little company I spoke of to you, I have not
quite made up my mind about it, and, therefore, haven't mentioned it; but if I carry out the
plan I will write to you at the Springs, and shall certainly expect you to be one of us." "That
would give me great pleasure," said Lawrence, in a tone which indicated to the quick brain
of the old lady that he would like to make a condition, but was too polite to do so.

"If Miss March should agree to come," she said, "it might be pleasant for you to make one of
her party and ride over at the same time. However, I'll let you know if she is coming, and
then you can join her or not, as suits your convenience."

"Thank you very much," said Lawrence, in a tone which betrayed no reserves.

As he rode away that afternoon, Lawrence Croft, as his habit was on such occasions, revolved
in his mind what he had heard and said and done during this little visit to the Keswick family.
"Nothing could have turned out better," he thought. "To be sure the young man could not or
would not be of any assistance to me, which is probably what I ought to have expected, but
the strong-tempered old lady, his aunt, promises to be of tenfold more service than he could
possibly be. As to that very odd young lady, Mrs Keswick's niece, I imagine that she does not
regard me very favorably, for she was quite cool after I refused to let her into the secret
of my desire to find her cousin, but as I did not ask for her confidences, she had no right
to expect a return for them. And, by-the-way, it's odd how many confidences have been reposed
in me since I've been down here. Keswick begins it; then old Brandon takes up the strain; after
that Mr Candy's ex-cashier tells me the story of her life, and entrusts me with the secret
of her marriage with a man of wind--that most useful Mr Null; after that, her aunt makes me
understand how much she hates Mr Null, and how she would like me to find out something disreputable
about him; and then--, by George! I forgot the old negro woman in the cabin!" At this he put
his hand in the side-pocket of his coat, and drew out the pair of little blue shoes. "Why in
the name of common sense did the old hag give me these? And why should she suppose that Mrs
Keswick intended me a harm? The old lady never saw or heard of me until yesterday, and her
manner certainly indicated no dislike of me. But, of course, Aunt Patsy's brain is cracked,
and she didn't know what she was talking about. I shall keep the shoes, however, and if ever
the venerable purple sun-bonnet runs afoul of me, I shall hold them up before it and see what
happens."

And so, very well satisfied with the result of his visit to Hewlett's, he rode on to the Green
Sulphur Springs.

On the afternoon of the next day Miss March received an invitation from Mrs Keswick to spend
a few days with her, and make the acquaintance of her niece who had recently returned to the
home of her childhood. The letter, for it was much more than a note of invitation, was cordial,
and in parts pathetic. It dwelt upon the sundered pleasant relations of the two families, and
expressed the hope that Mr Brandon's visit to her might be the beginning of a renewal of the
old intimacy. Mrs Keswick took occasion to incidentally mention that the house would be particularly
dull for her niece just now, as Junius was on the point of starting for Washington, where he
would be detained some weeks on business; and she hoped, most earnestly, that Miss Roberta
would accept this invitation to make her acquaintance and that of her niece; and she designated
Thursday of the following week as the day on which she would like her to come.

As may reasonably be supposed, this letter greatly astonished Miss March, who carried it to
her uncle, and asked him to explain, if he could, what it meant. The old gentleman was a good
deal surprised when he read it; but it delighted him in a far greater degree. He perceived
in it the first fruits of his diplomacy. Mrs Keswick saw that it would be to her interest,
for a time at least, to make friends with him; and this was the way she took to do it. She
would not come to Midbranch herself, and bring the niece, but she would have Roberta come to
her. In the pathos and cordiality Mr Brandon believed not at all. What the old hypocrite probably
wanted was to enlist his grateful sympathy in that ridiculous divorce case. But, whatever her
motives might be, he would be very glad to have his niece go to her; for if anything could
make an impression upon that time-hardened and seasoned old chopping-block of a woman, it was
Roberta's personal influence. If Mrs Keswick should come to know Roberta, that knowledge would
do more than anything else in the world to remove her objections to the marriage he so greatly
desired.

He said nothing of all this to his niece; but he most earnestly counselled her to accept the
invitation and make a visit to the two ladies. Of course Roberta did not care to go, but as
her uncle appeared to take the matter so much to heart, she consented to gratify him, and wrote
an acceptance. She found, also, when she had thought more on the matter, that she had a good
deal of curiosity to see this Mrs Keswick, of whom she had heard so much, and who had had such
an important influence on her life.

CHAPTER XV.

On the afternoon of the day on which Mrs Keswick's letter arrived at Midbranch, Peggy had great
news to communicate to Aunt Judy, the cook: "Miss Rob's gwine to Mahs' Junius' house in de
kerridge, an' I's gwine 'long wid her to set in front wid Sam."

"Mahs' Junius aint got no house," said Aunt Judy, turning around very suddenly. "Does you mean
she gwine ter old Miss Keswick's?"

"Yaas," answered Peggy.

"Well, den, why don' you say so? Dat aint Mahs' Junius' house nohow, though he lib dar as much
as he lib anywhar. Wot she gwine dar fur?"

"Gwine to git married, I reckon," said Peggy.

"Git out!" ejaculated Aunt Judy. "Wid you fur bride'maid?"

"Dunno," answered Peggy. "She done tole me she didn't think she'd have much use fur me, but
Mahs' Robert, he said it were too far fur her to go widout a maid; but ef she want me fur bride'maid
I'll do dat too."

"You bawn fool!" shouted Aunt Judy. "You ain't got sense 'nuf to hock the frocks ob de bridesmaids.
An dat's all fool talk about Miss Rob gwine dar to be married. When she an' Mahs' Junius hab
de weddin', dey'll hab it h'yar, ob course. She gwine to see ole Miss Keswick, coz dat's de
way de fus' fam'lies allus does afore dey hab dere weddin'. I's pow'ful glad she's gwine dar,
instid ob ole Miss Keswick comin' h'yar. I don' wan' her kunjerin' me, an' she'd do dat as
quick as winkin' ef de batter bread's a leetle burned, or dar's too much salt in de soup. You's
got to keep youse'f mighty straight, you Peggy, when you gits whar ole Miss Keswick is. Don'
you come none ob your fool tricks, or she kunjer you, an' one ob your legs curl up like a pig's
tail, an' neber uncurl no moh'. How you like dat?"

To this Peggy made no reply, but with her eyes steadfastly fixed on Aunt Judy, and her lower
jaw very much dropped, she mentally resolved to keep herself as straight as possible during
her stay at the Keswick's.

"Dar's ole Aun' Patsy," continued the speaker. "It's a mighty long time sence I've seen Aun'
Patsy. Dat was when I went ober dar wid Miss Rob's mudder when de two fam'lys was fren's. I
was her maid, an' went wid her jes as Mahs' Robert wants you ter go 'long wid Miss Rob. He
ain't gwine to furgit how they did in de ole times when de ladies went visitin' in dere kerridges
fur to stay free, four days. Aun' Patsy were pow'ful ole den, but she didn't die soon 'nuf,
an' ole Miss Keswick she kunjer her, an' now she can't die at all."

"Neber die!" ejaculated Peggy.

"Neber die, nohow!" answered Aunt Judy. "Mighty offen she thought she gwine to die but 'twarnt
no use. She can't do it. An' de las' time I hear ob her, she alibe yit, jes' de same as eber.
An' dar was Mahs' John Keswick. She cunjer him coz he rode de gray colt to de Coht House when
she done tole him to let dat gray colt alone, coz 'twarnt hisen but hern, an' he go shoot hese'f
dead by de gate pos'. You's got to go fru by dat pos' when you go inter de gate."

"Dat same pos'!" cried Peggy.

"Yaas," said Aunt Judy, "dat same one. An' dey tells me dat on third Chewsdays, which is Coht
day, de same as when he took de gray colt, as soon as it git dark he ghos' climb up to de top
ob dat pos', an' set dar all night."

With a conjuring old woman in the house, and a monthly ghost on the gate-post outside, the
Keswick residence did not appear as attractive to Peggy as it had done before, but she mentally
determined that while she was there she would be very careful to look put sharp for herself,
a performance for which she was very well adapted.

It was on a pleasant autumn morning that Mr Brandon very carefully ensconced his niece in the
family carriage, with Peggy and a trusty negro man, Sam, on the outside front seat. "I would
gladly go with you, my dear," he said, "even without the formality of an invitation, but it
is far better for you to go by yourself. My very presence would provoke an antagonism in the
old lady, while with you, personally, it is impossible that any such feeling should exist.
I hope your visit may do away with all ill feeling between our families."

"I want you to understand, uncle," said Miss Roberta, "that I am making this visit almost entirely
to please you, and I shall do everything in my power to make Mrs Keswick feel that you and
I are perfectly well disposed toward her; but you can't expect me to exhibit any great warmth
of friendship toward a person who once used such remarkable and violent expressions in regard
to me."

"But those feelings, my dear," said Mr Brandon, "if we are to believe Mrs Keswick's letter,
have entirely disappeared."

"It is quite natural that they should do so," said Roberta, "as there is no longer any reason
for them. And there is another thing I want to impress on your mind, Uncle Robert, you must
expect no result from this visit except a renewal of amity between yourself and Mrs Keswick."

"I understand it perfectly," said the old gentleman, feeling quite confident that if his family
and Mrs Keswick should once again become friendly, the main object of his desires would not
be difficult of accomplishment. "And now, my dear, I will not detain you any longer. I hope
you may have a very pleasant visit, and I advise you to cultivate that young Mrs Null, whom
I take to be a very sensible and charming person." And then he kissed her good-bye and shut
the carriage door.

It was about the middle of the afternoon when Sam drove through the outer Keswick gate, and
Peggy, who had jumped down to open said gate, had made herself positively sure that, at present,
there was no ghost sitting upon the post. Before she reached the house, Roberta began to wonder
a good deal if she should find Mrs Keswick the woman she had pictured in her mind. But when
the carriage drew up in front of the porch there came out to meet her, not the mistress of
the estate, but a much younger lady, who tripped down the steps and reached Roberta as she
descended from the carriage.

"We are very glad to see you, Miss March," she said. "My aunt is not here just now, but will
be back directly."

"This is Mrs Null, isn't it?" said Roberta, and as the other smiled and answered with a slight
flush that it was, Roberta stooped just the little that was necessary, and kissed her. Mrs
Keswick's niece had not expected so warm a greeting from this lady, to whom she was almost
a stranger, and instantly she said to herself: "In that kiss Freddy dies to you." For some
days she had been turning over and over in her mind the question whether or not she should
tell Roberta March that she was not Mrs Null. She greatly disliked keeping up the deception
where it was not necessary, and with Roberta, if she would keep the secret, there was no need
of this aerial matrimony. Besides her natural desire to confide in a person of her own sex
and age, she did not wish Mr Croft to be the only one who shared her secret; and so she had
determined that her decision would depend on what sort of girl Roberta proved to be. "If I
like her I'll tell her; if I don't, I won't," was the final decision. And when Roberta March
looked down upon her with her beautiful eyes and kissed her, Freddy Null departed this life
so far as those two were concerned.

Mrs Keswick had, apparently, made a very great miscalculation in regard to the probable time
of arrival of her guest, for Miss March and Peggy, and even Sam and the horses, had been properly
received and cared for, and Miss March had been sitting in the parlor for some time, and still
the old lady did not come into the house. Her niece had grown very anxious about this absence,
and had begun to fear that her aunt had treated Miss March as she had treated her on her arrival,
and had gone away to stay. But Plez, whom she had sent to tell his mistress that her visitor
was in the house, returned with the information that "ole miss" was in one of the lower fields
directing some men who were digging a ditch, and that she would return to the house in a very
short time. Thus assured that no permanent absence was intended, she went into the parlor to
entertain Miss March, and to explain, as well as she could, the state of affairs; when, as
she entered the door, she saw that lady suddenly arise and look steadfastly out of the window.

"Can that be Mr Croft?" Miss March exclaimed.

The younger girl made a dash forward and also looked out of the window. Yes, there was Mr Croft,
riding across the yard toward the tree where horses were commonly tied.

"Did you expect him?" asked Roberta, quickly.

"No more than I expected the man in the moon," was the impulsive and honest answer of her companion.

"I am very glad to see you, Mrs Null," said Lawrence, when that lady met him on the porch.
And when he was shown into the parlor, he greeted Miss March with much cordiality, but no surprise.
But when he inquired after other members of the family, he was much surprised to find that
Mr Keswick had gone to Washington. "Was not this very unexpected, Mrs Null?" he asked.

"Why, no," she answered. "Junius told us, almost as soon as he came here, that he would have
to be in Washington by the first of this week."

Mr Croft did not pursue this subject further, but presently remarked: "Are you and I the first
comers, Miss March?"

Roberta looked from one of her companions to the other, and remarked: "I do not understand you."

Lawrence now perceived that he was treading a very uncertain and, perhaps, dangerous path of
conversation, and the sooner he got out of it the better; but, before he could decide what
answer to make, a silent and stealthy figure appeared at the door, beckoning and nodding in
a very mysterious way. This proved to be the plump black maid, Letty, who, having attracted
the attention of the company, whispered loudly, "Miss Annie!" whereupon that young lady immediately
left the room.

"What other comers did you expect?" then asked Roberta of Mr Croft.

"I certainly supposed there would be a small company here," he said, "probably neighborhood
people, but if I was mistaken, of course I don't wish to say anything more about it to the family."

"Were you invited yourself?" asked Roberta.

Croft wished very much that he could say that he had accidentally dropped in. But this he could
not do, and he answered that Mrs Keswick asked him to come about this time. He did not consider
it necessary to add that she had written to him at the Springs, renewing her invitation very
earnestly, and mentioning that Miss March had consented to make one of the party.

This was as far as Roberta saw fit to continue the subject, on the present occasion; and she
began to talk about the charming weather, and the pretty way in which the foliage was reddening
on the side of a hill opposite the window. Mr Croft was delighted to enter into this new channel
of speech, and discussed with considerable fervor the attractiveness of autumn in Virginia.
Miss Annie found Letty in a very disturbed state of mind. The dinner had been postponed until
the arrival of Miss March, and now it had been still further delayed by the non-arrival of
the mistress of the house, and everything was becoming dried up, and unfit to eat. "This will
never do!" exclaimed Miss Annie. "I will go myself and look for aunt. She must have forgotten
the time of day, and everything else."

Putting on her hat she ran out of the back door, but she did not have to go very far, for she
found the old lady in the garden, earnestly regarding a bed of turnips. "Where have you been,
my dear aunt?" cried the girl. "Miss March has been here ever so long, and Mr Croft has come,
and dinner has been waiting until it has all dried up. I was afraid that you had forgotten
that company was coming to-day."

"Forgotten!" said the old lady, glaring at the turnips. "It isn't an easy thing to forget.
I invited the girl, and I expected her to come, but I tell you, Annie, when I saw that carriage
coming along the road, all the old feeling came back to me. I remembered what its owners had
done to me and mine, and what they are still trying to do, and I felt I could not go into the
house, and give her my hand. It would be like taking hold of a snake."

"A snake!" cried her niece, with much warmth. "She is a lovely woman! And her coming shows
what kindly feelings she has for you. But, no matter what you think about it, aunt, you have
asked her here, and you must come in and see her. Dinner is waiting, and I don't know what
more to say about your absence."

"Go in and have dinner," said Mrs Keswick.

"Don't wait for me. I'll come in and see her after a while; but I haven't yet got to the point
of sitting down to the table and eating with her."

"Oh, aunt!" exclaimed Annie, "you ought never to have asked her if you are going to treat her
in this way! And what am I to say to her? What excuse am I to make? Are you not sick? Isn't
something the matter with you?"

"You can tell them I'm flustrated," said the old lady, "and that is all that's the matter with
me. But I'm not coming in to dinner, and there is no use of saying anything more about it."

Annie looked at her, the tears of mortification still standing in her eyes. "I suppose I must
go and do the best I can," she said, "but, aunt, please tell me one thing. Did you invite any
other people here? Mr Croft spoke as if he expected to see other visitors, and if they ask
anything more about it, I don't know what to say."

"The only other people I invited," said the old lady with a grim grin, "were the King of Norway,
and the Prime Minister of Spain, and neither of them could come." Annie said no more, but hurrying
back to the house, she ordered dinner to be served immediately. At first the meal was not a
very lively one. The young hostess pro tempore explained the absence of the mistress of the
house by stating that she had had a nervous attack--which was quite true--and that she begged
them to excuse her until after dinner. The two guests expressed their regret at this unfortunate
indisposition, but each felt a degree of embarrassment at the absence of Mrs Keswick. Roberta,
who had heard many stories of the old woman, guessed at the true reason, and if the distance
had not been so great, she would have gone home that afternoon. Lawrence Croft, of course,
could imagine no reason for the old lady's absence, except the one that had been given them,
but he suspected that there must be some other. He did his best, however, to make pleasant
conversation; and Roberta, who began to have a tender feeling for the little lady at the head
of the table, who, she could easily see, had been placed in an unpleasant position, seconded
his efforts with such effect that, when the little party had concluded their dinner with a
course of hot pound cake and cream sauce, they were chatting together quite sociably.

In about ten minutes after they had all gone into the parlor, Miss Annie excused herself, and
presently returned with a message to Miss March that Mrs Keswick would be very glad to see
her in another room. This was a very natural message from an elderly lady, who was not well,
but Roberta arose and walked out of the parlor with a feeling as if she were about to enter
the cage of an erratic tigress. But she met with no such creature. She saw in the back room,
into which she was ushered, a small old woman, dressed very plainly, who came forward to meet
her, extending both hands, into one of which Roberta placed one of her own.

"I may as well say at once, Roberta March," said Mrs Keswick, "that the reason I didn't come
to meet you when you first arrived was, that I couldn't get over, all of a sudden, the feelings
I have had against your family for so many years."

"Why then, Mrs Keswick," said Roberta, very coldly, "did you ask me to come?"

"Because I wanted you to come," said Mrs Keswick, "and because I thought I was stronger than
I turned out to be; but you must make allowances for the stiffness which gets into old people's
dispositions as well as their backs. I want you to understand, however, that I meant all I
said in that letter, and I am very glad to see you. If anything in my conduct has seemed to
you out of the way, you must set it down to the fact that I was making a very sudden turn,
and starting out on a new track in which I hope we shall all keep for the rest of our lives."

Roberta could not help thinking that the sudden turn in the new track began with the visit
of her uncle to this house, and that the old lady need not have inflicted upon her the disagreeable
necessity of witnessing a hostess taking a very repulsive cold plunge; but all she said was
that she hoped the families would now live together in friendly relations; and that she was
sure that, if this were to be, it would give her uncle a great deal of pleasure. She very much
wanted to ask Mrs Keswick how Mr Croft happened to be here at this time, but she felt that
her very brief acquaintance with the lady would not warrant the discussion of a subject like that.

"She is very much the kind of woman I thought she was," said Roberta to herself, when, after
some further hospitable remarks from Mrs Keswick, the two went to the parlor together to find
Mr Croft. But that gentleman, having been deserted by all the ladies, was walking up and down
the greensward in front of the house, smoking a cigar. Mrs Keswick went out to him, and greeted
him very cordially, begging him to excuse her for not being able to see him as soon as he came.

Lawrence set all this aside in his politest manner, but declared himself very much disappointed
in not seeing Mr Keswick, and also remarked that from what she had said to him on his last
visit he had expected to find quite a little party here.

"I am sorry," said the old lady, "that Junius is away, for he would be very glad to see you,
and it never came into my mind to mention to you that he was obliged to be in Washington at
this time. And, as for the party, I thought afterwards that it would be a great deal cosier
just to have a few persons here."

"Oh, yes," said Lawrence, "most certainly, a great deal cosier."

Mrs Keswick ate supper with her guests, and behaved very well. During the evening she sustained
the main part of the conversation, giving the company a great many anecdotes and reminiscences
of old times and old families, relating them in an odd and peculiar way that was very interesting,
especially to Croft, to whom the subject matter was quite new. But, although her three companions
listened to the old lady with deferential attention, interspersed with appropriate observations,
each one made her the object of severe mental scrutiny, and endeavored to discover the present
object of her scheming old mind. Roberta was quite sure that her invitation and that of Mr
Croft was a piece of artful management on the part of the old lady, and imagined, though she
was not quite sure about it, that it was intended as a bit of match-making. To get her married
to somebody else, would be, of course, the best possible method of preventing her marrying
Junius; and this, she had reason to believe, was the prime object of old Mrs Keswick's existence.
But why should Mr Croft be chosen as the man with whom she was to be thrown. She had learned
that the old lady had seen him before, but was quite certain that her acquaintance with him
was slight. Could Junius have told his aunt about the friendship between herself and Mr Croft?
It was not like him, but a great many unlikely things take place.

As for Lawrence, he knew very well there was a trick beneath his invitation, but he could not
at all make out why it had been played. He had been given an admirable opportunity of offering
himself to Miss March, but there was no reason, apparent to him, why this should have been done.

Miss Annie, watching her aunt very carefully, and speaking but seldom, quite promptly made
up her mind in regard to the matter. She knew very well the bitter opposition of the old woman
to a marriage between Junius and Miss March; and saw, as plainly as she saw the lamp on the
table, that Roberta had been brought here on purpose to be sacrificed to Mr Croft. Everything
had been made ready, the altar cleared, and, as well as the old lady's grindstone would act,
the knife sharpened. "But," said Miss Annie to herself, "she needn't suppose that I am going
to sit quiet and see all this going on, with Junius away off there in Washington, knowing nothing
about any of it."

Miss Roberta retired quite early to her room, having been fatigued by her long drive, and she
was just about to put out her light when she heard a little knock at the door. Opening it slightly,
she saw there Junius Keswick's cousin, who also appeared quite ready for bed.

"May I come in for a minute?" said Annie.

"Certainly," replied Miss March, admitting her, and closing the door after her.

"I have something to tell you," said the younger lady, admiring as she spoke, the length of
her companion's braided hair. "I intended to keep it until to-morrow, but since I came up stairs
I felt I could not let you sleep a night under the same roof with me without knowing it. I
am not Mrs Null."

"What!" exclaimed Roberta, in a tone which made Annie lift up her hands and implore her not
to speak so loud, for fear that her aunt should hear her. "I know she hasn't come up stairs
yet, for she sits up dreadfully late, but she can hear things, almost anywhere. No, I am not
Mrs Null. There is no such person as Mr Null, or, at least, he is a mere gaseous myth, whom
I married for the sake of the protection his name gave me."

"This is the most extraordinary thing I ever heard," said Roberta. "You must tell me all about it."

"I don't want to keep you up," said Annie, "you must be tired."

"I am not tired," said Roberta, "for every particle of fatigue has flown away." And with this
she made Annie sit down beside her on the lounge. "Now you must tell me what this means," she
said. "Can it be that your aunt does not know about it?"

"Indeed, she does not," said Annie. "I married Freddy Null in New York, for reasons which we
need not talk of now, for that matter is all past and gone; but when I came here, I found almost
immediately, that he would be more necessary to me in this house than anywhere else."

"I cannot imagine," said Roberta, "why a gaseous husband should be necessary to you here."

"It is not a very easy thing to explain," said the other, "that is, it is easy enough, but--"

"Oh," said Roberta, catching the reason of her companion's hesitation, "I don't think you ought
to object to tell me your reason. Does it relate to your cousin Junius?"

"Well," said Annie, "not altogether, and not so much to him as to my aunt." "I think I see,"
said Roberta. "A marriage between you two would suit her very well. Are you afraid that she
would try to force him on you?"

"Oh, no;" said Annie, "that would be bad enough, but it would not be so embarrassing, and so
dreadfully unpleasant, as forcing me on him, and that is what aunt wants to do. And you can
easily see that, in that case, I could not stay in this house at all. I scarcely know my cousin
as a man, my strongest recollection of him being that of a big and very nice boy, who used
to climb up in the apple-trees to get me apples, and then come down to the very lowest branch
where he could drop the ripest ones right into my apron, and not bruise them. But, even if
I had been acquainted with him all these years, and liked him ever so much, I couldn't stay
here and have aunt make him take me, whether he wanted to, or not. And, unless you knew my
aunt very well, you could not conceive how unscrupulously straightforward she is in carrying
out her plans."

"And so," said Roberta, "you have quite baffled her by this little ruse of a marriage."

"Not altogether," said Annie with a smile, "for she vows she is going to get me divorced from
Mr Null."

"That is funnier than the rest of it," said Roberta, laughing. And they both laughed together,
but in a subdued way, so as not to attract the attention of the old lady below stairs. "And
now, you see," said Annie, "why I must be Mrs Null while I stay here. And you will promise
me that you will never tell any one?"

"You may be sure I shall keep your queer secret. But have you not told it to any one but me?"

"Yes," said Annie, "but I have only told it to one other, Mr Croft. But please don't speak
of it to him."

"Mr Croft!" exclaimed Roberta. "How in the world did you come to tell him? Do you know him
so well as that?"

"Well," said Annie, "it does seem out of the way, I admit, that I should tell him, but I can't
give you the whole story of how I came to do it. It wouldn't interest you--at least, it would,
but I oughtn't to tell it. It is a twisty sort of thing."

"Twisty?" said Roberta, drawing herself up, and a little away from her companion.

Annie looked up, and caught the glance by which this word was accompanied, and the tone in
which it was spoken went straight to her soul. "Now," said she, "if you are going to look at
me, and speak in that way, I'll tell you every bit of it." And she did tell the whole story,
from her first meeting with Mr Croft in the Information Shop, down to the present moment.

"What is your name, anyway?" said Roberta, when the story had been told.

"My name," said the other, "is Annie Peyton."

"And now, do you know, Annie Peyton," said Roberta, passing her fingers gently among the short,
light-brown curls on her companion's forehead, "that I think you must have a very, very kindly
recollection of the boy who used to come down to the lowest branches of the tree to drop apples
into your apron."

CHAPTER XVI.

Shortly after Peggy arrived with her mistress at the Keswick residence, her mind began to be
a good deal disturbed. She had been surprised, when the carriage drew up to the door, that
"Mahs' Junius" had not rushed down to meet his intended bride, and when she found he was not
in the house, and had, indeed, gone away from home, she did not at all know what to make of
it. If Miss Rob took the trouble to travel all the way to the home of the man that the Midbranch
people had decided she should marry, it was a very wonderful thing, indeed, that he should
not be there to meet her. And while these thoughts were turning themselves over in the mind
of this meditative girl of color, and the outgoing look in her eyes was extending itself farther
and farther, as if in search of some solution of the mystery, up rode Mr Croft.

"Dar he!" exclaimed Peggy, as she stood at the corner of the house where she had been pursuing
her meditations. "He!" she continued in a voice that would have been quite audible to any one
standing near. "Upon my libin' soul, wot brung him h'yar? Miss Rob don' wan' him round, nohow.
I done druv him off wunst. Upon my libin' soul, he's done brung his bag behin' him on de saddle,
an' I reckon he's gwine to stay."

As Mr Croft dismounted and went into the house, Peggy glowered at him; sundry expressions,
sounding very much like odds and ends of imprecations which she had picked up in the course
of a short but investigative existence, gurgling from her lips. "I wish dat ole Miss Keswick
kunjer him. Ef she knew how Miss Rob hate him, she curl he legs up, an' gib him mis'ry spranglin'
down he back."

The hope of seeing this intruder well "kunjered" by the old lady was the only thing that gave
a promise of peace to the mind of Peggy; and though her nature was by no means a social one,
she determined to make the acquaintance of some one or other in the house; hoping to find out
how Mrs Keswick conducted her conjurations; at what time of day or night they were generally
put into operation; and how persons could be brought under their influence.

The breakfast hour in the Keswick house was a variable one. Sometimes the mistress of the establishment
rose early and wanted her morning meal before she went out of doors; at other times she would
go off to some distant point on the farm to see about something that was doing or ought to
be done, and breakfast would be kept waiting for her. The delays, however, were not all due
to the old lady's irregular habits. Very often Letty would come up stairs with the information
that the "bread ain't riz;" and as a Virginia breakfast without hot bread would be an impossibility,
the meal would be postponed until the bread did conclude to rise, or until some substitute,
such as "beaten biscuit" had been provided.

On the morning after his arrival, Lawrence Croft came down stairs about eight o'clock, and
found the lower part of the house deserted; and glancing into the dining-room as he passed
its open door, he saw no signs of breakfast. The house was cool, but the sun appeared to be
shining warmly outside, and he stepped out of the open back door into a small flower garden,
with a series of broad boards down the walk which lay along the middle of it. Up and down this
board walk Lawrence strode, breathing the fresh air, and thinking over matters. He was not
at all satisfied at being here during Keswick's absence, feeling that he was enjoying an advantage
which, although it was quite honorable, did not appear so. What he had to do was to get an
interview with Miss March as soon as possible, and have that matter over. When he had been
definitely accepted or rejected, he would go away. And, whatever the result might be, he would
write to his rival as soon as he returned to the Springs, and inform him of it, and would also
explain how he had happened to be here with Miss March. While he was engaged in planning these
honorable intentions, there came from the house Mrs Keswick's niece, with a basket in one hand,
and a pair of scissors in the other, and she immediately applied herself to cutting some geraniums
and chrysanthemums, which were about the last flowers left blooming at that season in the garden.
"Good morning," said Croft, from the other end of the walk. "I am glad to see you out so early."

"Good morning," she replied, with a look which indicated that she was not at all glad to see
him, "but I don't think it is early."

Croft had noticed on the preceding day that her coolness towards him still continued, but it
did not suit him to let her know that he perceived it. He went up to her, and in a very friendly
way remarked: "There is something I wish very much you would tell me. What is your name? It
is very odd that during all the time I have been acquainted with you I have never known your name."

"You must have taken an immense interest in it," she said, as she snipped some dried leaves
off a twig of geranium she had cut.

"It was not that I did not take any interest," said Croft, "but at first your name never came
forward, and I soon began to know you by the title which your remarkable condition of wedlock
gave you."

"And that is the name," said the lady, very decidedly, "by which I am to be known in this house.
I am very proud of my maiden name, but I am not going to tell it to you for fear that some
time you will use it."

"Oh!" ejaculated Mr Croft. "Then I suppose I am to continue even to think of you as Mrs Null."

"You needn't think of me at all," said she, "but when you speak to me I most certainly expect
you to use that name. It was only by a sort of accident that you came to know it was not my
name." "I don't consider it an accident at all," said Croft. "I look upon it as a piece of
very kindly confidence."

Miss Annie gave a little twist to her mouth, which seemed to indicate that if she spoke she
should express her contempt of such an opinion, and Croft continued:

"I am very sorry that upon that occasion I should have felt myself obliged to refuse your request
that I should make you acquainted with my reasons for desiring to know Mr Keswick's whereabouts.
But I am sure, if you understood the matter, you would not be in the least degree--"

"Oh, you need not trouble yourself about that," she interrupted. "I don't want you to tell
me anything at all. It is quite easy, now, to see why you wished to know where my cousin was."

"It is impossible that you should know!" exclaimed Croft.

"We will say no more about it," replied Annie. "I am quite satisfied."

"I would give a good deal," said Lawrence, after looking steadily at her for a few moments,
"to know what you really do think."

Annie had cut all the flowers she wanted, or, rather, all she could get; and she now stood
up and looked her companion full in the face. "Mr Croft," she said, "it has been necessary,
and it is necessary now for me to have some concealments, and I am sorry for it; but it isn't
at all necessary for me to conceal my opinion of your reasons for wanting to know about Junius.
You were really in pursuit of Miss March, and knowing that he was in love with her, you wanted
to make sure that when you went to her, he wouldn't be there. It is my firm opinion that is
all there is about it; and the fact of your turning up here just after my cousin left, proves it."

"Miss Annie," exclaimed Croft--"I have heard you called by that name, and I vow I won't call
you Mrs Null, when there is no need for it--you were never more mistaken in your life, and
I am very sorry that you should have such a low opinion of me as to think I would wish to take
advantage of your cousin during his absence."

"Then why do you do it?" asked Miss Annie, with a little upward pitch of her chin.

At this moment the breakfast-bell rang, and Mrs Keswick appeared in the back door, evidently
somewhat surprised to see these two conversing in the garden.

"I am very much vexed," said Lawrence, as he followed his companion, who had suddenly turned
towards the house, "that you should think of me in this way."

But to this remark Miss Annie had no opportunity to reply.

After breakfast, Mrs Keswick proved the truth of what her niece had said about her unscrupulous
straightforwardness when carrying out her projects. She had invited Mr Croft and Miss March
to her house in order that the former might have the opportunity which she had discovered he
wanted and could not get, of offering himself in marriage to the lady; and she now made it
her business to see that Mr Croft's opportunity should stand up very clear and definite before
him; and that all interfering circumstances should be carefully removed. She informed her niece
that she wished her to go with her to a thicket on the other side of the wheat field which
that young lady had advised should be ploughed for pickles, to look for a turkey-hen which
she had reason to believe had been ridiculous enough to hatch out a brood of young at this
improper season. Annie demurred, for she did not want to go to look for turkeys, nor did she
want to give Mr Croft any opportunities; but the old lady insisted, and carried her off. Croft
felt that there was something very bare and raw-boned about the position in which he was left
with Miss March; and he thought that lady might readily suppose that Mrs Keswick's object was
to leave them together. He imagined that, himself, though why she should be so kind to him
he could not feel quite certain. However, his path lay straight before him, and if the, old
lady had whitewashed it to make it more distinct, he did not intend to refuse to walk in it.

"I have been looking at that hill over yonder," said he, "with a cluster of pine trees on the
brow of it. I should think there would be a fine view from that hill. Would you not like to
walk up there?"

Lawrence felt that this proposition was quite in keeping with the bareness of the previous
proceedings, but he did not wish to stay in the house and be subject to the unexpected return
of the old lady and her niece.

"Certainly," said Miss March; "nothing would please me better." And so they walked up Pine
Top Hill.

When they reached this elevated position, they sat down on the rock on which Mrs Null had once
conversed with Freddy, and admired the view, which was, indeed, a very fine one. After about
five minutes of this, which Lawrence thought was quite enough, he turned to his companion and said:

"Miss March, I do not wish you to suppose that I brought you up here for the purpose of viewing
those rolling hills and distant forests."

"You didn't?" exclaimed Roberta, in a tone of surprise.

"No," said he; "I brought you here because it is a place where I could speak freely to you,
and tell you I love you."

"That was not at all necessary," said Miss March. "We had the lower floor of the house entirely
to ourselves, and I am sure that Mrs Keswick would not have returned until you had waved a
handkerchief, or given some signal from the back of the house that it was all over."

Croft looked at her with a troubled expression. "Miss March," said he, "do you not think I
am in earnest? Do you not believe what I have said?" "I have not the slightest doubt you are
in earnest," she answered. "The magnitude of the preparation proves it." "I am glad you said
that, for it gives me the opportunity for making an explanation," said Lawrence. "Our meeting
at this place may be a carefully contrived stratagem, but it was not contrived by me. I am
very well aware that Mr Keswick also wishes to marry you--"

"Did you see that in the Richmond Dispatch or in one of the New York papers?" interrupted Miss
March.

"That is a point," said Lawrence, overlooking the ridicule, "which we need not discuss. I am
perfectly aware that Mr Keswick is my rival, but I wish you to understand that I am not voluntarily
taking any undue advantage of his absence. I believe him to be a very fair and generous man,
and I would wish to be as open and generous as he is. When I came, I expected to find him here,
and, standing on equal ground with him, I intended to ask you to accept my love."

"Well, then," said Roberta, "would it not be more fair and generous for you to go away now,
and postpone this proposal until some time when you would each have an equal chance?"

"No, it would not," said Lawrence, vehemently. "I have now an opportunity of telling you that
I love you ardently, passionately; and nothing shall cause me to postpone it. Will you not
consider what I say? Will you make no answer to this declaration of most true and honest love?"

"I am considering what you have said," she answered; "and I am very glad to hear that you did
not know of this cunning little trap that Mrs Keswick has laid for me. It is all very plain
to me, but I do not know why she should have selected you as one of the actors in the plot.
Have you ever told her that you are a suitor for my hand?"

"Never!" exclaimed Lawrence. "She may have imagined it, for she heard I was a frequent visitor
to Midbranch. But let us set all that aside. I am on fire with love for you. Will you tell
me that you can return that love, or that I must give up all hope? This is the most important
question of my whole life. I beg you, from the bottom of my heart, to decide it."

"Mr Croft," said she, "when you used to come, nearly every day, to see me at Midbranch, and
we took those long walks in the woods, you never talked in this way. I considered you as a
gentleman whose prudence and good sense would not allow him to step outside of the path of
perfectly conventional social intercourse. This is not conventional and not prudent."

"I loved you then, and I love you now;" exclaimed Lawrence. "You must have known that I loved
you, for my declaration does not in the least surprise you."

"Once--it was the last time you visited Midbranch--I suspected, just a little, that your mind
might be affected somewhat in the way you speak of, but I supposed that attack of weakness
had passed away."

"I know what you mean," said Lawrence, "but I can't endure to talk of such trifles. I love
you, Roberta--"

"Miss March," she interrupted.

"And I want you to tell me if you love me in return."

Miss March rose from the rock where she had been sitting, and her companion rose with her.
After a moment's silence, during which he watched her with intense eagerness, she said: "Mr
Croft, I am going to give you your choice. Would you prefer being refused under a cherry tree,
or under a sycamore?"

There was a little smile on her lips as she said this, which Lawrence could not interpret.

"I decline being refused under any tree," he said with vehemence.

"I prefer the cherry tree," said she, "there is a very pretty one over there on the ridge of
this hill, and its leaves are nearly all gone, which would make it quite appropriate--but what
is the meaning of this? There comes Peggy. It isn't possible that she thinks it's time for
me to give out something to Aunt Judy."

Croft turned, and there was the wooden Peggy, marching steadily up the hill, and almost upon them.

"What do you want, Peggy?" asked Miss Roberta.

"Dar's a man down to de house dat wants him," pointing to Mr Croft.

Lawrence was very much surprised. "A man who wants me!" he exclaimed. "You must be mistaken."

"No sah," replied Peggy, "you's de one."

For a moment Lawrence hesitated. His disposition was to let any man in the world, be he president
or king, wait until he had settled this matter with Miss March. But with Peggy present it was
impossible to go on with the love-making. He might, indeed, send her back with a message, but
the thought came to him that it would be well to postpone for a little the pressing of his
suit, for the lady was certainly in a very untoward humor, and he was not altogether sorry
to have an excuse for breaking off the interview at this point. He had not yet been discarded,
and he would like to think over the matter, and see if he could discover any reason for the
very disrespectful manner, to say the least of it, with which Miss March had received his amatory
advances. "I suppose I must go and see the man," he said, "though I can't imagine who it can
possibly be. Will you return to the house?"

"No," said Miss Roberta, "I will stay here a little longer, and enjoy the view."

CHAPTER XVII.

As Lawrence Croft walked down Pine Top Hill his mind was in a good deal of a hubbub. The mind
of almost any lover would be stirred up if he came fresh from an interview, in which his lady
had pinned him, to use a cruel figure, in various places on the wall to see how he would spin
and buzz in different lights. But the disdainful pin had not yet gone through a vital part
of Lawrence's hopes, and they had strength to spin and buzz a good deal yet. As soon as he
should have an opportunity he would rack his brains to find out what it was that had put Roberta
March into such a strange humor. No one who simply desired to decline the addresses of a gentleman
would treat her lover as Miss March had treated him. It was quite evident that she wished to
punish him. But what had been his crime?

But the immediate business on his hands was to go and see what man it was who wished to see
him. Ordinarily the fact that a man had called upon him would not be considered by Lawrence
a matter for cogitation, but as he walked toward the house it seemed to him very odd that any
one should call upon him in such an out-of-the-way place as this, where so few people knew
him to be. He was not a business man, but a large portion of his funds were invested in a business
concern, and it might be that something had gone wrong, and that a message had been sent him.
His address at the Green Sulphur Springs was known, and the man in charge there knew that he
was visiting Mrs Keswick.

These considerations made him a little anxious, and helped to keep his mind in the hubbub which
has been mentioned.

When he reached the front of the house, Lawrence saw a lean, gray horse tied to a tree, and
a man sitting upon the porch; and as soon as he made his appearance the latter came down the
steps to meet him.

"I didn't go into the house, sir," he said, "because I thought you'd just as lief have a talk
outside."

"What is your business?" asked Croft.

The man moved a few steps farther from the house, and Lawrence followed him.

"Is it anything secret you have to tell me?" he asked.

"Well, yes, sir, I should think it was," replied the other, a tall man, with sandy hair and
beard, and dressed in a checkered business suit, which had lost a good deal of the freshness
of its early youth. "I may as well tell you at once who I am. I am an anti-detective. Never
heard of that sort of person, I suppose?"

"Never," said Lawrence, curtly.

"Well, sir, the organization which I belong to is one which is filling a long felt want. You
know very well, sir, that this country is full of detective officers, not only those who belong
to a regular police force, but lots of private ones, who, if anybody will pay them for it,
will go to Jericho to hunt a man up. Now, sir, our object is to protect society against these
people. When we get information that a man is going to be hounded down by any of these detectives--and
we have private ways of knowing these things--we just go to that man, and if he is willing
to become one of our clients, we take him into our charge; and our business, after that, is
to keep him informed of just what is being done against him. He can stay at home in comfort
with his wife, settle up his accounts, and do what he likes, and the day before he is to be
swooped down on, he gets notice from us, and comfortably goes to Chicago, or Jacksonville,
where he can take his ease until we post him of the next move of the enemy. If he wants to
take extra precautions, and writes a letter to anybody in the place where he lives, dated from
London or Hong Kong, and sends that letter under cover to us, we'll see that it is mailed from
the place it is dated from, and that it gets into the hands of the detectives. There have been
cases where a gentleman has had six months or a year of perfect comfort, by the detectives
being thrown off by a letter like this. That is only one of the ways in which we help and protect
persons in difficulties who, if it wasn't for us, would be dragged off, hand-cuffed, from the
bosom of their families; and who, even if they never got convicted, would have to pay a lot
of money to get out of the scrape. Now, I have put myself a good deal out of the way, sir,
to come to you, and offer you our assistance."

"Me!" exclaimed Croft. "What are you talking about?"

The man smiled. "Of course, it's all right to know nothing about it, and it's just what we
would advise; but I assure you we are thoroughly posted in your affair, and to let you know
that we are, I'll just mention that the case is that of Croft after Keswick, through Candy."

"Stuff and nonsense!" exclaimed Lawrence, getting red in the face. "There is no such case!"

He was about to say more, when a few words from the anti-detective stopped him suddenly.

"Look here, Mr Keswick," said the man, leveling a long fore-finger at him, and speaking very
earnestly, "don't you go and flatter yourself that this thing has been dropped, because you
haven't heard of it for a month or two; and if you'll take my advice, you'll make up your mind
on the spot, either to let things go on and be nabbed, or to put yourself under our protection,
and live in entire safety until this thing has blown over, without any trouble, except a little
travelling." At the mention of Keswick's name, Lawrence had seen through the whole affair at
a single mental glance. The man was after Junius Keswick, and his business was to Lawrence
more startling and repugnant than it could possibly be to any one else. It was necessary to
be very careful. If he immediately avowed who he was, the man might yet find Keswick, before
warning and explanation could be got to him, and not only put that gentleman in a very unpleasant
state of mind, but do a lot of mischief besides. He did not believe that Mr Candy had recommenced
his investigations without consultation with him, but this person evidently knew that such
an investigation had been set on foot, and that would be sufficient for his purposes. Lawrence
decided to be very wary, and he said to the man, "Did you ask for me here by name?"

"No, sir," said the other, "I had information that you were here, and that you were the only
gentleman who lived here and although you are in your own home, I did not know but this was
one of those cases in which names were dropped and servants changed, to suit an emergency.
I asked the little darkey I saw at the front of the house if she lived here, and she told me
she had only just come. That put me on my guard, and so I merely asked if the gentleman was
in, and she went and got you. We're very careful about calling names, and you needn't be afraid
that any of our people will ever give you away on that line."

Lawrence reflected for a moment, and then he said: "What are your terms and arrangements for
carrying on an affair of this kind?"

"They are very simple and moderate," said the man, taking a wallet from his pocket. "There
is one of our printed slips, which we show but don't give away. To become a client all you
have to do is to send fifteen dollars to the office, or to pay it to me, if you think no time
should be lost. That will entitle you to protection for a year. After that we make the nominal
charge of five dollars for each letter sent you, giving you information of what is going on
against you. For extra services, such as mailing letters from distant points, of course there
will be extra charges."

Lawrence glanced over the printed slip, which contained information very similar to that the
man had given him, and as he did so, he came to the conclusion that there would be nothing
dishonest in allowing the fellow to continue in his mistake, and to endeavor to find out what
mischief was about to be done in his, Lawrence's, name, and under his apparent authority. "I
will become a subscriber," said he, taking out his pocket-book, "and request that you give
me all the information you possess, here and immediately."

"That is the best thing to do," said the man, taking the money, "for, in my opinion, no time
is to be lost. I'll give you a receipt for this."

"Don't trouble yourself about that," said Lawrence; "let me have your information."

"You're very right," said the man. "It's a great deal better not to have your name on anything.
And now for the points. Candy, who has charge of Croft's job, is going more into the detective
business than he used to be, and we have information that he has lately taken up your affair
in good, solid earnest. He found out that Croft had put somebody else on your track, without
regularly taking the business out of his hands, and this made him mad; and I don't wonder at
it, for Croft, as I understand, has plenty of money, and if he concluded to throw Candy over,
he ought to have done it fair and square, and paid him something handsome in consideration
for having taken the job away. But he didn't do anything of the kind, and Candy considers himself
still in his employment, and vows he's going to get hold of you before the other party does;
so, you see, you have got two sets of detectives after you, and they'll be mighty sharp, for
the first one that gets you will make the money."

"Where are Candy's detectives now?" asked Lawrence.

"That I can't tell you positively, as I am so far from our New York office, to which all information
comes. But now that you are a subscriber, I'll communicate with head-quarters and the necessary
points will be immediately sent to you by telegraph, if necessary. All that you have to do
is to stay here until you hear from us."

"From the way you spoke just now," said Lawrence, "I supposed the detective would be here to-day
or to-morrow."

"Oh no," said the other, "Candy has not the facilities for finding people that we have. But
it takes some time for me to communicate with head-quarters and for you to hear from there;
and so, as I said before, there isn't an hour to be lost. But you're all right now."

"I expected you to give me more definite information than this," said Lawrence, "but now, I
suppose, I must wait until I hear from New York, at five dollars a message."

"My business is to enlist subscribers," said the other. "You couldn't expect me to tell you
anything definite when I am in an out-of-the-way place like this."

"Did you come down to Virginia on purpose to find me?" asked Lawrence.

"No," said the man, "I am on my way to Mobile, and I only lose one train by stopping here to
attend to your business."

"How did you know I was here?"

"Ah," said the anti-detective, with a smile, "as I told you, we have facilities. I knew you
were at this house, and I came here, straight as a die."

"It is truly wonderful," said Lawrence, "how accurate your information is. And now I will tell
you something you can have, gratis. You have made one of the most stupid blunders that I ever
heard of. Mr Keswick went away from here, nearly a week ago, and I am the Mr Croft whom you
supposed to be in pursuit of him."

The man started, and gave vent to an unpleasant ejaculation.

"To prove it," said Lawrence, "there is my card, and," putting his hand into his pocket, "here
are several letters addressed to me. And I want to let you know that I am not in pursuit of
Mr Keswick; that he and I are very good friends; and that I have frequently seen him of late;
and so you can just drop this business at once. And as for Candy, he has no right to take a
single step for which I have not authorized him. I merely employed him to get Mr Keswick's
address, which I wished for a very friendly motive. I shall write to Candy at once."

The man's face was not an agreeable study. He looked angry; he looked baffled; and yet he looked
incredulous. "Now, come," said he, "if you are not Keswick, what did you pay me that money for?"

"I paid it to you," said Lawrence, "because I wanted to find out what dirty business you were
doing in my name. I have had the worth of my money, and you can now go."

The man did not go, but stood gazing at Lawrence in a very peculiar way. "If Mr Keswick isn't
here," he said, "I believe you are here waiting for him, and I am going to stay and warn him.
People don't set private detectives on other men's tracks just for friendly motives."

Lawrence's face flushed and he made a step forward, but suddenly checking himself, he looked
at the man for a moment and then said: "I suppose you want me to understand that if I become
one of your subscribers in my own name, you will be willing to withhold the information you
intended to give Mr Keswick."

"Well," said the man, relapsing into his former confidential tones, "business is business.
If I could see Mr Keswick, I don't know whether he would employ me or not. I have no reason
to work for one person more than another, and, of course, if one man comes to me and another
doesn't, I'm bound to work for the man who comes. That's business!"

"You have said quite enough," said Lawrence. "Now leave this place instantly!"

"No, I won't!" said the man, shutting his mouth very tightly, as he drew himself up and folded
his arms on his chest.

Lawrence was young, well-made, and strong, but the other man was taller, heavier, and perhaps
stronger. To engage in a personal contest to compel a fellow like this to depart, would be
a very unpleasant thing for Lawrence to do, even if he succeeded. He was a visitor here, the
ladies would probably be witnesses of the conflict, and although the natural impulse of his
heart, predominant over everything else at that moment, prompted him to spring upon the impudent
fellow and endeavor to thrash him, still his instincts as a gentleman forbade him to enter
into such a contest, which would probably have no good effect, no matter how it resulted. Never
before did he feel the weakness of the moral power of a just cause when opposed to brutal obstinacy.
Still he did not retreat from his position. "Did you hear what I said?" he cried. "Leave this
place!"

"You are not master here," said the other, still preserving his defiant attitude, "and you
have no right to order me away. I am not going."

Despite his inferiority in size, despite his gentlemanly instincts, and despite his prudent
desire not to make an exhibition of himself before Miss March and the household, it is probable
that Lawrence's anger would have assumed some form of physical manifestation, had not Mrs Keswick
appeared suddenly on the porch. It was quite evident to her, from the aspect of the two men,
that something was wrong, and she called out: "Who's that?"

"That, madam," said Lawrence, stepping a little back, "is a very impertinent man who has no
business here, and whom I've ordered off the place, and, as he has refused to go, I propose--"

"Stop!" cried the old lady. And turning, she rushed into the house. Before either of the men
could recover from their surprise at her sudden action, she reappeared upon the porch, carrying
a double-barreled gun. Taking her position on the top of the flight of steps, with a quick
movement of her thumb she cocked both barrels. Then, drawing herself up and resting firmly
on her right leg, with the left advanced, she raised the gun; her right elbow well against
her side, and with her extended left arm as steady as one of the beams of the roof above her.
She hooked her forefinger around one of the triggers, her eagle eye glanced along the barrels
straight at the head of the anti-detective, and, in a clarion voice she sang out "Go!"

The man stared at her. He saw the open muzzles of the gun barrels; beyond them, he saw the
bright tops of the two percussion caps; and still beyond them, he saw the bright and determined
eye that was taking sight along the barrels. All this he took in at a glance, and, without
word or comment, he made a quick dodge of his head, jumped to one side, made a dash for his
horse, and, untying the bridle with a jerk, he mounted and galloped out of the open gate, turning
as he did so to find himself still covered by the muzzles of that gun. When he had nearly reached
the outer gate and felt himself out of range, he turned in his saddle, and looking back at
Lawrence, who was still standing where he had left him, he violently shook his fist in the air.

"Which means," said Lawrence to himself, "that he intends to make trouble with Keswick."

"That settled him," said the old lady, with a grim smile, as she lowered the muzzle of the
gun, and gently let down the hammers. "Madam," said Lawrence, advancing toward her, "may I
ask if that gun is loaded?"

"I should say so," replied the old lady. "In each barrel are two thimblefuls of powder, and
half-a-box of Windfall's Teaberry Tonic Pills, each one of them as big and as hard as a buckshot.
They were brought here by a travelling agent, who sold some of them to my people; and I tell
you, sir, that those pills made them so sick that one man wasn't able to work for two days,
and another for three. I vowed if that agent ever came back, I'd shoot his abominable pills
into him, and I've kept the gun loaded for the purpose. Was this a pill man? I scarcely think
he was a fertilizer, because it is rather late in the season for those bandits."

"He is a man," said Lawrence, coming up the steps, "who belongs to a class much worse than
those you have mentioned. He is what is called a blackmailer."

"Is that so?" cried the old lady, her eyes flashing as she brought the butt of the gun heavily
upon the porch floor. "I'm very glad I did not know it; very glad, indeed; for I might have
been tempted to give him what belonged to another, without waiting for him to disobey my order
to go. I am very much troubled, sir, that this annoyance should have happened to you in my
house. Pray do not allow it to interfere with the enjoyment of your visit here, which I hope
may continue as long as you can make it convenient." The words and manner convinced Lawrence
that that they did not merely indicate a conventional hospitality. The old lady meant what
she said. She wanted him to stay.

That morning he had become convinced that he had been invited there because Mrs Keswick wished
him to marry Miss March; and she had done this, not out of any kind feeling toward him, because
that would be impossible, considering the shortness of their acquaintance, but because she
was opposed to her nephew's marriage with Miss March, and because he, Lawrence, was the only
available person who could be brought forward to supplant him. "But whatever her motive is,"
thought Lawrence, "her invitation comes in admirably for me, and I hope I shall get the proper
advantage from it."

Shortly after this, Lawrence sat in the parlor, by himself, writing a letter. It was to Junius
Keswick; and in it he related the facts of his search for him in New York, and the reason why
he desired to make his acquaintance. He concealed nothing but the fact that Keswick's cousin
had had anything to do with the affair. "If she wants him to know that," he thought, "she can
tell him herself. It is not my business to make any revelations in that quarter." He concluded
the letter by informing Mr Keswick of the visit of the anti-detective, and warning him against
any attempts which that individual might make upon his pocket, assuring him that the man could
tell him nothing in regard to the affair that he now did not know.

After dinner, during which meal Miss March appeared in a very good humor, and talked rather
more than she had yet done in the bosom of that family, Lawrence had his horse saddled, and
rode to the railroad station, about six miles distant, where he posted his letter; and also
sent a telegram to Mr Junius Keswick, warning him to pay no attention to any man who might
call upon him on business connected with Croft and Keswick, and stating that an explanatory
letter had been sent.

The anti-detective had left on a train an hour before, but Lawrence felt certain that the telegram
would reach Keswick before the man could possibly get to him, especially as the latter had
probably not yet found out his intended victim's address.

CHAPTER XVIII.

As Lawrence Croft rode back to Mrs Keswick's house, after having posted to his rival the facts
in the case of Croft after Keswick, he did not feel in a very happy or triumphant mood. The
visit of the anti-detective had compelled him to write to Keswick at a time when it was not
at all desirable that he should make any disclosures whatever in regard to his love affair
with Miss March, except that very important disclosure which he had made to the lady herself
that morning. Of course there was no great danger that any intimation would reach Miss March
of Mr Croft's rather eccentric search for his predecessor in the position which he wished to
occupy in her affections. But the matter was particularly unpleasant just now, and Lawrence
wished to occupy his time here in business very different from that of sending explanations
to rivals and warding off unfriendly entanglements threatened by a blackmailer.

It was absolutely necessary for him to find out what he had done to offend Miss March. Offended
that lady certainly was, and he even felt that she was glad of the opportunity his declaration
gave her to inflict punishment upon him. But still he did not despair. When she had made him
pay the penalty she thought proper for whatever error he had committed, she might be willing
to listen to him. He had not said anything to her in regard to his failure to make her the
promised visit at Midbranch, for, during the only time he had been alone with her here, the
subject of an immediate statement of his feelings toward her had wholly occupied his mind.
But it now occurred to him that she had reason to feel aggrieved at his failure to keep his
promise to her, and she must have shown that feeling, for, otherwise, her most devoted friend,
Mr Junius Keswick, would never have made that rather remarkable visit to him at the Green Sulphur
Springs. Of course he would not allude to that visit, nor to her wish to see him, for she had
sent him no message, nor did he know what object she had in desiring an interview. But it was
quite possible that she might have taken umbrage at his failure to come to her when expected,
and that this was the reason for her present treatment of him. To this treatment Lawrence might
have taken exception, but now he did not wish to judge her in any way. His only desire in regard
to her was to possess her, and therefore, instead of condemning her for her unjust method of
showing her resentment, he merely considered how he should set himself right with her. Cruel
or kind, just or unjust, he wanted her.

And then, as he slowly trotted along the lonely and uneven road, it suddenly flashed upon him,
as if in mounting a hill, a far-reaching landscape, hitherto unseen, had in a moment, spread
itself out before him, that, perhaps, Miss March had divined the reason of his extremely discreet
behavior toward her. Was it possible that she had seen his motives, and knew the truth, and
that she resented the prudence and caution he had shown in his intercourse with her?

If she had read the truth, he felt that she had good reason for her resentment, and Lawrence
did not trouble himself to consider if she had shown too much of it or not. He remembered the
story of the defeated general, and, feeling that so far he had been thoroughly defeated, he
determined to admit the fact, and to sound a retreat from all the positions he had held; but,
at the same time, to make a bold dash into the enemy's camp, and, if possible, capture the
commander-in-chief and the Minister of War.

He would go to Roberta, tell her all that he had thought, and explain all that he had done.
There should be no bit of truth which she could have reasoned out, which he would not plainly
avow and set before her. Then he would declare to her that his love for her had become so great,
that, rushing over every barrier, whether of prudence, doubt, or indecision, it had carried
him with it and laid him at her feet. When he had come to this bold conclusion, he cheered
up his horse with a thump of his heel and cantered rapidly over the rest of the road.

Peggy, having nothing else to do, was standing by the yard gate when he came in sight, and
she watched his approach with feelings of surprise and disgust. She had seen him ride away,
and not considering the fact that he did not carry his valise with him, she supposed he had
taken his final departure. She had conceived a violent dislike to Mr Croft, looking upon him
in the light of an interloper and a robber, who had come to break up that expected marriage
between Master Junius and Miss Rob, which the servants at Midbranch looked forward to as necessary
for the prosperity of the family; and the preliminary stages of which she had taken upon herself
the responsibility of describing with so much minuteness of detail. With the politeness natural
to the Southern negro, she opened the gate for the gentleman, but as she closed it behind him,
she cast after him a look of earnest malevolence. "Ef dot ole Miss Keswick don' kunjer you,
sah," she said in an undertone, "I's gwine to do it myse'f. So, dar!" And she gave her foot
a stamp on the ground.

Lawrence, all ignorant of the malignant feeling he had excited in this, to him, very unimportant
and uninteresting black girl, tied his horse and went into the house. As he passed the open
door of the parlor he saw a lady reading by a window in the farthest corner. Hanging up his
hat, he entered, hoping that the reader, whose form was partially concealed by the back of
the large rocking chair in which she was sitting, was Miss March. But it was not; it was Mrs
Keswick's niece, deeply engrossed by a large-paged novel. She turned her head as he entered,
and said: "Good evening."

"Good evening, Miss Annie," said Lawrence, seating himself in a chair opposite her on the other
side of the window.

"Mr Croft," said she, laying her book on her lap, and inclining herself slightly toward him,
"you have no right to call me Miss Annie, and I wish you would not do it. The servants in the
South call ladies by their first names, whether they are married or not, but people would think
it very strange if you should imitate them. My name in this house is Mrs Null, and I wish you
would not forget it."

"The trouble with me is," said Lawrence, with a smile, "that I cannot forget it is not Mrs
Null, but, of course, if you desire it, I will give you that name."

"I told you before how much I desired it," said she, "and why. When my aunt finds out the exact
state of this affair, I shall wish to stay no longer in this house; and I don't want my stay
to come to an end at present. I am very happy here with the only relatives I have in the world,
who are ever so much nicer people than I supposed they were, and you have no right to come
here and drive me away."

"My dear young lady," said Croft, "I wouldn't do such a thing for the world. I admit that I
am very sorry that it is necessary, or appears to you to be so, that you should be here under
false colors, but--"

"Appears to be," said she, with much emphasis on the first word. "Why, can't you see that it
would be impossible for me, as a young unmarried woman, to come to the house of a man, whose
proprietor, as Aunt Keswick considers herself to be, has been trying to marry to me, even before
I was grown up; for the letters that used to make my father most angry were about this. I hate
to talk of these family affairs, and I only do it so that you can be made understand things."

"Mrs Null," said Lawrence, "do not think I wish to blame you. You have had a hard time of it,
and I can see the peculiarities of your residence here. Don't be afraid of me; I will not betray
your secret. While I am here, I will address you, and will try to think of you as a very grave
young matron. But I wish very much that you were not quite so grave and severe when you address
me. When I was here last week your manner was very different. We were quite friendly then."

"I see no particular reason," said Annie, "why we should be friendly."

"Mrs Null," said Lawrence, after a little pause, during which he looked at her attentively,
"I don't believe you approve of me."

"No," said she, "I don't."

He could not help smiling at the earnest directness of her answer, though he did not like it.
"I am sorry," he said, "that you should have so poor an opinion of me. And, now, let me tell
you what I was going to say this morning, that my only object in finding your cousin was to
know the man who had been engaged to Miss March."

"So that you could find out what she probably objected to in him, and could then try and not
let her see anything of that sort in you."

"Mrs Null," said Lawrence, "you are unjust. There is no reason why you should speak to me in
this way."

"I would like to know," she said, "what cause there could possibly be for your wanting to become
acquainted with a man who had been engaged to the lady you wished to marry, if you didn't intend
to study him up, and try to do better yourself."

"My motive in desiring to become acquainted with Mr Keswick," said Lawrence, "is one you could
scarcely understand, and all I can say about it is, that I believed that if I knew the gentleman
who had formerly been the accepted lover of a lady, I should better know the lady."

"You must be awfully suspicious," said she.

"No, I am not," he answered, "and I knew you would not understand me. My only desire in speaking
to you upon this subject is that you may not unreasonably judge me."

"But I am not unreasonable," said Annie. "You are trying to get Miss March away from my cousin;
and I don't think it is fair, and I don't want you to do it. When you were here before, I thought
you two were good friends, but now I don't believe it."

How friendly might be the relations between himself and Keswick, when the latter should read
his letter about the Candy affair, and should know that he was in this house with Miss March,
Lawrence could not say; but he did not allude to this point in his companion's remarks. "I
do not think," he said, "that you have any reason to object to my endeavoring to win Miss March.
Even if she accepts me, it will be to the advantage of your cousin, because if he still hopes
to obtain her, the sooner he knows he cannot do so, the better it will be for him. My course
is perfectly fair. I am aware that the lady is not at present engaged to any one, and I am
endeavoring to induce her to engage herself to me. If I fail, then I step aside."

"Entirely aside, and out of the way?" asked Mrs Null.

"Entirely," answered Lawrence.

"Well," said Annie, leaning back in her chair, in which before she had been sitting very upright,
"you have, at last, given me a good deal of your confidence; almost as much as I gave you.
Some of the things you say I believe, others I don't."

Lawrence was annoyed, but he would not allow himself to get angry. "I am not accustomed to
being disbelieved," he said, gravely. "It is a very unusual experience, I assure you. Which
of my statements do you doubt?"

"I don't believe," said Annie, "that you will give her up if she rejects you while you are
here. You are too wilful. You will follow her, and try again."

"Mrs Null," said Lawrence, "I do not feel justified in speaking to a third person of these
things, but this is a peculiar case, and, therefore, I assure you, and request you to believe
me, that if Miss March shall now positively refuse me, I shall feel convinced that her affections
are already occupied, and that I have no right to press my suit any longer."

"Would you like to begin now?" said Annie. "She is coming down stairs."

"You are entirely too matter-of-fact," said Lawrence, smiling in spite of himself, and, in
a moment, Roberta entered the room.

If the young lady in the high-backed rocking-chair had any idea of giving Mr Croft and Miss
March an opportunity of expressing their sentiments toward each other, she took no immediate
steps to do so; for she gently rocked herself; she talked about the novel she had been reading;
she blamed Miss March for staying so long in her room on such a beautiful afternoon; and she
was the primary cause of a conversation among the three upon the differences between New York
weather and that of Virginia; and this continued until old Mrs Keswick joined the party, and
changed the conversation to the consideration of the fact that a fertilizer agent, a pill man,
or a blackmailer would find out a person's whereabouts, even if he were attending the funeral
of his grandmother on a desert island.

The next morning, about an hour after breakfast, Lawrence was walking up and down on the grass
in front of the house, smoking a cigar, and troubling his mind. He had had no opportunity on
the previous evening to be alone with Miss March, for the little party sat together in the
parlor until they separated for bed; and so, of course, nothing was yet settled. He was overstaying
the time he had expected to spend here, and he felt nervous about it. He had hoped to see Miss
March after breakfast, but she seemed to have withdrawn herself entirely from observation.
Perhaps she considered that she had sufficiently rejected him on the previous morning, and
that she now intended, except when she was sure of the company of the others, to remain in
her room until he should go away. But he had no such opinion in regard to their interview on
Pine Top Hill. He believed that he had been punished, not rejected, and that when he should
be able to explain everything to her, he would be forgiven. That, at least, was his earnest
hope, and hope makes us believe almost anything.

But, although there were so many difficulties in his way, Lawrence had a friend in that household
who still remained true to him. Mrs Keswick, with sun-bonnet and umbrella, came out upon the
porch, and said cheerily: "I should think a gentleman like you would prefer to be with the
ladies than to be walking about here by yourself. They have gone to take a walk in the woods.
I should have said that Miss March has gone on ahead, with her little maid Peggy. My niece
was going with her, but I called her back to attend to some housekeeping matters for me, and
I think she will be kept longer than she expected, for I have just sent Letty to her to be
shown how to cut out a frock. But you needn't wait; you can go right through the flower-garden,
and take the path over the fields into the woods." And, having concluded this bit of conscienceless
and transparent management, the old lady remarked that she, herself, was going for a walk,
and left him.

Lawrence lost no time in following her suggestions. Throwing away his cigar, he hurried through
the house and the little flower-garden, a gate at the back of which opened into a wide pasture-field.
This field sloped down gently to a branch, or little stream, which ran through the middle of
it, and then the ground ascended until it reached the edge of the woods. Following the well-defined
path, he looked across the little valley before him, and could see, just inside the edge of
the woods--the trees and bushes being much more thinly attired than in the summer time--the
form of a lady in a light-colored dress with a red scarf upon her shoulders, sometimes moving
slowly, sometimes stopping. This was Roberta, and those woods were a far better place than
the exposed summit of Pine Top Hill, in which to plight his troth, if it should be so that
he should be able to do it, and there were doubtless paths in those woods through which they
might afterwards wander, if things should turn out propitiously. At all events, in those woods
would he settle this affair.

His intention was still strong to make a very clean breast of it to Roberta. If she had blamed
him for his prudent reserve, she should have full opportunity to forgive him. All that he had
been she should know, but far more important than that, he would try to make her know, better
than he had done before, what he was now. Abandoning all his previous positions, and mounted
on these strong resolutions, thus would he dash into her camp, and hope to capture her.

Reaching the little ravine, at the bottom of which flowed the branch, now but two or three
feet wide, he ran down the rather steep slope and stepped upon the stout plank which bridged
the stream. The instant he did so, the plank turned beneath him as if it had been hung on pivots,
and he fell into the stony bed of the branch. It was an awkward fall, for the leg which was
undermost came down at an angle, and his foot, striking a slippery stone, turned under him.
In a moment he was on his feet, and scrambled up the side of the ravine, down which he had
just come. When he reached the top he sat down and put both his hands on his right ankle, in
which he felt considerable pain. In a few minutes he arose, and began to walk toward the house,
but he had not taken a dozen steps before he sat down again. The pain in his ankle was very
severe, and he felt quite sure that he had sprained it. He knew enough about such things to
understand that if he walked upon this injured joint, he would not only make the pain worse,
but the consequences might be serious. He was very much annoyed, not only that this thing had
happened to him, but that it had happened at such an inauspicious moment. Of course, he could
not now go on to the woods, and he must get somebody to help him to the house. Looking about,
he saw, at a distance, Uncle Isham, and he called loudly to him. As soon as Lawrence was well
away from the edge of the ravine, there emerged from some thick bushes on the other side of
it, and at a short distance from the crossing-place, a negro girl, who slipped noiselessly
down to the branch; moved with quick steps and crouching body to the plank; removed the two
round stones on which it had been skilfully poised, and replaced it in its usual firm position.
This done, she slipped back into the bushes, and by the time Isham had heard the call of Mr
Croft, she was slowly walking down the opposite hill, as if she were coming from the woods
to see why the gentleman was shouting.

Miss March also heard the call, and came out of the woods, and when she saw Lawrence sitting
on the grass on the other side of the branch, with one hand upon his ankle, she knew that something
had happened, and came down toward him. Lawrence saw her approaching, and before she was even
near enough to hear him, he began to shout to her to be careful about crossing the branch,
as the board was unsafe. Peggy joined her, and walked on in front of her; and when Miss March
understood what Lawrence was saying, she called back that she would be careful. When they reached
the ravine, Peggy ran down, stepped upon the plank, jumped on the middle of it, walked over
it, and then back again, and assured her mistress that it was just as good as ever it was,
and that she reckoned the city gentleman didn't know how to walk on planks, and that "he jes'
done fall off."

Miss March crossed, stepping a little cautiously, and reached Lawrence just as Uncle Isham,
with strong arms and many words of sympathy, had assisted him to his feet. "What has happened
to you, Mr Croft?" she exclaimed.

"I was coming to you," he said; "and in crossing the stream the plank turned under me, and
I am afraid I have sprained my ankle. I can't walk on it."

"I am very sorry," she said.

"Because I was coming to you," he said, grimly, "or because I hurt myself?"

"You ought to be ashamed to speak in that way," she answered, "but I won't find fault with
you, now that you are in such pain. Is there anything I can do for you?"

"No, thank you," said Lawrence. "I will lean on this good man, and I think I can hop to the house."

"Peggy," said Miss Roberta, "walk on the other side of the gentleman, and let him lean upon
your shoulder. I will go on and have something prepared to put on his ankle."

With one side supported by the stout Isham, and his other hand resting on the shoulder of the
good little Peggy, who bore up as strongly under it as if she had been a big walking-stick,
Lawrence slowly made his way to the house. Miss March got there sometime before he did, and
was very glad to find that Mrs Keswick had not yet gone out on the walk for which she was prepared.
That circumspect old lady had found this and that to occupy her, while she so managed her household
matters, that one thing should follow another, to detain her niece. But when she heard what
had happened, all other impulses gave way to those which belonged to a head nurse and a mistress
of emergencies. She set down her umbrella; shouted an order to Letty to put a kettle of water
on the fire; brought from her own room some flannel and two bottles of embrocation; and then
stopping a moment to reflect, ordered that the office should be prepared for Mr Croft, for
it would be a shame to make a gentleman, with a sprained ankle, clamber up stairs.

The office was a small building in the wide front yard, not very far from the house, and opposite
to the arbor, which has been before mentioned. It was one story high, and contained one large
and comfortable room. Such buildings are quite common on Virginian farms, and although called
offices are seldom used in an official way, being generally appropriated to the bachelors of
the family or their gentleman visitors. This one was occupied by Junius Keswick, when he was
at home, and a good many of his belongings were now in it; but as it was at present unoccupied,
nothing could be more proper than that Mr Croft should have it.

CHAPTER XIX.

About noon of the day of Mr Croft's accident, Uncle Isham had occasion to go to the cabin of
the venerable Aunt Patsy, and, of course he told her what had happened to the gentleman whom
he and Aunt Patsy still supposed to be Miss Annie's husband. The news produced a very marked
effect upon the old woman. She put down the crazy quilt, upon the unfinished corner of which
she was making a few feeble stitches, and looked at Uncle Isham with a troubled frown. She
was certain that this was the work of old Mrs Keswick, who had succeeded, at last, in conjuring
the young husband; and the charm she had given him, and upon which she had relied to avert
the ill will of "ole miss," had proved unavailing. The conjuring had been accomplished so craftily
and slyly, the bewitched plank in one place, and Mrs Keswick far off in another, that there
had been no chance to use the counteracting charm. And yet Aunt Patsy had thought it a good
charm, a very good one indeed.

Early in her married life Mrs Keswick had been the mother of a little girl. It had died when
it was very small, and it was the only child she ever had. Of this infant she preserved, as
a memento, a complete suit of its clothes, which she regarded with a feeling almost religious.
Years ago, however, Aunt Patsy, in order to protect herself against the conjuring powers of
the mistress of the house, in which she then served as a sort of supervising cook, had possessed
herself of the shoes belonging to the cherished suit of clothes. She knew the sacred light
in which they were regarded by their owner, and she felt quite sure that if "ole miss" ever
attempted, in one of her fits of anger, to exercise her power of limb twisting or back contortion
upon her, that the sight of those little blue shoes would create a revulsion of feeling, and,
as she put it to herself, "stop her mighty short." The shoes had never been missed, for the
box containing the suit was only opened on one day of the year, and then all the old lady could
endure was a peep at the little white frock which covered the rest of the contents; and Aunt
Patsy well knew that the sight of those little blue shoes would be to her mistress like two
little feet coming back from the grave.

Patsy had been much too old to act as nurse to the infant, Annie Peyton, then regarded as the
daughter of the house, but she had always felt for the child the deepest affection; and now
that she herself was so near the end of her career that she had little fear of being bewitched,
she was willing to give up the safeguards she had so long possessed, in order that they might
protect the man whom Miss Annie had loved and married. But they had failed, or rather it had
been impossible to use them, and Miss Annie's husband had been stricken down. "It's pow'ful
hard to git roun' ole miss," she groaned. "She too much fur ole folks like I is."

At this remark Uncle Isham fired up. Although the conduct of his mistress troubled him at times
very much he was intensely loyal to her, and he instantly caught the meaning of this aspersion
against her. "Now, look h'yar, Aun' Patsy," he exclaimed, "wot you talkin' 'bout? Wot ole miss
got to do wid Mister Crof' sprainin' he ankle? Ole miss warn't dar; an' when I done fotch him
up to de house, she cut roun' an' do more fur him dan anybody else. She got de hot water, an'
she dipped de flannels in it, an' she wrop up de ankle all herse'f, an' when she got him all
fixed comfable in de offis, she says to me, says she, 'Now, Isham, you wait on Mister Crof',
an' you gib him eberything he want, an' when de cool ob de ebenin' comes on you make a fire
in dat fireplace, an' stay whar he kin call you wheneber he wants you to wait on him.' I didn't
eben come down h'yar till I axed him would he want me fur half an hour."

"Well," said Aunt Patsy, her eyes softening a little, "p'raps she didn't do it dis time. It
mout a been his own orkardness. I hopes to mussiful goodness dat dat was so. But wot fur you
call him Mister Crof'? Is dat he fus' name?"

"I reckon so," said Isham. "He one ob de fam'ly now, an' I reckon dey calls him by he fus'
name. An' now, look h'yar, Aun' Patsy, I wants you not to disremember dis h'yar. Don' you go
imaginin' ebery time anything happens to folks, that ole miss done been kunjerin' 'em. Dat
ain't pious, an' 'taint suitable fur a ole pusson like you, Aun' Patsy, wot's jus' settin'
on de poach steps ob heaben, a waitin' till somebody finds out you's dar, an' let's you in."

Aunt Patsy turned her great spectacles full upon him, and then she said: "You, Isham, ef eber
you gits a call to preach to folks, you jus' sing out: 'Oh, Lor', I aint fit!' And den you
go crack your head wid a mill-stone, fur fear you git called agin, fru mistake."

Uncle Isham made no answer to this piece of advice, but taking up some clothes which Aunt Patsy's
great granddaughter had washed and ironed for him, he left the cabin. He was a man much given
to attending to his own business, and paying very little attention to those affairs of his
mistress's household, with which he had no personal concern. When Mr Croft first came to the
house he, as well as Aunt Patsy, had been told that it was Mr Null, the husband of Miss Annie;
and although not thinking much about it, he had always supposed this to be the case. But now
it struck him as a very strange thing that Miss Annie did not attend to her husband, but allowed
his mistress and himself to do everything that was done for him. It was a question which his
mind was totally incapable of solving, but when he reached the house, he spoke to Letty on
the subject. "Bress your soul!" exclaimed that well-nourished person, "dat's not Mister Null,
wot married Miss Annie. Dat's Mister Crof', an' he aint married to nobody. Mister Null he aint
come yet, but I reckon he'll be along soon."

"Well den," exclaimed Isham, much surprised, "how come Aun' Patsy to take he for Miss Annie's
husband?"

"Oh, git out!" contemptuously exclaimed Letty, "don' you go put no 'count on dem fool notions
wot Aun' Patsy got in she old head. Nobody knows how dey come dar, no more'n how dey eber manage
to git out. 'Taint no use splainin nothin' to Aun' Patsy, an' if she b'lieves dat's Miss Annie's
husband, you can't make her b'lieve it's anybody else. Jes' you lef her alone. Nuffin she b'lieves
aint gwine to hurt her."

And Isham, remembering his frequent ill success in endeavoring to make Aunt Patsy think as
she ought to think, concluded that this was good advice.

At the time of the conversation just mentioned, Lawrence was sitting in a large easy chair
in front of the open door of the room of which he had been put in possession. His injured foot
was resting upon a cushioned stool, a small table stood by him, on which were his cigar and
match cases; a pitcher of iced water and a glass, and a late copy of a semi-weekly paper. Through
the doorway, which was but two steps higher than the grass sward before it, his eyes fell upon
a very pleasing scene. To the right was the house, with its vine-covered porch and several
great oak trees overhanging it, which still retained their heavy foliage, although it was beginning
to lose something of its summer green. In front of him, at the opposite end of the grassy yard,
was the pretty little arbor in which he had told Mr Junius Keswick of the difficulties in the
way of his speaking his mind to Miss March. Beyond the large garden, at the back of this arbor,
stretched a wide field with a fringe of woods at its distant edge, gay with the colors of autumn.
The sky was bright and blue, and fair white clouds moved slowly over its surface; the air was
sunny and warm, with bumble-bees humming about some late-flowering shrubs; and, high in the
air, floated two great turkey-buzzards, with a beauty of motion surpassed by no other flying
thing, with never a movement of their wide-spread wings, except to give them the necessary
inclination as they rose with the wind, and then turned and descended in a long sweep, only
to rise again and complete the circle; sailing thus for hours, around and around, their shadows
moving over the fields below them.

Fearing that he had sustained some injury more than a mere sprain, Lawrence had had the Howlett's
doctor summoned, and that general practitioner had come and gone, after having assured Mr Croft
that no bones had been broken; that Mrs Keswick's treatment was exactly what it should be,
and that all that was necessary for him was to remain quiet for a few days, and be very careful
not to use the injured ankle. Thus he had the prospect of but a short confinement; he felt
no present pain; and there was nothing of the sick-room atmosphere in his surroundings, for
his position close to the door almost gave him the advantage of sitting in the open air of
this bright autumnal day.

But Lawrence's mind dwelt not at all on these ameliorating circumstances; it dwelt only upon
the fact that he was in one house and Miss March was in another. It was impossible for him
to go to her, and he had no reason to believe that she would come to him. Under ordinary circumstances
it would be natural enough for her to look in upon him and inquire into his condition, but
now the case was very different. She knew that he desired to see her, that he had been coming
to her when he met with his accident, and she knew, too, exactly what he wanted to say; and
it was not to be supposed that a lady would come to a man to be wooed, especially this lady,
who had been in such an unfavorable humor when he had wooed her the day before.

But it was quite impossible for Lawrence, at this most important crisis of his life, to sit
without action for three or four days, during which time it was not unlikely that Miss March
might go home. But what was he to do? It would be rediculous to think of sending for her, she
knowing for what purpose she was wanted; and as for writing a letter, that did not suit him
at all. There was too much to be explained, too much to be urged, too much to be avowed, and,
probably, too many contingencies to be met, for him to even consider the subject of writing
a letter. A proposal on paper would most certainly bring a rejection on paper. He could think
of no plan; he must trust to chance. If his lucky star, and it had shone a good deal in his
life, should give him an opportunity of speaking to her, he would lose not an instant in broaching
the important subject. He was happy to think he had a friend in the old lady. Perhaps she might
bring about the desired interview. But although this thought was encouraging, he could not
but tremble when he remembered the very plain and unvarnished way she had of doing such things.

While these thoughts were passing through his mind, a lady came out upon the porch, and descended
the steps. At the first sight of her through the vines, Lawrence had thought it might be Miss
March, and his heart had given a jump. But it was not; it was Mrs Null, and she came over the
grass toward him, and stopped in front of his door. "How are you feeling now?" she asked. "Does
your foot still hurt you?"

"Oh, no," said Lawrence, "I am in no pain. The only thing that troubles me is that I have to
stay just here."

"It might have been better on some accounts," said she, "if you had been taken into the house;
but it would have hurt you dreadfully to go up stairs, unless Uncle Isham carried you on his
back, which I don't believe he could do."

"Of course it's a great deal better out here," said Lawrence. "In fact this is a perfectly
charming place to be laid up in, but I want to get about. I want to see people." "Many people?"
asked she, with a significant little smile.

Lawrence smiled in return. "You must know, Mrs Null, from what I have told you," he said, "that
there is one person I want to see very much, and that is why I am so annoyed at being kept
here in this chair."

"You must be of an uncommonly impatient turn of mind," she said, "for you haven't been here
three hours, altogether, and hundreds of persons sit still that long, just because they want to."

"I don't want to sit still a minute," said Lawrence. "I very much wish to speak to Miss March.
Couldn't you contrive an opportunity for me to do so?"

"It is possible that I might," she said, "but I won't. Haven't I told you that I don't approve
of this affair of yours? My cousin is in love with Miss March, and all I should do for you
would be directly against him. Aunt so managed things this morning that I was actually obliged
to give you an opportunity to be with her, but I had intended going with Roberta to the woods,
as she had asked me to do."

"You are very cruel," said Lawrence.

"No, I am not," said she, "I am only just." "I explained to you yesterday," said he, "that
your course of thinking and acting is not just, and is of no possible advantage to anybody.
How can it injure your cousin if Miss March refuses me and I go away and never see her again?
And, if she accepts me, then you should be glad that I had put an end to your cousin's pursuit
of a woman who does not love him."

"That is nonsense," said she. "I shouldn't be glad at all to see him disappointed. I should
feel like a traitor if I helped you. But I did not come to talk about these things. I came
to ask you what you would have for dinner."

"I had an idea," said Lawrence, not regarding this remark, "that you were a young lady of a
kindly disposition."

"And you don't think so, now?" she said.

"No," answered Lawrence, "I cannot. I cannot think a woman kind who will refuse to assist a
man, situated as I am, to settle the most important question of his life, especially as I have
told you, before, that it is really to the interest of the one you are acting for, that it
should be settled."

Miss Annie, still standing in front of the door, now regarded Lawrence with a certain degree
of thoughtfullness on her countenance, which presently changed to a half smile. "If I were
perfectly sure," she said, "that she would reject you, I would try to get her here, and have
the matter settled, but I don't know her very well yet, and can't feel at all certain as to
what she might do."

"I like your frankness," said Lawrence, "but, as I said before, you are very cruel."

"Not at all," said she, "I am very kind, only--"

"You don't show it," interrupted Lawrence.

At this Miss Annie laughed. "Kindness isn't of much use, if it is shut up, is it?" she said.
"I suppose you think it is one of those virtues that we ought to act out, as well as feel,
if we want any credit. And now, isn't there something I can do for you besides bringing another
man's sweetheart to you?"

Lawrence smiled. "I don't believe she is his sweetheart," he said, "and I want to find out
if I am right."

"It is my opinion," said Miss Annie, "that you ought to think more about your sprained ankle
and your general health, than about having your mind settled by Miss March. I should think
that keeping your blood boiling, in this way, would inflame your joints."

"The doctor didn't tell me what to think about," said Lawrence. "He only said I must not walk."

"I haven't heard yet," said Miss Annie, "what you would like to have to eat." "I don't wish
to give the slightest trouble," answered Lawrence. "What do you generally give people in such
scrapes as this? Tea and toast?"

Annie laughed. "Nonsense," said she. "What you want is the best meal you can get. Aunt said
if there was anything you particularly liked she would have it made for you."

"Do not think of such a thing," said Lawrence. "Give me just what the family has."

"Would you like Miss March to bring it out to you?" she asked.

"The word cruel cannot express your disposition," said Lawrence. "I pity Mr Null." "Poor man,"
said she; "but it would be a good thing for you if you could keep your mind as quiet as his
is." And with that she went into the house.

After dinner, Miss March did come out to inquire into Mr Croft's condition, but she was accompanied
by Mrs Keswick. Lawrence invited the ladies to come in and be seated, but Roberta stood on
the grass in front of the door, as Miss Annie had done, while Mrs Keswick entered the room,
looked into the ice-water pitcher, and examined things generally, to see if Uncle Isham had
been guilty of any sins of omission.

"Do you feel quite at ease now?" said Miss March.

"My ankle don't trouble me," said Lawrence, "but I never felt so uncomfortable and dissatisfied
in my life." And with these latter words he gave the lady a look which was intended to be,
and which probably was, full of meaning to her.

"Wouldn't you like some books?" said Mrs Keswick, now appearing from the back of the room.
"You haven't anything to read. There are plenty of books in the house, but they are all old."

"I think those are the most delightful of books," said Miss March. "I have been looking over
the volumes on your shelves, Mrs Keswick. I am sure there are a good many of them Mr Croft
would like to read, even if he has read them before. There are lots of queer old-time histories
and biographies, and sets of bound magazines, some of them over a hundred years old. Would
you like me to select some for you, Mr Croft? Or shall I write some of the titles on a slip
of paper, and let you select for yourself?"

"I shall be delighted," said Lawrence, "to have you make a choice for me; and I think the list
would be the better plan, because books would be so heavy to carry about."

"I will do it immediately," said Miss March, and she walked rapidly to the house.

"Now then," said Mrs Keswick, "I'll put a chair out here on the grass, close to the door. It's
shady there, and I should think it would be pleasant for both of you, if she would sit there
and read to you out of those books. She is a fine woman, that Miss March--a much finer woman
than I thought she could be, before I knew her."

"She is, indeed," said Lawrence.

"I suppose you think she is the finest woman in the world?" said the old lady, with a genial grin.

"What makes you suppose so?" asked Lawrence.

"Haven't I eyes?" said Mrs Keswick. "But you needn't make any excuses. You have made an excellent
choice, and I hope you may succeed in getting her. Perhaps you have succeeded?" she added,
giving Lawrence an earnest look, with a question in it.

Lawrence did not immediately reply. It was not in his nature to confide his affairs to other
people, and yet he had done so much of it, of late, that he did not see why he should make
an exception against Mrs Keswick, who was, indeed, the only person who seemed inclined to be
friendly to his suit. He might as well let her know how matters stood. "No," he said, "I have
not yet succeeded, and I am very sorry that this accident has interfered with my efforts to do so."

"Don't let it interfere," said the old lady, her eyes sparkling, while her purple sun-bonnet
was suddenly and severely bobbed. "You have just as good a chance now as you ever had, and
all you have to do is to make the most of it. When she comes out here to read to you, you can
talk to her just as well as if you were in the woods, or on top of a hill. Nobody'll come here
to disturb you; I'll take care of that."

"You are very kind," said Lawrence, somewhat wondering at her enthusiasm.

"I intended to go away and leave her here with you," continued Mrs Keswick, "if I could find
a good opportunity to do so, but she hit on the best plan herself. And now I'll be off and
leave the coast clear. I will come again before dark and put some more of that stuff on your
ankle. If you want anything, ring this bell, and if Isham doesn't hear you, somebody will call
him. He has orders to keep about the house."

"You are putting me under very great obligations to you, madam," said Lawrence.

But the old lady did not stop to hear any thanks, and hastened to clear the coast.

Lawrence had to wait a long time for his list of books, but at last it came; and, much to his
surprise and chagrin, Mrs Null brought it. "Miss March asked me to give you this," she said,
"so that you can pick out just what books you want."

Lawrence took the paper, but did not look at it. He was deeply disappointed and hurt. His whole
appearance showed it.

"You don't seem glad to get it," said Miss Annie. Lawrence looked at her, his face darkening.
"Did you persuade Miss March," he said, "to stay in the house and let you bring this?"

"Now, Mr Croft," said the young lady, a very decided flush coming into her face, "that is going
too far. You have no right to accuse me of such a thing. I am not going to help in your love
affairs, but I don't intend to be mean about it, either. Miss March asked me to bring that
list, and at first I wouldn't do it, for I knew, just as well as I know anything, that you
expected her to come to you with it, and I was very sure you wanted to see her more than the
paper. I refused two or three times, but she said, at last, that if I didn't take it, she'd
send it by some one in the house; so I just picked it up and brought it right along. I don't
like her as much as I did."

"Why not?" asked Lawrence.

"You needn't accept a man if you don't want him," said Miss Annie, "but there is no need of
being cruel to him, especially when he is laid up. If she didn't intend to come out to you
again, she ought not to have made you believe so. You did expect her to come, didn't you?"

"Most certainly," said Lawrence, in rather a doleful tone. "Yes, and there is the chair she
was to sit in," said Miss Annie, "while you said seven words about the books and ten thousand
about the way your heart was throbbing. I see Aunt Keswick's hand in that, as plain as can
be. I don't say I'd put her in that chair if I could do it, but I certainly am sorry she disappointed
you so. Would you like to have any of those books? If you would, I'll get them for you."

"I am much obliged, Mrs Null," said Lawrence, "but I don't think I care for any books. And
let me say that I am very sorry for the way I spoke to you, just now."

"Oh, don't mention that," said she. "If I'd been in your place, I should have been mad enough
to say anything. But it's no use to sit here and be grumpy. You'd better let me go and get
you a book. The "Critical Magazine" for 1767 and 1768, is on that list, and I know there are
lots of queer, interesting things in it, but it takes a good while to hunt them out from the
other things for which you would not care at all. And then there are all the "Spectators,"
and "Ramblers," and "The World Displayed" in eight volumes, which, from what I saw when I looked
through it, seems to be a different kind of world from the one I live in; and there are others
that you will see on your list. But there is one book which I have been reading lately which
I think you will find odder and funnier than any of the rest. It is the "Geographical Grammar"
by Mr Salmon. Suppose I bring you that. It is a description of the whole world, written more
than a hundred years ago, by an Irish gentleman who, I think, never went anywhere."

"Thank you," said Lawrence, "I shall be obliged to you if you will be kind enough to bring
me that one." He was glad for her to go away, even for a little time, that he might think.
The smart of the disappointment caused by the non-appearance of Miss March was beginning to
subside a little. Looking at it more quietly and reasonably, he could see that, in her position,
it would be actually unmaidenly for her to come to him by herself. It was altogether another
thing for this other girl, and, therefore, perhaps it was quite proper to send her. But, in
spite of whatever reasonableness there might have been in it, he chafed under this propriety.
It would have been far better, he thought, if she had come and told him that she could not
possibly accept him, and that nothing more must be said about it. But then he did not believe,
if she had given him time to say the words he wished to say, that she would have come to such
a decision; and as he called up her lovely face and figure, as it stood framed in the open
doorway, with a background of the sunlit arbor and fields, the gorgeous distant foliage, with
the blue sky and its white clouds and circling birds, he thought of the rapture and ecstasy
which would have come to him, if she had listened to his words, and had given him but a smile
of encouragement.

But here came Mrs Null, with a fat brown book in her hand. "One of the funniest things," she
said, as she came to the door, "is Mr Salmon's chapter on paradoxes. He thinks it would be
quite improper to issue a book of this kind without alluding to geographical paradoxes. Listen
to this one." And then she read to him the elucidation of the apparent paradox that there is
a certain place in this world where the wind always blows from the south; and another explaining
the statement that in certain cannibal islands the people eat themselves. "There is something
he says about Virginia," said she, turning over the pages, "which I want you to be sure to read."

"Won't you sit down," said Lawrence, "and read to me some of those extracts? You know just
where to find them."

"That chair wasn't put there for me," said Miss Annie, with a smile.

"Nonsense," said Lawrence. "Won't you please sit down? I ought to have asked you before. Perhaps
it is too cool for you, out there."

"Oh, not at all," said she. "The air is still quite warm." And she took her seat on the chair
which was placed close to the door-step, and she read to him some of the surprising and interesting
facts which Mr Salmon had heard, in a Dublin coffee-house, about Virginia and the other colonies,
and also some of those relating to the kindly way in which slave-holders in South America,
when they killed a slave to feed their hounds, would send a quarter to a neighbor, expecting
some day to receive a similar favor in return. When they had laughed over these, she read some
very odd and surprising statements about Southern Europe, and the people of far-away lands;
and so she went on, from one thing to another, talking a good deal about what she had read,
and always on the point of stopping and giving the book to Lawrence, until the short autumnal
afternoon began to draw to its close, and he told her that it was growing too chilly for her
to sit out on the grass any longer.

"Very well," said she, closing the book, and handing it to him, "you can read the rest of it
yourself, and if you want any other books on the list, just let me know by Uncle Isham, and
I will send them to you. He is coming now to see after you. I wonder," she said, stopping for
a moment as she turned to leave, "if Miss March had been sitting in that chair, if you would
have had the heart to tell her to go away; or if you would have let her sit still, and take cold."

Lawrence smiled, but very slightly. "That subject," said he, "is one on which I don't joke."

"Goodness!" exclaimed Miss Annie, clasping her hands and gazing with an air of comical commiseration
at Mr Croft's serious face. "I should think not!" and away she went.

Just before supper time, when Lawrence's door had been closed, and his lamp lighted, there
came a knock, and Mrs Keswick appeared. "That plan of mine didn't work," she said, "but I will
bring Miss March out here, and manage it so that she'll have to stay till I come back. I have
an idea about that. All that you have to do is to be ready when you get your chance."

Lawrence thanked her, and assured her he would be very glad to have a chance, although he hoped,
without much ground for it, that Roberta would not see through the old lady's schemes.

Mrs Keswick lotioned and rebandaged the sprained ankle, and then she said. "I think it would
be pleasant if we were all to come out here after supper, and have a game of whist. I used
to play whist, and shouldn't mind taking a hand. You could have the table drawn up to your
chair, and,--let me see--yes, there are three more chairs. It won't be like having her alone
with you," she said, with the cordial grin in which she sometimes indulged, "but you will have
her opposite to you for an hour, and that will be something."

Lawrence approved heartily of the whist party, and assured Mrs Keswick that she was his guardian
angel.

"Not much of that," she said, "but I have been told often enough that I'm a regular old matchmaker,
and I expect I am."

"If you make this match," said Lawrence, "you will have my eternal gratitude."

The supper sent out to Lawrence was a very good one, and the anticipation of what was to follow
made him enjoy it still more, for his passion had now reached such a point that even to look
at his love, although he could only speak to her of trumps and of tricks, would be a refreshing
solace which would go down deep into his thirsty soul.

But bedtime and old Isham came, and the whist players came not. It needed no one to tell Lawrence
whose disinclination it was that had prevented their coming.

"I reckon," said Uncle Isham, as he looked in at Letty's cabin on his way to his own, "dat
dat ar Mister Crof' aint much use to gittin' hisse'f hurt. All de time I was helpin' him to
go to bed he was a growlin' like de bery debbil."

CHAPTER XX.

Although October in Southern Virginia can generally be counted upon as a very charming month,
it must not be expected that her face will wear one continuous smile. On the day after Lawrence
Croft's misadventure the sky was gray with low-hanging clouds, there was a disagreeable wind
from the north-east, and the air was filled with the slight drizzle of rain. The morning was
so cool that Lawrence was obliged to keep his door shut, and Uncle Isham had made him a small
wood fire on the hearth. As he sat before this fire, after breakfast, his foot still upon a
stool, and vigorously puffed at a cigar, he said to himself that it mattered very little to
him whether the sun shone, or all the rains of heaven descended, so long as Roberta March would
not come out to him; and that she did not intend to come, rain or shine, was just as plain
as the marks on the sides of the fireplace, probably made by the heels of Mr Junius Keswick
during many a long, reflective smoke.

On second thoughts, however, Lawrence concluded that a rainy day was worse for his prospects
than a bright one. If the sun shone, and everything was fair, Miss March might come across
the grassy yard and might possibly stop before his open door to bid him good morning, and to
tell him that she was sorry that a headache had prevented her from coming to play whist the
evening before. But this last, he presently admitted, was rather too much to expect, for he
did not think she was subject to headaches, or to making excuses. At any rate he might have
caught sight of her, and if he had, he certainly would have called to her, and would have had
his say with her, even had she persisted in standing six feet from the door-step. But now this
dreary day had shut his door and put an interdict upon strolls across the grass. Therefore
it was that he must resign any opportunity, for that day, at least, of soothing the harrowing
perturbations of his passion by either the comforting warmth of hope, or by the deadening frigidity
of a consummated despair. This last, in truth, he did not expect, but still, if it came, it
would be better than perturbations; they must be soothed at any cost. But how to incur this
cost was a difficult question altogether. So, puffing, gazing into the fire, and knitting his
brows, he sat and thought.

As a good-looking young man, as a well-dressed young man, as an educated and cultured man,
as a man of the clubs, and of society, and, when occasion required, as a very sensible man
of business, Mr Croft might be looked upon as essentially a commonplace personage, and in our
walks abroad we meet a great many like him. But there dwelt within him a certain disposition,
which, at times, removed him to quite a distance from the arena in which commonplace people
go through their prescribed performances. He would come to a determination, generally quite
suddenly, to attain a desired end in his own way, without any reference to traditionary or
conventional methods; and the more original and startling these plans the better he liked it.

This disposition it was which made Lawrence read with so much interest the account of the defeated
general who made the cavalry charge into the camp of his victorious enemy. Defeat had been
his, all through his short campaign, and it now seemed that the time had come to make another
bold effort to get the better of his bad luck. As he could not woo Miss March himself, he must
get some one else to do it for him, or, if not actually to woo the lady, to get her at least
into such a frame of mind that she would allow him to woo her, even in spite of his present
disadvantages. This would be a very bold stroke, but Lawrence put a good deal of faith in it.

If Miss March were properly talked to by one of her own sex, she might see, as perhaps she
did not now see, how cruel was her line of conduct toward him, and might be persuaded to relent,
at least enough to allow his voice to reach her; and that was all he asked for. He had not
the slightest doubt that the widow Keswick would gladly consent to carry any message he chose
to send to Miss March, and, more than that, to throw all the force of her peculiar style of
persuasion into the support of his cause. But this, he knew very well, would finish the affair,
and not at all in the way he desired. The person he wanted to act as his envoy was Mrs Null.
To be sure, she had refused to act for him, but he thought he could persuade her. She was quiet,
she was sensible, and could talk very gently and confidingly when she chose; she would say
just what he told her to say, and if a contingency demanded that she should add anything, she
would probably do it very prudently. But then it would be almost as difficult to communicate
with her as with Miss March.

While he was thus thinking, in came the old lady, very cross. "You didn't get any rubber of
whist last night, did you?" said she, without salutatory preface. "But I can tell you it wasn't
my fault. I did all that I could, and more than I ought, to make her come, but she just put
her foot down and wouldn't stir an inch, and at last I got mad and went to bed. I don't know
whether she saw it or not, but I was as mad as hops; and I am that way yet. I had a plan that
would have given you a chance to talk to her, but that ain't any good, now that it is raining.
Let me look at your ankle; I hope that is getting along all right, any way."

While the old lady was engaged in ministering to his needs, he told her of his plan. He said
he wished to send a message to Miss March by some one, and if he could get the message properly
delivered, it would help him very much.

