  Could the young man rise early, and remain
in the saddle for ten hours together?  Could he live upon hard-boiled eggs and brandy-and-water?
Could he take his chance of a tent under which to sleep, and make himself happy with the bare
fact of being in the desert?  He saw my hesitation, and attributed it to a cause which was
not present in my mind at the moment, though the subject was one of the greatest importance
when strangers consent to join themselves together for a time, and agree to become no strangers
on the spur of the moment.

"Of course I will take half the expense," said he, absolutely blushing as he mentioned the matter.

"As to that there will be very little.  You have your own horse, of course?"

"Oh, yes."

"My dragoman and groom-boy will do for both.  But you'll have to pay forty shillings to the
Arabs!  There's no getting over that.  The consul won't even look after your dead body, if
you get murdered, without going through that ceremony."

Mr. Smith immediately produced his purse, which he tendered to me. "If you will manage it all,"
said he, "it will make it so much the easier, and I shall be infinitely obliged to you."  This
of course I declined to do.  I had no business with his purse, and explained to him that if
we went together we could settle that on our return to Jerusalem.  "But could he go through
really hard work?" I asked.  He answered me with an assurance that he would and could do anything
in that way that it was possible for man to perform.  As for eating and drinking he cared nothing
about it, and would undertake to be astir at any hour of the morning that might be named. 
As for sleeping accommodation, he did not care if he kept his clothes on for a week together.
He looked slight and weak; but he spoke so well, and that without boasting, that I ultimately
agreed to his proposal, and in a few minutes he took his leave of me, promising to be at Z-'s
door with his horse at five o'clock on the following morning.

"I wish you'd allow me to leave my purse with you," he said again.

"I cannot think of it.  There is no possible occasion for it," I said again.  "If there is
anything to pay, I'll ask you for it when the journey is over.  That forty shillings you must
fork out.  It's a law of the Medes and Persians."

"I'd better give it you at once," he said again, offering me money. But I would not have it.
It would be quite time enough for that when the Arabs were leaving us.

"Because," he added, "strangers, I know, are sometimes suspicious about money; and I would
not, for worlds, have you think that I would put you to expense."  I assured him that I did
not think so, and then the subject was dropped.

He was, at any rate, up to his time, for when I came down on the following morning I found
him in the narrow street, the first on horseback.  Joseph, the Frenchman, was strapping on
to a rough pony our belongings, and was staring at Mr. Smith.  My new friend, unfortunately,
could not speak a word of French, and therefore I had to explain to the dragoman how it had
come to pass that our party was to be enlarged.

"But the Bedouins will expect full pay for both," said he, alarmed. Men in that class, and
especially Orientals, always think that every arrangement of life, let it be made in what way
it will, is made with the intention of saving some expense, or cheating somebody out of some
money.  They do not understand that men can have any other object, and are ever on their guard
lest the saving should be made at their cost, or lest they should be the victims of the fraud.

"All right," said I.

"I shall be responsible, Monsieur," said the dragoman, piteously.

"It shall be all right," said I, again.  "If that does not satisfy you, you may remain behind."

"If Monsieur says it is all right, of course it is so;" and then he completed his strapping.
We took blankets with us, of which I had to borrow two out of the hotel for my friend Smith,
a small hamper of provisions, a sack containing forage for the horses, and a large empty jar,
so that we might supply ourselves with water when leaving the neighbourhood of wells for any
considerable time.

"I ought to have brought these things for myself," said Smith, quite unhappy at finding that
he had thrown on me the necessity of catering for him.  But I laughed at him, saying that it
was nothing; he should do as much for me another time.  I am prepared to own that I do not
willingly rush up-stairs and load myself with blankets out of strange rooms for men whom I
do not know; nor, as a rule, do I make all the Smiths of the world free of my canteen.  But,
with reference to this fellow I did feel more than ordinarily good- natured and unselfish.
There was something in the tone of his voice which was satisfactory; and I should really have
felt vexed had anything occurred at the last moment to prevent his going with me.

Let it be a rule with every man to carry an English saddle with him when travelling in the
East.  Of what material is formed the nether man of a Turk I have never been informed, but
I am sure that it is not flesh and blood.  No flesh and blood,--simply flesh and blood,-- could
withstand the wear and tear of a Turkish saddle.  This being the case, and the consequences
being well known to me, I was grieved to find that Smith was not properly provided.  He was
seated on one of those hard, red, high-pointed machines, in which the shovels intended to act
as stirrups are attached in such a manner, and hang at such an angle, as to be absolutely destructive
to the leg of a Christian.  There is no part of the Christian body with which the Turkish saddle
comes in contact that does not become more or less macerated.  I have sat in one for days,
but I left it a flayed man; and, therefore, I was sorry for Smith.

I explained this to him, taking hold of his leg by the calf to show how the leather would chafe
him; but it seemed to me that he did not quite like my interference.  "Never mind," said he,
twitching his leg away, "I have ridden in this way before."

"Then you must have suffered the very mischief?"

"Only a little, and I shall be used to it now.  You will not hear me complain."

"By heavens, you might have heard me complain a mile off when I came to the end of a journey
I once took.  I roared like a bull when I began to cool.  Joseph, could you not get a European
saddle for Mr. Smith?"  But Joseph did not seem to like Mr. Smith, and declared such a thing
to be impossible.  No European in Jerusalem would think of lending so precious an article,
except to a very dear friend. Joseph himself was on an English saddle, and I made up my mind
that after the first stage, we would bribe him to make an exchange.  And then we started.

The Bedouins were not with us, but we were to meet them, as I have said before, outside St.
Stephen's gate.  "And if they are not there," said Joseph, "we shall be sure to come across
them on the road."

"Not there!" said I.  "How about the consul's tariff, if they don't keep their part of the
engagement?"  But Joseph explained to me that their part of the engagement really amounted
to this,--that we should ride into their country without molestation, provided that such and
such payments were made.

It was the period of Easter, and Jerusalem was full of pilgrims. Even at that early hour of
the morning we could hardly make our way through the narrow streets.  It must be understood
that there is no accommodation in the town for the fourteen or fifteen thousand strangers who
flock to the Holy Sepulchre at this period of the year.  Many of them sleep out in the open
air, lying on low benches which run along the outside walls of the houses, or even on the ground,
wrapped in their thick hoods and cloaks.  Slumberers such as these are easily disturbed, nor
are they detained long at their toilets.  They shake themselves like dogs, and growl and stretch
themselves, and then they are ready for the day.

We rode out of the town in a long file.  First went the groom-boy; I forget his proper Syrian
appellation, but we used to call him Mucherry, that sound being in some sort like the name.
Then followed the horse with the forage and blankets, and next to him my friend Smith in the
Turkish saddle.  I was behind him, and Joseph brought up the rear.  We moved slowly down the
Via Dolorosa, noting the spot at which our Saviour is said to have fallen while bearing his
cross; we passed by Pilate's house, and paused at the gate of the Temple,--the gate which once
was beautiful,--looking down into the hole of the pool in which the maimed and halt were healed
whenever the waters moved.  What names they are!  And yet there at Jerusalem they are bandied
to and fro with as little reverence as are the fanciful appellations given by guides to rocks
and stones and little lakes in all countries overrun by tourists.

"For those who would still fain believe,--let them stay at home," said my friend Smith.

"For those who cannot divide the wheat from the chaff, let THEM stay at home," I answered.
And then we rode out through St. Stephen's gate, having the mountain of the men of Galilee
directly before us, and the Mount of Olives a little to our right, and the Valley of Jehoshaphat
lying between us and it.  "Of course you know all these places now?" said Smith.  I answered
that I did know them well.

"And was it not better for you when you knew them only in Holy Writ?" he asked.

"No, by Jove," said I.  "The mountains stand where they ever stood. The same valleys are still
green with the morning dew, and the water-courses are unchanged.  The children of Mahomet may
build their tawdry temple on the threshing-floor which David bought that there might stand
the Lord's house.  Man may undo what man did, even though the doer was Solomon.  But here we
have God's handiwork and His own evidences."

At the bottom of the steep descent from the city gate we came to the tomb of the Virgin; and
by special agreement made with Joseph we left our horses here for a few moments, in order that
we might descend into the subterranean chapel under the tomb, in which mass was at this moment
being said.  There is something awful in that chapel, when, as at the present moment, it is
crowded with Eastern worshippers from the very altar up to the top of the dark steps by which
the descent is made.  It must be remembered that Eastern worshippers are not like the churchgoers
of London, or even of Rome or Cologne.  They are wild men of various nations and races,-- Maronites
from Lebanon Roumelians, Candiotes, Copts from Upper Egypt, Russians from the Crimea, Armenians
and Abyssinians.  They savour strongly of Oriental life and of Oriental dirt.  They are clad
in skins or hairy cloaks with huge hoods.  Their heads are shaved, and their faces covered
with short, grisly, fierce beards. They are silent mostly, looking out of their eyes ferociously,
as though murder were in their thoughts, and rapine.  But they never slouch, or cringe in their
bodies, or shuffle in their gait.  Dirty, fierce-looking, uncouth, repellent as they are, there
is always about them a something of personal dignity which is not compatible with an Englishman's
ordinary hat and pantaloons.

 As we were about to descend, preparing to make our way through the
crowd, Smith took hold of my arm.  "That will never do, my dear
fellow," said I, "the job will be tough enough for a single file,
but we should never cut our way two and two.  I'm broad-shouldered
and will go first."  So I did, and gradually we worked our way into
the body of the chapel.  How is it that Englishmen can push
themselves anywhere?  These men were fierce-looking, and had murder
and rapine, as I have said, almost in their eyes.  One would have
supposed that they were not lambs or doves, capable of being thrust
here or there without anger on their part; and they, too, were all
anxious to descend and approach the altar.  Yet we did win our way
through them, and apparently no man was angry with us.  I doubt,
after all, whether a ferocious eye and a strong smell and dirt are
so efficacious in creating awe and obedience in others, as an open
brow and traces of soap and water.  I know this, at least,--that a
dirty Maronite would make very little progress, if he attempted to
shove his way unfairly through a crowd of Englishmen at the door of
a London theatre.  We did shove unfairly, and we did make progress,
till we found ourselves in the centre of the dense crowd collected
in the body of the chapel.

Having got so far, our next object was to get out again.  The place was dark, mysterious, and
full of strange odours; but darkness, mystery, and strange odours soon lose their charms when
men have much work before them.  Joseph had made a point of being allowed to attend mass before
the altar of the Virgin, but a very few minutes sufficed for his prayers.  So we again turned
round and pushed our way back again, Smith still following in my wake.  The men who had let
us pass once let us pass again without opposition or show of anger.  To them the occasion was
very holy.  They were stretching out their hands in every direction, with long tapers, in order
that they might obtain a spark of the sacred fire which was burning on one of the altars. 
As we made our way out we passed many who, with dumb motions, begged us to assist them in their
object.  And we did assist them, getting lights for their tapers, handing them to and fro,
and using the authority with which we seemed to be invested. But Smith, I observed, was much
more courteous in this way to the women than to the men, as I did not forget to remind him
when we were afterwards on our road together.

Remounting our horses we rode slowly up the winding ascent of the Mount of Olives, turning
round at the brow of the hill to look back over Jerusalem.  Sometimes I think that of all spots
in the world this one should be the spot most cherished in the memory of Christians.  It was
there that He stood when He wept over the city. So much we do know, though we are ignorant,
and ever shall be so, of the site of His cross and of the tomb.  And then we descended on the
eastern side of the hill, passing through Bethany, the town of Lazarus and his sisters, and
turned our faces steadily towards the mountains of Moab.

Hitherto we had met no Bedouins, and I interrogated my dragoman about them more than once;
but he always told me that it did not signify; we should meet them, he said, before any danger
could arise.  "As for danger," said I, "I think more of this than I do of the Arabs," and I
put my hand on my revolver.  "But as they agreed to be here, here they ought to be.  Don't
you carry a revolver, Smith?"

Smith said that he never had done so, but that he would take the charge of mine if I liked.
To this, however, I demurred.  "I never part with my pistol to any one," I said, rather drily.
But he explained that he only intended to signify that if there were danger to be encountered,
he would be glad to encounter it; and I fully believed him.  "We shan't have much fighting,"
I replied; "but if there be any, the tool will come readiest to the hand of its master. But
if you mean to remain here long I would advise you to get one. These Orientals are a people
with whom appearances go a long way, and, as a rule, fear and respect mean the same thing with
them.  A pistol hanging over your loins is no great trouble to you, and looks as though you
could bite.  Many a dog goes through the world well by merely showing his teeth."

And then my companion began to talk of himself.  "He did not," he said, "mean to remain in
Syria very long."

"Nor I either," said I.  "I have done with this part of the world for the present, and shall
take the next steamer from Jaffa for Alexandria.  I shall only have one night in Jerusalem
on my return."

After this he remained silent for a few moments and then declared that that also had been his
intention.  He was almost ashamed to say so, however, because it looked as though he had resolved
to hook himself on to me.  So he answered, expressing almost regret at the circumstance.

"Don't let that trouble you," said I; "I shall be delighted to have your company.  When you
know me better, as I hope you will do, you will find that if such were not the case I should
tell you so as frankly.  I shall remain in Cairo some little time; so that beyond our arrival
in Egypt, I can answer for nothing."

He said that he expected letters at Alexandria which would govern his future movements.  I
thought he seemed sad as he said so, and imagined, from his manner, that he did not expect
very happy tidings.  Indeed I had made up my mind that he was by no means free from care or
sorrow.  He had not the air of a man who could say of himself that he was "totus teres atque
rotundus."  But I had no wish to inquire, and the matter would have dropped had he not himself
added--"I fear that I shall meet acquaintances in Egypt whom it will give me no pleasure to see."

"Then," said I, "if I were you, I would go to Constantinople instead;--indeed, anywhere rather
than fall among friends who are not friendly.  And the nearer the friend is, the more one feels
that sort of thing.  To my way of thinking, there is nothing on earth so pleasant as a pleasant
wife; but then, what is there so damnable as one that is unpleasant?"

"Are you a married man?" he inquired.  All his questions were put in a low tone of voice which
seemed to give to them an air of special interest, and made one almost feel that they were
asked with some special view to one's individual welfare.  Now the fact is, that I am a married
man with a family; but I am not much given to talk to strangers about my domestic concerns,
and, therefore, though I had no particular object in view, I denied my obligations in this
respect.  "No," said I; "I have not come to that promotion yet.  I am too frequently on the
move to write myself down as Paterfamilias."

"Then you know nothing about that pleasantness of which you spoke just now?"

"Nor of the unpleasantness, thank God; my personal experiences are all to come,--as also are
yours, I presume?"

It was possible that he had hampered himself with some woman, and that she was to meet him
at Alexandria.  Poor fellow! thought I. But his unhappiness was not of that kind.  "No," said
he; "I am not married; I am all alone in the world."

"Then I certainly would not allow myself to be troubled by unpleasant acquaintances."

It was now four hours since we had left Jerusalem, and we had arrived at the place at which
it was proposed that we should breakfast.  There was a large well there, and shade afforded
by a rock under which the water sprung; and the Arabs had constructed a tank out of which the
horses could drink, so that the place was ordinarily known as the first stage out of Jerusalem.

Smith had said not a word about his saddle, or complained in any way of discomfort, so that
I had in truth forgotten the subject.  Other matters had continually presented themselves,
and I had never even asked him how he had fared.  I now jumped from my horse, but I perceived
at once that he was unable to do so.  He smiled faintly, as his eye caught mine, but I knew
that he wanted assistance.  "Ah," said I, "that confounded Turkish saddle has already galled
your skin.  I see how it is; I shall have to doctor you with a little brandy,--externally applied,
my friend."  But I lent him my shoulder, and with that assistance he got down, very gently
and slowly.

We ate our breakfast with a good will; bread and cold fowl and brandy-and-water, with a hard-boiled
egg by way of a final delicacy; and then I began to bargain with Joseph for the loan of his
English saddle.  I saw that Smith could not get through the journey with that monstrous Turkish
affair, and that he would go on without complaining till he fainted or came to some other signal
grief.  But the Frenchman, seeing the plight in which we were, was disposed to drive a very
hard bargain.  He wanted forty shillings, the price of a pair of live Bedouins, for the accommodation,
and declared that, even then, he should make the sacrifice only out of consideration to me.

"Very well," said I.  "I'm tolerably tough myself; and I'll change with the gentleman.  The
chances are that I shall not be in a very liberal humour when I reach Jaffa with stiff limbs
and a sore skin. I have a very good memory, Joseph."

"I'll take thirty shillings, Mr. Jones; though I shall have to groan all the way like a condemned
devil."

I struck a bargain with him at last for five-and-twenty, and set him to work to make the necessary
change on the horses.  "It will be just the same thing to him," I said to Smith.  "I find that
he is as much used to one as to the other."

"But how much money are you to pay him?" he asked.  "Oh, nothing," I replied.  "Give him a
few piastres when you part with him at Jaffa." I do not know why I should have felt thus inclined
to pay money out of my pocket for this Smith,--a man whom I had only seen for the first time
on the preceding evening, and whose temperament was so essentially different from my own; but
so I did.  I would have done almost anything in reason for his comfort; and yet he was a melancholy
fellow, with good inward pluck as I believed, but without that outward show of dash and hardihood
which I confess I love to see.  "Pray tell him that I'll pay him for it," said he.  "We'll
make that all right," I answered; and then we remounted,--not without some difficulty on his
part.  "You should have let me rub in that brandy," I said.  "You can't conceive how efficaciously
I would have done it."  But he made me no answer.

At noon we met a caravan of pilgrims coming up from Jordan.  There might be some three or four
hundred, but the number seemed to be treble that, from the loose and straggling line in which
they journeyed.  It was a very singular sight, as they moved slowly along the narrow path through
the sand, coming out of a defile among the hills, which was perhaps a quarter of a mile in
front of us, passing us as we stood still by the wayside, and then winding again out of sight
on the track over which we had come.  Some rode on camels,--a whole family, in many cases,
being perched on the same animal.  I observed a very old man and a very old woman slung in
panniers over a camel's back,--not such panniers as might be befitting such a purpose, but
square baskets, so that the heads and heels of each of the old couple hung out of the rear
and front.  "Surely the journey will be their death," I said to Joseph.  "Yes it will," he
replied, quite coolly; "but what matter how soon they die now that they have bathed in Jordan?"
Very many rode on donkeys; two, generally, on each donkey; others, who had command of money,
on horses; but the greater number walked, toiling painfully from Jerusalem to Jericho on the
first day, sleeping there in tents and going to bathe on the second day, and then returning
from Jericho to Jerusalem on the third.  The pilgrimage is made throughout in accordance with
fixed rules, and there is a tariff for the tent accommodation at Jericho,- -so much per head
per night, including the use of hot water.

Standing there, close by the wayside, we could see not only the garments and faces of these
strange people, but we could watch their gestures and form some opinion of what was going on
within their thoughts.  They were much quieter,--tamer, as it were,--than Englishmen would
be under such circumstances.  Those who were carried seemed to sit on their beasts in passive
tranquillity, neither enjoying nor suffering anything.  Their object had been to wash in Jordan,--to
do that once in their lives;--and they had washed in Jordan.  The benefit expected was not
to be immediately spiritual.  No earnest prayerfulness was considered necessary after the ceremony.
To these members of the Greek Christian Church it had been handed down from father to son that
washing in Jordan once during life was efficacious towards salvation.  And therefore the journey
had been made at terrible cost and terrible risk; for these people had come from afar, and
were from their habits but little capable of long journeys.  Many die under the toil; but this
matters not if they do not die before they have reached Jordan.  Some few there are, undoubtedly,
more ecstatic in this great deed of their religion.  One man I especially noticed on this day.
He had bound himself to make the pilgrimage from Jerusalem to the river with one foot bare.
He was of a better class, and was even nobly dressed, as though it were a part of his vow to
show to all men that he did this deed, wealthy and great though he was.  He was a fine man,
perhaps thirty years of age, with a well-grown beard descending on his breast, and at his girdle
he carried a brace of pistols.

But never in my life had I seen bodily pain so plainly written in a man's face.  The sweat
was falling from his brow, and his eyes were strained and bloodshot with agony.  He had no
stick, his vow, I presume, debarring him from such assistance, and he limped along, putting
to the ground the heel of the unprotected foot.  I could see it, and it was a mass of blood,
and sores, and broken skin.  An Irish girl would walk from Jerusalem to Jericho without shoes,
and be not a penny the worse for it.  This poor fellow clearly suffered so much that I was
almost inclined to think that in the performance of his penance he had done something to aggravate
his pain.  Those around him paid no attention to him, and the dragoman seemed to think nothing
of the affair whatever.  "Those fools of Greeks do not understand the Christian religion,"
he said, being himself a Latin or Roman Catholic.

At the tail of the line we encountered two Bedouins, who were in charge of the caravan, and
Joseph at once addressed them.  The men were mounted, one on a very sorry-looking jade, but
the other on a good stout Arab barb.  They had guns slung behind their backs, coloured handkerchiefs
on their heads, and they wore the striped bernouse.  The parley went on for about ten minutes,
during which the procession of pilgrims wound out of sight; and it ended in our being accompanied
by the two Arabs, who thus left their greater charge to take care of itself back to the city.
I understood afterwards that they had endeavoured to persuade Joseph that we might just as
well go on alone, merely satisfying the demand of the tariff.  But he had pointed out that
I was a particular man, and that under such circumstances the final settlement might be doubtful.
So they turned and accompanied us; but, as a matter of fact, we should have been as well without
them.

The sun was beginning to fall in the heavens when we reached the actual margin of the Dead
Sea.  We had seen the glitter of its still waters for a long time previously, shining under
the sun as though it were not real.  We have often heard, and some of us have seen, how effects
of light and shade together will produce so vivid an appearance of water where there is no
water, as to deceive the most experienced.  But the reverse was the case here.  There was the
lake, and there it had been before our eyes for the last two hours; and yet it looked, then
and now, as though it were an image of a lake, and not real water.  I had long since made up
my mind to bathe in it, feeling well convinced that I could do so without harm to myself, and
I had been endeavouring to persuade Smith to accompany me; but he positively refused.  He would
bathe, he said, neither in the Dead Sea nor in the river Jordan.  He did not like bathing,
and preferred to do his washing in his own room.  Of course I had nothing further to say, and
begged that, under these circumstances, he would take charge of my purse and pistols while
I was in the water.  This he agreed to do; but even in this he was strange and almost uncivil.
I was to bathe from the farthest point of a little island, into which there was a rough causeway
from the land made of stones and broken pieces of wood, and I exhorted him to go with me thither;
but he insisted on remaining with his horse on the mainland at some little distance from the
island.  He did not feel inclined to go down to the water's edge, he said.

I confess that at this moment I almost suspected that he was going to play me foul, and I hesitated.
He saw in an instant what was passing through my mind.  "You had better take your pistol and
money with you; they will be quite safe on your clothes."  But to have kept the things now
would have shown suspicion too plainly, and as I could not bring myself to do that, I gave
them up.  I have sometimes thought that I was a fool to do so.

I went away by myself to the end of the island, and then I did bathe.  It is impossible to
conceive anything more desolate than the appearance of the place.  The land shelves very gradually
away to the water, and the whole margin, to the breadth of some twenty or thirty feet, is strewn
with the debris of rushes, bits of timber, and old white withered reeds.  Whence these bits
of timber have come it seems difficult to say.  The appearance is as though the water had receded
and left them there.  I have heard it said that there is no vegetation near the Dead Sea; but
such is not the case, for these rushes do grow on the bank.  I found it difficult enough to
get into the water, for the ground shelves down very slowly, and is rough with stones and large
pieces of half-rotten wood; moreover, when I was in nearly up to my hips the water knocked
me down; indeed, it did so when I had gone as far as my knees, but I recovered myself; and
by perseverance did proceed somewhat farther.  It must not be imagined that this knocking down
was effected by the movement of the water.  There is no such movement.  Everything is perfectly
still, and the fluid seems hardly to be displaced by the entrance of the body; but the effect
is that one's feet are tripped up, and that one falls prostrate on to the surface.  The water
is so strong and buoyant, that, when above a few feet in depth has to be encountered, the strength
and weight of the bather are not sufficient to keep down his feet and legs.  I then essayed
to swim; but I could not do this in the ordinary way, as I was unable to keep enough of my
body below the surface; so that my head and face seemed to be propelled down upon it.

I turned round and floated, but the glare of the sun was so powerful that I could not remain
long in that position.  However, I had bathed in the Dead Sea, and was so far satisfied.

