He had just read Karen Woodruff's last letter, and he was in the mood, charmed, amused and
touched, that her letters always brought. Never, he thought, had there been such sweet and
such funny letters; so frank and so impersonal; so simple and so mature. During these months
of their correspondence the thought of her had been constantly in his mind, mingling now not
only with his own deep and distant memories, but, it seemed, with hers, so that while she still
walked with him over the hills of his boyhood and stooped to look with him at the spring gushing
from under the bracken, they also brushed together the dry, soft snow from the trailing arbutus,
or stood above the sea on the Cornish headlands. Never in his life had he so possessed the
past and been so aware of it. His youth was with him, even though he still thought of his relation
to Karen Woodruff as a paternal and unequal one; imagining a crisis in which his wisdom and
knowledge of the world might serve her; a foolish love-affair, perhaps, that he would disentangle;
or a disaster connected with the great woman under whose protection she lived; he could so
easily imagine disasters befalling Madame von Marwitz and involving everyone around her. And
now in a week's time he would be in Cornwall and seeing again the little Hans Andersen heroine.
This was the thought that emerged from the sweet vagrancy of his mood; and, as it came, he
was pierced suddenly with a strange rapture and fear that had in it the very essence of the
spring-time.

Gregory had continued to think of the girl he was to marry in the guise of a Constance Armytage,
and although Constance Armytage's engagement to another man found him unmoved, except with
relief for the solution of what had really ceased to be a perplexity--since, apparently, he
could not manage to fall in love with her--this fact had not been revealing, since he still
continued to think of Constance as the type, if she had ceased to be the person. Karen Woodruff
was almost the last type he could have fixed upon. She fitted nowhere into his actual life.
She only fitted into the life of dreams and memories.

So now, still looking down at the trees and daffodils, he drew a long breath and tried to smile
over what had been a trick of the imagination and to relegate Karen to the place of half-humorous
dreams. He tried to think calmly of her. He visualized her in her oddity and child-likeness;
seeing the flat blue bows of the concert; the old-fashioned gold locket of the tea; the sealskin
cap of the station. But still, it was apparent, the infection of the season was working in
him; for these trivial bits of her personality had become overwhelmingly sweet and wonderful.
The essential Karen infused them. Her limpid grey eyes looked into his. She said, so ridiculously,
so adorably: "My guardian likes best to be called von Marwitz by those who know her personally."
She laughed, the tip of her tongue caught between her teeth. From the place of dream and memory,
the living longing for her actual self emerged indomitably.

Gregory turned from the balcony and went inside. He was dazed. Her primroses stood about the
room in the white and blue bowls. He wanted to kiss them. Controlling the impulse, which seemed
to him almost insane, he looked at them instead and argued with himself. In love? But one didn't
fall in love like that between shaving and breakfast. What possessed him was a transient form
of idée fixe, and he had behaved very foolishly in playing fairy-godfather to a dear little
girl. But at this relegating phrase his sense of humour rose to mock him. He could not relegate
Karen Woodruff as a dear little girl. It was he who had behaved like a boy, while she had maintained
the calm simplicities of the mature. He hadn't the faintest right to hope that she saw anything
in his correspondence but what she had herself brought to it. Fear fell more strongly upon
him. He sat down to his breakfast, his thoughts in inextricable confusion. And while he drank
his coffee and glanced nervously down the columns of his newspaper, a hundred little filaments
of memory ran back and linked the beginning to the present. It had not been so sudden. It had
been there beside him, in him; and he had not seen it. The meeting of their eyes in the long,
grave interchange at the concert had been full of presage. And why had he gone to tea at Mrs.
Forrester's? And why, above all why, had he dreamed that dream? It was his real self who had
felt no surprise when, at the edge of the forest, she had said: "And I love you." The words
had been spoken in answer to his love.

Gregory laid down his paper and stared before him. He was in love. Should he get over it? Did
he want to get over it? Was it possible to get over it if he did want to? And, this was the
culmination, would she have him? These questions drove him forth.

When Barker, his man, came to clear away the breakfast things he found that the bacon and eggs
had not been eaten. Barker was a stone-grey personage who looked like a mid-Victorian Liberal
statesman. His gravity often passed into an air of despondent responsibility. "Mr. Jardine
hasn't eaten his breakfast," he said to his wife, who was Gregory's cook. "It's this engagement
of Miss Armytage's. He was more taken with her than we'd thought."

Gregory had intended to motor down to Cornwall, still a rare opportunity in those days; a friend
who was going abroad had placed his car at his disposal. But he sent the car ahead of him and,
on the first day of his freedom, started by train. Next day he motored over to the little village
near the Lizard.

It was a pale, crystalline Spring day. From heights, where the car seemed to poise like a bird
in mid-air, one saw the tranquil blue of the sea. The woods were veiled in young green and
the hedges thickly starred with blackthorn. Over the great Goonhilly Downs a silvery sheen
trembled with impalpable colour and the gorse everywhere was breaking into gold. It was a day
of azure, illimitable distances; of exultation and delight. Even if one were not in love one
would feel oneself a lover on such a day.

Gregory had told himself that he would be wise; that he would go discreetly and make sure not
only that he was really in love, but that there was in his love a basis for life. Marriage
must assure and secure his life, not disturb and disintegrate it; and a love resisted and put
aside unspoken may soon be relegated to the place of fond and transient dream. Perhaps the
little Hans Andersen heroine would settle happily into such a dream. How little he had seen
of her. But while he thus schooled himself, while the white roads curved and beckoned and unrolled
their long ribbons, the certainties he needed of himself merged more and more into the certainties
he needed of her. And he felt his heart, in the singing speed, lift and fly towards the beloved.

He had written to her and told her the hour of his arrival, and at a turning he suddenly saw
her standing above the road on one of the stone stiles of the country. Dressed in white and
poised against the blue, while she kept watch for his coming, she was like a calm, far-gazing
figure-head on a ship, and the ship that bore her seemed to have soared into sight.

She was new, yet unchanged. Her attitude, her smile, as she held up an arresting hand to the
chauffeur, filled him with delight and anxiety. It disconcerted him to find how new she was.
He felt that he spoke confusedly to her when she came to shake his hand.

"People often lose their way in coming to see Tante," she said, and it struck him, even in
the midst of his preoccupation with her, as too sweetly absurd that the first sentence she
spoke to him should sound the familiar chime. "They have gone mistakenly down the lane that
leads to the cliff path, that one there, or the road that leads out to the moors. And one poor
man was quite lost and never found his way to us at all. It meant, for he had only a day or
two to spend in England, that he did not see her for another year. Tante has had signs put
up since then; but even now people can go wrong."

She mounted beside the chauffeur so that she could guide him down the last bit of road, sitting
sideways, her arm laid along the back of the seat. From time to time she smiled at Gregory.

She was a person who accepted the unusual easily and with no personal conjecture. She was so
accustomed, no doubt, to the sudden appearance of all sorts of people, that she had no discriminations
to apply to his case. There was no shyness and no surmise in her manner. She smiled at him
as composedly as she had smiled over the Great Wall of China in Mrs. Forrester's drawing-room,
and her pleasure in seeing him was neither less frank nor more intimate.

She wore a broad hat of sun-burnt straw and a white serge coat and skirt that looked as if
they had shrunk in frequent washings. Her white blouse had the little frills at neck and wrists
and around her throat was the gold locket on its black ribbon. Her eyes, when she turned them
on him and smiled, seemed to open distances like the limitlessness of the moorland. Her tawny
skin and shining golden hair were like the gorse and primroses and she in her serenity and
gladness like the day personified.

They did not attempt to talk through the loudly purring monotones of the car, which picked
its way swiftly and delicately down the turning road and then skimmed lightly on the level
ground between hedges of fuchsia and veronica. As the prospect opened Karen pointed to the
golden shoulder of a headland bathed in sunlight and the horizon line of the sea beyond. They
turned among wind-bitten Cornish elms, leaning inland, and Gregory saw among them the glimmer
of Les Solitudes.

It was a white-walled house with a high-pitched roof of grey shingles, delicately rippling;
a house almost rustic, yet more nearly noble, very beautiful; simple, yet unobtrusively adapted
to luxury. Simplicity reigned within, though one felt luxury there in a chrysalis condition,
folded exquisitely and elaborately away and waiting the return of the enchantress.

Karen led him across the shining spaces of the hall and into the morning-room. Books, flowers
and sunlight seemed to furnish it, and, with something austere and primitive, to make it the
most fitting background for herself. But while her presence perfected it for him, it was her
guardian's absence that preoccupied Karen. Again, and comically, she reminded Gregory of the
sacristan explaining to the sight-seer that the famous altar-piece had been temporarily removed
and that he could not really judge the chapel without its culminating and consecrating object.
"If only Tante were here!" she said. "It seems so strange that anyone should see Les Solitudes
who has not seen her in it. I do not remember that it has ever happened before. This is the
dining-room--yes, I like to show it all to you--she planned it all herself, you know--is it
not a beautiful room? You see, though we are Les Solitudes, we can seat a large dinner-party
and Tante has sometimes many guests; not often though; this is her place of peace and rest.
She collected all this Jacobean furniture; connoisseurs say that it is very beautiful. The
music-room, alas, is closed; but I will show you the garden--and Mrs. Talcott in it. I am eager
for you and Mrs. Talcott to meet."

He would rather have stayed and talked to her in the morning-room; but she compelled him, rather
as a sacristan compels the slightly bewildered sight-seer, to pass on to the next point of
interest. She led him out to the upper terrace of the garden, which dropped, ledge by ledge,
with low walls and winding hedges, down the cliff-side. She pointed out to him the sea-front
of the house, with its wide verandah and clustered trees and the beautiful dip of the roof
over the upper windows, far gazing little dormer windows above these. Tante, she told him,
had designed the house. "That is her room, the corner one," she said. "She can see the sunrise
from her bed."

Gregory was interested neither in Madame von Marwitz's advantages nor in her achievements.
He asked Karen where her own room was. It was at the back of the house, she said; a dear little
room, far up. She, too, had a glimpse of the Eastern headland and of the sunrise.

They were walking along the paths, their borders starred as yet frugally with hints of later
glories; but already the aubrietia and arabis made bosses of white or purple on the walls,
and in a little copse daffodils grew thickly.

"There is Mrs. Talcott," said Karen, quickening her pace. Evidently she considered Mrs. Talcott,
in her relation to Tante, as an important feature of Les Solitudes.

It was her relation to Karen that caused Gregory to look with interest at the stout old lady,
dressed in black alpaca, who was stooping over a flower-border at a little distance from them.
He had often wondered what this sole companion of Karen's cloistered life was like. Mrs. Talcott's
skirts were short; her shoes thick-soled and square-toed, fastening with a strap and button
over white stockings at the ankle. She wore a round straw hat, like a child's, and had a basket
of gardening implements beside her.

"Mrs. Talcott, here is Mr. Jardine," Karen announced, as they approached her.

Mrs. Talcott raised herself slowly and turned to them, drawing off her gardening gloves. She
was a funny looking old woman, funnier than Karen had prepared him for finding her, and uglier.
Her large face, wallet-shaped and sallow, was scattered over with white moles, or rather, warts,
one of which, on her eyelid, caused it to droop over her eye and to blink sometimes, suddenly.
She had a short, indefinite nose and long, large lips firmly folded. With its updrawn hair
and impassivity her face recalled that of a Chinese image; but more than of anything else she
gave Gregory the impression, vaguely and incongruously tragic, of an old shipwrecked piece
of oaken timber, washed up, finally, out of reach of the waves, on some high, lonely beach;
battered, though still so solid; salted through and through; crusted with brine, and with odd,
bleached excrescences, like barnacles, adhering to it. Her look of almost inhuman cleanliness
added force to the simile.

"Mr. Jardine heard Tante last winter, you know," said Karen, "and met her at Mrs. Forrester's."

"I'm very happy to make your acquaintance, Sir," said Mrs. Talcott, giving Gregory her hand.

"Mrs. Talcott is a great gardener," Karen went on. "Tante has the ideas and Mrs. Talcott carries
them out. And sometimes they aren't easy to carry out, are they, Mrs. Talcott!"

Mrs. Talcott, her hands folded at her waist, contemplated her work.

"Mitchell made a mistake about the campanulas, Karen," she remarked. "He's put the clump of
blue over yonder, instead of the white."

"Oh, Mrs. Talcott!" Karen turned to look. "And Tante specially wanted the white there so that
they should be against the sea. How very stupid of Mitchell."

"They'll have to come out, I presume," said Mrs. Talcott, but without emotion.

"And where is the pyramidalis alba?"

"Well, he's got that up in the flagged garden where she wanted the blue," said Mrs. Talcott.

"And it will be so bad for them to move them again! What a pity! They have been sent for specially,"
Karen explained to Gregory. "My guardian heard of a particularly beautiful kind, and the white
were to be for this corner of the wall, you see that they would look very lovely against the
sea, and the blue were to be among the white veronica and white lupins in the flagged garden.
And now they are all planted wrong, and so accurately and solidly wrong," she walked ahead
of Mrs. Talcott examining the offending plants. "Are you quite sure they're wrong, Mrs. Talcott?"

"Dead sure," Mrs. Talcott made reply. "He did it this morning when I was in the dairy. He didn't
understand, or got muddled, or something. I'll commence changing them round as soon as I've
done this weeding. It'll be a good two hours' work."

"No, you must not do it till I can help you," said Karen. "To-morrow morning." She had a manner
at once deferential and masterful of addressing the old lady. They were friendly without being
intimate. "Now promise me that you will wait till I can help you."

"Well, I guess I won't promise. I like to get things off my mind right away," said Mrs. Talcott.
If Karen was masterful, she was not yielding. "I'll see how the time goes after tea. Don't
you bother about it."

They left her bending again over her beds. "She is very strong, but I think sometimes she works
too hard," said Karen.

By a winding way she led him to the high flagged garden with its encompassing trees and far
blue prospect, and here they sat for a little while in the sunlight and talked. "How different
all this must be from your home in Northumberland," said Karen. "I have never been to Northumberland.
Is your brother much there? Is he like you? Have you brothers and sisters?"

She questioned him with the frank interest with which he wished to question her. He told her
about Oliver and said that he wasn't like himself. A faint flavour of irony came into his voice
in speaking of his elder brother and finding Karen's calm eyes dwelling on him he wondered
if she thought him unfair. "We always get on well enough," he said, "but we haven't much in
common. He is a good, dull fellow, half alive."

"And you are very much alive."

"Yes, on the whole, I think so," he answered, smiling, but sensitively aware of a possible
hint of irony in her. But she had intended none. She continued to look at him calmly. "You
are making use of all of yourself; that is to be alive, Tante always says; and I feel that
it is true of you. And his wife? the wife of the dull hunting brother? Does she hunt too and
think of foxes most?"

He could assure her that Betty quite made up in the variety of her activities for Oliver's
deficiencies. Karen was interested in the American Betty and especially in hearing that she
had been at the concert from which their own acquaintance dated. She asked him, walking back
to the house, if he had seen Mrs. Forrester. "She is an old friend of yours, isn't she?" she said.

"That must be nice. She was so kind to me that last day in London. Tante is very fond of her;
very, very fond. I hardly think there is anyone of all her friends she has more feeling for.
Here is Victor, come to greet you. You remember Victor, and how he nearly missed the train."

The great, benignant dog came down the path to them and as they walked Karen laid her hand
upon his head, telling Gregory that Sir Alliston had given him to Tante when he was quite a
tiny puppy. "You saw Sir Alliston, that sad, gentle poet? There is another person that Tante
loves." It was with a slight stir of discomfort that Gregory realised more fully from these
assessments how final for Karen was the question of Tante's likes and dislikes.

They were on the verandah when she paused. "But I think, though the music-room is closed, that
you must see the portrait."

"The portrait? Of you?" Actually, and sincerely, he was off the track.

"Of me? Oh no," said Karen, laughing a little. "Why should it be of me? Of my guardian, of
course. Perhaps you know it. It is by Sargent and was in the Royal Academy some years ago."

"I must have missed it. Am I to see it now?"

"Yes. I will ask Mrs. Talcott for the key and we will draw all the blinds and you shall see
it." They walked back to the garden in search of Mrs. Talcott.

"Do you like it?" Gregory asked.

Karen reflected for a moment and then said; "He understands her better than Mr. Drew does,
or, at all events, does not try to make up for what he does not understand by elaborations.
But there are blanks!--oh blanks!--However, it is a very magnificent picture and you shall
see. Mrs. Talcott, may I have the key of the music-room? I want to show the Sargent to Mr.
Jardine."

They had come to the old woman again, and again she slowly righted herself from her stooping
posture. "It's in my room, I'll come and get it," said Mrs. Talcott, and on Karen's protesting
against this, she observed that it was about tea-time, anyway. She preceded them to the house.

"But I do beg," Karen stopped her in the hall. "Let me get it. You shall tell me where it is."

Mrs. Talcott yielded. "In my left top drawer on the right hand side under the pile of handkerchiefs,"
she recited. "Thanks, Karen."

While Karen was gone, Mrs. Talcott in the hall stood in front of Gregory and looked past him
in silence into the morning-room. She did not seem to feel it in any sense incumbent upon her
to entertain him, though there was nothing forbidding in her manner. But happening presently,
while they waited, to glance at the droll old woman, he found her eyes fixed on him in a singularly
piercing, if singularly impassive, gaze. She looked away again with no change of expression,
shifting her weight from one hip to the other, and something in the attitude suggested to Gregory
that she had spent a great part of her life in waiting. She had a capacity, he inferred, for
indefinite waiting. Karen came happily running down the stairs, holding the key.

They went into the dim, white room where swathed presences stood as if austerely welcoming
them. Karen drew up the blind and Mrs. Talcott, going to the end of the room, mounted a chair
and dexterously twitched from its place the sheet that covered the great portrait. Then, standing
beside it, and still holding its covering, she looked, not at it, but, meditatively, out at
the sea that crossed with its horizon line the four long windows. Karen, also in silence, came
and stood beside Gregory.

It was indeed a remarkable picture; white and black; silver and green. To a painter's eye the
arresting balance of these colours would have first appealed and the defiant charm with which
the angular surfaces of the grand piano and the soft curves of the woman seated at it were
combined. The almost impalpable white of an azalea with its flame-green foliage, and a silver
statuette, poised high on a slender column of white chalcedony, were the only accessories.
But after the first delighted draught of wonder it was the face of Madame Okraska--pre-eminently
Madame Okraska in this portrait--that compelled one to concentration. She sat, turning from
the piano, her knees crossed, one arm cast over them, the other resting along the edge of the
key-board. The head drooped slightly and the eyes looked out just below the spectator's eyes,
so that in poise and glance it recalled somewhat Michael Angelo's Lorenzo da Medici. And something
that Gregory had felt in her from the first, and that had roused in him dim hostilities and
ironies, was now more fully revealed. The artist seemed to have looked through the soft mask
of the woman's flesh, through the disturbing and compelling forces of her own consciousness,
to the very structure and anatomy of her character. Atavistic, sub-conscious revelations were
in the face. It was to see, in terms of art, a scientific demonstration of race, temperament,
and the results of their interplay with environment. The languors, the feverish indolences,
the caprice of generations of Spanish exiles were there, and the ambiguity, the fierceness
of Slav ancestry. And, subtly interwoven, were the marks of her public life upon her. The face,
so moulded to indifference, was yet so aware of observation, so adjusted to it, so insatiable
of it, that, sitting there, absorbed and brooding, lovely with her looped pearls and diamonds,
her silver broideries and silken fringes, she was a product of the public, a creature reared
on adulation, breathing it in softly, peacefully, as the white flowers beside her breathed
in light and air. Her craftsmanship, her genius, though indicated, were submerged in this pervasive
quality of an indifference based securely on the ever present consciousness that none could
be indifferent to her. And more than the passive acceptance and security was indicated. Strange,
sleeping potentialities lurked in the face; as at the turn of a kaleidoscope, Gregory could
fancy it suddenly transformed, by some hostile touch, some menace, to a savage violence and
rapacity. He was aware, standing between the girl who worshipped her and the devoted old woman,
of the pang of a curious anxiety.

"Well," said Karen at last, and she looked from the picture to him. "What do you think of it?"

"It's splendid," said Gregory. "It's very fine. And beautiful."

"But does it altogether satisfy you?" Her eyes were again on the portrait. "What is lacking,
I cannot say; but it seems to me that it is painted with intelligence only, not with love.
It is Madame Okraska, the great genius; but it is not Tante; it is not even Madame von Marwitz."

The portrait seemed to Gregory to go so much further and so much deeper than what he had himself
seen that it was difficult to believe that hers might be the deepest vision, but he was glad
to take refuge in the possibility. "It does seem to me wonderfully like," he said. "But then
I don't know 'Tante.'"

Karen now glanced at Mrs. Talcott. "It is a great bone of contention between us," she said,
smiling at the old lady, yet smiling, Gregory observed, with a touch of challenge. "She feels
it quite complete. That, in someone who does know Tante, I cannot understand."

Mrs. Talcott, making no reply, glanced up at the portrait and then, again, out at the sea.

Gregory looked at her with awakened curiosity. This agreement was an unexpected prop for him.
"You, too, think it a perfect likeness?" he asked her. Her old blue eyes, old in the antique
tranquillity of their regard, yet still of such a vivid, unfaded turquoise, turned on him and
again he had that impression of an impassive piercing.

"It seems to me about as good a picture as anyone's likely to get," said Mrs. Talcott.

"Yes, but, oh Mrs. Talcott"--with controlled impatience Karen took her up--"surely you see,--it
isn't Tante. It is a genius, a great woman, a beautiful woman, a beautiful and poetic creature,
of course;--he has seen all that--who wouldn't? but it is almost a woman without a heart. There
is something heartless there. I always feel it. And when one thinks of Tante!" And Mrs. Talcott
remaining silent, she insisted: "Can you really say you don't see what I mean?"

"Well, I never cared much about pictures anyway," Mrs. Talcott now remarked.

"Well, but you care for this one more than I do!" Karen returned, with a laugh of vexation.
"It isn't a question of pictures; it's a question of a likeness. You really think that this
does Tante justice? It's that I can't understand."

Mrs. Talcott, thus pursued, again looked up at the portrait, and continued, now, to look at
it for several moments. And as she stood there, looking up, she suddenly and comically reminded
Gregory of the Frog gardener before the door in "Alice," with his stubborn and deliberate misunderstanding.
He could almost have expected to see Mrs. Talcott advance her thumb and rub the portrait, as
if to probe the cause of her questioner's persistence. When she finally spoke it was only to
vary her former judgment: "It seems to me about as good a picture as Mercedes is likely to
get taken," she said. She pronounced the Spanish name: "Mursadees."

Karen, after this, abandoned her attempt to convince Mrs. Talcott. Tea was ready, and they
went into the morning-room. Here Mrs. Talcott presided at the tea-table, and for all his dominating
preoccupation she continued to engage a large part of Gregory's attention. She sat, leaning
back in her chair, slowly eating, her eyes, like tiny, blue stones, immeasurably remote, immeasurably
sad, fixed on the sea.

"Is it long since you were in America?" he asked her. He felt drawn to Mrs. Talcott.

"Why, I guess it's getting on for twenty-five years now," she replied, after considering for
a moment; "since I've lived there. I've been over three or four times with Mercedes; on tours."

"Twenty-five years since you came over here? That is a long time."

"Oh, it's more than that since I came," said Mrs. Talcott. "Twenty-five years since I lived
at home. I came over first nearly fifty years ago. Yes; it's a long time."

"Dear me; you have lived most of your life here, then."

"Yes; you may say I have."

"And don't you ever want to go back to America to stay?"

"I don't know as I do," said Mrs. Talcott.

"You're fonder of it over here, like so many of your compatriots?"

"Well, I don't know as I am," Mrs. Talcott, who had a genius it seemed for non-committal statements,
varied; and then, as though aware that her answers might seem ungracious, she added: "All my
folks are dead. The young editor and his wife used to gaze at it adoringly as they
drove to and from the office morning and evening; and they gilded
the town with high hopes.

For then they were in their twenties. The population of Harvey for the most part those first
years was in its twenties also, when gilding is cheap. But thank Heaven the gilding of our
twenties is lasting.

It was into this gilded world that Grant Adams was born.

Suckled behind the press, cradled in the waste basket, toddling under hurrying feet, Grant's
earliest memories were of work--work and working lovers, and their gay talk as they worked wove
strange fancies in his little mind.

It was in those days that Amos Adams and his wife, considering the mystery of death, tried to peer
behind the veil.

For Amos tables tipped, slates wrote, philosophers, statesmen and conquerors flocked in with grotesque
advice, and all those curious phenomena that come from the activities of the abnormal mind, appeared
and astounded the visionaries as they went about their daily work. The boy Grant used to sit,
a wide-eyed, freckled, sun-browned little creature, running his skinny
little hands through his red hair, and wondering about the unsolvable
problems of life and death.

But soon the problems of a material world came in upon Grant as the child became a boy: problems
of the wood and field, problems of the constantly growing herd at
play in water, in snow, on the ice and in the prairie; and then came
the more serious problems of the wood box, the stable and farm.

Thus he grew strong of limb, quick of hand, firm of foot and sure of mind. And someway as he
grew from childhood into boyhood, getting hold of his faculties--finding himself physically,
so Harvey seemed to grow with him. All over the town where men needed money Daniel Sands's
mortgages were fastened--not heavily (nothing was heavy in that day of the town's glorious
youth) but surely. Dr. Nesbit's gay ruthless politics, John Kollander's patriotism, leading always
to the court house and its emoluments, Captain Morton's inventions
that never materialized, the ever coming sunrise of the Adams--all
these things became definitely a part of the changeless universe of
Harvey as Grant's growing faculties became part of his consciousness.

And here is a mystery: the formation of the social crystal. In that crystal the outer facets and
the inner fell into shape--the Nesbits, the Kollanders, the Adamses,
the Calvins, the Mortons, and the Sandses, falling into one group;
and the Williamses, the Hogans, the Bowmans, the McPhersons, the Dooleys
and Casper Herdicker falling into another group.

The hill separated from the valley.

The separation was not a matter of moral sense; for John Kollander and Dan Sands and Joseph Calvin
touched zero in moral intelligence; and it could not have been business
sense, for Captain Morton for all his dreams was a child with a dollar,
and Dr. Nesbit never was out of debt a day in his life; without his
salary from tax-payers John Kollander would have been a charge on
the county.

In the matter of industry Daniel Sands was a marvel, but Jamie McPherson toiling all day used
to come home and start up his well drill and its clatter could be
heard far into the night, and often he started it hours before dawn.

Nor could aspirations and visions have furnished the line of cleavage;
for no one could have hopes so high for Harvey as Jamie, who sank
his drill far into the earth, put his whole life, every penny of his
earnings and all his strength into the dream that some day he would
bring coal or oil or gas to Harvey and make it a great city.

Yet when he found the precious vein, thick and rich and easy to mine, Daniel Sands and Joseph
Calvin took his claim from him by chicanery as easily as they would have robbed a blind man of a penny,
and Jamie went to work in the mines for Daniel Sands grumbling but faithful. Williams and Dooley
and Hogan and Herdicker bent at their daily tasks in those first years, each feeling that the
next day or the next month or at most the next year his everlasting
fortune would be made.

And Dick Bowman, cohort of Dr. Nesbit, many a time and oft would
wash up, put on a clean suit, and go out and round up the voters in
the Valley for the Doctor's cause and scorn his task with a hissing;
for Dick read Karl Marx and dreamed of the day of the revolution.

Yet he dwelled with the sons of Essua, who as they toiled murmured
about their stolen birthright.

When a decade had passed in Harvey the social crystal was firm; the hill and the valley were
cast into the solid rock of things as they are. No one could say why; it was a mystery. It
is still a mystery. As society forms and reforms, its cleavages follow unknown lines.


CHAPTER X

He came next day and every day. They were favoured with the rarely given gift of a perfect
spring. They walked along the cliffs and headlands. They sat and talked in the garden. He took
her with Mrs. Talcott for long drives to distant parts of the coast which he and Karen would
explore, while Mrs. Talcott in the car sat, with apparently interminable patience, waiting
for them.

Karen played to him in the morning-room; and this was a new revelation of her. She was not
a finished performer and her music was limited by her incapacity; but she had the gift for
imparting, with transparent sincerity and unfailing sensitiveness, the very heart of what she
played. There were Arias from Schubert Sonatas, and Bach Preludes, and loving little pieces
of Schumann, that Gregory thought he had never heard so beautifully played before. Everything
they had to say was said, though, it might be, said very softly. He told her that he cared
more for her music than for any he had listened to, and Karen laughed, not at all taking him
seriously. "But you do care for music, though you are no musician," she said. "I like to play
to you; and to someone who does not care it is impossible."

Her acceptances of their bond might give ground for all hope or for none. As for himself there
had been, from the moment of seeing her again, of knowing in her presence that fear and that
delight, no further doubt as to his own state and its finality. Yet his first perplexities
lingered and could at moments become painful.

He felt the beloved creature to be at once inappropriate and inevitable. With all that was
deepest and most instinctive in him her nature chimed; the surfaces, the prejudices, the principles
of his life she contradicted and confused. She talked to him a great deal, in answer to his
questions, about her past life, and what she told him was often disconcerting. The protective
tenderness he had felt for her from the first was troubled by his realisation of the books
she had placidly read--under Tante's guidance--the people whose queer relationships she placidly
took for granted as in no need of condonation. When he intimated to her that he disapproved
of such contacts and customs, she looked at him, puzzled, and then said, with an air of kindly
maturity at once touching and vexatious: "But that is the morality of the Philistines."

It was, of course, and Gregory considered it the very best of moralities; but remembering her
mother he could not emphasize to her how decisively he held by it.

It was in no vulgar or vicious world that her life, as the child of the unconventional sculptor,
as the protégée of the great pianist, had been passed. But it was a world without religion,
without institutions, without order. Gregory, though his was not the religious temperament,
had his reasoned beliefs in the spiritual realities expressed in institutions and he had his
inherited instincts of reverence for the rituals that embodied the spiritual life of his race.
He was impatient with dissent and with facile scepticisms. He did not expect a woman to have
reasoned beliefs, nor did he ask a credulous, uncritical orthodoxy; but he did want the Christian
colouring of mind, the Christian outlook; he did want his wife to be a woman who would teach
her children to say their prayers at her knees. It was with something like dismay that he gathered
from Karen that her conception of life was as untouched by any consciousness of creed as that
of a noble young pagan. He was angry at himself for feeling it and when he found himself applying
his rules and measures to her; for what had it been from the first but her spiritual strength
and loveliness that had drawn him to her? Yet he longed to make her accept the implications
of the formulated faiths that she lived by. "Oh, no, you're not," he said to her when, turning
unperturbed eyes upon him, she assured him: "Oh yes, I am quite, quite a pagan." "I don't think
you know what you mean when you say you're a pagan," Gregory continued.

"But, yes," she returned. "I have no creed. I was brought up to think of beauty as the only
religion. That is my guardian's religion. It is the religion, she says, of all free souls.
And my father thought so, too." It was again the assurance of a wisdom, not her own, yet possessed
by her, a wisdom that she did not dream of anybody challenging. Was it not Tante's?

"Well," he remarked, "beauty is a large term. Perhaps it includes more than you think."

Karen looked at him with approbation. "That is what Tante says; that it includes everything."
And she went on, pleased to reveal to him still more of Tante's treasure, since he had proved
himself thus understanding; "Tante, you know, belongs to the Catholic Church; it is the only
church of beauty, she says. But she is not pratiquante; not croyante in any sense. Art is her
refuge."

"I see," said Gregory. "And what is your refuge?"

Karen, at this, kept silence for a moment, and then said: "It is not that; not art. I do not
feel, perhaps, that I need refuges. And I am happier than my dear guardian. I believe in immortality;
oh yes, indeed." She looked round gravely at him--they were sitting on the turf of a headland
above the sea. "I believe, that is, in everything that is beautiful and loving going on for ever."

He felt abashed before her. The most dependent and child-like of creatures where her trust
and love were engaged, she was, as well, the most serenely independent. Even Tante, he felt,
could not touch her faiths.

"You mustn't say that you are a pagan, you see," he said.

"But Plato believed in immortality," Karen returned, smiling. "And you will not tell me that
Plato was pratiquant or croyant."

He could not claim Plato as a member of the Church of England, though he felt quite ready to
demonstrate, before a competent body of listeners, that, as a nineteenth century Englishman,
Plato would have been. Karen was not likely to follow such an argument. She would smile at
his seeming sophistries.

No; he must accept it, and as a very part of her lovableness, that she could not be made to
fit into the plan of his life as he had imagined it. She would not carry on its traditions,
for she would not understand them. To win her would be, in a sense, to relinquish something
of that orderly progression as a professional and social creature that he had mapped out for
himself, though he knew himself to be, through his experience of her, already a creature more
human, a creature enriched. Karen, if she came to love him, would be, through love, infinitely
malleable, but in the many adjustments that would lie before them it would be his part to foresee
complications and to do the adjusting. Change in her would be a gradual growth, and never towards
mere conformity.

He felt it to be the first step towards adjustments when he motored Karen and Mrs. Talcott
to Guillian House to lunch with his friends the Lavingtons. The occasion must mark for him
the subtle altering of an old tie. Karen and the Lavingtons could never be to each other what
he and the Lavingtons had been. It was part of her breadth that congeniality could never for
her be based on the half automatic affinities of caste and occupation; and it was part of her
narrowness, or, rather, of her inexperience, that she could see people only as individuals
and would not recognize the real charm of the Lavingtons, which consisted in their being, like
their house and park, part of the landscape and of an established order of things. Yet, once
he had her there, he watched the metamorphosis that her presence worked in his old associations
with pleasure rather than pain. It pleased him, intimately, that the Lavingtons should see
in him a lover as yet uncertain of his chances. It pleased him that they should not find in
Karen the type that they must have expected the future Mrs. Jardine to be, the type of Constance
Armytage and the type of Evelyn Lavington, Colonel and Mrs. Lavington's unmarried daughter,
who, but for Karen, might well have become Mrs. Jardine one day. He observed, with a lover's
fond pride, that Karen, in her shrunken white serge and white straw hat, Karen, with her pleasant
imperturbability, her mingled simplicity and sophistication, did, most decisively, make the
Lavingtons seem flavourless. Among them, while Mrs. Lavington walked her round the garden and
Evelyn elicited with kindly concern that she played neither golf, hockey nor tennis, and had
never ridden to hounds, her demeanour was that of a little rustic princess benignly doing her
social duty. The only reason why she did not appear like this to the Lavingtons was that, immutably
unimaginative as they were, they knew that she wasn't a princess, was, indeed, only the odd
appendage of an odd celebrity with whom their friend had chosen, oddly, to fall in love. They
weren't perplexed, because, since he had fallen in love with her, she was placed. But they,
in the complete contrast they offered, had little recognition of individual values and judged
a dish by the platter it was served on. A princess was a princess, and an appendage an appendage,
and a future Mrs. Jardine a very recognizable person; just as, had a subtle charlotte russe
been brought up to lunch in company with the stewed rhubarb they would have eaten it without
comment and hardly been aware that it wasn't an everyday milk-pudding.

"Did you and Mrs. Lavington and Evelyn and Mrs. Haverfield find much to talk of after lunch?"
Gregory asked, as he motored Mrs. Talcott and Karen back to Les Solitudes.

"Yes; we talked of a good many things," said Karen. "But I know about so few of their things
and they about so few of mine. Miss Lavington was very much surprised to think that I had never
been to a fox-hunt; and I," Karen smiled, "was very much surprised to think that they had never
heard Tante play."

"They hardly ever get up to town, you see," said Gregory. "But surely they knew about her?"

"Not much," said Karen. "Mrs. Lavington asked me about her--for something pleasant to say--and
they were such strange questions; as though one should be asked whether Mr. Arthur Balfour
were a Russian nihilist or Metchnikoff an Italian poet." Karen spoke quite without grievance
or irony.

"And after your Sargent," said Gregory, "you must have been pained by that portrait of Mrs.
Haverfield in the drawing-room."

"Mrs. Lavington pointed it out to me specially," said Karen, laughing, "and told me that it
had been in the Academy. What a sad thing; with all those eyelashes! And yet opposite to it
hung the beautiful Gainsborough of a great-grandmother. Mrs. Lavington saw no difference, I think."

"They haven't been trained to see differences," said Gregory, and he summed up the Lavingtons
in the aphorism to himself as well as to Karen; "only to accept samenesses." He hoped indeed,
by sacrificing the æsthetic quality of the Lavingtons, to win some approbation of their virtues;
but Karen, though not inclined to proffer unasked criticism, found, evidently, no occasion
for commendation. Later on, when they were back at Les Solitudes and walking in the garden,
she returned to the subject of his friends and said: "I was a little disturbed about Mrs. Talcott;
did you notice? no one talked to her at all, hardly. It was as if they thought her my dame
de compagnie. She isn't my dame de compagnie; and if she were, I think that she should have
been talked to."

Gregory had observed this fact and had hoped that it might have escaped Karen's notice. To
the Lavingtons Mrs. Talcott's platter had been unrecognizable and they had tended to let its
contents alone.

"It's as I said, you know," he put forward a mitigation; "they've not been trained to see differences;
she is very different, isn't she?"

"Well, but so am I," said Karen, "and they talked to me. I don't mean to complain of your friends;
that would be very rude when they were so nice and kind; and, besides, are your friends. But
people's thoughtlessness displeases me, not that I am not often very thoughtless myself."

Gregory was anxious to exonerate himself. "I hope she didn't feel left out;" he said. "I did
notice that she wasn't talking. I found her in the garden, alone--she seemed to be enjoying
that, too--and she and I went about for quite a long time together."

"I know you did," said Karen. "You are not thoughtless. As for her, one never knows what she
feels. I don't think that she does feel things of that sort at all; she has been used to it
all her life, one may say; but there's very little she doesn't notice and understand. She understands--oh,
perfectly well--that she is a queer old piece of furniture standing in the background, and
one has to remember not to treat her like a piece of furniture. It's a part of grace and tact,
isn't it, not to take such obvious things for granted. You didn't take them for granted with
her, or with me," said Karen, smiling her recognition at him. "For, of course, to most people
I am furniture, too; and if Tante is about, there is, of course, nothing to blame in that;
everybody becomes furniture when Tante is there."

"Oh no; I can't agree to that," said Gregory. "Not everybody."

"You know what I mean," Karen rejoined. "If you will not agree to it for me, it is because
from the first you felt me to be your friend; that is different." They were walking in the
flagged garden where the blue campanulas were now safely established in their places and the
low afternoon sun slanted in among the trees. Karen still wore her hat and motoring veil and
the smoky grey substance flowed softly back about her shoulders. Her face seemed to emerge
from a cloud. It had always to Gregory's eyes the air of steadfast advance; the way in which
her hair swept back and up from her brows gave it a wind-blown, lifted look. He glanced at
her now from time to time, while, in a meditative and communicative mood, she continued to
share her reflections with him. Gregory was very happy.

"Even Tante doesn't always remember enough about Mrs. Talcott," she went on. "That is of course
because Mrs. Talcott is so much a part of her life that she sometimes hardly sees her. She
is, for her, the dear old restful chair that she sinks back into and forgets about. Besides,
some people have a right not to see things. One doesn't ask from giants the same sort of perception
that one does from pygmies."

This was indeed hard on the Lavingtons; but Gregory was not thinking of the Lavingtons, who
could take care of themselves. He was wondering, as he more and more wondered, about Madame
von Marwitz, and what she saw and what she permitted herself not to see.

"You aren't invisible to her sometimes?" he inquired.

Her innocence before his ironies made him ashamed always of having spoken them. "It is just
that that makes me feel sometimes so badly about Mrs. Talcott," she answered now; "just because
she is, in a sense, sometimes invisible, and I'm not. Mrs. Talcott, of course, counts for a
great deal more in the way of comfort and confidence than I do; I don't believe that Tante
really is as intimate with anybody in the world as with Mrs. Talcott; but she doesn't count
as much as I do, I am nearly sure, in the way of tenderness. I really think that in the way
of tenderness I am nearer than anybody."

They left the flagged garden now, and came down to a lower terrace. Here the sun shone fully;
they walked to and fro in the radiance. "Of course," Karen continued to define and confide,
"as far as interest goes any one of her real friends counts for more than I do, and you mustn't
think that I mean to say that I believe myself the most loved; not at all. But I am the tender,
home thing in her life; the thing to pet and care for and find waiting. It is that that is
so beautiful for me and so tragic for her."

"Why tragic?"

"Oh, but you do not feel it? A woman like that, such a heart, and such a spirit--and no one
nearer than I am? That she should have no husband and no child? I am a makeshift for all that
she has lost, or never had."

"And Mrs. Talcott?" said Gregory after a moment. "Is it Mrs. Talcott's tragedy to have missed
even a makeshift?"

Karen now turned her eyes on him, and her face, as she scrutinized him, showed a slight severity.
"Hardly that. She has Tante."

"Has her as the chair has her, you mean?" He couldn't for the life of him control the question.
It seemed indeed due to their friendship that he should not conceal from her the fact that
he found disproportionate elements in her devotion. Yet it was not the right way in which to
be frank, and Karen showed him so in her reply. "I mean that Tante is everything to her and
that, in the nature of things, she cannot be so much to Tante. You mustn't take quite literally
what I said of the chair, you know. It can hardly be a makeshift to have somebody like Tante
to love and care for. I don't quite know what you mean by speaking like that," Karen said.
Her gaze, in meeting his, had become almost stern. She seemed to scan him from a distance.

Gregory, though he felt a pang of disquietude, felt no disposition to retreat. He intended
that she should be made to understand what he meant. "I think that what it comes to is that
it is you I am thinking of, rather than of Mrs. Talcott," he said. "I don't know your guardian,
and I do know you, and it is what she gets rather than what she gives that is most apparent to me."

"Gets? From me? What may that be?" Karen continued to return his gaze almost with haughtiness.

"The most precious thing I can imagine," said Gregory. "Your love. I hope that she is properly
grateful for it."

She looked at him and the slow colour mounted to her cheeks; but it was as if in unconscious
response to his feeling; it hardly, even yet, signified self-consciousness. She had stood still
in asking her last question and she still did not move as she said: "I do not like to hear
you speak so. It shows me that you understand nothing."

"Does it? I want to understand everything."

"You care for me," said Karen, standing still, her eyes on his, "and I care for you; but what
I most wish in such a friend is that he should see and understand. May I tell you something?
Will you wait while I tell you about my life?"

"Please tell me."

"I want you to see and understand Tante," said Karen. "And how much I love her; and why."

They walked on, from the terrace to the cliff-path. Karen stopped when they had gone a little
way and leaned her elbows on the stone wall looking out at the sea. "She has been everything
to me," she said. "Everything."

He was aware, as he leaned beside her in the mellow evening light, of a great uneasiness mingling
with the beautiful gravity of the moment. She was near him as she had never yet been near.
She had almost recognized his love. It was there between them, and it was as if, not turning
from it, she yet pointed to something beyond and above it, something that it was his deep instinct
to evade and hers to show him. He must not take a step towards her, she seemed to tell him,
until he had proved to her that he had seen what she did. And nothing she could say would,
he felt sure of it, alter his fundamental distrust of Madame von Marwitz.

"I want to tell you about my life," said Karen, looking out at the sea from between her hands.
"You have heard my story, of course; people are always told it; but you have never heard it
from my side. You have heard no doubt about my father and mother, and how she left the man
she did not love for him. My mother died when I was quite little; so, though I remember her
well she does not come into the part of my story that I want to tell you. But I was thirteen
years old when my father died, and that begins the part that leads to Tante. It was in Rome,
in winter when he died; and I was alone with him; and there was no money, and I had more to
bear than a child's mind and heart should have. He died. And then there were dreadful days.
Cold, coarse people came and took me and put me in a convent in Paris. That convent was like
hell to me. I was so miserable. And I had never known restraint or unkindness, and the French
girls, so sly and so small in their thoughts, were hateful to me. And I did not like the nuns.
I was punished and punished--rightly no doubt. I was fierce and sullen, I remember, and would
not obey. Then I heard, by chance, from a girl whose family had been to her concert in Paris,
that Madame Okraska was with her husband at Fontainebleau. Of her I knew nothing but the lovely
face in the shop-windows. But her husband's name brought back distant days to me. He had known
my father; I remembered him--the fair, large, kindly smiling, very sad man--in my father's
studio among the clay and marble. He bought once a little head my father had done of me when
I was a child. So I ran away from the convent--oh, it was very bad; I knocked down a nun and
escaped the portress, and hid for a long time in the streets. And I made my way through Paris
and walked for a day and night to Fontainebleau; and there in the forest, in the evening, I
was lost, and almost dead with hunger and fatigue. And as I stood by the road I saw the carriage
approaching from very far away and saw sitting in it, as it came nearer, the beautiful woman.
Shall I ever forget it? The dark forest and the evening sky above and her face looking at me--looking,
looking, full of pity and wonder. She has told me that I was the most unhappy thing that she
had ever seen. My father's friend was with her; but though I saw him and knew that I was safe,
I had eyes only for her. Her face was like heaven opening. When the carriage stopped and she
leaned to me, I sprang to her and she put her arms around me. They have been round me ever
since," said Karen, joining her fingers over her eyes and leaning her forehead upon them so
that her face was hidden; and for a moment she did not speak. "Ever since," she went on presently,
"she has been joy and splendour and beauty. What she has given me is nothing. It is what she
is herself that lifts the lives of other people. Those who do not know her seem to me to have
lives so sad and colourless compared to mine. You cannot imagine it, anyone so great, yet at
the same time so little and so sweet. She is merry like no one else, and witty, and full of
cajoleries, like a child. One cannot be dull with her, not for one moment. And there is through
it all her genius, the great flood of wonderful music; can you think what it is like to live
with that? And under-lying everything is the great irremediable sorrow. I was with her when
it came; the terrible thing. I did not live with them while he was alive, you know, my Onkel
Ernst; he was so good and kind--always the kindest of friends to me; but he loved her too deeply
to be able to share their life, and how well one understands that in her husband. He had me
put at a school in Dresden. I did not like that much, either. But, even if I were lonely, I
knew that my wonderful friends--my Tante and my Onkel--were there, like the sun behind the
grey day, and I tried to study and be dutiful to please them. And in my holidays I was always
with them, twice it was, at their beautiful estate in Germany. And it was there that the horror
came that wrecked her life; her husband's death, his death that cannot be explained or understood.
He drowned himself. We never say it, but we know it. That is the fear, the mystery. All his
joy with her, his love and happiness--to leave them;--it was madness; he had always been a
sad man; one saw that in his face; the doctors said it was madness. He disappeared without
a word one day. For three weeks--nothing. Tante was like a creature crying out on the rack.
And it was I who found him by the lake-edge one morning. She was walking in the park, I knew;
she used to walk and walk fast, fast, quite silent; and with horrible fear I thought: If I
can keep her from seeing. I turned--and she was beside me. I could not save her. Ah--poor woman!"
Karen closed her hands over her face.

They stood for a long time in silence, Gregory leaning beside her and looking down at the sea.
His thought was not with the stricken figure she put before him; it dwelt on the girl facing
horror, on the child bearing more than a child should bear. Yet he was glad to feel, as a background
to his thoughts, that Madame von Marwitz was indeed very pitiful.

"You understand," said Karen, straightening herself at last and laying her hands on the wall.
"You see how it is."

"Yes," said Gregory.

"It is kind of you, and beautiful, to feel me, as your friend, a person of value," said Karen.
"But it does not please me to have the great fact of my life belittled."

"I haven't meant to do that, really. I see why it means so much, to you. But I see you before
I see the facts of your life; they interest me because of you," said Gregory. "You come first
to me. It's that I want you to understand."

Karen had at last turned her eyes upon his and they met them in a long encounter that recalled
to Gregory their first. It was not the moment for explicit recognitions or avowals; the shadow
of the past lay too darkly upon her. But that their relation had changed her deepened gaze
accepted. She took his hand, she had a fashion almost boyish of taking his rather than giving
her hand, and said: "We shall both understand more and more; that is so, is it not? And some
day you will know her. Until you know her you cannot really understand."

CHAPTER XI

Karen and he had walked back to the house in silence, and at the door, where she stood to see
him off, it had been arranged that he was to lunch at Les Solitudes next day and that she was
to show him a favourite headland, one not far away, but that he had never yet been shown. From
the sweetness, yet gravity, of her look and voice he could infer nothing but that she recognized
change and a new significance. Her manner had neither the confusion nor the pretended unconsciousness
of ordinary girlhood. She was calm, but with a new thoughtfulness. He arrived a little early
next day and found Mrs. Talcott alone in the morning-room writing letters. He noticed, as she
rose from the bureau, her large, immature, considered writing. "Karen'll be down in a minute
or two, I guess," she said. "Take a chair."

"Don't let me interrupt you," said Gregory, as Mrs. Talcott seated herself before him, her
hands folded at her waist. But Mrs. Talcott, remarking briefly, "Don't mention it," did not
move back to her former place. She examined him and he examined her and he felt that she probed
through his composure to his unrest. "I wanted a little talk," she observed presently. "You've
gotten pretty fond of Karen, haven't you, Mr. Jardine?"

This was to come at once to the point. "Very fond," said Gregory, wondering if she had been
diagnosing his fondness in a letter to Madame von Marwitz.

"She hasn't got many friends," Mrs. Talcott, after another moment of contemplation, went on.
"She's always been a lonesome sort of child."

"That's what has struck me, too," said Gregory.

"Sometimes Mercedes takes her along; but sometimes she don't," Mrs. Talcott pursued. "It ain't
a particularly lively sort of life for a young girl, going on in an out-of-the-way place like
this with an old woman like me. She's spent most of her time with me, when you come to reckon
it up." There was no air of criticism or confidence in Mrs. Talcott. She put forward these
remarks with unbiassed placidity.

"I suppose Madame von Marwitz couldn't arrange always to take her?" Gregory asked after a pause.

"It ain't always convenient toting a young girl round with you," said Mrs. Talcott. "Sometimes
Mercedes feels like it and sometimes she don't. Karen and I stay at home, now that I'm too
old to go about with her, and we see her when she's home. That's the idea. But she ain't much
at home. She's mostly travelling and staying around with folks."

"It isn't a particularly lively time, it seems to me, for either of you," said Gregory. It
was his instinct to blame Madame von Marwitz for the featureless lives led by her dependents,
though he could but own that it might, perhaps, be difficult to fit them into the vagabondage
of a great pianist's existence.

"Well, it's good enough for me," said Mrs. Talcott. "I'm very contented if it comes to that;
and so is Karen. She's known so much that's worse, the same as I have. But she's known what's
better, too; she was a pretty big girl when her Poppa died and she was a companion to him and
I reckon that without figuring it up much to herself she's lonesome a good deal."

Gregory for a moment was silent. Then he found it quite natural to say to Mrs. Talcott: "What
I hope is that she will marry me."

"I hope so, too," said Mrs. Talcott with no alteration of tone. "I hoped so the moment I set
eyes on you. I saw that you were a good young man and that you'd make her a good kind husband."

"Thanks, very much," said Gregory, smiling yet deeply touched. "I hope I may be. I intend to
be if she will have me."

"The child is mighty fond of you," said Mrs. Talcott. "And it's not as if she took easy to
people. She don't. She's never seemed to need folks. But I can see that she's mighty fond of
you, and what I want to say is, even if it don't seem to work out like you want it to right
away, you hang on, Mr. Jardine; that's my advice; an old woman like me understands young girls
better than they understand themselves. Karen is so wrapped up in Mercedes and thinks such
a sight of her that perhaps she'll feel she don't want to leave her and that sort of thing;
but just you hang on."

"I intend to," said Gregory. "I can't say how much I thank you for being on my side."

"Yes; I'm on your side, and I'm on Karen's side; and I want to see this thing put through,"
said Mrs. Talcott.

Something seemed to hover between them now, a fourth figure that must be added to the trio
they made. He wondered, if he did hang on successfully and if it did work out as he intended
that it should, how that fourth figure would work in. He couldn't see a shared life with Karen
from which it could be eliminated, nor did he, of course, wish to see it eliminated; but he
did not see himself, either, as forming one of a band of satellites, and the main fact about
the fourth figure seemed to be that any relation to it involved one, apparently, in discipleship.
There seemed even some disloyalty to Mrs. Talcott in accepting her sympathy while anxieties
and repudiations such as these were passing through his mind; for she, no doubt, saw in Karen's
relation to Madame von Marwitz the chief asset with which she could present a husband; and
he expected Mrs. Talcott, now, to make some reference to this asset; but none came; and if
she expected from him some recognition of it, no expectancy was visible in the old blue eyes
fixed on his face. A silence fell between them, and as it grew longer it grew the more consoling.
Into their compact of understanding she let him see, he could almost fancy, that the question
of Madame von Marwitz was not to enter.

Karen, when she appeared, was looking preoccupied, and after shaking his hand and giving him,
for a moment, the sweet, grave smile with which they had parted, she glanced at the writing-table.
"You are writing to Tante, Mrs. Talcott?" she said. "You heard from her this morning?"

"Yes; I heard from her," said Mrs. Talcott. Gregory at once inferred that Madame von Marwitz
had been writing for information concerning himself.

She must by now have become aware of his correspondence with Karen and its significant continuity.

"Are there any messages?--any news?" asked Karen, and she could not keep dejection from her
voice. She had had no letter.

"It's only a business note," said Mrs. Talcott. "Hasn't Miss Scrotton written?"

"Does my cousin keep you posted as a rule?" Gregory asked, as Karen shook her head.

"No; but Tante asks her to write sometimes, when she is too tired or rushed; and I had a letter
from her, giving me their plans, only a few days ago; so that I know that all is well. It is
only that I am always greedy for Tante's letters, and this is the day on which they often come."

They went in to lunch. Karen spoke little during the meal. Gregory and Mrs. Talcott carried
on a desultory conversation about hotels and the different merits of different countries in
this respect. Mrs. Talcott had a vast experience of hotels. From Germany to Australia, from
New York to St. Petersburg, they were known to her.

After lunch he and Karen started on their walk. It had been a morning of white fog and the
mist still lay thickly over the sea, so that from the high cliff-path, a clear, pale sky above
them, they looked down into milky gulfs of space. Then, as the sun shone softly and a gentle
breeze arose, a rift of dark, still blue appeared below, as the sky appears behind dissolving
clouds, and fold upon fold, slumbrously, the mist rolled back upon itself. The sea lay like
a floor of polished sapphire beneath the thick, soft webs. Far below, in a cavern, the sound
of lapping water clucked, and a sea-gull, indolently intent, drifted by slowly on dazzling wings.

Karen and Gregory reached their headland and, seating themselves on the short, warm turf, looked
out over the sea. During the walk they had hardly spoken, and he had wondered whether her thoughts
were with him and with their last words yesterday, or dwelling still on her disappointment.
But presently, as if her preoccupation had drifted from her as the fog had drifted from the
sea, Karen turned tranquil eyes upon him and said: "I suddenly thought, and the stillness made
me think it, and Mrs. Talcott's hotels, too, perhaps, of all that is going on in the world
while we sit here so lonely and so peaceful. Frenchmen with fat cheeks and flat-brimmed silk
hats sitting at little tin tables in boulevards; isn't it difficult to realize that they exist?
and Arabs on camels crossing deserts; they are quite imaginable; and nuns praying in convent
cells; and stokers, all stripped and sweating, under the engines of great steamers; and a little
Japanese artist carving so carefully the soles of the feet of some tiny image; there they are,
all going on; as real to themselves as we are, at the very moment that we sit here and feel
that only we, in all the world, are real." She might almost have been confiding her fancies
to a husband whose sympathy had been tested by years of fond companionship.

Gregory, wondering at her, loving her, pulled at the short turf as he lay, propped on an elbow,
beside her, and said: "What nice thoughts you have."

"You have them, too, I think," said Karen, smiling down at him. "And nicer ones. Mine are usually
only amusing, like those; but yours are often beautiful. I see that in your face, you know.
It is a face that makes me think always of a cold, clear, steely pool;--that is what it looks
like if one does not look down into it but only across it, as it were; but if one bends over
and looks down, deep down, one sees the sky and passing white clouds and boughs of trees. I
saw deep down at once. That is why," her eyes rested upon him, "we were friends from the first."

"It's what you bring that you see," said Gregory; "you make me think of all those things."

"Ah, but you think them for yourself, too; when you are alone you think them."

"But when I am alone and think them, without you in the thought of them, it's always with sadness,
for something I've lost. You bring them back, with happiness. The thought of you is always
happy. I have never known anyone who seemed to me so peacefully happy as you do. You are very
happy, aren't you?" Gregory looked down at his little tufts of turf as he asked this question.

"I am glad I seem to you like that," said Karen. "I think I am usually quiet and gay and full
of confidence; I sometimes wonder at my confidence. But it is not always so. No, I am not always
happy. Sometimes, when I think and remember, it is like feeling a great hole being dug in my
heart--as if the iron went down and turned up dark forgotten things. I have that feeling sometimes;
and then I wonder that I can ever be happy."

"What things, dear Karen?"

"You know, I think." Karen looked out at the sea. "Tante's face when I found her husband's
body. And my father's face when he was dying; he did not know what was to become of me; he
was quite weak, like a little child, and he cried on my breast. And my mother's face when she
died. I have not told you anything of my mother."

"Will you? I want to hear everything about you; everything," said Gregory.

"This is her locket," Karen said, putting her hand over it. "Her face is in it; would you like
to see it?"

He held out his hand, and slipping the ribbon over her head she pressed the little spring and
laid the open locket in it.

He saw the tinted photograph of a young girl's head, a girl younger than Karen and with her
fair hair and straight brows and square chin; but it was a gentler face and a clumsier, and
strange with its alien nationality.

"I always feel as if she were my child and I her mother when I look at that," said Karen. "It
was taken before I was born. She had a happy life, and yet my memory of her breaks my heart.
She was so very young and it frightened her so much to die; she could not bear to leave us."

Gregory, holding the little locket, looked at it silently. Then he put it to his lips. "You
care for me, don't you, Karen?" he said.

"You know, I think," said Karen, repeating her former words.

He laid the locket in her hand, and the moment had for him a sacramental holiness so that the
locket was like a wedding-ring; holding it and her hand together he said, lifting his eyes
to hers, "I love you. Do you love me?"

Her eyes had filled with tears when he had kissed her mother's face, and there was young awe
in her gaze; but no shadow, no surprise.

"Yes," she said, unhesitatingly. "Yes, I love you, dear Gregory."

The simplicity, the inevitableness of his bliss overwhelmed him. He held her hand and looked
down at it. All about them was the blue. All her past, its beauty, its dark, forgotten things,
she had given to him. She was his for ever. "Oh, my darling Karen," he murmured.

She bent down to look at him now, smiling and unclosing her hand from his gently, so that she
could look at her mother's face. "How glad she would be if she could know," she said. "Perhaps
she does know. Do you not think so?"

"Dear--I don't know what I think about those hopes. I hope."

"Oh, it is more than hope, my belief that she is there; that she is not lost. Only one cannot
tell how or when or where it all may be. For that, yes, it can be only hope. She, too, would
love you, I am sure," Karen continued.

"Would she? I'm glad you think so, darling."

"We are so much alike, you see, that it is natural to feel sure that we should think alike.
Do you not think that her face is much like mine? What happiness! I am glad it is not a day
of rain for our happiness." And she then added, "I hope we may be married."

"Why, we are to be married, dear child," Gregory said, smiling at her. "There is no 'may' about
it, since you love me."

"Only one," said Karen, who still looked at her mother's face. "And perhaps it will be well
not to speak much of our love till we can know. But I feel sure that she will say this happiness
is for me."

"She?" Gregory repeated. For a moment he imagined that she meant some superstition connected
with her mother.

Karen, slipping the ribbon over her head, had returned the locket to its place. "Yes; Tante,"
she said, still with the locket in her hand.

"Tante?" Gregory repeated.

At his tone, its change, she lifted startled eyes to his.

"What has she to do with it?" Gregory asked after a moment in which she continued to gaze at him.

"What has Tante to do with it?" said Karen in a wondering voice. "Do you think I could marry
without Tante's consent?"

"But you love me?"

"I do not understand you. Was it wrong of me to have said so before I had her consent? Was
that not right? Not fair to you?"

"Since you love me you ought to be willing to marry me whether you have your guardian's consent
or not." His voice strove to control its bitterness; but the day had darkened; all his happiness
was blurred. He felt as if a great injury had been done him.

Karen continued to gaze at him in astonishment. "Would you have expected me to marry you without
my mother's consent? She is in my mother's place."

"If you loved me I should certainly expect you to say that you would marry me whether your
mother consented or not. You are of age. There is nothing against me. Those aren't English
ideas at all, Karen."

"But I am not English," said Karen, "my guardian is not English. They are our ideas."

"You mean, you seriously mean, that, loving me, you would give me up if she told you to?"

"Yes," said Karen, now with the heaviness of their recognized division. "She would not refuse
her consent unless it were right that I should give you up."

For some moments after this Gregory, in silence, looked down at the grass between them, clasping
his knees; for he now sat upright. Then, controlling his anger to argumentative rationality,
he said, while again wrenching away at the strongly rooted tufts: "If she did refuse, what
reason could she give for refusing? As I say, there's absolutely nothing against me."

Karen had kept her troubled eyes on his downcast face. "There might be things she did not like;
things she would not believe for my happiness in married life," she replied.

"And you would take her word against mine?"

"You forget, I think," he had lifted his eyes to hers and she looked back at him, steadily,
with no entreaty, but with all the perplexity of her deep pain. "She has known me for eleven
years. I have only known you for three months."

He could not now control the bitterness or the dismay; for, coldly, cuttingly he knew it, it
was quite possible that Madame von Marwitz would not "like things" in him. Their one encounter
had not been of a nature to endear him to her. "It simply means," he said, looking into her
eyes, "that you haven't any conception of what love is. It means that you don't love me."

They looked at each other for a moment and then Karen said, "That is hard." And after another
moment she rose to her feet. Gregory got up and they went down the cliff-path towards Les Solitudes.

He had not spoken recklessly. His words expressed his sense of her remoteness. He could not
imagine what sort of love it was that could so composedly be put aside. And making no feminine
appeal or protest, she walked steadily, in silence, before him. Only at a turning of the way
did he see that her lips were compressed and tears upon her cheeks.

"Karen," he said, looking into her face as he now walked beside her; "won't you talk it over?
You astonish me so unspeakably. Can she destroy our friendship, too? Would you give me up as
a friend if she didn't like things in me?"

The tears expressed no yielding, for she answered "Yes."

"And how far do you push submission? If she told you to marry someone she chose for you, would
you consent, whether you loved him or not?"

"It is not submission," said Karen. "It is our love, hers and mine. She would not wish me to
marry a man I did not love. The contrary is true. My guardian before she went away spoke to
me of a young man she had chosen for me, someone for whom she had the highest regard and affection;
and I, too, am very fond of him. She felt that it would be for my happiness to marry him, and
she hoped that I would consent. But I did not love him. I told her that I could never love
him; and so it ended immediately. You do her injustice in your thoughts of her; and you do
me injustice, too, if you think of me as a person who would marry where I did not love."

He walked beside her, bitterly revolving the sorry comfort of this last speech. "Who was the
young man?" he asked. Not that he really cared to know.

"His name is Herr Franz Lippheim," said Karen, gravely. "He is a young musician."

"Herr Franz Lippheim," Gregory repeated, with an irritation glad to wreak itself on this sudden
object presented opportunely. "How could you have been imagined as marrying someone called
Lippheim?"

"Why not, pray?"

"Is he a German Jew?" Gregory inquired after a moment.

"He is, indeed, of Joachim's nationality," Karen answered, in a voice from which the tears
were gone.

They walked on, side by side, the estrangement cutting deep between their new-won nearness.
Yet in the estrangement was an intimacy deeper than that of the merely blissful state. They
seemed in the last miserable half hour to have advanced by years their knowledge of each other.
Mrs. Talcott and tea were waiting for them in the morning-room. The old woman fixed her eyes
upon each face in turn and then gave her attention to her tea-pot.

"I am sorry, Mrs. Talcott, that we are so late," Karen said. Her composure was kept only by
an effort that gave to her tones a stately conventionality.

"Don't mention it," said Mrs. Talcott. "I'm only just in myself."

"Has it not been a beautiful afternoon?" Karen continued. "What have you been doing in the
garden, Mrs. Talcott?"

"I sowed a big bed of mignonette down by the arbour, and Mitchell and I set out a good lot
of plants."

Mrs. Talcott made her replies to the questions that Karen continued to ask, in an even voice
in which Gregory, who kept his dismal eyes upon her, detected a melancholy patience. Mrs. Talcott
must perceive his state to be already one of "hanging on." Of her sympathy he was, at all events,
assured. She showed it by rising as soon as he and Karen had drunk their tea. "I've got some
more things to do," she said. "Good-bye, Mr. Jardine. Are you coming over to-morrow?"

"No," said Gregory taking Mrs. Talcott's hand. "My holiday is over. I shall be going back to
town to-morrow."

Mrs. Talcott looked into his eyes. "Well, that's too bad," she observed.

"Isn't it? I'd far rather stay here, I can assure you," said Gregory.

"We'll miss you, I guess," said Mrs. Talcott. "I'm very glad to have had the pleasure of making
your acquaintance."

"And I of making yours."

Mrs. Talcott departed and Gregory turned to Karen. She was standing near the window, looking
at him.

"We must say good-bye, too, I suppose," said Gregory, mastering his grief. "You will give me
your guardian's address so that I can write to her at once?"

Her face had worn the aspect of a grey, passive sheet of water; a radiant pallor now seemed
struck from its dulled surface.

"You are going to write to Tante?" she said.

"Isn't that the next step?" Gregory asked. "You will write, too, won't you? Or is it part of
my ordeal that I'm to plead my cause alone?"

Karen had clasped her hands together on her breast and, in the eyes fixed on his, tears gathered.
"Do not speak harshly," she said. "I am so sorry there must be the ordeal. But so happy, too--so
suddenly. Because I believed that you were going to leave me since you thought me so wrong
and so unloving."

"Going to leave you, Karen?" Gregory repeated in amazement. Desperate amusement struggled in
his face with self-reproach. "My darling child, what must you think of me? And, actually, you'd
have let me go?" He had come to her and taken her hands in his.

"What else could I do?"

"Such an idiot would have deserved it? Could you believe me such an idiot? Darling, you so
astonish me. What a strange, indomitable creature you are."

"What else could I do, Gregory?" she repeated, looking into his face and not smiling in answer
to his smiling, frowning gaze.

"Love me more; that's what you could have done--a great deal more," said Gregory. "That's what
you must do, Karen. I can't bear to think that you wouldn't marry me without her consent. I
can't bear to think that you don't love me enough. But leave you because you don't love me
as much as I want you to love me! My darling, how little you understand."

"You seemed very angry," said Karen. "I was so unhappy. I don't know how I should have borne
it if you had gone away and left me like this. But love should not make one weak, Gregory.
There you are wrong, to think it is because I do not love you."

"Ah, you'll find out if I'm wrong!" Gregory exclaimed with tender conviction. "You'll find
out how much more you are to love me. Oh, yes, I will kiss you good-bye, Karen. I don't care
if all the Tantes in the world forbid it!"

In thinking afterwards of these last moments that they had had together, the discomfitures
and dismays of the afternoon tended to resolve themselves for Gregory into the memory of the
final yielding. She had let him take her into his arms, and with the joy was the added sweetness
of knowing that in permitting and reciprocating his unauthorized kiss she sacrificed some principles,
at all events, for his sake.

CHAPTER XII

Madame von Marwitz was sitting on the great terrace of a country-house in Massachusetts, opening
and reading her post, as we have already seen her do. Impatient and weary as the occupation
often made her, she yet depended upon the morning waves of adulation that lapped in upon her
from every quarter of the earth. To miss the fullness of the tide gave her, when by chance
there was deficiency, the feeling that badly made café au lait gave her at the beginning of
the day; something was wrong; the expected stimulant lacked in force or in flavour, and coffee
that was not strong and sweet and aromatic was a mishap so unusual that, when it occurred,
it became an offence almost gross and unnatural, as did a post that brought few letters of
homage and appreciation. To-day the mental coffee was as strong and as perfumed as that of
which she had shortly before partaken in her lovely little Louis Quinze boudoir, after she
had come in from her bath. The bath-room was like that of a Roman Empress, all white marble,
with a square of emerald water into which one descended down shallow marble steps. Madame von
Marwitz was amused by the complexities of luxury among which she found herself, some of which,
even to her, were novel. "Eh, eh, ma chère," she had said to Miss Scrotton, "beautiful if you
will, and very beautiful; but its nails are too much polished, its hair too much ondulé. I
prefer a porcelain to a marble bath-tub." But the ingenuities of hospitality which the Aspreys--earnest
and accomplished millionaires--lavished upon their guests made one, she owned, balmily comfortable.
And as she sat now in her soft white draperies under a great silken sunshade, raised on a stand
above her and looking in the sunlight like a silver bell, the beauty of her surroundings--the
splendid Italian gardens, a miracle of achievement even if lacking, as the miraculous may,
an obvious relation with its surroundings; the landscape with its inlaid lake and wood and
hill and great arch of bluest sky; the tall, transparent, Turneresque trees in the middle distance;--all
this stately serenity seemed to have wrought in her an answering suavity and gladness. There
was almost a latent gaiety in her glance, as, with her large, white, securely moving hands,
which seemed to express their potential genius in every deft and delicate gesture, she took
up and cut open and unfolded her letters, pausing between them now and then to tweak off and
eat a grape as large as a plum from the bunch lying on its leaves in a Veronese-like silver
platter beside her.

This suavity, this gladness and even gaiety of demeanour were apparent to Miss Eleanor Scrotton
when she presently emerged from the house and advanced slowly along the terrace, pausing at
intervals beside its balustrade to gaze with a somewhat melancholy eye over the prospect.

Miss Scrotton was struggling with a half formulated sense of grievance. It was she who had
brought Madame von Marwitz and the Aspreys together. Madame von Marwitz already knew, of course,
most of the people in America who were worth knowing; if she hadn't met them there she had
met them in Europe; but the Aspreys she had, till then, never met, and they had been, indisputably,
Miss Scrotton's possession. Miss Scrotton had known them slightly for several years; her father
and Mr. Asprey had corresponded on some sociological theme and the Aspreys had called on him
in London in a mood of proper deference and awe. She had written to the Aspreys before sailing
with Mercedes, had found that they were wintering in Egypt, but would be back in America in
Spring, ready to receive Madame von Marwitz and herself with open arms; and within those arms
she had, a week ago, placed her treasure. No doubt someone else would have done it if she hadn't;
and perhaps she had been too eager in her determination that no one else should do it. Perhaps
she was altogether a little too eager. Madame von Marwitz liked people to care for her and
showed a pretty gratitude for pains endured on her behalf; at least she usually did so; but
it may well have been that the great woman, at once vaguely aloof and ironically observant,
had become a little irked, or bored, or merely amused at hearing so continually, as it were,
her good Scrotton panting beside her, tense, determined and watchful of opportunity. However
that may have been, Miss Scrotton, as Madame von Marwitz's glance now lifted and rested upon
herself, detected the sharper gaiety defined by the French as "malice," lighting, though ever
so mildly, her friend's eyes and lips. Like most devotees Miss Scrotton had something of the
valet in her composition, and with the valet's capacity for obsequiousness went a valet-like
shrewdness of perception. She hadn't spent four months travelling about America with Madame
von Marwitz without seeing her in undress. She had long since become uncomfortably aware that
when Madame von Marwitz found one a little ridiculous she could be unkind, and that when one
added plaintiveness to folly she often amused herself by giving one, to speak metaphorically,
soft yet sharp little pinches that left one nervously uncertain of whether a caress or an aggression
had been intended.

Miss Scrotton was plaintive, and she could not conceal it. Glory as she might in the rôle of
second fiddle, she was very tenaciously aware of what was due to that subservient but by no
means insignificant performer; and the Aspreys had not shown themselves enough aware, Mercedes
had not shown herself aware at all, of what they all owed to her sustaining, discreet and harmonious
accompaniment. In the carefully selected party assembled at Belle Vue for Madame von Marwitz's
delectation, she had been made a little to feel that she was but one of the indistinguishable
orchestra that plucked out from accommodating strings a mellow bass to the one thrilling solo.
Not for one moment did she grudge any of the recognitions that were her great friend's due;
but she did expect to bask beside her; she did expect to find transmitted to her an important
satellite's share of beams; and, it wasn't to be denied, Mercedes had been too much occupied
with other people--and with one other in particular--to shine upon her in any distinguishing
degree. Mercedes had the faculty, chafe against it as one might--and her very fondness, her
very familiarity were a part of the effect--of making one show as an unimportant satellite,
as something that would revolve when wanted and be contentedly invisible when that was fitting.
"I might almost as well be a paid dame de compagnie," Miss Scrotton had more than once murmured
to herself with a lip that trembled; and, obscurely, she realised that close association with
the great might reveal one as insignificant rather than as glorified. It was therefore with
her air of melancholy that she paused in her advance along the terrace to gaze out at the prospect,
and with an air of emphasized calm and dignity that she finally came towards her friend; and,
as she came, thus armed, the blitheness deepened in the great woman's eyes.

"Well, ma chèrie," she remarked, "How goes it?" She spoke in French.

"Very well, ma bien aimée," Miss Scrotton replied in the same language. Her French was correct,
but Mercedes often made playful sallies at the expense of her accent. She preferred not to
talk in French. And when Madame von Marwitz went on to ask her where her fellow convives were,
it was in English that she answered, "I don't know where they all are--I have been busy writing
letters; Mrs. Asprey and Lady Rose are driving, I know, and Mr. Asprey and Mr. Drew I saw in
the smoking-room as I passed. The Marquis I don't think is down yet, nor Mrs. Furnivall; the
young people are playing tennis, I suppose."

Miss Scrotton looked about the terrace with its rhythmic tubs of flowering trees, its groups
of chairs, its white silk parasols, and then wandered to the parapet to turn and glance up
at the splendid copy of an Italian villa that rose above it. "It is really very beautiful,
Mercedes," she observed. "It becomes the more significant from being so isolated, so divorced
from what we are accustomed to find in Europe as a setting for such a place, doesn't it? Just
as, I always think, the people of the Asprey type, the best this country has to offer, are
more significant, too, for being picked out from so much that is indistinguishable. I do flatter
myself, darling, that in this visit, at least, I've been able to offer you something really
worth your while, something that adds to your experience of people and places. You are enjoying
yourself," said Miss Scrotton with a manner of sad satisfaction.

"Yes; truly," Madame von Marwitz made genial reply. "The more so for finding myself surrounded
by so many old acquaintances. It is a particular pleasure to see again Lady Rose and the vivacious
and intelligent Mrs. Furnivall; it was in Venice that we last met; her Palazzo there you must
one day see. Monsieur de Hautefeuille and Mr. Drew I counted already as friends in Europe."

"And Mrs. Asprey you will soon count as one, I hope. She is really a somewhat remarkable woman.
She comes, you know, of one of their best and oldest families."

"Oh, for that, no; not remarkable. Good, if you will--bon comme du pain; it strikes me much,
that goodness, among these American rich whom we are accustomed to hear so crudely caricatured
in Europe;--and it is quite a respectable little aristocracy. They ally themselves, as we see
here in our excellent host and hostess, with what there is of old blood in the country and
win tradition to guide their power. They are not the flaunting, vulgar rich, of whom we hear
so much from those who do not know them, but the anxious, thoughtful, virtuous rich, oppressed
by their responsibilities and all studying so hard, poor dears, at stiff, deep books, in order
to fulfil them worthily. They all go to conférences, these ladies, it seems, and study sociology.
They take life with a seriousness that I have never seen equalled. Mrs. Asprey is like them
all; good, oh, but yes. And I am pleased to know her, too. Mrs. Furnivall had promised her
long since, she tells me, that it should be. She and Mrs. Furnivall are old school-mates."

Miss Scrotton, all her merit thus mildly withdrawn from her, stood silent for some moments
looking away at the lake and the Turneresque trees.

"It was so very kind of you, Mercedes, to have had Mr. Drew asked here," she observed at last,
very casually. "It is a real opportunity for a young bohemian of that type; you are a true
fairy-godmother to him; first Mrs. Forrester and now the Aspreys. Curious, wasn't it, his appearing
over here so suddenly?"

"Curious? It did not strike me so," said Madame von Marwitz, showing no consciousness of the
thrust her friend had ventured to essay. "People come to America a great deal, do they not;
and often suddenly. It is the country of suddenness. His books are much read here, it seems,
and he had business with his publishers. He knew, too, that I was here; and that to him was
also an attraction. Why curious, my Scrotton?"

Miss Scrotton disliked intensely being called "my Scrotton;" but she had never yet found the
necessary courage to protest against the appellation. "Oh, only because I had had no hint of
it until he appeared," she returned. "And I wondered if you had had. Yes; I suppose he would
be a good deal read over here. It is a very derivative and artificial talent, don't you think,
darling?"

"Rather derivative; rather artificial," Madame von Marwitz replied serenely.

"He doesn't look well, does he?" Miss Scrotton pursued, after a little pause. "I don't like
that puffiness about the eyelids and chin. It will be fatal for him to become fat."

"No," said Madame von Marwitz, as serenely as before, her eyes now on a letter that she held.
"Ah, no; he could rise above fat, that young man. I can see him fat with impunity. Would it
become, then, somewhat the Talleyrand type? How many distinguished men have been fat. Napoleon,
Renan, Gibbon, Dr. Johnson--" she turned her sheet as she mildly brought out the desultory
list. "And all seem to end in n, do they not? I am glad that I asked Mr. Drew. He flavours
the dish like an aromatic herb; and what a success he has been; hein? But he is the type of
personal success. He is independent, indifferent, individual."

"Ah, my dear, you are too generous to that young man," Miss Scrotton mused. "It's beautiful,
it's wonderful to watch; but you are, indeed, too kind to him." She mused, she was absent,
yet she knew, and knew that Mercedes knew, that never before in all their intercourse had she
ventured on such a speech. It implied watchfulness; it implied criticism; it implied, even,
anxiety; it implied all manner of things that it was not permitted for a satellite to say.

The Baroness's eyes were on her letter, and though she did not raise them her dark brows lifted.
"Tiens," she continued, "you find that I am too kind to him?"

Miss Scrotton, to keep up the appearance of ingenuousness, was forced to further definition.
"I don't think, darling, that in your sympathy, your solicitude, where young talent is concerned,
you quite realize how much you give, how much you can be made use of. The man admires you,
of course, and has, of course, talent of a sort. Yet, when I see you together, I confess that
I receive sometimes the impression of a scattering of pearls."

Madame von Marwitz laid down her letter. "Ah! ah!--oh! oh!--ma bonne," she said. She laughed
out. Her eyes were lit with dancing sparks. "Do you know you speak as if you were very, very
jealous of this young man who is found so charming?"

"Jealous, my dear Mercedes?" Miss Scrotton's emotion showed itself in a dark flush.

"Mais oui; mais oui; you tell me that my friend is a swine. Does that not mean that you, of
late, have received too few pearls?"

"My dear Mercedes! Who called him a swine?"

"One doesn't speak of scattered pearls without rousing these associations." Her tone was beaming.

Was it possible to swallow such an affront? Was it possible not to? And she had brought it
upon herself. There was comfort and a certain restoration of dignity in this thought. Miss
Scrotton, struggling inwardly, feigned lightness. "So few of us are worthy of your pearls,
dear. Unworthiness doesn't, I hope, consign us to the porcine category. Perhaps it is that
being, like him, a little person, I'm able to see Mr. Drew's merits and demerits more impartially
than you do. That is all. I really ought to know a good deal about Mr. Drew," Miss Scrotton
pursued, regaining more self-control, now that she had steered her way out of the dreadful
shoals where her friend's words had threatened to sink her; "I've known him since the days
when he was at Oxford and I used to stay there with my uncle the Dean. He was sitting, then,
at the feet of Pater. It's a derivative, a parvenu talent, and, I do feel it, I confess I do,
a derivative personality altogether, like that of so many of these clever young men nowadays.
He is, you know, of anything but distinguished antecedents, and his reaction from his own milieu
has been, perhaps, from the first, a little marked. Unfortunately his marriage is there to
remind people of it, and I never see Mr. Drew dans le monde without, irrepressibly, thinking
of the dismal little wife in Surbiton whom I once called upon, and his swarms--but swarms,
my dear--of large-mouthed children."

Miss Scrotton wondered, as she proceeded, whether she had again too far abandoned discretion.

The Baroness examined her next letter for a moment before opening it and if she, too, had received
her sting, she abandoned nothing.

She answered with complete, though perhaps ominous, mildness: "He is rather like Shelley, I
always think, a sophisticated Shelley who had sat at the feet of Pater. Shelley, too, had swarms
of children, and it is possible that they were large-mouthed. The plebeian origin that you
tell me of rather attracts me. I care, especially, for the fine flame that mounts from darkness;
and I, too, on one side, as you will remember, ma bonne, am du peuple."

"My dear Mercedes! Your father was an artist, a man of genius; and if your parents had risen
from the gutter, you, by your own genius, transcend the question of rank as completely as a
Shakespeare."

The continued mildness was alarming Miss Scrotton; an eagerness to make amends was in her eye.

"Ah--but did he, poor man!" Madame von Marwitz mused, rather irrelevantly, her eyes on her
letter. "One hears now, not. But thank you, my Scrotton, you mean to be consoling. I have,
however, no dread of the gutter. Tiens," she turned a page, "here is news indeed."

Miss Scrotton had now taken a chair beside her and her fingers tapped a little impatiently
as the Baroness's eye--far from the thought of pearls and swine--went over the letter.

"Tiens, tiens," Madame von Marwitz repeated; "the little Karen is sought in marriage."

"Really," said Miss Scrotton, "how very fortunate for the poor little thing. Who is the young
man, and how, in heaven's name, has she secured a young man in the wilds of Cornwall?"

Madame von Marwitz made no reply. She was absorbed in another letter. And Miss Scrotton now
perceived, with amazement and indignation, that the one laid down was written in the hand of
Gregory Jardine.

"You don't mean to tell me," Miss Scrotton said, after some moments of hardly held patience,
"that it's Gregory?"

Madame von Marwitz, having finished her second letter, was gazing before her with a somewhat
ambiguous expression.

"Tallie speaks well of him," she remarked at last. "He has made a very good impression on Tallie."

"Are you speaking of Gregory Jardine, Mercedes?" Miss Scrotton repeated.

Madame von Marwitz now looked at her and as she looked the tricksy light of malice again grew
in her eye. "Mais oui; mais oui. You have guessed correctly, my Scrotton," she said. "And you
may read his letter. It is pleasant to me to see that stiff, self-satisfied young man brought
to his knees. Read it, ma chère, read it. It is an excellent letter."

Miss Scrotton read, and, while she read, Madame von Marwitz's cold, deep eyes rested on her,
still vaguely smiling.

"How very extraordinary," said Miss Scrotton. She handed back the letter.

"Extraordinary? Now, why, ma bonne?" her friend inquired, all limpid frankness. "He looked
indeed, a stockish, chill young man, of the cold-nosed type--ah, que je n'aime pas ça!--but
he is a good young man; a most unimpeachable young man; and our little Karen has melted him;
how much his letter shows."

"Gregory Jardine is a very able and a very distinguished person," said Miss Scrotton, "and
of an excellent county family. His mother and mine were cousins, as you know, and I have always
taken the greatest interest in him. One can't but wonder how the child managed it." Mercedes,
she knew, was drawing a peculiar satisfaction from her displeasure; but she couldn't control it.

"Ah, the child is not a manager. She is so far from managing it, you see, that she leaves it
to me to manage. It touches and surprises me, I confess, to find that her devotion to me rules
her even at a moment like this. Yes; Karen has pleased me very much."

"Of course that old-fashioned formality would in itself charm Gregory. He is very conventional.
But I do hope, my dear Mercedes, that you will think it over a little before giving your consent.
It is really a most unsuitable match. Karen's feelings are, evidently, not at all deeply engaged
and with Gregory it must be a momentary infatuation. He will get over it in time and thank
you for saving him; and Karen will marry Herr Lippheim, as you hoped she would."

"Now upon my word, my Scrotton," said Madame von Marwitz in a manner as near insolence as its
grace permitted, "I do not follow you. A barrister, a dingy little London barrister, to marry
my ward? You call that an unsuitable marriage? I protest that I do not follow you and I assert,
to the contrary, that he has played his cards well. Who is he? A nobody. You speak of your
county families; what do they signify outside their county? Karen in herself is, I grant you,
also a nobody; but she stands to me in a relation almost filial--if I chose to call it so;
and I signify more than the families of many counties put together. Let us be frank. He opens
no doors to Karen. She opens doors to him."

Miss Scrotton, addressed in these measured and determined tones, changed colour. "My dear Mercedes,
of course you are right there. Of course in one sense, if you take Gregory in as you have taken
Karen in, you open doors to him. I only meant that a young man in his position, with his way
to make in the world, ought to marry some well-born woman with a little money. He must have
money if he is to get on. He ought to be in parliament one day; and Karen is without a penny,
you have often told me so, as well as illegitimate. Of course if you intend to make her a large
allowance, that is a different matter; but can you really afford to do that, darling?"

"I consider your young man very fortunate to get Karen without one penny," Madame von Marwitz
pursued, in the same measured tones, "and I shall certainly make him no present of my hard-earned
money. Let him earn the money for Karen, now, as I have done for so many years. Had she married
my good Franz, it would have been a very different thing. This young man is well able to support
her in comfort. No; it all comes most opportunely. I wanted Karen to settle and to settle soon.
I shall cable my consent and my blessings to them at once. Will you kindly find me a servant,
ma chère."

Miss Scrotton, as she rose automatically to carry out this request, was feeling that it is
possible almost to hate one's idols. She had transgressed, and she knew it, and Mercedes had
been aware of what she had done and had punished her for it. She even wondered if the quick
determination to accept Gregory as Karen's suitor hadn't been part of the punishment. Mercedes
knew that she had a pride in her cousin and had determined to humble it. She had perhaps herself
to thank for having riveted this most disastrous match upon him. It was with a bitter heart
that she walked on into the house.

As she went in Mr. Claude Drew came out and Miss Scrotton gave him a chill greeting. She certainly
hated Mr. Claude Drew.

Claude Drew blinked a little in the bright sunlight and had somewhat the air of a graceful,
nocturnal bird emerging into the day. He was dressed with an appropriateness to the circumstances
of stately villégiature so exquisite as to have a touch of the fantastic.

Madame von Marwitz sat with her back to him in the limpid shadow of the great white parasol
and was again looking, not at Karen's, but at Gregory Jardine's, letter. One hand hung over
the arm of her chair.

Mr. Drew approached with quiet paces and, taking this hand, before Madame von Marwitz could
see him, he bowed over it and kissed it. The manner of the salutation made of it at once a
formality and a caress.

Madame von Marwitz looked up quickly and withdrew her hand. "You startled me, my young friend,"
she said. In her gaze was a mingled severity and softness and she smiled as if irrepressibly.

Mr. Drew smiled back. "I've been wearying to escape from our host and come to you," he said.
"He will talk to me about the reform of American politics. Why reform them? They are much more
amusing unreformed, aren't they? And why talk to me about them. I think he wants me to write
about them. If I were to write a book for the Americans, I would tell them that it is their
mission to be amusing. Democracies must be either absurd or uninteresting. America began by
being uninteresting; and now it has quite taken its place as absurd. I love to hear about their
fat, bribed, clean-shaven senators; just as I love to read the advertisements of tooth-brushes
and breakfast foods and underwear in their magazines, written in the language of persuasive,
familiar fraternity. It was difficult not to confess this to Mr. Asprey; but I do not think
he would have understood me." Mr. Drew spoke in a soft, slightly sibilant voice, with little
smiling pauses between sentences that all seemed vaguely shuffled together. He paused now,
smiling, and looking down at Madame von Marwitz.

"You speak foolishly," said Madame von Marwitz. "But he would have thought you wicked."

"Because I like beauty and don't like democracy. I suppose so." Still smiling at her he added,
"One forgets democracies when one looks at you. You are very beautiful this morning."

"I am not, this morning, in a mood for unconventionalities," Madame von Marwitz returned, meeting
his gaze with her mingled severity and softness.

And again, with composure, he ignored her severity and returned her smile. It would have been
unfair to say that there was effrontery in Mr. Drew's gaze; it merely had its way with you
and, if you didn't like its way, passed from you unperturbed. With all his rather sickly grace
and ambiguous placidity, Mr. Drew was not lacking in character. He had risen superior to a
good many things, the dismal wife at Surbiton and the large-mouthed children perhaps among
them, and he had won his detachment. The homage he offered was not unalloyed by humour. To
a person of Madame von Marwitz's calibre, he seemed to say, he would not pretend to raptures
or reverences they had both long since seen through. It would bore him to be rapturous or reverent,
and if you didn't like him, so his whole demeanour mildly demonstrated, you could leave him,
or, rather, he could leave you. So that when Madame von Marwitz sought to quell him she found
herself met with a gentle unawareness, even a gentle indifference. Cogitation and a certain
disquiet were often in her eye when it rested on this devotee.

"Does one make conventional speeches to the moon?" he now remarked, taking a chair beside her
and turning the brim of his white hat over his eyes so that of his face only the sensual, delicate
mouth and chin were in sunlight. "I shouldn't want to make speeches to you if you were conventional.
You are done with your letters? I may talk to you?"

"Yes, I have done. You may talk, as foolishly as you please, but not unconventionally; whether
I am or am not conventional is not a matter that concerns you. I have had good news to-day.
My little Karen is to marry."

"Your little Karen? Which of all the myriads is this adorer?"

"The child you saw with me in London. The one who stays in Cornwall."

"You mean the fair, square girl who calls you Tante? I only remember of her that she was fair
and square and called you Tante."

"That is she. She is to marry an excellent young man, a young man," said Madame von Marwitz,
slightly smiling at him, "who would never wish to make speeches to the moon, who is, indeed,
not aware of the moon. But he is very much aware of Karen; so much so," and she continued to
smile, as if over an amusing if still slightly perplexing memory, "that when she is there he
is not aware of me. What do you say to that?"

"I say," Mr. Drew replied, "that the barbarians will always be many and the civilized few.
Who is this barbarian?"

"A Mr. Gregory Jardine."

"Jardine? Connais-pas," said Mr. Drew.

"He is a cousin of our Scrotton's," said Madame von Marwitz, "and a man of law. Very stiff
and clean like a roll of expensive paper. He has asked me very nicely if he may inscribe the
name of Mrs. Jardine upon a page of it. He is the sort of young man of law, I think I distinguish,"
Madame von Marwitz mused, her eyes on the landscape, "who does not smoke a briar wood pipe
and ride on an omnibus, but who keeps good cigars in a silver box and always takes a hansom.
He will make Karen comfortable and, I gather from her letter, happy. It will be a strange change
of milieu for the child, but I have, I think, made her independent of milieus. She will write
more than Mrs. Jardine on his scroll. It is a child of character."

"And she will no longer be in Cornwall," Mr. Drew observed. "I am glad of that."

"Why, pray? I am not glad of it. I shall miss my Karen at Les Solitudes."

"But I, you see, don't want to have other worshippers there when I go to stay with you," said
Mr. Drew; "for, you know, you are going to let me stay a great deal with you in Cornwall. You
will play to me, and I will write something that you will, perhaps, care to read. And the moon
will be very kind and listen to many speeches. You know," he added, with a change of tone,
"that I am in love with you. I must be alone with you at Les Solitudes."

"Let us have none of that, if you please," said Madame von Marwitz. She looked away from him
along the sunny stretches of the terrace and she frowned slightly, though smiling on, as if
with tolerant affection. And in her look was something half dazed and half resentful like the
look of a fierce wild bird, subdued by the warmth and firmness of an enclosing hand.

CHAPTER XIII

Gregory went down to Cornwall again only nine days after he had left it. He and Karen met as
if under an arch of infinite blessings. He had his cable to show her and she hers to show him,
and, although Gregory did not see them as the exquisite documents that Karen felt them to be,
they did for him all that he asked Madame von Marwitz to do.

"I give her to you. Be worthy of my trust. Mercedes von Marwitz"--his read. And Karen's: "I
could only yield you to a greater joy than you can find with me--but it could not be to a greater
love. Do not forget me in your happiness. You are mine, my beloved child, not less but more
than ever.--Tante."

Karen's joy was unshadowed. It made him think of primroses and crystal springs. She was not
shy; he was shyer than she, made a little dumb, a little helpless, by his man's reverence,
his man's awed sense of the beloved's dawn-like wonder. She was not changed; any change in
Karen would come as quiet growth, not as transformation. Gregory's gladness had not this simplicity.
It revealed to him a new world, a world newly beautiful but newly perilous, and a changed self,--the
self of boyhood, renewed yet transformed, through whose joy ran the reactionary melancholy
that, in a happiness attained, glances at fear, and at a climax of life, is aware of gulfs
of sorrow as yet unsounded. More than his lover's passion was a tenderness for her and for
her unquestioning acceptances that seemed near tears. Karen was in character so wrought and
in nature so simple. Her subtleties were all objective, subtleties of sympathy, of recognition,
of adaptation to the requirements of devoted action; her simplicity was that of a whole-heartedness
unaware at high moments of all but the essential.

She had to tell him fully, holding his hand and looking into his eyes, all about her side of
it; what she had thought when she saw him at the concert--certain assumptions there gave Gregory
his stir of uneasiness--"You were caring just as much as I was--in the same way--for her music";
what she had thought at Mrs. Forrester's, and at the railway station, and when the letters
went on and on. She had of course seen what was coming that evening after they had been to
the Lavington's; "When you didn't understand about me and Tante, you know; and I made you understand."
And then he had made her understand how much he cared for her and she for him; only it had
all come so quietly; "I did not think a great deal about it, or wonder; it sank into me--like
stars one sees in a still lake, so that next day it was no surprise at all, when you told me;
it was like looking up and seeing all the real stars in the sky. Afterwards it was dreadful
for a little while, wasn't it?" Karen held his hand for a moment to her cheek.

When all the past had been looked at together, Gregory asked her if she would not marry him
quite soon; he hoped, indeed, that it might be within the month. "You see, why not?" he said.
"I miss you so dreadfully and I can't be here; and why should you be? Let me come down and
marry you in that nice little church on the other side of the village as soon as our banns
can be called."

But, for the first time, a slight anxiety showed in her eyes. "I miss you dreadfully, too,"
she said. "But you forget, Tante will not be back till July. We must wait for Tante, Gregory.
We are in May now, it is not so far to July. You will not mind too much?"

He felt, sitting under the arch of blessings as he was, that it would be most ungrateful and
inappropriate to mind. But then, he said, if they must put it off like that, Karen would have
to come to London. She must come and stay with Betty. "And get your trousseau"; this was a
brilliant idea. "You'll have to get your trousseau, you know, and Betty is an authority on
clothes."

"Oh, but clothes. I never have clothes in that sense," said Karen. "A little seamstress down
here makes most of them and Louise helps her sometimes if she has time. Tante gave me twenty
pounds before she went away; would twenty pounds do for a trousseau?"

"Betty would think twenty pounds just about enough for your gloves and stockings, I imagine,"
said Gregory.

"And will you expect me to be so luxurious? You are not rich? We shall not live richly?"

"I'm not at all rich; but I want you to have pretty things--layers and layers of the nice,
white, soft things brides always have, and a great many new hats and dresses. Couldn't I give
you a little tip--to begin the trousseau?"

"Ah, it can wait, can't it?" said Karen easily. "No; you can't give me a tip. Tante, I am sure,
will see that I have a nice trousseau. She may even give me a little dot when I marry. I have
no money at all; not one penny, you know. Do you mind?"

"I'd far rather have you without a penny because I want to give you everything. If Tante doesn't
give you the little dot, I shall."

Karen was pondering a little seriously. "I don't know what Tante will feel since you have enough
for us both. It was when she wished me to marry Franz that she spoke of a dot. And Franz is
of course very poor and has a great family of brothers and sisters to help support. You will
know Franz one day. You did not speak very nicely of Franz that time, you know; that was another
reason why I thought you were so angry. And it made me angry, too," said Karen, smiling at him.

"Wasn't I nice? I am sure Franz is."

"Oh, so good and kind and true. And very talented. And his mother would be a wonderful musician
if she had not so many children to take care of; that has harmed her music. And she, too, is
a golden-hearted person; she used often to help me with my dresses. Do you remember that little
white silk dress of mine? perhaps so; I wore it at the concert, such a pretty dress, I think.
Frau Lippheim helped me with that--she and a little German seamstress in Leipsig. I see us
now, all bending over the rustling silk, round the table with the lamp on it. We had to make
it so quickly. Tante had sent for me to come to her in Vienna and I had nothing to wear at
the great concert she was to give. We sat up till twelve to finish it. Franz and Lotta cooked
our supper for us and we only stopped long enough to eat. Dear Frau Lippheim. Some day you
will know all the Lippheims."

He listened to her with dreamy, amused delight, seeing her bending in the ugly German room
over the little white silk dress and only vaguely aware of the queer figures she put before
him. He had no inclination to know Franz and his mother, and no curiosity about them. But Karen
continued. "That is the one, the only thing I can give you," she said, reflecting. "You know
so few artists, don't you; so few people of talent. As to people, your life is narrow, isn't
it so? I have met so many great people in my life, first through my father and then through
Tante. Painters, poets, musicians. You will probably know them now, too; some of them certainly,
for some are also friends of mine. Strepoff, for example; oh--how I shall like you to meet
him. You have read him, of course, and about his escape from Siberia and his long exile."

"Strepoff? Yes, I think so. A dismal sort of fellow, isn't he?"

Gregory's delight was merging now in a more definite amusement, tinged, it may be confessed,
with alarm. He remembered to have seen a photograph of this celebrity, very turbulently haired
and very fixed and fiery of eye. He remembered a large bare throat and a defiant neck-tie.
He had no wish to make Strepoff's acquaintance. It was quite enough to read about him in the
magazines and admire his exploits from a distance.

"Dismal?" Karen had repeated, with a touch of severity. "Who would not be after such a life?
Yes, he is a sad man, and the thought of Russia never leaves him. But he is full of gaiety,
too. He spent some months with us two years ago at the Italian lakes and I grew so fond of
him. We had great jokes together, he and I. And he sometimes writes to me now, such teasing,
funny letters. The last was from San Francisco. He is giving lectures out there, raising money;
for he never ceases the struggle. He calls me Liebchen. He is very fond of me."

"What do you call him?" Gregory inquired.

"Just Strepoff; everybody calls him that. Dear Belot, too," Karen pursued. "He could not fail
to interest you. Perhaps you have already met him. He has been in London."

"Belot? Does he write poetry?"

"Poetry? No. Belot is a painter; a great painter. Surely you have heard of Belot?"

"Well, I'm afraid that if I have I've forgotten. You see, as you say, I live so out of the
world of art."

"Did you not see his portrait of Susanne Mauret--the great French actress? It has been exhibited
through all the world."

"Of course I have. Belot of course. The impressionist painter. It looked to me, I confess,
awfully queer; but I could see that it was very clever."

"Impressionist? No; Belot would not rank himself among the impressionists. And he would not
like to hear his work called clever; I warn you of that. He has a horror of cleverness. It
was not a clever picture, but sober, strange, beautiful. Well, I know Belot and his wife quite
intimately. They are great friends of the Lippheims, too, and call themselves the Franco-Prussian
alliance. Madame Belot is a dear little woman. You must have often seen his pictures of her
and the children. He has numbers of children and adores them. La petite Margot is my special
pet and she always sends me a little present on my birthday. Madame Belot was once his model,"
Karen added, "and is quite du peuple, and I believe that some of his friends were sorry that
he married her; but she makes him very happy. That beautiful nude in the Luxembourg by Chantefoy
is of her--long before she married, of course. She does not sit for the ensemble now, and indeed
I fear it has lost all its beauty, for she is very fat. It would be nice to go to Paris on
our wedding-tour and see the Belots," said Karen.

Gregory made an evasive answer. He reflected that once he had married her it would probably
be easy to detach Karen from these most undesirable associates. He hoped that she would take
to Betty. Betty would be an excellent antidote. "And you think your sister-in-law will want
me?" said Karen, when he brought her from the Belots back to Betty. "She doesn't know me."

"She must begin to know you as soon as possible. You will have Mrs. Forrester at hand, you
see, if my family should oppress you too much. Barring Betty, who hardly counts as one of them,
they aren't interesting, I warn you."

"I may oppress them," said Karen, with the shrewdness that often surprised him. "Who will they
take refuge with?"

"Oh, they have all London to fall back upon. They do nothing when they're up but go out. That's
my plan; that they should leave you a good deal when they go out, and leave you to me."

"That will be nice," said Karen. "But Mrs. Forrester, you know," she went on, "is not exactly
an intimate of mine that I could fall back upon. I am, in her eyes, only a little appendage
of Tante's."

"Ah, but you have ceased, now, to be an appendage of Tante's. And Mrs. Forrester is an intimate,
an old one, of mine."

"She'll take me in as your appendage," Karen smiled.

"Not at all. It's you, now, who are the person to whom the appendage belongs. I'm your appendage.
That quite alters the situation. You will have to stand in the foreground and do all the conventional
things."

"Shall I?" smiled Karen, unperturbed. She was, as he knew, not to be disconcerted by any novel
social situation. She had witnessed so many situations and such complicated ones that the merely
conventional were, in her eyes, relatively insignificant and irrevelant. There would be for
her none of the débutante's sense of awkwardness or insufficiency. Again she reminded him of
the rustic little princess, unaware of alien customs, and ready to learn and to laugh at her
own blunders.

It was arranged, Mrs. Talcott's appearance helping to decisions, that as soon as Karen heard
from her guardian, who might have plans to suggest, she should come up to London and stay with
Lady Jardine.

Mrs. Talcott, on entering, had grasped Gregory's hand and shaken it vigorously, remarking:
"I'm very pleased to see you back again."

"I didn't tell Mrs. Talcott anything, Gregory," said Karen. "But I am sure she guessed."

"Mrs. Talcott and I had our understandings," said Gregory, "but I'm sure she guessed from the
moment she saw me down here. She was much quicker than you, Karen."

"I've seen a good many young folks in my time," Mrs. Talcott conceded.

Gregory's sense of the deepened significance in all things lent a special pathos to his conjectures
to-day about Mrs. Talcott. He did not know how far her affection for Karen went and whether
it were more than the mere kindly solicitude of the aged for the young; but the girl's presence
in her life must give at least interest and colour, and after Mrs. Talcott had spoken her congratulations
and declared that she believed they'd be real happy together, he said, the idea striking him
as an apt one, "And Mrs. Talcott, you must come up and stay with us in London sometimes, won't
you?"

"Oh, Mrs. Talcott--yes, yes;" said Karen, delighted. He had never seen her kiss Mrs. Talcott,
but she now clasped her arm, standing beside her. Mrs. Talcott did not smile; but, after a
moment, the aspect of her face changed; it always took some moments for Mrs. Talcott's expression
to change. Now it was like seeing the briny old piece of shipwrecked oak mildly illuminated
with sunlight on its lonely beach.

"That's real kind of you; real kind," said Mrs. Talcott reflectively. "I don't expect I'll
get up there. I'm not much of a traveller these days. But it's real kind of you to have thought
of it."

"But it must be," Karen declared. "Only think; I should pour out your coffee for you in the
morning, after all these years when you've poured out mine; and we would walk in the park--Gregory's
flat overlooks the park you know--and we would drive in hansoms--don't you like hansoms--and
go to the play in the evening. But yes, indeed, you shall come."

Mrs. Talcott listened to these projects, still with her mild illumination, remarking when Karen
had done, "I guess not, Karen; I guess I'll stay here. I've been moving round considerable
all my life long and now I expect I'll just stay put. There's no one to look after things here
but me and they'd get pretty muddled if I was away, I expect. Mitchell isn't a very bright man."

"The real difficulty is," said Karen, holding Mrs. Talcott's arm and looking at her with affectionate
exasperation, "that she doesn't like to leave Les Solitudes lest she should miss a moment of
Tante. Tante sometimes turns up almost at a moment's notice. We shall have to get Tante safely
away to Russia, or America again, before we can ask you; isn't that the truth, Mrs. Talcott?"

"Well, I don't know. Perhaps there's something in it," Mrs. Talcott admitted. "Mercedes likes
to know I'm here seeing to things. She mightn't feel easy in her mind if I was away."

"We'll lay it before her, then," said Karen. "I know she will say that you must come."

CHAPTER XIV

It was not until some three weeks after that Karen paid her visit to London. Tante had not
written at once and Gregory had to control his discontent and impatience as best he might.
He and Karen wrote to each other every day and he was aware of a fretful anxiety in his letters
which contrasted strangely with the serenity of hers. Once more she made him feel that she
was the more mature. In his brooding imaginativeness he was like the most youthful of lovers,
seeing his treasure menaced on every hand by the hazards of life. He warned Karen against cliff-edges;
he warned her, now that motors were every day becoming more common, against their sudden eruption
in "cornery" lanes; he begged her repeatedly to keep safe and sound until he could himself
take care of her. Karen replied with sober reassurances and promises and showed no corresponding
alarms on his behalf. She had, evidently, more confidence in the law of probability.

She wired at last to say that she had heard from Tante and would come up next day if Lady Jardine
could have her at such short notice. Gregory had made his arrangements with Betty, who showed
a most charming sympathy for his situation, and when, at the station, he saw Karen's face smiling
at him from a window, when he seized her arm and drew her forth, it was with a sense of relief
and triumph as great as though she were restored to him after actual perils.

"Darling, it has seemed such ages," he said.

He was conscious, delightedly, absorbedly, of everything about her. She wore her little straw
hat with the black bow and a long hooded cape of thin grey cloth. In her hand she held a small
basket containing her knitting--she was knitting him a pair of golf stockings--and a book.

He piloted her to the cab he had in waiting. Her one small shabby box was put on the top and
a very large dressing-case, curiously contrasting in its battered and discoloured magnificence
with the box, placed inside; it was a discarded one of Madame von Marwitz's, as its tarnished
initials told him. It was only as the cab rolled out of the station, after he had kissed Karen
and was holding her hand, that he realized that she was far less aware of him than he of her.
Not that she was not glad; she sighed deeply with content, smiling at him, holding his hand
closely; but there was a shadow of preoccupation on her.

"Tell me, darling, is everything all right?" he asked. "You have had good news from your guardian?"

She said nothing for a moment, looking out of the window, and then back at him. Then she said:
"She is beautiful to me. But I have made her sad."

"Made her sad? Why have you made her sad?" Gregory suppressed--only just suppressed--an indignant
note.

"I did not think of it myself," said Karen. "I didn't think of her side at all, I'm afraid,
because I did not realise how much I was to her. But you remember what I told you I was, the
little home thing; I am that even more deeply than I had thought; and she feels--dear, dear
one--that that is gone from her, that it can never be the same again." She turned her eyes
from him and the tears gathered thickly in them.

"But, dearest," said Gregory, "she can't want to make you sad, can she? She must really be
glad to have you happy. She herself wanted you to get married, and had found Franz Lippheim
for you, you know." Instinct warned him to go carefully.

Karen shook her head with a little impatience. "One may be glad to have someone happy, yet
sad for oneself. She is sad. Very, very sad."

"May I see her letter?" Gregory asked after a moment, and Karen, hesitating, then drew it from
the pocket of her cloak, saying, as she handed it to him, and as if to atone for the impatience,
"It doesn't make me love you any less--you understand that, dear Gregory--because she is sad.
It only makes me feel, in my own happiness, how much I love her."

Gregory read. The address was "Belle Vue."

     "My Darling Child,--A week has passed since I had your letter and
     now the second has come and I must write to you. My Karen knows
     that when in pain it is my instinct to shut myself away, to be
     quite still, quite silent, and so to let the waves go over me. That
     is why, she will understand, I have not written yet. I have waited
     for the strength and courage to come back to me so that I might
     look my sorrow in the face. For though it is joy for you, and I
     rejoice in it, it is sorrow, could it be otherwise, for me. So the
     years go on and so our cherished flowers drop from us; so we feel
     our roots of life chilling and growing old; and the marriage-veil
     that we wrap round a beloved child becomes the symbol of the shroud
     that is to fold us from her. I knew that I should one day have to
     give up my Karen; I wished it; she knows that; but now that it has
     come and that the torch is in her hand, I can only feel the
     darkness in which her going leaves me. Not to find my little Karen
     there, in my life, part of my life;--that is the thought that
     pierces me. In how many places have I found her, for years and
     years; do you remember them all, Karen? I know that in heart we are
     not to be severed; I know that, as I cabled to you, you are not
     less but more mine than ever; but the body cries out for the dear
     presence; for the warm little hand in my tired hand, the loving
     eyes in my sad eyes, the loving heart to lean my stricken heart
     upon. How shall I bear the loneliness and the silence of my life
     without you?

     "Do not forget me, my Karen. Ah, I know you will not, yet the cry
     arises. Do not let this new love that has come to you in your youth
     and gladness shut me out more than it must. Do not forget the old,
     the lonely Tante. Ah, these poor tears, they fall and fall. I am
     sad, sad to death, my Karen. Great darknesses are behind me, and
     before me I see the darkness to which I go.

     "Farewell, my darling.--Lebewohl.--Tell Mr. Jardine that he must
     make my child happy indeed if I am to forgive him for my loss.

     "Yes; it shall be in July, when I return. I send you a little gift
     that my Karen may make herself the fine lady, ready for all the
     gaieties of the new life. He will wish it to be a joyful one, I
     know; he will wish her to drink deep of all that the world has to
     offer of splendid, and rare, and noble. My child is worthy of a
     great life, I have equipped her for it. Go forward, my Karen, with
     your husband, into the light. My heart is with you always.

     "Tante."

Gregory read, and instinctively, while he read, he glanced at Karen, steadying his face lest
she should guess from its tremor of contempt how latent antagonisms hardened to a more ironic
dislike. But Karen gazed from the window--grave, preoccupied. Such suspicions were far indeed
from her. Gregory could give himself to the letter and its intimations undiscovered. Suffering?
Perhaps Madame von Marwitz was suffering; but she had no business to say it. Forgive him indeed;
well, if those were the terms of forgiveness, he promised himself that he should deserve it.
Meanwhile he must conceal his resentment.

"I'm so sorry, darling," he said, giving the letter back to Karen. "We shall have to cheer
her up, shan't we? When she sees how very happy you are with me I am sure she'll feel happier."
He wasn't at all sure.

"I don't know, Gregory. I am afraid that my happiness cannot make her less lonely."

Karen's griefs were not to be lightly dispersed. But she was not a person to enlarge upon them.
After another moment she pointed out something from the window and laughed; but the unshadowed
gladness that he had imagined for their meeting was overcast.

Betty awaited them with tea in her Pont Street drawing-room, a room of polished, glittering,
softly lustrous surfaces. Precious objects stood grouped on little Empire tables or ranged
in Empire cabinets. Flat, firm cushions of rose-coloured satin stood against the backs of Empire
chairs and sofas. On the walls were French engravings and a delicate portrait of Betty done
at the time of her marriage by Boutet de Monvel. The room, like Betty herself, combined elegance
and cordiality.

"I was there, you know, at the very beginning," she said, taking Karen's hands and scanning
her with her jewel-like eyes. "It was love at first sight. He asked who you were at once and
I'm pleased to think that it was I who gave him his first information. Now that I look back
upon it," said Betty, taking her place at the tea-table and holding Karen still with her bright
and friendly gaze, "I remember that he was far more interested in you than in anything else
that evening. I don't believe that Madame Okraska existed for him." Betty was drawing on her
imagination in a manner that she took for granted to be pleasing.

"I should be sorry to think that," Karen observed and Gregory was relieved to see that she
did not take Betty's supposition seriously. She watched her pretty hands move among the teacups
with an air of pleased interest.

"Would you really? You would want him to retain all his æsthetic faculties even while he was
falling in love? Do you think one could?" Betty asked her questions smiling. "Or perhaps you
think that one would fall in love the more securely from listening to Madame Okraska at the
same time. I think perhaps I should. I do admire her so much. I hope now that some day I shall
know her. She must be, I am sure, as lovely as she looks."

"Yes, indeed," said Karen. "And you will meet her very soon, you see, for she comes back in July."

Gregory sat and listened to their talk, satisfied that they were to get on, yet with a slight
discomfort. Betty questioned and Karen replied, unaware that she revealed aspects of her past
that Betty might not interpret as she would feel it natural that they should be interpreted,
supremely unaware that any criticism could attach itself to her guardian as a result of these
revelations. Yes; she had met so-and-so and this and that, in Rome, in Paris, in London or
St. Petersburg; but no, evidently, she could hardly say that she knew any of these people,
friends of Tante's though they were. The ambiguity of her status as little camp-follower became
defined for Betty's penetrating and appraising eyes and the inappropriateness of the letter,
with its broken-hearted maternal tone, returned to Gregory with renewed irony. He didn't want
to share with Betty his hidden animosities and once or twice, when her eye glanced past Karen
and rested reflectively upon himself, he knew that Betty was wondering how much he saw and
how he liked it. The Lippheims again made their socially unillustrious appearance; Karen had
so often stayed with them before Les Solitudes had been built and while Tante travelled with
Mrs. Talcott; she had never stayed--Gregory was thankful for small mercies--with the Belots;
Tante, after all, had her own definite discriminations; she would not have placed Karen in
the charge of Chantefoy's lady of the Luxembourg, however reputable her present position; but
Gregory was uneasy lest Karen should disclose how simply she took Madame Belot's past. The
fact that Karen's opportunities in regard to dress were so obviously haphazard, coming up with
the question of the trousseau, was somewhat atoned for by the sum that Madame von Marwitz now
sent--Gregory had forgotten to ask the amount. "A hundred pounds," said Betty cheerfully; "Oh,
yes; we can get you very nicely started on that."

"Tante seems to think," said Karen, "that I shall have to be very gay and have a great many
dresses; but I hope it will not have to be so very much. I am fond of quiet things."

"Well, especially at first, I suppose you will have a good many dinners and dances; Gregory
is fond of dancing, you know. But I don't think you lead such a taxing social life, do you,
Gregory? You are a rather sober person, aren't you?"

"That is what I thought," said Karen. "For I am sober, too, and I want to read so many things,
in the evening, you know, Gregory. I want to read Political Economy and understand about politics;
Tante does not care for politics, but she always finds me too ignorant of the large social
questions. You will teach me all that, won't you? And we must hear so much music; and travel,
too, in your holidays; I do not see how we can have much time for many dinners. As for dances,
I do not know how to dance; would that make any difference, when you went? I could sit and
look on, couldn't I?"

"No, indeed; you can't sit and look on; you'll have to dance with me," said Gregory. "I will
teach you dancing as well as Political Economy. She must have lessons, mustn't she, Betty?
Of course you must learn to dance."

"I do not think I shall learn easily," Karen said, smiling from him to Betty. "I do not think
I should do you credit in a ballroom. But I will try, of course."

Gregory was quite prepared for Betty's probes when Karen went upstairs to her room. "What a
dear she is, Gregory," she said; "and how clever it was of you to find her, hidden away as
she has been. I suppose the life of a great musician doesn't admit of formalities. She never
had time to introduce, as it were, her adopted daughter."

"Well, no; a great musician could hardly take an adopted or a real daughter around to dances;
and Karen isn't exactly adopted."

"No, I see." Betty's eyes sounded him. "She is really very nice I suppose, Madame von Marwitz?
You like her very much? Mrs. Forrester dotes upon her, of course; but Mrs. Forrester is an
enthusiast."

"And I'm not, as you know," Gregory returned, he flattered himself, with skill. "I don't think
that I shall ever dote on Madame von Marwitz. When I know her I hope to like her very much.
At present I hardly know her better than you do."

"Ah--but you must know a great deal about her from Karen," said Betty, who could combine tact
with pertinacity; "but she, too, in that respect, is an enthusiast, I suppose."

"Well, naturally. It's been a wonderful relationship. You remember you felt that so much in
telling me about Karen at the very first."

"Of course; and it's all true, isn't it; the forest and all the rest of it. Only, not having
met Karen, one didn't realize how much Madame von Marwitz was in luck." Betty, it was evident,
had already begun to wonder whether Tante was as lovely as she looked.

CHAPTER XV

"Dear Mrs. Forrester, you know that I worship the ground she treads on," said Miss Scrotton;
"but it can't be denied--can you deny it?--that Mercedes is capricious."

It was one day only after Miss Scrotton's return from America and she had returned alone, and
it was to this fact that she alluded rather than to the more general results of Madame von
Marwitz's sudden postponement. Owing to the postponement, Karen to-day was being married in
Cornwall without her guardian's presence. Miss Scrotton had touched on that. She had said that
she didn't think Mercedes would like it, she had added that she couldn't herself, however inconvenient
delay might have been, understand how Karen and Gregory could have done it. But she had not
at first much conjecture to give to the bridal pair. It was upon the fact that Mercedes, at
the last moment, had thrown all plans overboard, that she dwelt, with a nipped and tightened
utterance and a gaze, fixed on the wall above the tea-table, almost tragic. Mrs. Forrester
was the one person in whom she could confide. It was through Mrs. Forrester that she had met
Mercedes; her devotion to Mercedes constituted to Mrs. Forrester, as she was aware, her chief
merit. Not that Mrs. Forrester wasn't fond of her; she had been fond of her ever since, as
a relative of the Jardines' and a precociously intelligent little girl who had published a
book on Port-Royal at the age of eighteen, she had first attracted her attention at a literary
tea-party. But Mrs. Forrester would not have sat so long or listened so patiently to any other
theme than the one that so absorbed them both and that so united them in their absorption.
Miss Scrotton even suspected that a tinge of bland and kindly pity coloured Mrs. Forrester's
readiness to sympathize. She must know Mercedes well enough to know that she could give her
devotees bad half hours, though the galling thing was to suspect that Mrs. Forrester was one
of the few people to whom she wouldn't give them. Mrs. Forrester might worship as devoutly
as anybody, yet her devotion never let her in for so much forbearance and sacrifice. Perhaps,
poor Miss Scrotton worked it out, the reason was that to Mrs. Forrester Mercedes was but one
among many, whereas to herself Mercedes was the central prize and treasure. Mrs. Forrester
was incapable of a pang of jealousy or emulation; she was always delighted yet never eager.
When, in the first flow of intimacy with Mercedes, Miss Scrotton had actually imagined, for
an ecstatic and solemn fortnight, that she stood first with her, Mrs. Forrester had met her
air of irrepressible triumph with a geniality in which was no trace of grievance or humiliation.
The downfall had been swift; Mercedes had snubbed her one day, delicately and accurately, in
Mrs. Forrester's presence, and Miss Scrotton's cheek still burned when she remembered it. There
were thus all sorts of unspoken things between her and Mrs. Forrester, and not the least of
them was that her folly should have endeared her. Miss Scrotton at once chafed against and
relied upon her old friend's magnanimity. Her intercourse with her was largely made up of a
gloomy demand for sympathy and a stately evasion of it.

Mrs. Forrester now poured her out a second cup of tea, answering, soothingly, "Yes, she is
capricious. But what do you expect, my dear Eleanor? She is a force of nature, above our little
solidarities and laws. What do you expect? When one worships a force of nature, il faut subir
son sort." It was kind of Mrs. Forrester to include herself in these submissions.

"I had really built all my summer about the plans that we had made," Miss Scrotton said. "Mercedes
was to have come back with me, I was to have stopped in Cornwall for Karen's marriage and after
my month here in London I was to have joined her at Les Solitudes for August. Now August is
empty and I had refused more than one very pleasant invitation in order to go to Mercedes.
She isn't coming back for another three months."

"You didn't care to go with the Aspreys to the Adirondacks?"

"How could I go, dear Mrs. Forrester, when I was full of engagements here in London for July?
And, moreover, they didn't ask me. It is rather curious when one comes to think of it. I brought
the Aspreys and Mercedes together, I gave her to them, one may say, but, I am afraid I must
own it, they seized her and looked upon me as a useful rung in the ladder that reached her.
It has been a disillusionizing experience, I can't deny it; but passons for the Aspreys and
their kind. The fact is," said Miss Scrotton, dropping her voice a little, "the real fact is,
dear Mrs. Forrester, that the Aspreys aren't responsible. It wasn't for them she'd have stayed,
and I think they must realize it. No, it is all Claude Drew. He is at the bottom of everything
that I feel as strange and altered in Mercedes. He has an unholy influence over her, oh, yes,
I mean it, Mrs. Forrester. I have never seen Mercedes so swayed before."

"Swayed?" Mrs. Forrester questioned.

"Oh, but yes, indeed. He managed the whole thing--and when I think that he would in all probability
never have seen the Aspreys if it had not been for me!--Mercedes had him asked there, you know;
they are very, but very, very fashionable people, they know everybody worth knowing all over
the world. I needn't tell you that, of course. But it was all arranged, he and Mercedes, and
Lady Rose and the Marquis de Hautefeuille, and a young American couple--with the Aspreys in
the background as universal providers--it made a little group where I was plainly de trop.
Mr. Drew planned everything with her. She is to have her piano and he is to write a book under
her aegis. And they are to live in the pinewoods with the most elaborate simplicity. However,
I am sure the Adirondacks will soon bore her."

"And how soon will Mr. Drew bore her?" asked Mrs. Forrester, who had listened to these rather
pitiful revelations with, now and then, a slight elevation of her intelligent eyebrows.

The question gave Miss Scrotton an opportunity for almost ominous emphasis; she paused over
it, holding Mrs. Forrester with a brooding eye.

"He won't bore her," she then brought out.

"What, never? never?" Mrs. Forrester questioned gaily.

"Never, never," Miss Scrotton repeated. "He is too clever. He will keep her interested--and
uncertain."

"Well," Mrs. Forrester returned, as if this were all to the good, "it is a comfort to think
that the poor darling has found a distraction."

"You feel it that? I wish I could. I wish I could feel it anything but an infatuation. If only
he weren't so much the type of a great woman's folly; if only he weren't so of the region of
whispers. It isn't like our wonderful Sir Alliston; one sees her there standing high on a mountain
peak with the winds of heaven about her. To see her with Mr. Drew is like seeing her through
some ambiguous, sticky fog. Oh, I can't deny that it has all made me very, very unhappy." Tears
blinked in Miss Scrotton's eyes.

Mrs. Forrester was kind, she leaned forward and patted Miss Scrotton's hand, she smiled reassuringly,
and she refused, for a moment, to share her anxiety. "No, no, no," she said, "you are troubling
yourself quite needlessly, my dear Eleanor. Mercedes is amusing herself and the young man is
an interesting young man; she has talked to me and written to me about him. And I think she
needed distraction just now, I think this marriage of little Karen's has affected her a good
deal. The child is of course connected in her mind with so much that is dear and tragic in
the past."

"Oh, Karen!" said Miss Scrotton, who, drying her eyes, had accepted Mrs. Forrester's consolations
with a slight sulkiness, "she hasn't given a thought to Karen, I can assure you."

"No; you can't assure me, Eleanor," Mrs. Forrester returned, now with a touch of severity.
"I don't think you quite understand how deep a bond of that sort can be for Mercedes--even
if she seldom speaks of it. She has written to me very affectingly about it. I only hope she
will not take it to heart that they could not wait for her. I could not blame them. Everything
was arranged; a house in the Highlands lent to them for the honeymoon."

"Take it to heart? Dear me no; she won't like it, probably; but that is a different matter."

"Gregory is radiant, you know."

"Is he?" said Miss Scrotton gloomily. "I wish I could feel radiant about that match; but I
can't. I did hope that Gregory would marry well."

"It isn't perhaps quite what one would have expected for him," Mrs. Forrester conceded; "but
she is a dear girl. She behaved very prettily while she was here with Lady Jardine."

"Did she? It is a very different marriage, isn't it, from the one that Mercedes had thought
suitable. She told you, I suppose, about Franz Lippheim."

"Yes; I heard about that. Mercedes was a good deal disappointed. She is very much attached
to the young man and thought that Karen was, too. I have never seen him."

"From what I've heard he seemed to me as eminently suitable a husband for Karen as my poor
Gregory is unsuitable. What he can have discovered in the girl, I can't imagine. But I remember
now how much interested in her he was on that day that he met her here at tea. She is such
a dull girl," said Miss Scrotton sadly. "Such a heavy, clumsy person. And Gregory has so much
wit and irony. It is very curious."

"These things always are. Well, they are married now, and I wish them joy."

"No one is at the wedding, I suppose, but old Mrs. Talcott. The next thing we shall hear will
be that Sir Alliston has fallen in love with Mrs. Talcott," said Miss Scrotton, indulging her
gloomy humour.

"Oh, yes; the Jardines went down, and Mrs. Morton;"--Mrs. Morton was a married sister of Gregory's.
"Lady Jardine has very much taken to the child you know. They have given her a lovely little
tiara."

"Dear me," said Miss Scrotton; "it is a case of Cinderella. No; I can't rejoice over it, though,
of course I wish them joy; I wired to them this morning and I'm sending them a very handsome
paper-cutter of dear father's. Gregory will appreciate that, I think. But no; I shall always
be sorry that she didn't marry Franz Lippheim."

CHAPTER XVI

The Jardines did not come back to London till October. They had spent a month in Scotland and
a month in Italy and two weeks in France, returning by way of Paris, where Gregory passed through
the ordeal of the Belots. He saw Madame Belot clasp Karen to her breast and the long line of
little Belots swarm up to be kissed successively, Monsieur Belot, a short, stout, ruddy man,
with outstanding grey hair and a square grey beard, watching the scene benignantly, his palette
on his thumb. Madame Belot didn't any longer suggest Chantefoy's picture; she suggested nothing
artistic and everything domestic. From a wistful Burne-Jones type with large eyes and a drooping
mouth she had relapsed to her plebeian origins and now, fat, kind, cheerful, she was nothing
but wife and mother, with a figure like a sack and cheap tortoiseshell combs stuck, apparently
at random, in the untidy bandeaux of her hair.

Following Karen and Monsieur Belot about the big studio, among canvases on easels and canvases
leaned against the walls, Gregory felt himself rather bewildered, and not quite as he had expected
to be bewildered. They might be impossible, Madame Belot of course was impossible; but they
were not vulgar and they were extremely intelligent, and their intelligence displayed itself
in realms to which he was almost disconcertingly a stranger. Even Madame Belot, holding a stalwart,
brown-fisted baby on her arm, could comment on her husband's work with a discerning aptness
of phrase which made his own appreciation seem very trite and tentative. He might be putting
up with the Belots, but it was quite as likely, he perceived, that they might be putting up
with him. He realized, in this world of the Belots, the significance, the laboriousness, the
high level of vitality, and he realized that to the Belots his own world was probably seen
as a dull, half useful, half obstructive fact, significant mainly for its purchasing power.
For its power of appreciation they had no respect at all. "Il radote, ma chèrie," Monsieur
Belot said to Karen of a famous person, now, after years of neglect, loudly acclaimed in London
at the moment when, by fellow-artists, he was seen as defunct. "He no longer lives; he repeats
himself. Ah, it is the peril," Monsieur Belot turned kindly including eyes on Gregory; "if
one is not born anew, continually, the artist dies; it becomes machinery."

Karen was at home among the Belot's standards. She talked with Belot, of processes, methods,
technique, the talk of artists, not artistic talk. "Et la grande Tante?" he asked her, when
they were all seated at a nondescript meal about a long table of uncovered oak, the children
unpleasantly clamorous and Madame Belot dispensing, from one end, strange, tepid tea, but excellent
chocolate, while Belot, from the other, sent round plates of fruit and buttered rolls. Karen
was laughing with la petite Margot, whom she held in her lap.

"She is coming," said Karen. "At last. In three weeks I shall see her now. She has been spending
the summer in America, you know; among the mountains."

One of the boys inquired whether there were not danger to Madame von Marwitz from les Peaux-Rouges,
and when he was reassured and the question of buffaloes disposed of Madame Belot was able to
make herself heard, informing Karen that the Lippheims, Franz, Frau Lippheim, Lotta, Minna
and Elizabeth, were to give three concerts in Paris that winter. "You have not seen them yet,
Karen?" she asked. "They have not yet met Monsieur Jardine?" And when Karen said no, not yet;
but that she had heard from Frau Lippheim that they were to come to London after Paris, Madame
Belot suggested that the young couple might have time now to travel up to Leipsig and take
the Lippheims by surprise. "Voilà de braves gens et de bons artistes," said Monsieur Belot.

"You did like my dear Belots," Karen said, as she and Gregory drove away. She had, since her
marriage, grown in perception; Gregory would have found it difficult, now, to hide ironies
and antipathies from her. Even retrospectively she saw things which at the time she had not
seen, saw, for instance, that the idea of the Belots had not been alluring to him. He knew,
too, that she would have considered dislike of the Belots as showing defect in him not in them,
but cheerfully, if with a touch of her severity. She had an infinite tolerance for the defects
and foibles of those she loved. He was glad to be able to reply with full sincerity: "Ils sont
de braves gens et de bons artistes."

"But," Karen said, looking closely at him, and with a smile, "you would not care to pass your
life with them. And you were quite disturbed lest I should say that I wanted to go and take
the Lippheims by surprise at Leipsig. You like les gens du monde better than artists, Gregory."

"What are you?" Gregory smiled back at her. "I like you better."

"I? I am gens du monde manqué and artiste manqué. I am neither fish, flesh nor fowl," said
Karen. "I'm only--positively--my husband's wife and Tante's ward. And that quite satisfies me."

He knew that it did. Their happiness was flawless; flawless as far as her husband's wife was
concerned. It was in regard to Tante's ward that Gregory was more and more conscious of keeping
something from Karen, while more and more it grew difficult to keep anything from her. Already,
if sub-consciously, she must have become aware that her guardian's unabated mournfulness did
not affect her husband as it did herself. She had showed him no more of Tante's letters, and
they had been quite frequent. She had told him while they were in Scotland that it had hurt
Tante very much that they should not have waited till her return; but she did not enlarge on
the theme; and Gregory knew why; to enlarge would have been to reproach him. Karen had yielded,
against her own wishes, to his entreaties. And there was the diary, or old-fashioned Memory Book
of Mary Adams. What a pile of neatly folded sheets covered with Mary Adams' handwriting are
there on the table by the window! What memories they revive, what old dead joys are brought to
life, what faded visions are repainted. This is to be the Book--the book that they dreamed of
in their youth--even before little Kenyon was born, before Jasper was born, indeed before Grant
was born.

But now the years have written in many things and it will not be even their story. Indeed as life
wrote upon their hearts its mysterious legend--the legend that erased many of their noble dreams
and put iron into their souls, there is evidence in what they wrote that they thought it would
be Grant's story. Most parents think their sons will be heroes. But their boy had to do his part
in the world's rough work and before the end the clippings and the
notes in the Memory Book show that they felt that a hero in blue overalls
would hardly answer for their Book.

Then there came a time when Amos alone in his later years thought
that it might be Kenyon's story; for Kenyon now is a fiddler of fame,
and fiddlers make grand heroes.

But as the clippings and the notes show forth still another story, the Book that was to be their
book and story, may not be one man's or one woman's story. It may not be even the story of a town;
though Harvey's story is tragic enough. (Indeed sometimes it has seemed that the story of
Harvey, rising in a generation out of the sunshine and prairie grass,
a thousand flued hell, was to be the story of the Book.) But now Harvey
seems to be only a sign of the times, a symptom of the growth of the
human soul.

So the Book must tell the tale of a time and a place where men and women loved and strove and
joyed or suffered and lost or won after the old, old fashion of our race; with only such new
girdles and borders and frills in the record of their work and play as the changing skirts of
passing circumstance require. The Book must be more than Amos Adams's or his son's or his
son's son's story or his town's, though it must be all of these. It must be the story of many
men and many women, each one working out his salvation in his own way and all the threads woven
into the divine design, carrying along in its small place on the
loom the inscrutable pattern of human destiny.

But most of all it should be the story which shall explain the America that rose when her great
day came--exultant, triumphant to the glorious call of an ideal, arose from sordid things environing
her body and soul, and consecrated herself without stint or faltering hand to the challenge
of democracy.

In the old days--the old days when Amos Adams was young--he printed the Harvey Tribune on a hand
press.
 Tante had not told her what the present was, but
had written that Karen would care for it very much. "To find her present waiting for us is
like having Tante to welcome us," Karen said. After her surmise about the present she relapsed
into happy musings and Gregory, too, was silent, able only to give a side-glance of gratitude,
as it were, at the thought that Tante was to welcome them by proxy.

His mood was one of almost tremulous elation. He was bringing her home after bridal wanderings
that had never lost their element of dream-like unreality. There had always been the feeling
that he might wake any day to find Italy and Karen both equally illusory. But to see Karen
in his home, taking her place in his accustomed life, would be to feel his joy linking itself
securely with reality.

The look of London at this sunny hour of late afternoon and at this autumnal season matched
his consciousness of a tranquil metamorphosis. Idle still and empty of its more vivid significance,
one yet felt in it the soft stirrings of a re-entering tide of life. Cabs passed, piled with
brightly badged luggage; the drowsily reminiscent shop-windows showed here and there an adventurous
forecast, and a house or two, among the rows of dumb, sleeping faces, opened wide eyes at the
leisurely streets. The pale, high pinks of the sky drooped and melted into the greys and whites
and buffs below, and blurred the heavy greens of the park with falling veils of rose. The scene
seemed drawn in flat delicate tones of pastel.

Karen sat beside him in the cab and, while she gazed before her, she had slipped her hand into
his. She had preserved much of the look of the unmarried Karen in her dress. The difference
was in the achievement of an ideal rather than in a change. The line of her little grey travelling
hat above her brows was still unusual; with her grey gloves and long grey silken coat she had
an air, cool, competent, prepared for any emergency of travel. She would have looked equally
appropriate dozing under the hooded light in a railway carriage, taking her place at a table
d'hôte in a provincial French town, or walking in the wind and sun along a foreign plage. After
looking at the London to which he brought her, Gregory looked at her. Marriage had worked none
of its even superficial disenchantments in him. After three months of intimacy, Karen still
constantly arrested him with a sense of the undiscovered, the unforeseen. What it consisted
in he could not have defined; she was simple, even guileless, still; she had no reticences;
yet she seemed to express so much of which she was unaware that he felt himself to be continually
making her acquaintance. That quiet slipping now of her hand into his, while her gaze maintained
its calm detachment, the charm of her mingled tenderness and independence, had its vague sting
for Gregory. She accepted him and whatever he might mean with something of the happy matter-of-fact
with which she accepted all that was hers. She loved him with a completeness and selflessness
that had made the world suddenly close round him with gentle arms; but Gregory often wondered
if she were in love with him. Rapture, restlessness and fear all seemed alien to her, and to
turn from thoughts of her and of their love to Karen herself was like passing from dreams of
poignant, starry ecstasy to a clear, white dawn, with dew on the grass and a lark rising and
the waking sweetness of a world at once poetical and practical about one. She strengthened
and stilled his passion for her. And she seemed unaware of passion.

They arrived at the great, hive-like mansion and in the lift, which took them almost to the
top, Karen, standing near him, again put her hand in his and smiled at him. She was not feeling
his tremor, but she was limpidly happy and as conscious as he of an epoch-making moment.

Barker opened the door to them, murmuring a decorous welcome and they went down the passage
towards the drawing-room. They must at once inaugurate their home-coming, Gregory said, by
going out on the balcony and looking at the view together.

"I beg your pardon, sir," said Barker, who followed after them, "but I hope you and Mrs. Jardine
will think it best what I've done with the large case, sir, that has come. I didn't know where
you'd like it put, and it was a job getting it in anywhere. There wasn't room to leave it standing
here."

"Tante's present!" Karen exclaimed. "Oh, where is it?"

"I had it put in the drawing-room, Ma'am," said Barker. "It made a hole in the wall and knocked
down two prints, sir; I'm very sorry, but there was no handling it conveniently."

They turned down the next passage; the drawing-room was at the end. Gregory threw open the
door and he and Karen paused upon the threshold. Standing in the middle of the room, high and
dark against the half-obliterated windows, was a huge packing-case, an incredibly huge packing-case.
At a first glance it had blotted out the room. The furniture, huddled in the corners, seemed
to have drawn back from the apparition, scared and startled, and Gregory, in confronting it,
felt an actual twinge of fear. The vast, unexpected form loomed to his imagination, for a moment,
like a tidal-wave rising terrifically in familiar surroundings and poised in menace above him
and his wife. He controlled an exclamation of dismay, and the ominous simile receded before
a familiar indignation; that, too, he controlled; he could not say: "How stupid!"

"Is it a piano?" Karen, after their long pause, asked in a hushed, tentative voice.

"It's too high for a piano, darling," said Gregory, who had her arm in his--"and I have my
little upright, you see. I can't imagine."

"Shall I get the porter, sir, to help open it while you and Mrs. Jardine have tea?" Barker
asked. "I laid tea in the dining-room, Ma'am."

"Yes; let us have it opened at once," said Karen. "But I must be here when it is opened." She
drew her arm from Gregory's and made the tour of the case. "It is probably something very fragile
and that is why it is packed in such a great box; it cannot itself be so big."

"Barker will begin peeling off the outer husks while we get ready for tea; we shall have plenty
of time," said Gregory. "Get the porter up at once, Barker. I'm afraid your guardian has an
exaggerated idea of the size of our domain, darling. The present looks as if only baronial
halls could accommodate it."

She glanced up at him while he led her to their room and he knew that something in his voice
struck her; he hadn't been able to control it and it sounded like ill-temper. Perhaps it was
ill-temper. It was with a feeling of relief, and almost of escape, that he shut the door of
the room upon tidal-waves and put his arms around his wife. "Darling," he said, "this is really
it--at last--our home-coming."

She returned his clasp and kiss with her frank, sweet fervour, though he saw in her eyes a
slight bewilderment. He insisted--he had often during their travels been her maid--on taking
off her hat and shoes for her before going into his adjoining dressing-room. Karen always protested.
"It is so dear and foolish; I am so used to waiting on myself; I am so unused to being the
fine idle lady." And she protested now, adding, as he knelt before her, and putting her hand
on his head: "And besides, I believe that in some ways I am stronger than you. It should not
be you to take care of me."

"Stronger? In what ways? Upon my word, Madam!" Gregory exclaimed smiling up at her, "Do you
know that I was one of the best men of my time at Oxford?"

"I don't mean in body, I mean in feelings, in nerves," said Karen. "It is more like Tante."

He wondered, while in his little dressing-room he splashed restoringly in hot water, what she
quite did mean. Did she guess at the queer, morbid moment that had struck at his blissful mood?
It was indeed disconcerting to have her find him like Tante.

"Do you mind," said Karen, when he joined her again, smiling at him and clasping her hands
in playful entreaty, "seeing at once what the present is before we have tea? I do not know
how I could eat tea while I had not seen it."

"Mind? I'm eager to see it, too," said Gregory, with a pang of self-reproach. "Of course we
must wait tea."

The porter, in the passage, was carrying away the outer boards of the packing-case and in the
drawing-room they found Barker, knee deep in straw, ripping the heavy sacking covering that
enveloped a much diminished but still enormous parcel.

Gregory came to his aid. They drew forth fine shavings and unwrapped layers of paper, neatly
secured; slowly the core of the mystery disclosed itself in a temple-like form with a roof
of dull black lacquer and dimly gilded inner walls, a thickly swathed figure wedged between
them. The gift was, they now perceived, a Chinese Bouddha in his shrine, and, as Gregory and
Barker disengaged the figure and laid it upon the ground, amusement, though still of an acrid
sort, overcame Gregory's vexation. "A Bouddha, upon my word!" he said. "This is a gorgeous gift."

Karen stooped to help unroll as if from a mummy, the multitudinous bandages of fine paper;
the passive bronze visage of the idol was revealed, and by degrees, the seated figure, ludicrously
prone. They moved the temple to the end of the room, where two pictures were taken down and
a sofa pushed away to make room for it; the Bouddha was hoisted, with difficulty, on to its
lotus, and there, dark on its glimmering background of gold, it sat and ambiguously blessed them.

Karen had worked with them neatly and expeditionary, and in silence, and Gregory, glancing
at her face from time to time, felt sure that she was adjusting herself to a mingled bewilderment
and disappointment; to the wish also, that she might be worthy of her new possession. She stood
now before the Bouddha and gazed at it.

They had turned up the electric lights, but the curtains were not drawn and the scent, and
light, and vague, diffused roar of London at this evening hour came in at the open windows.
Barker, the porter and the housemaid were carrying away the litter of paper and straw. The
bright cheerful room with its lovable banality and familiar comfort smiled its welcome; and
there, in the midst, the majestic and alien presence sat, overpowering, and grotesque in its
inappropriateness.

Karen now turned her eyes on her husband and slightly smiled. "It is very wonderful," she said,
"but I feel as if Tante expected a great deal of me in giving it to me--a great deal more than
is in me. It ought to be a very deep and mystic person to have that Bouddha."

"Yes, it's a wonderful thing; quite awesome. Perhaps she expects you to become deep and mystic,"
said Gregory. "Please don't."

"There is no danger of that," said Karen. "Of course it is the beauty of it and the strangeness,
that made Tante care for it. It is the sort of thing she would love to have herself."

"Where on earth is he to go?" Gregory surmised. "Yes, he might look well in that big music-room
at Les Solitudes, or in some vast hall where he would be more of an episode and less of a white
elephant. I hardly thing he'll fit anywhere into the passage," he ventured.

Karen had been looking from him to the Bouddha. "But Gregory, of course he must stay here,"
she said, "in the room we live in. Tante, I am sure, meant that." Her voice had a tremor. "I
am sure it would hurt her dreadfully if we put him out of the way."

Barker was now gone and Gregory put his arm around her. "But it makes all the room wrong, doesn't
it? It will make us all wrong--that's what I rather feel. We aren't à la hauteur." He remembered,
after speaking them, that these were the words he had used of his one colloquy with Madame
von Marwitz.

"I don't think," said Karen after a moment, "that you are quite kind."

"Darling--I'm only teasing you," said Gregory. "I'll like the thing if you want me to, and
make offerings to him every morning--he looks in need of sacrifices and offerings, doesn't
he? And what a queer Oriental scent is in the air. Rather nice, that."

"Please don't call it the 'thing,'" said Karen. He saw into her divided loyalty. And his comfort
was to know that she didn't like the Bouddha either.

"I won't," he promised. "It isn't a thing, but a duty, a privilege, a responsibility. He shall
stay here, where he is. He really won't crowd us too impossibly, and that sofa can go."

"You see," said Karen, and tears now came to her eyes, "it would hurt her so dreadfully if
she could dream that we did not love it very, very much."

"I know," said Gregory, kissing her. "I perfectly understand. We will love it very, very much.
Come now, you must be hungry; let us have our tea."

CHAPTER XVII

Madame von Marwitz sat in the deep chintz sofa with Karen beside her, and while she talked
to the young couple, Karen's hand in hers, her eyes continually went about the room with an
expression that did not seem to match her alert, if rather mechanical, conversation. Karen
had already seen her, the day before, when she had gone to the station to meet her and had
driven with her to Mrs. Forrester's. But Miss Scrotton had been there, too, almost tearful
in her welcoming back of her great friend, and there had been little opportunity for talk in
the carriage. Tante had smiled upon her, deeply, had held her hand, closely, and had asked,
with the playful air which forestalls gratitude, how she liked her present. "You will see it,
my Scrotton; a Bouddha in his shrine--of the best period; a thing really rare and beautiful.
Mr. Asprey told me of it, at a sale in New York; and I was able to secure it. Hein, ma petite;
you were pleased?"

"Oh, Tante, my letter told you that," said Karen.

"And your husband? He was pleased?"

"He thought that it was gorgeous," said Karen, but after a momentary hesitation not lost upon
her guardian.

"I was sorely tempted to keep it myself," said Madame von Marwitz. "I could see it in the music-room
at Les Solitudes. But at once I felt--it is Karen's. My only anxiety was for its background.
I have never seen Mr. Jardine's flat. But I knew that I could trust the man my child had chosen
to have beauty about him."

"It isn't exactly a beautiful room," Karen confessed, smiling. "It isn't like the music-room;
you won't expect that from a London flat--or from us. But it is very bright and comfortable
and, yes, pretty. I hope that you will like my home."

Miss Scrotton, Karen felt, while she made these preparatory statements, had eyed her in a somewhat
gaunt manner; but she was accustomed to a gaunt manner from Miss Scrotton, and Miss Scrotton's
drawing-room, certainly, was not as nice as Gregory's. Karen had not cared at all for its quality
of earnest effort. Miss Scrotton, not many years ago, had been surrounded with art-tinted hangings
and photographs from Rossetti, and the austerity of her eighteenth-century reaction was now
almost defiant. Her drawing-room, in its arid chastity, challenged you, as it were, to dare
remember the æsthetics of South Kensington.

Karen did not feel that Gregory's drawing-room required apologies and Tante had been so mild
and sweet, if also a little absent, that she trusted her to show leniency.

She had, as yet, to-day, said nothing about the Bouddha or the background on which she found
him. She talked to Gregory, while they waited for tea, asking him a great many questions, not
seeming, always, to listen to his answers. "Ah, yes. Well done. Bravo," she said at intervals,
as he told her about their wedding-trip and how he and Karen had enjoyed this or that. When
Barker brought in the tea-tray and set it on a little table before Karen, she took up one of
the cups--they were of an old English ware with a wreath of roses inside and lines of half
obliterated gilt--and said--it was her first comment on the background--"Tiens, c'est joli.
Is this one of your presents, Karen?"

Karen told her that the tea-set was not a present; it had belonged to a great-grandmother of
Gregory's.

Madame von Marwitz continued to examine the cup and, as she set it down among the others, with
the deliberate nicety of gesture that gave at once power and grace to her slightest movement,
she said: "You were fortunate in your great-grandmother, Mr. Jardine."

Her voice, her glance, her gestures, were already affecting Gregory unpleasantly. There was
in them a quality of considered control, as though she recognised difficulty and were gently
and warily evading it. Seated on his chintz sofa in the bright, burnished room, all in white,
with a white lace head-dress, half veil, half turban, binding her hair and falling on her shoulders,
she made him think, in her inappropriateness and splendour, of her own Bouddha, who, in his
glimmering shrine, lifted his hand as if in a gesture of bland exorcism before which the mirage
of a vulgar and trivial age must presently fade away. The Bouddha looked permanent and the
room looked transient; the only thing in it that could stand up against him, as it were, was
Karen. To her husband's eye, newly aware of æsthetic discriminations, Karen seemed to interpret
and justify her surroundings, to show their commonplace as part of their charm and to make
the Bouddha and Madame von Marwitz herself, in all their portentous distinction, look like
incidental ornaments.

Madame von Marwitz's silence in regard to the Bouddha had already become a blight, but it was,
perhaps, the growing crisp decision in Gregory's manner that made Karen first aware of constraint.
Her eyes then turned from Tante to the shrine at the end of the room, and she said: "You don't
care for the way it looks here, Tante, do you--your present?"

Madame von Marwitz had finished her tea and she turned in the sofa so that she could consider
the Bouddha no longer incidentally but decisively. "I am glad that it is yours, ma chérie,"
she said, after the pause of her contemplation. "Some day you must place it more happily. You
don't intend, do you, Mr. Jardine, to live for any length of time in these rooms?"

"Oh, but I like it here so much, Tante," Karen took upon herself the reply. "I want to go on
living where Gregory has lived for so long. We have such a view, you see; and such air."

Madame von Marwitz mused upon her for a moment and then giving her chin a little pinch, half
meditative, half caressing, she inquired, with Continental frankness: "A very pretty sentiment,
ma petite, but what will you do when the babies come?"

Karen was not disconcerted. "I rather hope we may not have babies for a year or two, Tante;
and when they do come there will be room, quite happily, for several. You don't know how big
the flat is; you will see. Gregory has always been able to put up his married sister and her
husband; that gives us one quite big room over and a small one."

"But then you can have no friends if your rooms are full of babies," Madame von Marwitz objected,
still with mild playfulness.

"No," Karen had to admit it; "but while they were very small I do not think I should have much
time for friends in the house, should I. And we think, Gregory and I, of soon taking a tiny
cottage in the country, too."

"Then, while you remain here, and unless my Bouddha is to look very foolish," said Madame von
Marwitz, "you must, I think, change your drawing-room. It can be changed," she gazed about
her with a touch of wildness. "Something could be done. It could be darkened; quieted; it talks
too much and too loudly now, does it not? But you could move these so large chairs and couches
away and have sober furniture, of a good period; one can still pick up good things if one is
clever; a Chinese screen here and there; a fine old mirror; a touch of splendour; a flavour
of dignity. The shape of the room is not impossible; the outlook, as you say, gives space and
breathing; something could be done."

Karen's gaze followed hers, cogitating but not acquiescent. "But you see, Tante," she remarked,
"these are things that Gregory has lived with. And I like them so, too. I should not like them
changed."

"But they are not things that you have lived with, parbleu!" said Madame von Marwitz laughing
gently. "It is a pretty sentiment, ma petite, it does you honour; you are--but oh! so deeply--the
wife, already, are you not, my Karen? but I am sure that your husband will not wish you to
sacrifice your taste to your devotion. Young men, many of them do not care for these domestic
matters; do not see them. My Karen must not pretend to me that she does not care and see. I
am right, am I not, Mr. Jardine? you would not wish to deprive Karen of the bride's distinctive
pleasure--the furnishing of her own nest."

Gregory's eyes met hers;--it seemed to be their second long encounter;--eyes like jewels, these
of Madame von Marwitz; full of intense life, intense colour, still, bright and cold, tragically
cold. He seemed to see suddenly that all the face--the long eyebrows, with the plaintive ripple
of irregularity bending their line, the languid lips, the mournful eyelids, the soft contours
of cheek and throat,--were a veil for the coldness of her eyes. To look into them was like
coming suddenly through dusky woods to a lonely mountain tarn, lying fathomless and icy beneath
a moonlit sky. Gregory was aware, as if newly and more strongly than before, of how ambiguous
was her beauty, how sinister her coldness.

Above the depths where these impressions were received was his consciousness that he must be
careful if Karen were not to guess how much he was disliking her guardian. It was not difficult
for him to smile at a person he disliked, but it was difficult not to smile sardonically. This
was an apparently trivial occasion on which to feel that it was a contest that she had inaugurated
between them; but he did feel it. "Karen knows that she can burn everything in the room as
far as I'm concerned," he said. "Even your Bouddha," he added, smiling a little more nonchalantly,
"I'd gladly sacrifice if it gave her pleasure."

Nothing was lost upon Madame von Marwitz, of that he was convinced. She saw, perhaps, further
than he did; for he did not see, nor wish to, beyond the moment of guarded hostility. And it
was with the utmost gentleness and precaution, with, indeed, the air of one who draws softly
aside from a sleeping viper found upon the path, that she answered: "I trust, indeed, that
it may never be my Karen's pleasure, or yours, Mr. Jardine, to destroy what is precious; that
would hurt me very much. And now, child, may I not see the rest of this beloved domain?" She
turned from him to Karen.

Gregory rose; he had told Karen that he would leave them alone after tea; he had letters to
write and he would see Madame von Marwitz before she went. He had the sense, as he closed the
door, of flying before temptation. What might he not say to Madame von Marwitz if he saw too
much of her?

When she and Karen were left alone, Madame von Marwitz's expression changed. The veils of lightness
fell away; her face became profoundly melancholy; she gazed in silence at Karen and then held
out her arms to her; Karen came closer and was enfolded in their embrace.

"My child, my child," said Madame von Marwitz, leaning, as was her wont at these moments, her
forehead against Karen's cheek.

"Dear Tante," said Karen. "You are not sad?" she murmured.

"Sad?" her guardian repeated after a moment. "Am I ever anything but sad? But it is not of
my sadness that I wish to speak. It is of you. Are you happy, my dear one?"

"Oh, Tante--so happy, so very happy; more than I can say."

"Is it so?" Madame von Marwitz lifted her head and stroked back the girl's hair. "Is it so
indeed? He loves you very much, Karen?"

"Oh, yes, Tante."

"It is a great love? selfless? passionate? It is a love worthy of my child?"

"Yes, indeed." A slight austerity was now apparent in Karen's tone. Silence fell between them
for a moment, and then, stroking again the golden head, Madame von Marwitz continued, with
great tenderness; "It is well. It is what I have prayed for--for my child. And let me not cast
one shadow, even of memory, upon your happiness. Yet ah--ah Karen--if you could have let me
share in the sunshine a little. If you could have remembered how dark was my way, how lonely.
That my child should have married without me. It hurts. It hurts--"

She did not wish to cast a shadow, yet she was weeping, the silent, undisfigured weeping that
Karen knew so well, showing only in the slow welling of tears from darkened eyes.

"Oh, Tante," Karen now leaned her head to her guardian's shoulder, "I did not dream you would
mind so much. It was so difficult to know what to do."

"Have I shown myself so indifferent to you in the past, my Karen, that you should have thought
I would not mind?"

"I do not mean that, Tante. I thought that you would feel that it was what it was best for
me to do. I had given my word. All the plans were made."

"You had given your word? Would he not have let you put me before your word? For once? For
that one time in all our lives?"

"It was not that, Tante. Gregory would have done what I wished. You must not think that I was
forced in any way." Karen now had raised her head. "But we had waited for you. We thought that
you were coming. It was only at the last moment that you let us know, Tante, and you did not
even say when you were coming back."

Madame von Marwitz kept silence for some moments after this, savouring perhaps in the words--though
Karen's eyes, in speaking them, had also filled with tears--some hint of resistance. She looked
away from the girl, keeping her hand in hers, as she said: "I could not come. I could not tell
you when I was to come. There were reasons that bound me; ties; claims; a tangle of troubled
human lives--the threads passing through my fingers. No; I was not free; and there I would
have had you trust me. No, no, my Karen, we will speak of it no farther. I understand young
hearts--they are forgetful; they cannot dwell on the shadowed places. Let us put it aside,
the great grief. What surprises me is to find that the littlest, littlest ones cling so closely.
I am foolish, Karen. I have had much to bear lately, and I cannot shake off the little griefs.
That others than myself should have chosen my child's trousseau; oh, it is small--so very small
a thing; yet it hurts; it hurts. That the joy of seeking all the pretty clothes together--that,
that, too, should have been taken from me. Do not weep, child."

"Tante, you could not come, and the things had to be made ready. They all--Mrs. Forrester--Betty--seemed
to feel there was no time to lose. And I have always chosen my own clothes; I did not know
that you would feel this so."

"Betty? Who is Betty?" Madame von Marwitz mournfully yet alertly inquired.

"Lady Jardine, Gregory's sister-in-law. You remember, Tante, I have written of her. She has
been so kind."

"Betty," Madame von Marwitz repeated, sadly. To the southward on the canvas the prairie grass is broken
by the heavy green foliage above a sluggish stream that writhes and twists and turns through
the prairie, which rises above the stream and meets another limestone
belt upon which the waving ripples of the unmowed grass wash southward
to the eye's reach.

Enter R. U. E. a four-ox team hauling a cart laden with a printing press and a printer's outfit;
following that are other ox teams hauling carts laden with tents and bedding, household goods,
lumber, and provisions. A four-horse team hauling merchandise, and a span of mules hitched
to a spring wagon come crashing up through the timber by the stream. Men and women are walking
beside the oxen or the teams and are riding in the covered wagons.

They are eagerly seeking something. It is the equality of opportunity that is supposed to be found
in the virgin prairies of the new West. The men are nearly all veterans of the late war, for
the most part bearded youngsters in their twenties or early thirties.

The women are their fresh young wives. As the procession halts before the canvas, the men and
women begin to unpack the wagons and to line out on each side of an imaginary street in the prairie.
The characters are discovered as follows:

Amos Adams, a red-bearded youth of twenty-nine and Mary Sands, his wife. They are printers and
begin unpacking and setting up the printing material in a tent.

Dr. James Nesbit and Bedelia Satterthwaite, his wife, in the tent beside the Adamses.

Captain Ezra Morton, and Ruth his wife; he is selling a patent, self-opening
gate.

Ahab Wright, in side whiskers, white necktie, flannel shirt and carefully
considered trousers tucked in shiny boots.

Daniel Sands, Jane, his young wife, and Mortimer, her infant stepson.
Daniel owns the merchandise in the wagon.

Casper Herdicker, cobbler,
and Brunhilde Herdicker, his wife.

Herman Müller, bearded, coarse-featured,
noisy; a Pennsylvania Dutchman, his faded, rope-haired, milk-eyed,
sickly wife and Margaret, their baby daughter. "And I wanted to explain to you about the
drawing-room. You see it is that; I am simple; not a sea-anemone of taste, like you. I quite
well see things. I see that Les Solitudes is beautiful, and that this is not like Les Solitudes.
Yet I like it here just as it is."

"Because it is his, is it not so, my child-in-love? Ah, she must not be teased. You can be
happy, then, among so much brass?--so many things that glitter and are highly coloured?"

"Yes, indeed. And it is a pretty bedroom, Tante. You must say that it is a pretty bedroom?"

"Is it? Must I? Pretty? Yes, no doubt it is pretty. Yet I could have wished that my Karen's
nest had more distinction, expressed a finer sense of personality. I imagine that every young
woman in this vast beehive of homes has just such a bedroom."

"You think so, Tante? I am afraid that if you think this like everybody's room you will find
Gregory's library even worse. You must see that now; it is all that you have not seen." Karen
took her last bull by the horns, leading her out.

"Has it red wall-paper, sealing-wax red; with racing prints on the walls and a very large photograph
over the mantelpiece of a rowing-crew at Oxford?" Madame von Marwitz questioned with a mixture
of roguishness and resignation.

"Yes, yes, you wicked Tante. How did you know?"

"I know; I see it," said Madame von Marwitz. "But a man's room expresses a man's past. One
cannot complain of that."

They went to the library. Madame von Marwitz had described it with singular accuracy. Gregory
rose from his letters and his eyes went from her face to Karen's, both showing their traces
of tears.

"It is au revoir, then," said Madame von Marwitz, standing before him, her arm round Karen's
shoulders. "I am happy in my child's happiness, Mr. Jardine. You have made her happy, and I
thank you. You will lend her to me, sometimes? You will be generous with me and let me see her?"

"Of course; whenever you want to; whenever she wants to," said Gregory, leaning his hands on
the back of his chair and tilting it a little while he smiled the fullest acquiescence.

Madame von Marwitz's eyes brooded on him. "That is kind," she said gently.

"Oh no, it isn't," Gregory returned.

"I think," said Madame von Marwitz, becoming even more gentle, "that you misunderstand my meaning.
When people love, it is hard sometimes not to be selfish in the joy of love, and the lesser
claims tend to be forgotten. I only ask that you should make it easy for Karen to come to me."

To this Gregory did not reply. He continued to tilt his chair and to smile at Madame von Marwitz.

"This husband of yours, Karen," said Madame von Marwitz, "does not understand me yet. You must
interpret me to him. Adieu, Mr. Jardine. Will you come with me alone to the door, Karen. It
is our first farewell in a home I do not give you."

She gave Gregory her hand. They left him and went down the passage together. Madame von Marwitz
kept her arm round the girl's shoulders, but its grasp had tightened.

"My child! my own child!" she murmured, as, at the door, she turned and clasped her. Her voice
strove with deep emotion.

"Dear, dear Tante," said Karen, also with a faltering voice.

Madame von Marwitz achieved an uncertain smile. "Farewell, my dear one. I bless you. My blessing
be upon you." Then, on the threshold she paused. "Try to make your husband like me a little,
my Karen," she said.

Karen did not come back to him in the smoking-room and Gregory presently got up and went to
look for her. He found her in the drawing-room, sitting in the twilight, her elbow on her knee,
her chin in her hand. He did not know what she could be feeling; the fact that dominated in
his own mind was that her guardian had made her weep.

"Well, darling," he said. He stooped over her and put his hand on her shoulder.

The face she lifted to him was ambiguous. She had not wept again; on the contrary, he felt
sure that she had been intently thinking. The result of her thought, now, was a look of resolute
serenity. But he was sure that she did not feel serene. For the first time, Karen was hiding
her feeling from him. "Well, darling," she replied.

She got up and put her arms around his neck; she looked at him, smiling calmly; then, as if
struck by a sudden memory, she said: "It is the night of the dance, Gregory."

They were to dine at Edith Morton's and go on to Karen's first dance. Under Betty's supervision
she had already made progress through half-a-dozen lessons, though she had not, she confessed
to Gregory, greatly distinguished herself at them. "I'll get you round all right," he had promised
her. They looked forward to the dance.

"So it is," said Gregory. "It's not time to dress yet, is it?"

"It's only half-past six. Shall I wear my white silk, Gregory, with the little white rose wreath?"

"Yes, and the nice little square-toed white silk shoes--like a Reynolds lady's--and like nobody
else's. I do so like your square toes."

"I cannot bear pinched toes," said Karen. "My father gave me a horror of that; and Tante. Her
feet are as perfect as her hands. She has all her shoes made for her by a wonderful old man
in Vienna who is an artist in shoes. She was looking well, wasn't she, Tante?" Karen added,
in even tones. Gregory and she were sitting now on the sofa together, their arms linked and
hand-in-hand.

"Beautiful," said Gregory with sincerity. "How well that odd head-dress became her."

"Didn't it? It was nice that she liked those pretty teacups, wasn't it. And appreciated our
view; even though," Karen smiled, taking now another bull by the horns, "she was so hard on
our flat. I'm afraid she feels her Bouddha en travestie here."

"Well, he is, of course. I do hope," said Gregory, also seizing his bull, "that she didn't
think me rude in my joke about being willing to burn him. And you will change everything--burn
anything--barring the Bouddha and the teacups--that you want to, won't you, dear?"

"No; I wouldn't, even if I wanted to; and I don't want to. Perhaps Tante did not quite understand.
I think it may take a little time for her to understand your jokes or you her outspokenness.
She is like a child in her candour about the things she likes or dislikes." A fuller ease had
come to her voice. By her brave pretence that all was well she was persuading herself that
all could be made well.

Perhaps it might be, thought Gregory, if only he could go on keeping his temper with Madame
von Marwitz and if Karen, wise and courageous darling, could accept the unspoken between them,
and spare him definitions and declarations. A situation undefined is so often a situation saved.
Life grows over and around it. It becomes a mere mummied fly, preserved in amber; unsightly
perhaps; but unpernicious. After all, he told himself--and he went on thinking over the incidents
of the afternoon while he dressed--after all, Madame von Marwitz might not be much in London;
she was a comet and her course would lead her streaming all over the world for the greater
part of her time. And above all and mercifully, Madame von Marwitz was not a person upon whose
affections one would have to count. He seemed to have found out all sorts of things about her
this afternoon: he could have given Sargent points. The main strength of her feeling for anyone,
deep instinct told him, was an insatiable demand that they should feel sufficiently for her.
And the chief difficulty--he refused to dignify it by the name of danger--was that Madame von
Marwitz had her deep instincts, too, and had, no doubt, found out all sorts of things about
him. He did not like her; he had not liked her from the first; and she could hardly fail to
feel that he liked her less and less. He was able to do Madame von Marwitz justice. Even a
selflessly devoted mother could hardly rejoice wholeheartedly in the marriage of a daughter
to a man who disliked herself; and how much less could Madame von Marwitz, who was not a mother
and not selflessly devoted to anybody, rejoice in Karen's marriage. She was right in feeling
that it menaced her own position. He did her justice; he made every allowance for her; he intended
to be straight with her; but the fact that stood out for Gregory was that, already, she was
not straight with him. Already she was picking surreptitiously, craftily, at his life; and
this was to pick at Karen's.

He would give her a long string and make every allowance for the vexations of her situation;
but if she began seriously to tarnish Karen's happiness he would have to pull the string smartly.
The difficulty--he refused to see this as danger either--was that he could not pull the string
upon Madame von Marwitz without, by the same gesture, upsetting himself as well.

CHAPTER XVIII

The unspoken, for the first month or so of Madame von Marwitz's return, remained accepted.
There were no declarations and no definitions, and Gregory's immunity was founded on something
more reassuring than the mere fact that Madame von Marwitz frequently went away. When she was
in London, it became apparent, he was to see very little of her, and as long as they did not
meet too often he felt that he was, in so far, safe. Madame von Marwitz was tremendously busy.
She paid many week-end visits; she sat to Belot--who had come to London to paint it--for a
great portrait; she was to give three concerts in London during the winter and two in Paris,
and it was natural enough that she had not found time to come to the flat again.

But although Gregory saw so little of her, although she was not in his life as a presence,
he felt her in it as an influence. She might have been the invisible but portentous comet moving
majestically on the far confines of his solar system; and one accounted for oddities of behaviour
in the visible planets by inferring that the comet was the cause of them. If he saw very little
of Madame von Marwitz, he saw, too, much less of his twin planet, Karen. It was not so much
that Karen's course was odd as that it was altered. If Madame von Marwitz sent for her very
intermittently, she had, all the same, in all her life, as she told Gregory, never seen so
much of her guardian. She frankly displayed to him the radiance of her state, wishing him,
as he guessed, to share to the full every detail of her privileges, and to realise to the full
her gratitude to him for proving so conclusively to Tante that there was none of the selfishness
of love in him. Tante must see that he made it very easy for her to go to her, and Gregory
derived his own secret satisfaction from the thought that Karen's radiance was the best of
retorts to Madame von Marwitz's veiled intimations. As long as she made Karen happy and let
him alone, he seemed to himself to tell her, he would get on very well; and he suspected that
her clutch of Karen would soon loosen when she found it unchallenged. In the meantime there
was not much satisfaction for him elsewhere. Karen's altered course left him often lonely.
Not only had the readings of Political Economy, begun with so much ardour in in their spare
evenings, almost lapsed for lack of consecutiveness; but he frequently found on coming home
tired for his tea, and eager for the sight of his wife, a little note from her telling him
that she had been summoned to Mrs. Forrester's as Tante was "with Fafner in his cave" and wanted
her.

Fafner was the name that Madame von Marwitz gave to her moods of sometimes tragic and sometimes
petulant melancholy. Karen had told him all about Fafner and how, in the cave, Tante would
lie sometimes for long hours, silent, her eyes closed, holding her hand; sometimes asking her
to read to her, English, French, German or Italian poetry; their range of reading always astonished
Gregory.

He gathered, too, from Karen's confidences, how little, until now, he had gauged the variety
of the great woman's resources, how little done justice to her capacity for being merely delightful.
She could be whimsically gay in the midst of melancholy, and her jests and merriment were the
more touching, the more exquisite, from the fact that they flowered upon the dark background
of the cave. It was, he saw, with a richer flavour that Karen tasted again the charm of old
days, when, after some great musical or social event, in which the girl had played her part
of contented observer, they had laughed together over follies and appreciated qualities, in
the familiar language of allusion evolved from long community in experience.

Karen repeated to him Tante's sallies at the expense of this or that person and the phrase
with which she introduced these transformations of human foolishness to the service of comedy.
"Come, let us make méringues of them."

The dull or ludicrous creatures, so to be whipped up and baked crisp, revealed, in the light
of the analogy, the tempting vacuity of a bowl of white of egg. When Tante introduced her wit
into the colourless substance she frothed it to a sparkling work of art.

Gregory was aware sometimes of a pang as he listened. He and Karen had, indeed, their many
little jokes, and their stock of common association was growing; but there was nothing like
the range of reference, nothing like the variety of experience, that her life with Madame von
Marwitz had given her to draw upon. It was to her companionship, intermittent as it had been,
with the world-wandering genius that she owed the security of judgment that often amused yet
often disconcerted him, the catholicity of taste beside which, though he would not acknowledge
its final validity, he felt his own taste to be sometimes narrow and sometimes guileless. He
saw that Karen had every ground for feeling her own point of view a larger one than his. It
was no personal complacency that her assurance expressed, but the modest recognition of privilege.
Beyond their personal tie, so her whole demeanour showed him, he had nothing to add to her
highly dowered life.

Gregory had known that his world would mean nothing to Karen; yet when, under Betty's guidance,
she fulfilled her social duties, dined out, gave dinners, received and returned visits, the
very compliance of her indifference, while always amusing, vexed him a little, and a little
alarmed him, too. He had known that he would have to make all the adjustments, but how adjust
oneself to a permanent separation between one's private and one's social life? Old ties, lacking
new elements of growth, tended to become formalities. When Karen was not there, he did not
care to go without her to see people, and when she was with him the very charm of her personality
was a barrier between him and them. His life became narrower as well as lonelier. There was
nothing much to be done with people to whom one's wife was indifferent.

It was very obvious to him that she found the sober, conventional people who were his friends
very flavourless, especially when she came to them from Fafner's cave. He had always taken
his friends for granted, as part of the pleasant routine of life, like one's breakfast or one's
bath; but now, seeing them anew, through Karen's eyes, he was inclined more and more to believe
that they weren't as dull as she found them. She lacked the fundamental experience of a rooted
life. She was yet to learn--he hoped, he determined, she should learn--that a social system
of harmonious people, significant perhaps more because of their places in the system than as
units, and bound together by a highly evolved code, was, when all was said and done, a more
satisfactory place in which to spend one's life than an anarchic world of erratic, undisciplined,
independent individuals. Karen, however, did not understand the use of the system and she saw
its members with eyes as clear to their defects as were Gregory's to the defects of Madame
von Marwitz.

Gregory's friends belonged to that orderly and efficient section of the nation that moves contentedly
between the simply professional and the ultra fashionable. They had a great many duties, social,
political and domestic, which they took with a pleasant seriousness, and a great many pleasures
which they took seriously, too. They "came up" from the quiet responsibilities of the country-side
for a season and "did" the concerts and exhibitions as they "did" their shopping and their
balls. Art, to most of them, was a thing accepted on authority, like the latest cut for sleeves
or the latest fashion for dressing the hair. A few of them, like the Cornish Lavingtons, had
never heard Madame Okraska; a great many of them had never heard of Belot. The Madame Okraskas
and the Belots of the world were to them a queer, alien people, regarded with only a mild,
derivative interest. They recognized the artist as a decorative appurtenance of civilized life,
very much as they recognized the dentist or the undertaker as its convenient appurtenances.
It still struck them as rather strange that one should meet artists socially and, perhaps,
as rather regrettable, their traditional standard of good faith requiring that the people one
met socially should, on the whole, be people whom one wouldn't mind one's sons and daughters
marrying; and they didn't conceive of artists as entering that category.

Gregory, with all his acuteness, did not gauge the astonishment with which Karen came to realize
these standards of his world. Her cheerful evenness of demeanour was a cloak, sometimes for
indignation and sometimes for mirth. She could only face the fact that this world must, in
a sense, be hers, by relegating it and all that it meant to the merest background in their
lives. Her real life consisted in Gregory; in Tante. All that she had to do with these people--oh,
so nice and kind they were, she saw that well, but oh so stupid, most of them, so inconceivably
blind to everything of value in life--all that she had to do was, from time to time, to open
their box, their well-padded, well-provendered box, and look at them pleasantly. She felt sure
that for Gregory's sake, if not for theirs, she should always be able to look pleasantly; unless--she
had been afraid of this sometimes--they should say or do things that in their blindness struck
at Tante and at the realities that Tante stood for. But all had gone so well, so Karen believed,
that she felt no misgivings when Tante expressed a wish to look into the box with her and said,
"You must give a little dinner-party for me, my Karen, so that I may see your new milieu."

Gregory controlled a dry little grimace when Karen reported this speech to him. He couldn't
but suspect Tante's motives in wanting them to give a little dinner-party for her. But he feigned
the most genial interest in the plan and agreed with Karen that they must ask their very nicest
to meet Tante.

Betty had helped Karen with all her dinners; she had seen as yet very little of the great woman,
and entered fully into Karen's eagerness that everything should be very nice.

"Gregory will take her in," said Betty; "and we'll put Bertram Fraser on her other side. He's
always delightful. And we'll have the Canning-Thompsons and the Overtons and the Byngs; the
Byngs are so decorative!" Constance Armytage was now Mrs. Byng.

"And my dear old General," said Karen, sitting at her desk with a paper on her knee and an
obedient pencil in her hand; "I forget his name, but we met him at the dinner that you gave
after we married; you know, Betty, with the thin russet face and the little blue eyes. May
he take me in?"

"General Montgomery. Yes; that is a good idea; glorious old man. Though Lady Montgomery is
rather a stodge," said Betty; "but Oliver can have her."

"I remember, a sleek, small head--like a turtle--with salmon-pink feathers on it. Poor Oliver.
Will he mind?"

"Not a bit. He never minds anything but the dinner; and with Mrs. Barker we can trust to that."

"Tante often likes soldiers," said Karen, pleased with her good idea. "Our flags, she says,
they are, and that the world would be drab-coloured without them."

So it was arranged. Bertram Fraser was an old family friend of the Jardines'. His father was
still the rector of their Northumberland parish, and he and Gregory and Oliver had hunted and
fished and shot and gone to Oxford together. Bertram had been a traveller in strange countries
since those days, had written one or two clever books and was now in Parliament. The Overtons,
also country neighbours, were fond of music as well as of hunting, and Mr. Canning-Thompson
was an eminent, if rather ponderous, Q.C., for whose wife, the gentle and emaciated Lady Mary,
Gregory had a special affection. She was a great philanthropist and a patient student of early
Italian art, and he and she talked gardens and pictures together.

Betty and Oliver were the first to arrive on the festal night, Betty's efficiency, expressed
by all her diamonds and a dress of rose-coloured velvet, making up for whatever there might
be of inefficiency in Karen's appearance and deportment. Karen was still, touchingly so to
her husband's eyes, the little Hans Andersen heroine in appearance. She wore to-night the white
silk dress and the wreath of little white roses.

Oliver and Gregory chatted desultorily until the Byngs arrived. Oliver was fair and ruddy and
his air of dozing contentment was always vexatious to his younger brother. He had every reason
for contentment. Betty's money had securely buttressed the family fortunes and he had three
delightful little boys to buttress Betty's money. Gregory grew a little out of temper after
talking for five minutes to Oliver and this was not a fortunate mood in which to realise, as
the Montgomerys, the Overtons and the Canning-Thompsons followed the Byngs, at eight-fifteen,
that Madame von Marwitz was probably going to be late. At eight-thirty, Karen, looking at him
with some anxiety expressed in her raised brows, silently conveyed to him her fear that the
soup, at the very least, would be spoiled. At eight-forty Betty murmured to Karen that they
had perhaps better begin without Madame von Marwitz--hadn't they? She must, for some reason,
be unable to come. Dinner was for eight. "Oh, but we must wait longer," said Karen. "She would
have telephoned--or Mrs. Forrester would--if she had not been coming. Tante is always late;
but always, always," she added, without condemnation if with anxiety. "And there is the bell
now. Yes, I heard it."

It was a quarter to nine when Madame von Marwitz, with Karen, who had hastened out to meet
her, following behind, appeared at last, benign and unperturbed as a moon sliding from clouds.
In the doorway she made her accustomed pause, the pause of one not surveying her audience but
indulgently allowing her audience to survey her. It was the attitude in which Belot was painting
his great portrait of her. But it was not met to-night by the eyes to which she was accustomed.
The hungry guests looked at Madame von Marwitz with austere relief and looked only long enough
to satisfy themselves that her appearance really meant dinner.

Gregory led the way with her into the dining-room and suspected in her air of absent musing
a certain discomfiture.

She was, as usual, strangely and beautifully attired, as though for the operatic stage rather
than for a dinner-party. Strings of pearls fell from either side of her head to her shoulders
and a wide tiara of pearls banded her forehead in a manner recalling a Russian head-dress.
She looked, though so lovely, also so conspicuous that there was a certain ludicrousness in
her appearance. It apparently displeased or surprised Lady Montgomery, who, on Gregory's other
hand, her head adorned with the salmon-pink, ostrich feathers, raised a long tortoiseshell
lorgnette and fixed Madame von Marwitz through it for a mute, resentful moment. Madame von
Marwitz, erect and sublime as a goddess in a shrine, looked back. It was a look lifted far
above the region of Lady Montgomery's formal, and after all only tentative, disapprobations;
divine impertinence, sovereign disdain informed it. Lady Montgomery dropped her lorgnette with
a little clatter and, adjusting her heavy diamond bracelets, turned her sleek mid-Victorian
head to her neighbour. Gregory did not know whether to be amused or vexed.

It was now his part to carry on a conversation with the great woman: and he found the task
difficult. She was not silent, nor unresponsive. She listened to his remarks with the almost
disconcerting closeness of attention that he had observed in her on their meeting of the other
day, seeming to seek in them some savour that still escaped her good-will. She answered him
alertly, swiftly, and often at random, as though by her intelligence and competence to cover
his ineptitude. Her smile was brightly mechanical; her voice at once insistent and monotonous.
She had an air, which Gregory felt more and more to be almost insolent, of doing her duty.

Bertram Fraser's turn came and he rose to it with his usual buoyancy. He was interested in
meeting Madame von Marwitz; but he was a young man who had made his way in the world and perhaps
exaggerated his achievement. He expected people to be interested also in meeting him. He expected
from the great genius a reciprocal buoyancy. Madame von Marwitz bent her brows upon him. Irony
grew in her smile, a staccato crispness in her utterance. Cool and competent as he was, Bertram
presently looked disconcerted; he did not easily forgive those who disconcerted him, and, making
no further effort to carry on the conversation, he sat silent, smiling a little, and waited
for his partner to turn to him again. Had Gregory not taken up his talk, lamely and coldly,
with Madame von Marwitz, she would have been left in an awkward isolation.

She answered him now in a voice of lassitude and melancholy. Leaning back in her chair, strange
and almost stupefying object that she was, her eyes moved slowly round the table with a wintry
desolation of glance, until, meeting Karen's eyes, they beamed forth a brave warmth of cherishing,
encouraging sweetness. "Yes, ma chérie," they seemed to say; "Bear up, I am bearing up. I will
make méringues of them for you."

She could make méringues of them; Gregory didn't doubt it. Yet, and here was the glow of malicious
satisfaction that atoned to him for the discomforts he endured, they were, every one of them,
making méringues of her.

In their narrowness, in their defects, ran an instinct, as shrewd as it was unconscious, that
was a match for Madame von Marwitz's intelligence. They were so unperceiving that no one of
them, except perhaps Betty and Karen--who of course didn't count among them at all--was aware
of the wintry wind of Madame von Marwitz's boredom; yet if it had been recognised it would
have been felt as insignificant. They knew that she was a genius, and that she was very odd
looking and that, as Mrs. Jardine's guardian, she had not come in a professional capacity and
might therefore not play to them after dinner. So defined, she was seen, with all her splendour
of association, as incidental.

Only perhaps in this particular section of the British people could this particular effect
of cheerful imperviousness have been achieved. They were not of the voracious, cultured hordes
who make their way by their well-trained appreciations, nor of the fashionable lion-collecting
tribe who do not need to make their way but who need to have their way made amusing. Well-bred,
securely stationed, untouched by boredom or anxiety, they were at once too dull and too intelligent
to be fluttered by the presence of a celebrity. They wanted nothing of her, except, perhaps,
that after their coffee she should give them some music, and they did not want this at all eagerly.

If Madame von Marwitz had come to crush, to subjugate or to enchant, she had failed in every
respect and Gregory saw that her failure was not lost upon her. Her manner, as the consciousness
grew, became more frankly that of the vain, ill-tempered child, ignored. She ceased to speak;
her eyes, fixed on the wall over Sir Oliver's head, enlarged in a sullen despondency.

Lady Montgomery was making her way through a bunch of grapes and Lady Mary had only peeled
her peach, when, suddenly, taking upon herself the prerogative of a hostess, Madame von Marwitz
caught up her fan and gloves with a gesture of open impatience, and swept to the door almost
before Gregory had time to reach it or the startled guests to rise from their places.

CHAPTER XIX

When the time came for going to the drawing-room, Gregory found Betty entertaining the company
there, while Karen, on a distant sofa, was apparently engaged in showing her guardian a book
of photographs. He took in the situation at a glance, and, as he took it in, he was aware that
part of its significance lay in the fact that it obliged him to a swift interchange with Betty,
an interchange that irked him, defining as it did a community of understanding from which Karen,
in her simplicity, was shut out.

He went across to the couple on the sofa. Only sudden illness could have excused Madame von
Marwitz's departure from the dining-room, yet he determined to ask no questions, and to leave
any explanations to her.

Karen's eyes, in looking at him, were grave and a little anxious; but the anxiety, he saw,
was not on his account. "Tante wanted to see our kodaks," she said. "Do sit here with us, Gregory.
Betty is talking to everybody so beautifully."

"But you must go and talk to everybody beautifully, too, now, darling," said Gregory. He put
his hand on her shoulder and looked down at her smiling. The gesture, with its marital assurance,
the smile that was almost a caress, were involuntary; yet they expressed more than his tender
pride and solicitude, they defined his possession of her, and they excluded Tante. "It's been
a nice little dinner, hasn't it," he went on, continuing to look at her and not at Madame von
Marwitz. "I saw that the General was enjoying you immensely. There he is, looking over at you
now; he wants to go on talking about Garibaldi with you. He said he'd never met a young woman
so well up in modern history."

Madame von Marwitz's brooding eyes were on him while he thus spoke. He ignored them.

Karen looked a little perplexed. "Did you think it went so well, then, Gregory?"

"Why, didn't you?"

"I am not sure. I don't think I shall ever much like dinners, when I give them," she addressed
herself to her guardian as well as to her husband. "They make one feel so responsible."

"Well, as far as you were responsible for this one you were responsible for its being very
nice. Everybody enjoyed themselves. Now go and talk to the General."

"I did enjoy him," said Karen, half closing her book. "But Tante has rather a headache--I am
afraid she is tired. You saw at dinner that she was tired."

"Yes, oh yes, indeed, I thought that you must be feeling a little ill, perhaps," Gregory observed
blandly, turning his eyes now on Madame von Marwitz. "Well, you see, Karen, I will take your
place here, and it will give me a chance for a quiet talk with your guardian."

"People must not bother her," Karen rose, pleased, he could see, with this arrangement, and
hoping, he knew, that the opportunity was a propitious one, and that in it her dear ones might
draw together. "You will see that they don't bother her, Gregory, and go on showing her these."

"They won't bother a bit, I promise," said Gregory, taking her place as she rose. "They are
all very happily engaged, and Madame von Marwitz and I will look at the photographs in perfect
peace."

Something in these words and in the manner with which her guardian received them, with a deepening
of her long, steady glance, arrested Karen's departure. She stood above them, half confident,
yet half hesitating.

"Go, mon enfant," said Madame von Marwitz, turning the steady glance on her. "Go. Nobody here,
as your husband truly says, is thinking of me. I shall be quite untroubled."

Still with her look of preoccupation Karen moved away.

Cheerfully and deliberately Gregory now proceeded to turn the pages of the kodak album, and
to point out with painstaking geniality the charms and associations of each view, "Tu l'as
voulu, Georges Dandin," expressed his thought, for he didn't believe that Madame von Marwitz,
more than any person not completely self-abnegating, could tolerate looking at other people's
kodaks. But since it was her chosen occupation, the best she could find to do with their dinner-party,
she should be gratified; should be shown Karen standing on a peak in the Tyrol; Karen feeding
the pigeons before St. Mark's; Karen, again--wasn't it rather nice of her?--in a gondola. Madame
von Marwitz bent her head with its swinging pearls above the pictures, proffering now and then
a low murmur of assent.

But in the midst of the Paris pictures she lifted her head and looked at him. It was again
the steady, penetrating look, and now it seemed, with the smile that veiled it, to claim some
common understanding rather than seek it. "Enough," she said. She dismissed the kodaks with
a tap of her fan. "I wish to talk with you. I wish to talk with you of our Karen."

Gregory closed the volume. Madame von Marwitz's attitude as she leaned back, her arms lightly
folded, affected him in its deliberate grace and power as newly significant. Keeping his frosty,
observant eyes upon her, Gregory waited for what she had to say. "I am glad, very glad, that
you have given me this opportunity for a quiet conversation," so she took up the threads of
her intention. "I have wanted, for long, to consult with you about various matters concerning
Karen, and, in especial, about her future life. Tell me--this is what I wish in particular
to ask you--you are going, are you not, in time, when she has learned more skill in social
arts, to take my Karen into the world--dans le monde," Madame von Marwitz repeated, as though
to make her meaning genially clear. "Skill she is as yet too young to have mastered--or cared
to master. But she had always been at ease on the largest stage, and she will do you credit,
I assure you."

It was rather, to Gregory's imagination--always quick at similes--as though she had struck
a well-aimed blow right in the centre of a huge gong hanging between them. There she was, the
blow said. It was this she meant. No open avowal of hostility could have been more reverberating
or purposeful, and no open avowal of hostility would have been so sinister. But Gregory, though
his ears seemed to ring with the clang of it, was ready for her. He, too, with folded arms,
sat leaning back and he, too, smiled genially. "That's rather crushing, you know," he made
reply, "or didn't you? Karen is in my world. This is my world."

Madame von Marwitz gazed at him for a moment as if to gauge his seriousness. And then she turned
her eyes on his world and gazed at that. It was mildly chatting. It was placid, cheerful, unaware
of deficiency. It thought that it was enjoying itself. It was, indeed, enjoying itself, if
with the slightest of materials. Betty and Bertram Fraser laughed together; Lady Mary and Oliver
ever so slowly conversed. Constance Byng and Mr. Overton discussed the latest opera, young
Byng had joined Karen and the General, and a comfortable drone of politics came from Mrs. Overton
and Mr. Canning-Thompson. Removed a little from these groups Lady Montgomery, very much like
a turtle, sat with her head erect and her eyes half closed, evidently sleepy. It was upon Lady
Montgomery that Madame von Marwitz's gaze dwelt longest.

"You are contented," she then said to Gregory, "with these good people; for yourself and for
your wife?"

"Perfectly," said Gregory. "You see, Karen has married a commonplace person."

Madame von Marwitz paused again, and again her eyes dwelt on Lady Montgomery, whose pink feathers
had given a sudden nod and then serenely righted themselves. "I see," she then remarked. "But
she is not contented."

"Ah, come," said Gregory. "You can't shatter the conceit of a happy husband so easily, Madame
von Marwitz. You ask too much of me if you ask me to believe that Karen makes confidences to
you that she doesn't to me. I can't take it on, you know," he continued to smile.

He had already felt that the loveliness of Madame von Marwitz's face was a veil for its coldness,
and hints had come to him that it masked, also, some more sinister quality. And now, for a
moment, as if a primeval creature peeped at him from among delicate woodlands, a racial savagery
crossed her face with a strange, distorting tremor. The blood mounted to her brow; her skin
darkened curiously, and her eyes became hot and heavy as though the very irises felt the glow.

"You do not accept my word, Mr. Jardine?" she said. Her voice was controlled, but he had a
disagreeable sensation of scorching, as though a hot iron had been passed slowly before his face.

Gregory shook his foot a little, clasping his ankle. "I don't say that, of course. But I'm
glad to think you're mistaken."

"Let me tell you, Mr. Jardine," she returned, still with the curbed elemental fury colouring
her face and voice, "that even a happy husband's conceit is no match for a mother's intuition.
Karen is like my child to me; and to its mother a child makes confidences that it is unaware
of making. Karen finds your world narrow; borné; it does not afford her the wide life she has
known."

"You mean," said Gregory, "the life she led with Mrs. Talcott?"

He had not meant to say it. If he had paused to think it over he would have seen that it exposed
him to her as consciously hostile and also as almost feminine in his malice. And, as if this
recognition of his false move restored to her her full self-mastery, she met his irony with
a masculine sincerity, putting him, as on the occasion of their first encounter, lamentably
in the wrong. "Ah," she commented, her eyes dwelling on him. "Ah, I see. You have wondered.
You have criticized. You have, I think, Mr. Jardine, misunderstood my life and its capacities.
Allow me to explain. Your wife is the creature dearest to me in the world, and if you misread
my devotion to her you endanger our relation. You would not, I am sure, wish to do that; is
it not so? Allow me therefore to exculpate myself. I am a woman who, since childhood, has had
to labour for my livelihood and for that of those I love. You can know nothing of what that
labour of the artist's life entails,--interminable journeys, suffocating ennui, the unwholesome
monotony and publicity of a life passed in hotels and trains. It was not fit that a young and
growing girl should share that life. As much as has been possible I have guarded Karen from
its dust and weariness. I have had, of necessity, to leave her much alone, and she has needed
protection, stability, peace. I could have placed her in no lovelier spot than my Cornish home,
nor in safer hands than those of the guardian and companion of my own youth. Do you not feel
it a little unworthy, Mr. Jardine, when you have all the present and all the future, to grudge
me even my past with my child?"

She spoke slowly, with a noble dignity, all hint of sultry menace passed; willing, for Karen's
sake, to stoop to this self-justification before Karen's husband. And, for Karen's sake, she
had the air of holding in steady hands their relation, hers and his, assailed so gracelessly
by his taunting words. Gregory, for the first time in his knowledge of her, felt a little bewildered.
It was she who had opened hostilities, yet she almost made him forget it; she almost made him
feel that he alone had been graceless. "I do beg your pardon," he said. "Yes; I had wondered
a little about it; and I understand better now." But he gathered his wits together sufficiently
to add, on a fairer foothold: "I am sure you gave Karen all you could. What I meant was, I
think, that you should be generous enough to believe that I am giving her all I can."

Madame von Marwitz rose as he said this and he also got up. It was not so much, Gregory was
aware, that they had fought to a truce as that they had openly crossed swords. Her eyes still
dwelt on him, and now as if in a sad wonder. "But you are young. You are a man. You have ambition.
You wish to give more to the loved woman."

"I don't really quite know what you mean by more, Madame von Marwitz," said Gregory. "If it
applies to my world, I don't expect, or wish, to give Karen a better one."

They stood and confronted each other for a moment of silence.

"Bien," Madame von Marwitz then said, unemphatically, mildly. "Bien. I must see what I can
do." She turned her eyes on Karen, who, immediately aware of her glance, hastened to her. Madame
von Marwitz laid an arm about her neck. "I must bid you good-night, ma chérie. I am very tired."

"Tante, dear, I saw that you were so tired, I am so sorry. They fell in easily with all that he proposed,
and then he took away from them all religion and released them from
all those duties of piety, devotion, and the fear of God that he prescribed
for them in the beginning.

 Good-night, Mr. Jardine. Karen will come with me."

Pausing for no further farewells, Madame von Marwitz passed from the room with a majestic,
generalized bending of the head.

Betty joined her brother-in-law. "Dear me, Gregory," she said. "We've had the tragic muse to
supper, haven't we. What is the matter, what has been the matter with Madame von Marwitz? Is
she ill?"

"She says she's tired," said Gregory.

"It was disconcerting, wasn't it, her trailing suddenly out of the dining-room in that singular
fashion," said Betty. "Do you know, Gregory, that I'm getting quite vexed with Madame von Marwitz."

"Really? Why, Betty?"

"Well, it has been accumulating. I'm a very easy-going person, you know; but I've been noticing
that whenever I want Karen, Madame von Marwitz always nips in and cuts me out, so that I have
hardly seen her at all since her guardian came to London. And then it did rather rile me, I
confess, to find that the one hat in Karen's trousseau that I specially chose for her is the
one--the only one--that Madame von Marwitz objects to. Karen never wears it now. She certainly
behaved very absurdly to-night, Gregory. I suppose she expected us to sit round in a circle
and stare."

"Perhaps she did," Gregory acquiesced. "Perhaps we should have."

He was anxious to maintain the appearance of bland lightness before Betty. Karen had re-entered
as they spoke and Betty called her to them. "Tell me, Karen dear, is Madame von Marwitz ill?
She didn't give me a chance to say good-night to her." Betty had the air of wishing to exonerate
herself.

"She isn't ill," said Karen, whose face was grave. "But very tired."

"Now what made her tired, I wonder?" Betty mused. "She looks such a robust person."

It was bad of Betty, and as Karen stood before them, looking from one to the other, Gregory
saw that she suspected them. Her face hardened. "A great artist needs to be robust," she said.
"My guardian works every day at her piano for five or six hours."

"Dear me," Betty murmured. "How splendid. I'd no idea the big ones had to keep it up like that."

"There is great ignorance about an artist's life," Karen continued coldly to inform her. "Do
you not know what von Bulow said: If I miss my practising for one day I notice it; if for two
days my friends notice it; if I miss it for three days the public notices it. The artist is
like an acrobat, juggling always, intent always on his three golden balls kept flying in the
air. That is what it is like. Every atom of their strength is used. People, like my guardian,
literally give their lives for the world."

"Oh, yes, it is wonderful, of course," Betty assented. "But of course they must enjoy it; it
can hardly be called a sacrifice."

"Enjoy is a very small word to apply to such a great thing," said Karen. "You may say also,
if you like, that the saint enjoys his life of suffering for others. It is his life to give
himself to goodness; it is the artist's life to give himself to beauty. But it is beauty and
goodness they seek, not enjoyment; we must not try to measure these great people by our standards."

Before this arraignment Betty showed a tact for which Gregory was grateful to her. He, as so
often, found Karen, in her innocent sententiousness, at once absurd and adorable, but he could
grant that to Betty she might seem absurd only.

"Don't be cross with me, Karen," she said. "I suppose I am feeling sore at being snubbed by
Madame von Marwitz."

"But indeed she did not mean to snub you, Betty," said Karen earnestly. "And I am not cross;
please do not think that. Only I cannot bear to hear some of the things that are said of artists."

"Well, prove that you're not cross," said Betty, smiling, "by at last giving me an afternoon
when we can do something together. Will you come and see the pictures at Burlington House with
me to-morrow and have tea with me afterwards? I've really seen nothing of you for so long."

"To-morrow is promised to Tante, Betty. I'm so sorry. Her great concert is to be on Friday,
you know; and till then, and on the Saturday, I have said that I will be with her. She gets
so very tired. And I know how to take care of her when she is tired like that."

"Oh, dear!" Betty sighed. "There is no hope for us poor little people, is there, while Madame
von Marwitz is in London. Well, on Monday, then, Karen. Will you promise me Monday afternoon?"

"Monday is free, and I shall like so very much to come, Betty," Karen replied.

When Gregory and his wife were left alone together, they stood for some moments without speaking
on either side of the fire, and, as Karen's eyes were on the flames, Gregory, looking at her
carefully, read on her face the signs of stress and self-command. The irony, the irritation
and the oppression that Madame von Marwitz had aroused in him this evening merged suddenly,
as he looked at Karen into intense anger. What had she not done to them already, sinister woman?
It was because of her that constraint, reticence and uncertainty were rising again between
him and Karen.

"Darling," he said, putting out his hand and drawing her to him; "you look very tired."

She came, he fancied, with at first a little reluctance, but, as he put his arm around her,
she leaned her head against his shoulder with a sigh. "I am tired, Gregory."

They stood thus for some moments and then, as if the confident tenderness their attitude expressed
forced her to face with him their difficulty, she said carefully: "Gregory, dear, did you say
anything to depress Tante this evening?"

"Why do you ask, darling?" Gregory, after a slight pause, also carefully inquired.

"Only that she seemed depressed, very much depressed. I thought, I hoped that you and she were
talking so nicely, so happily."

There was another little pause and then Gregory said: "She rather depressed me, I think."

"Depressed you? But how, Gregory?"

He must indeed be very careful. It was far too late, now, for simple frankness; simple frankness
had, perhaps, from the beginning been impossible and in that fact lay the insecurity of his
position, and the immense advantage of Madame von Marwitz's. And as he paused and sought his
words it was as if, in the image of the Bouddha, looking down upon him and Karen, Madame von
Marwitz were with them now, a tranquil and ironic witness of his discomfiture. "Well," he said,
"she made me feel that I had only a very dingy sort of life to offer you and that my friends
were all very tiresome--borné was the word she used. That did rather--well--dash my spirits."

Standing there within his arm, of her face, seen from above, only the brow, the eyelashes,
the cheek visible, she was very still for a long moment. Then, gently, she said--and in the
gentleness he felt that she put aside the too natural suspicion that he was complaining of
Tante behind her back: "She doesn't realise that I don't care at all about people. And they
are rather bornés, aren't they, Gregory."

"I don't find them so," said Gregory, reasonably. "They aren't geniuses, of course, or acrobats,
or saints, or anything of that sort; but they seem to me, on the whole, a very nice lot of people."

"Very nice indeed, Gregory. But I don't think it is saints and geniuses that Tante misses here;
she misses minds that are able to recognise genius." Her quick ear had caught the involuntary
irony of his quotation.

"Ah, but, dear, you mustn't expect to find the average nice person able to pay homage at a
dinner-party. There is a time and a place for everything, isn't there."

"It was not that I meant, Gregory, or that Tante meant. There is always a place for intelligence. "If
she wants Jared she can have him. I'm not holding her," interrupted the youth. "And anyway,"
he exclaimed, "what do I owe to Jared and what do I owe to her or to any one but myself!"

Fenn
did not answer at once. At length he broke the silence. "Well, you heard what I said and I didn't
smile when I said it."

But Tom Van Dorn did smile as he answered, a smile of such sweetness,
and of such winning grace that it sugar-coated his words.

"Henry,"
he cried in his gay, deep voice with the exuberance of youth ringing
in it, "the world is mine. To have to defend his friends
when it was Tante who stood so lamentably in need of defence had begun to work upon his nerves.
"And some dowagers are as interesting as anybody. There are all sorts of ways of being interesting.
Dowagers are as intelligent as geniuses sometimes." His lightness was not unprovocative.

"It isn't funny, Gregory, to see Tante put into a false position."

"But, my dear, we did the best we could for her."

"I know that we did; and our best isn't good enough for her. That is all that I ask you to
realise," said Karen.

She was angry, and from the depths of his anger against Madame von Marwitz Gregory felt a little
gush of anger against Karen rise. "You are telling me what she told me," he said; "that my
best isn't good enough for her. You may say it and think it, of course; but it's a thing that
Madame von Marwitz has no right to say."

Karen moved away from his arm. Something more than the old girlish sternness was in the look
with which she faced him, though that flashed at him, a shield rather than a weapon. He recognised
the hidden pain and astonishment and his anger faded in tenderness. How could she but resent
and repell any hint that belittled Tante's claims and justifications? how could she hear but
with dismay the half threat of his last words, the intimation that from her he would accept
what he would not accept from Tante? The sudden compunction of his comprehension almost brought
the tears to his eyes. Karen saw that his resistance melted and the sternness fell from her
look. "But Gregory," she said, her voice a little trembling, "Tante did not say that. Please
don't make mistakes. It is so dreadful to misunderstand; nothing frightens me so much. I say
it; that our best isn't good enough, and I am thinking of Tante; only of Tante; but she--too
sweetly and mistakenly--was thinking of me. Tante doesn't care, for herself, about our world;
why should she? And she is mistaken to care about it for me; because it makes no difference,
none at all, to me, if it is borné. All that I care about, you know that, Gregory, is you and
Tante."

Gregory had his arms around her. "Do forgive me, darling," he said.

"But was I horrid?" Karen asked.

"No. It was I who was stupid," he said. "Do you know, I believe we were almost quarrelling, Karen."

"And we can quarrel safely--you and I, Gregory, can't we?" Karen said, her voice still trembling.

He leaned his head against her hair. "Of course we can. Only--don't let us quarrel--ever. It
is so dreadful."

"Isn't it dreadful, Gregory. But we must not let it frighten us, ever, because of course we
must quarrel now and then. And we often have already, haven't we," she went on, reassuring
him, and herself. "Do you remember, in the Tyrol, about the black bread!--And I was right that
time.--And the terrible conflict in Paris, about La Gaine d'Or; when I said you were a Philistine."

"Well, you owned afterwards, after you read about the beastly thing, that you were glad we
hadn't gone."

"Yes; I was glad. You were right there. Sometimes it is you and sometimes I," Karen declared,
as if that were the happy solution.

So, in their mutual love, they put aside the menacing difference. Something had happened, they
could but be aware of that; but their love tided them over. They did not argue further as to
who was right and who wrong that evening.

CHAPTER XX

The first of Madame von Marwitz's great concerts was given on Friday, and Karen spent the whole
of that day and of Saturday with her, summoned by an urgent telephone message early in the
morning. On Sunday she was still secluded in her rooms, and Miss Scrotton, breaking in determinedly
upon her, found her lying prone upon the sofa, Karen beside her.

"I cannot see you, my Scrotton," said Madame von Marwitz, with kindly yet listless decision.
"Did they not tell you below that I was seeing nobody? Karen is with me to watch over my ill-temper.
She is a soothing little milk-poultice and I can bear nothing else. I am worn out."

Before poor Miss Scrotton's brow of gloom Karen suggested that she should herself go down to
Mrs. Forrester for tea and leave her place to Miss Scrotton, but, with a weary shake of the
head, Madame von Marwitz rejected the proposal. "No; Scrotton is too intelligent for me to-day,"
she said. "You will go down to Mrs. Forrester for your tea, my Scrotton, and wait for another
day to see me."

Miss Scrotton went down nearly in tears.

"She refused to see Sir Alliston," Mrs. Forrester said, soothingly. "She really is fit for
nothing. I have never seen her so exhausted."

"Yet Karen Jardine always manages to force her way in," said Miss Scrotton, controlling the
tears with difficulty. "She has absolutely taken possession of Mercedes. It really is almost
absurd, such devotion, and in a married woman. Gregory doesn't like it at all. Oh, I know it.
Betty Jardine gave me a hint only yesterday of how matters stand."

"Lady Jardine has always seemed to me a rather trivial little person. I should not accept her
impression of a situation," said Mrs. Forrester. "Mercedes sends for Karen constantly. And
I am sure that Gregory is glad to think that she can be of use to Mercedes."

"Oh, Betty Jardine thinks, too, that it is Mercedes who takes Karen from her husband. But I
really can't agree with her, or with you, dear Mrs. Forrester, there. Mercedes is simply too
indolent and kind-hearted to defend herself from the sort of habit the girl has imposed upon
her. As for Gregory being grateful I can only assure you that you are entirely mistaken. My
own impression is that he is beginning to dislike Mercedes. Oh, he is a very jealous temperament;
I have always felt it in him. He is one of those cold, passionate men who become the most infatuated
and tyrannical of husbands."

"My dear Eleanor," Mrs. Forrester raised her eyebrows. "I see no sign of tyranny. He allows
Karen to come here constantly."

"Yes; because he knows that to refuse would be to endanger his relation to her. Mercedes is
angelic to him of course, and doesn't give him a chance for making things difficult for Karen.
But it is quite obvious to me that he hates the whole situation."

"I hope not," said Mrs. Forrester, gravely now. "I hope not. It would be tragical indeed if
this last close relation in Mercedes's life were to be spoiled for her. I could not forgive
Gregory if he made it difficult in any way for Karen to be with her guardian."

