'This little affair,' said the Time Traveller, resting his elbows upon the table and pressing
his hands together above the apparatus, 'is only a model. It is my plan for a machine to travel
through time. You will notice that it looks singularly askew, and that there is an odd twinkling
appearance about this bar, as though it was in some way unreal.' He pointed to the part with
his finger. 'Also, here is one little white lever, and here is another.'

The Medical Man got up out of his chair and peered into the thing. 'It's beautifully made,'
he said.

'It took two years to make,' retorted the Time Traveller. Then, when we had all imitated the
action of the Medical Man, he said: 'Now I want you clearly to understand that this lever,
being pressed over, sends the machine gliding into the future, and this other reverses the
motion. This saddle represents the seat of a time traveller. Presently I am going to press
the lever, and off the machine will go. It will vanish, pass into future Time, and disappear.
Have a good look at the thing. Look at the table too, and satisfy yourselves there is no trickery.
I don't want to waste this model, and then be told I'm a quack.'

There was a minute's pause perhaps. The Psychologist seemed about to speak to me, but changed
his mind. Then the Time Traveller put forth his finger towards the lever. 'No,' he said suddenly.
'Lend me your hand.' And turning to the Psychologist, he took that individual's hand in his
own and told him to put out his forefinger. So that it was the Psychologist himself who sent
forth the model Time Machine on its interminable voyage. We all saw the lever turn. I am absolutely
certain there was no trickery. There was a breath of wind, and the lamp flame jumped. One of
the candles on the mantel was blown out, and the little machine suddenly swung round, became
indistinct, was seen as a ghost for a second perhaps, as an eddy of faintly glittering brass
and ivory; and it was gone--vanished! Save for the lamp the table was bare.

Everyone was silent for a minute. Then Filby said he was damned.

The Psychologist recovered from his stupor, and suddenly looked under the table. At that the
Time Traveller laughed cheerfully. 'Well?' he said, with a reminiscence of the Psychologist.
Then, getting up, he went to the tobacco jar on the mantel, and with his back to us began to
fill his pipe.

We stared at each other. 'Look here,' said the Medical Man, 'are you in earnest about this?
Do you seriously believe that that machine has travelled into time?'

'Certainly,' said the Time Traveller, stooping to light a spill at the fire. Then he turned,
lighting his pipe, to look at the Psychologist's face. (The Psychologist, to show that he was
not unhinged, helped himself to a cigar and tried to light it uncut.) 'What is more, I have
a big machine nearly finished in there'--he indicated the laboratory--'and when that is put
together I mean to have a journey on my own account.'

'You mean to say that that machine has travelled into the future?' said Filby.

'Into the future or the past--I don't, for certain, know which.'

After an interval the Psychologist had an inspiration. 'It must have gone into the past if
it has gone anywhere,' he said.

'Why?' said the Time Traveller.

'Because I presume that it has not moved in space, and if it travelled into the future it would
still be here all this time, since it must have travelled through this time.'

'But,' I said, 'If it travelled into the past it would have been visible when we came first
into this room; and last Thursday when we were here; and the Thursday before that; and so forth!'

'Serious objections,' remarked the Provincial Mayor, with an air of impartiality, turning towards
the Time Traveller.

'Not a bit,' said the Time Traveller, and, to the Psychologist: 'You think. You can explain
that. It's presentation below the threshold, you know, diluted presentation.'

'Of course,' said the Psychologist, and reassured us. 'That's a simple point of psychology.
I should have thought of it. It's plain enough, and helps the paradox delightfully. We cannot
see it, nor can we appreciate this machine, any more than we can the spoke of a wheel spinning,
or a bullet flying through the air. If it is travelling through time fifty times or a hundred
times faster than we are, if it gets through a minute while we get through a second, the impression
it creates will of course be only one-fiftieth or one-hundredth of what it would make if it
were not travelling in time. That's plain enough.' He passed his hand through the space in
which the machine had been. 'You see?' he said, laughing.

We sat and stared at the vacant table for a minute or so. Then the Time Traveller asked us
what we thought of it all.

'It sounds plausible enough to-night,' said the Medical Man; 'but wait until to-morrow. Wait
for the common sense of the morning.'

'Would you like to see the Time Machine itself?' asked the Time Traveller. And therewith, taking
the lamp in his hand, he led the way down the long, draughty corridor to his laboratory. I
remember vividly the flickering light, his queer, broad head in silhouette, the dance of the
shadows, how we all followed him, puzzled but incredulous, and how there in the laboratory
we beheld a larger edition of the little mechanism which we had seen vanish from before our
eyes. Parts were of nickel, parts of ivory, parts had certainly been filed or sawn out of rock
crystal. The thing was generally complete, but the twisted crystalline bars lay unfinished
upon the bench beside some sheets of drawings, and I took one up for a better look at it. Quartz
it seemed to be.

'Look here,' said the Medical Man, 'are you perfectly serious? Or is this a trick--like that
ghost you showed us last Christmas?'

'Upon that machine,' said the Time Traveller, holding the lamp aloft, 'I intend to explore
time. Is that plain? I was never more serious in my life.'

None of us quite knew how to take it.

I caught Filby's eye over the shoulder of the Medical Man, and he winked at me solemnly.

II

I think that at that time none of us quite believed in the Time Machine. The fact is, the Time
Traveller was one of those men who are too clever to be believed: you never felt that you saw
all round him; you always suspected some subtle reserve, some ingenuity in ambush, behind his
lucid frankness. Had Filby shown the model and explained the matter in the Time Traveller's
words, we should have shown him far less scepticism. For we should have perceived his motives;
a pork butcher could understand Filby. But the Time Traveller had more than a touch of whim
among his elements, and we distrusted him. Things that would have made the frame of a less
clever man seemed tricks in his hands. It is a mistake to do things too easily. The serious
people who took him seriously never felt quite sure of his deportment; they were somehow aware
that trusting their reputations for judgment with him was like furnishing a nursery with egg-shell
china. So I don't think any of us said very much about time travelling in the interval between
that Thursday and the next, though its odd potentialities ran, no doubt, in most of our minds:
its plausibility, that is, its practical incredibleness, the curious possibilities of anachronism
and of utter confusion it suggested. For my own part, I was particularly preoccupied with the
trick of the model. That I remember discussing with the Medical Man, whom I met on Friday at
the Linnaean. He said he had seen a similar thing at Tubingen, and laid considerable stress
on the blowing out of the candle. But how the trick was done he could not explain.

The next Thursday I went again to Richmond--I suppose I was one of the Time Traveller's most
constant guests--and, arriving late, found four or five men already assembled in his drawing-room.
The Medical Man was standing before the fire with a sheet of paper in one hand and his watch
in the other. I looked round for the Time Traveller, and--'It's half-past seven now,' said
the Medical Man. 'I suppose we'd better have dinner?'

'Where's----?' said I, naming our host.

'You've just come? It's rather odd. He's unavoidably detained. He asks me in this note to lead
off with dinner at seven if he's not back. Says he'll explain when he comes.'

'It seems a pity to let the dinner spoil,' said the Editor of a well-known daily paper; and
thereupon the Doctor rang the bell.

The Psychologist was the only person besides the Doctor and myself who had attended the previous
dinner. The other men were Blank, the Editor aforementioned, a certain journalist, and another--a
quiet, shy man with a beard--whom I didn't know, and who, as far as my observation went, never
opened his mouth all the evening. There was some speculation at the dinner-table about the
Time Traveller's absence, and I suggested time travelling, in a half-jocular spirit. The Editor
wanted that explained to him, and the Psychologist volunteered a wooden account of the 'ingenious
paradox and trick' we had witnessed that day week. He was in the midst of his exposition when
the door from the corridor opened slowly and without noise. I was facing the door, and saw
it first. 'Hallo!' I said. 'At last!' And the door opened wider, and the Time Traveller stood
before us. I gave a cry of surprise. 'Good heavens! man, what's the matter?' cried the Medical
Man, who saw him next. And the whole tableful turned towards the door.

He was in an amazing plight. His coat was dusty and dirty, and smeared with green down the
sleeves; his hair disordered, and as it seemed to me greyer--either with dust and dirt or because
its colour had actually faded. His face was ghastly pale; his chin had a brown cut on it--a
cut half healed; his expression was haggard and drawn, as by intense suffering. For a moment
he hesitated in the doorway, as if he had been dazzled by the light. Then he came into the
room. He walked with just such a limp as I have seen in footsore tramps. We stared at him in
silence, expecting him to speak.

He said not a word, but came painfully to the table, and made a motion towards the wine. The
Editor filled a glass of champagne, and pushed it towards him. He drained it, and it seemed
to do him good: for he looked round the table, and the ghost of his old smile flickered across
his face. 'What on earth have you been up to, man?' said the Doctor. The Time Traveller did
not seem to hear. 'Don't let me disturb you,' he said, with a certain faltering articulation.
'I'm all right.' He stopped, held out his glass for more, and took it off at a draught. 'That's
good,' he said. His eyes grew brighter, and a faint colour came into his cheeks. His glance
flickered over our faces with a certain dull approval, and then went round the warm and comfortable
room. Then he spoke again, still as it were feeling his way among his words. 'I'm going to
wash and dress, and then I'll come down and explain things ... Save me some of that mutton.
I'm starving for a bit of meat.'

He looked across at the Editor, who was a rare visitor, and hoped he was all right. The Editor
began a question. 'Tell you presently,' said the Time Traveller. 'I'm--funny! Be all right
in a minute.'

He put down his glass, and walked towards the staircase door. Again I remarked his lameness
and the soft padding sound of his footfall, and standing up in my place, I saw his feet as
he went out. He had nothing on them but a pair of tattered, blood-stained socks. Then the door
closed upon him. I had half a mind to follow, till I remembered how he detested any fuss about
himself. For a minute, perhaps, my mind was wool-gathering. Then, 'Remarkable Behaviour of
an Eminent Scientist,' I heard the Editor say, thinking (after his wont) in headlines. And
this brought my attention back to the bright dinner-table.

'What's the game?' said the Journalist. 'Has he been doing the Amateur Cadger? I don't follow.'
I met the eye of the Psychologist, and read my own interpretation in his face. I thought of
the Time Traveller limping painfully upstairs. I don't think any one else had noticed his lameness.

The first to recover completely from this surprise was the Medical Man, who rang the bell--the
Time Traveller hated to have servants waiting at dinner--for a hot plate. At that the Editor
turned to his knife and fork with a grunt, and the Silent Man followed suit. The dinner was
resumed. Conversation was exclamatory for a little while, with gaps of wonderment; and then
the Editor got fervent in his curiosity. 'Does our friend eke out his modest income with a
crossing? or has he his Nebuchadnezzar phases?' he inquired. 'I feel assured it's this business
of the Time Machine,' I said, and took up the Psychologist's account of our previous meeting.
The new guests were frankly incredulous. The Editor raised objections. 'What was this time
travelling? A man couldn't cover himself with dust by rolling in a paradox, could he?' And
then, as the idea came home to him, he resorted to caricature. Hadn't they any clothes-brushes
in the Future? The Journalist too, would not believe at any price, and joined the Editor in
the easy work of heaping ridicule on the whole thing. They were both the new kind of journalist--very
joyous, irreverent young men. 'Our Special Correspondent in the Day after To-morrow reports,'
the Journalist was saying--or rather shouting--when the Time Traveller came back. He was dressed
in ordinary evening clothes, and nothing save his haggard look remained of the change that
had startled me.

'I say,' said the Editor hilariously, 'these chaps here say you have been travelling into the
middle of next week! Tell us all about little Rosebery, will you? What will you take for the lot?'

The Time Traveller came to the place reserved for him without a word. He smiled quietly, in
his old way. 'Where's my mutton?' he said. 'What a treat it is to stick a fork into meat again!'

'Story!' cried the Editor.

'Story be damned!' said the Time Traveller. 'I want something to eat. I won't say a word until
I get some peptone into my arteries. Thanks. And the salt.'

'One word,' said I. 'Have you been time travelling?'

'Yes,' said the Time Traveller, with his mouth full, nodding his head.

'I'd give a shilling a line for a verbatim note,' said the Editor. The Time Traveller pushed
his glass towards the Silent Man and rang it with his fingernail; at which the Silent Man,
who had been staring at his face, started convulsively, and poured him wine. The rest of the
dinner was uncomfortable. For my own part, sudden questions kept on rising to my lips, and
I dare say it was the same with the others. The Journalist tried to relieve the tension by
telling anecdotes of Hettie Potter. The Time Traveller devoted his attention to his dinner,
and displayed the appetite of a tramp. The Medical Man smoked a cigarette, and watched the
Time Traveller through his eyelashes. The Silent Man seemed even more clumsy than usual, and
drank champagne with regularity and determination out of sheer nervousness. At last the Time
Traveller pushed his plate away, and looked round us. 'I suppose I must apologize,' he said.
'I was simply starving. I've had a most amazing time.' He reached out his hand for a cigar,
and cut the end. 'But come into the smoking-room. It's too long a story to tell over greasy
plates.' And ringing the bell in passing, he led the way into the adjoining room.

