"Young woman," said the Judge, "it is my painful duty to tell you, that your life is forfeited
under a law, which, if it may seem in some degree severe, is yet wisely so, to render those
of your unhappy situation aware what risk they run, by concealing, out of pride or false shame,
their lapse from virtue, and making no preparation to save the lives of the unfortunate infants
whom they are to bring into the world. When you concealed your situation from your mistress,
your sister, and other worthy and compassionate persons of your own sex, in whose favour your
former conduct had given you a fair place, you seem to me to have had in your contemplation,
at least, the death of the helpless creature, for whose life you neglected to provide. How
the child was disposed of--whether it was dealt upon by another, or by yourself--whether the
extraordinary story you have told is partly false, or altogether so, is between God and your
own conscience. I will not aggravate your distress by pressing on that topic, but I do most
solemnly adjure you to employ the remaining space of your time in making your peace with God,
for which purpose such reverend clergymen, as you yourself may name, shall have access to you.
Notwithstanding the humane recommendation of the jury, I cannot afford to you, in the present
circumstances of the country, the slightest hope that your life will be prolonged beyond the
period assigned for the execution of your sentence. Forsaking, therefore, the thoughts of this
world, let your mind be prepared by repentance for those of more awful moments--for death,
judgment, and eternity.--Doomster, read the sentence."*

* Note N. Doomster, or Dempster, of Court.

When the Doomster showed himself, a tall haggard figure, arrayed in a fantastic garment of
black and grey, passmented with silver lace, all fell back with a sort of instinctive horror,
and made wide way for him to approach the foot of the table. As this office was held by the
common executioner, men shouldered each other backward to avoid even the touch of his garment,
and some were seen to brush their own clothes, which had accidentally become subject to such
contamination. A sound went through the Court, produced by each person drawing in their breath
hard, as men do when they expect or witness what is frightful, and at the same time affecting.
The caitiff villain yet seemed, amid his hardened brutality, to have some sense of his being
the object of public detestation, which made him impatient of being in public, as birds of
evil omen are anxious to escape from daylight, and from pure air.

Repeating after the Clerk of Court, he gabbled over the words of the sentence, which condemned
Euphemia Deans to be conducted back to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, and detained there until
Wednesday the day of ---; and upon that day, betwixt the hours of two and four o'clock afternoon,
to be conveyed to the common place of execution, and there hanged by the neck upon a gibbet.
"And this," said the Doomster, aggravating his harsh voice, "I pronounce for doom."

He vanished when he had spoken the last emphatic word, like a foul fiend after the purpose
of his visitation had been accomplished; but the impression of horror excited by his presence
and his errand, remained upon the crowd of spectators.

The unfortunate criminal,--for so she must now be termed,--with more susceptibility, and more
irritable feelings than her father and sister, was found, in this emergence, to possess a considerable
share of their courage. She had remained standing motionless at the bar while the sentence
was pronounced, and was observed to shut her eyes when the Doomster appeared. But she was the
first to break silence when that evil form had left his place.

