Dear reader, I generally leave my audience with a heavy load on my heart. Why? Because, as
other public workers and speakers, I find few, very few, comparatively speaking, who heed the
warnings which observation and practical experience have prompted me to give out. Once as I
was walking out of a church, two ladies directly behind me were conversing on the address just
finished. One said to the other, "Weren't you immensely interested in those dreadful word-pictures
from real life?" "Yes," replied the other, "but that work is very unpopular, and requires peculiarly
adapted people, entirely different from you and me." I silently thanked God for so richly endowing
a few of us with sufficiently peculiar qualities to seek for wonderful, priceless jewels among
the fallen who, through lack of proper home training and companionship, have taken the downward
course. Many of these outcasts, if sought and cared for, will some day occupy an exalted place
in the Master's kingdom.

CHAPTER XLII.

LOS ANGELES DANCE-HALLS AND OTHER PLACES.

Well, you may call them first-class if you like; I call them first-class stepping-stones to
an everlasting hell. Furthermore, I will prove my statement.

On July 24 of that year (1908) I was again in Los Angeles. As usual, I was interviewed, this
time by a Times editor. Among other things I made mention of the fact that many mothers did
not know what their children were doing after school-hours, and stated that such women had
better play less whist and give their children more attention. And oh! the terrifying iniquities
of society. Do you know, the worst enemy a girl who has fallen into error has is her own sex.
Women simply will not have anything to do with her, and that is what keeps the world back.
The cause? Selfishness, of course.

"Yes, I believe there are too many marriages of convenience. And oh! the dreadful race suicide
that I know is going on around me on every hand. It sounds the doom of the American race. We
are indeed on the downward path."

"Why do not our mothers bring up their girls in a full knowledge of this world and its snares
for young and faltering feet, instead of letting them run the streets and meet unknown men?"

"It is because the mothers themselves are too often unfit for the divine duties of motherhood.
They are lacking in a knowledge of what makes for the best life. I have seen so much of it
that I am going to try to arouse the mothers of Los Angeles at a special meeting."

The different dailies kept tab of "Mother Roberts" for some time. To be a target, a cynosure,
is an indescribable cross to the Christian; but some one must be willing, else how is the world
to comprehend the situation?

Among other things said in the mothers' meeting were these:

"Too many mothers will not, because of their false modesty, give proper instruction to their
children. Yes, parents fearfully misrepresent conditions to their boys and girls, even resorting
to absolute falsehood. Of course the children soon learn the facts, and instead of the parents
and children making confidants of each other, both practise deception. When girls find out
these things, they often slip away to their downfall.

"When I was sixteen years of age, I saw in a paper an advertisement stating that an elderly
lady wanted a young lady as companion and amanuensis. The advertisement read very smoothly
and I answered it. The woman, who was seemingly a prepossessing, lonely old woman, inspected
my recommendations and at once engaged me on trial. I shortly returned to her, taking with
me some of my choicest worldly possessions; but before I had been with her twenty-four hours,
some of her strange actions so alarmed me that on the following morning I made the excuse at
the breakfast table of wanting to go to my boarding-place for expected mail, promising to return
within half an hour. After I had told the family of my experiences and suspicions, the mother
would not allow me to return even for my effects, which I have not seen from that day to this.
It turned out that I was only one of about forty girls who had been engaged by that diabolical
woman to fill 'positions as companions.' I am very thankful that 'the way of escape' had been
made for me, and though feeling badly about losing my belongings, I agreed with my friends
that it were better to avoid notoriety than to create a disturbance.

"At the time of this occurrence (it was in San Francisco) I had but recently arrived from England,
the land of my birth and breeding, under the protection of elderly people, who consigned me
to the care of relatives in California. As with thousands of other girls, my education on certain
lines had been badly neglected. I was, alas! too unsophisticated.

"In after-years, when I became a Christian in spirit as well as in name, I thanked God for
this early experience, which has enabled me to sympathize with those who, much of the time,
are more sinned against than guilty of sinning, and who so often are enticed away by the various
methods devised by unprincipled beings called men and women.

SATAN LURKS IN THE WALTZ.

"Yes; I have watched them dance in many places, even in Los Angeles. Is it degrading, demoralizing?
You know as well as I that there is nothing uplifting, nothing of a good moral tendency, about
the dance, especially the waltz; and I saw nothing else offered than the waltz, or round dances
closely resembling it, in either of the places I attended last evening.

"My heart sorely ached as I observed mothers with their little girls, five to twelve years
old, allowing, aye, even encouraging them to get up and waltz on the same floor with questionable
characters. Evidently there is little or no need of introductions. Both sexes anxiously observe
who are the best dancers, and soon these, though perhaps total strangers, are spinning, sliding,
or gliding about together, in many instances in a close embrace, breast to breast, and cheek
to cheek. But they 'must dance.' they 'love it so.' And the music! The most sensual, the most
alluring, as subtle as a wily serpent, and just as harmful.

"There were church-members there; mothers chaperoning their young daughters; mothers who profess
to be following in the footsteps of the Redeemer; mothers who have promised to bring up their
little ones in the way Jesus would have them.

"In a few instances I even saw fathers waltzing with their own little girls on the great crowded
dance-hall floor as late as nearly midnight. 'What!' you say, 'surely no father would think
of such a thing.' Perhaps not; perhaps I am presuming. Perhaps it was the mother's escort to
the ball in each instance. I don't know. This I do know: Those little children last night were
eager, hungry, craving, tireless dancers. O merciful God! The pity of it, the pity of it!

"I observed some of the young men. The contour of some of their heads peculiarly interested
me. To be sure, you could not tell what the girls' heads were like because of so many etceteras
bulging out all over; but as I looked at many of the young men's heads, I was not long in deciding
that those who danced the most gracefully evidently had the bulk of their brains in their heels.

"At the first place I visited, one young fellow walked up to a pretty pompadoured, short-skirted
miss who stood close to me and who had waltzed with several strangers, and asked her to dance.
She refused him. Why? He smelt too strong of whiskey and was unsteady in his gait, but she
did not give him that as her reason, and because of his persistence she soon said to her companions
(some other young girls), 'Come on, let's go down to----; there isn't enough fun here.' It
was no sooner said than done. I also left for this other place, where I found hundreds of couples
dancing, and many refined, pretty-looking young girls sitting or standing around, waiting for
any strange young man to invite them on to the floor and hug them (oh yes, better call things
by their proper names)--hug them to alluring waltz-time.

EVEN ON THE LORD'S DAY.

"There is hour after hour of this, day after day, night after night; yes, even on the one day
set apart for the worship of our Redeemer and Creator, and this in the so-called respectable
dance-hall. At the entrance is a prominent sign--'Dancing every night including Sunday.' 'No
bowery dancing allowed.' Tell me why that sign if the dance is strictly respectable?

"A young gentleman made this comment to me: 'You won't find one girl in a hundred today, who
is not fond of the dance.'

"'Why?' I inquired.

"'Considering their training, it isn't to be wondered at,' he answered.

"'What training?' I questioned.

"'Because their mothers loved it before them, and the girls do not hesitate to say so.'

"Another young man said: 'I can take advantage of the situation, if so inclined, every time.
Invariably any girl who dances will drink, and any one that drinks will go still farther.'

"One girl said: 'It isn't what occurs at the actual dance, but any girl that dances often has
to fight for her virtue, almost her life, after the dance--on her way home. Often her escort
takes her only part of the way. Yet, "like moths that court the candle," even though we know
that death and ruin are in the wake, still we will dance.'

"Whoever heard of any man worth the having, seeking for a wife and the future mother of his
children in a ballroom?

WARNING TO GIRLS.

"Let me quote another young man: 'If the pure-minded girls with whom we sometimes are dancing
knew our thoughts, they would never put a foot on the ballroom floor again, as they value their
lives; but lots of young girls don't know this, and their mothers who sometimes chaperon them,
don't suspect us. I consider the dance-hall even worse than the saloon. I'm a dancer myself,
but I won't pay serious address to any girl who dances.'

"Have matters assumed such shape that we can not furnish the majority of the present generation,
pleasures so pure, refining, and alluring that the dance and other vices may not be relegated
to oblivion? This question should stir the innermost recesses of the souls of all who are interested
in the welfare of the young people of today, be they young or old, rich or poor. The next generation
is cursed already, frightfully cursed, unless unusual sacrifice will now be made. There is
no time to lose, especially on the part of those who love the title, 'Soldier of the Cross.'

"'Put on the whole armor of God.' Go where he wants you to go. Do what he wants you to do.
Be what he wants you to be, in thought, in word, in deed, even though it may mean to part with
your very life. God is yearning for a few more Calebs and Joshuas and Daniels. What use to
pray 'Thy Kingdom Come,' if you patronize or countenance places where, under no consideration,
could you invite the One you profess to love and serve."

Whilst contending against the dance-hall evil, I received a note asking for an immediate interview.
The writer, who signed her own name, stated that she had been an employee in ----'s Dance-hall
(rated as one of the exclusive and first-class places) and that she believed that, under the
existing circumstances, my granting her an audience, would still further aid the cause, as
she could throw much light on the subject.

Soon she was at my rooms, also a reporter, and the following is, in part, what she had to say:

"I am utterly disgusted with dance-halls, and am determined to do all I can against them. Mr.
C---- [her husband] and I came here from New York in reduced financial circumstances, and I
applied for and obtained a position at ----'s Dance-hall.

"For reasons best known to ourselves, we posed as brother and sister, pretending my husband
was in the East. I worked there only fourteen days, or until my husband secured a permanent
position, but I left the place with a complete knowledge of the disreputable work done there
under the guise of a respectable dance-hall. I do not wish to be mean in my assertions, but
the facts will bear me up in what I actually saw and heard during the two weeks I was engaged
at ----'s Dance-hall.

"I was on the reception committee to introduce the lonesome boys to the charming girls for
the dances. It would take me two hours to state the disgusting features I saw there.

"The manager at one time asked me to drink whiskey with him. I told him that I was not in the
habit of indulging and that if I should get drunk he would have to take care of me, to which
he said, 'I can do that all right.'

"One night a young man became dead drunk in the dance-hall, in full view of the dancers, making
a disgusting show of himself, all of which apparently passed unnoticed by the manager. The
friends of the young man took him out of the hall.

"One time I saw a young girl dancing with a young man who was trying to hide a whiskey bottle,
with which she and her partner appeared to be mixed. All this was supposed to be in plain sight
of the manager.

"A young girl on duty selling tickets asked me to bring her an empty glass from the soda fountain.
A young man took it and filled it nearly full with brandy and passed it to the girl. She slyly
wrapped her handkerchief around it to hide the brandy, and drank it as if drinking a glass
of water. This was seen by several by-standers.

"It makes me shudder to think of what I saw and heard in that hall. One young girl unused to
the ways of the world was taken out of the hall in a ruined condition, and after an unlawful
surgical operation had been performed, she was sent to a well-known hospital. She was the victim
of a prominent lawyer of Los Angeles.

"One night last week the manager spoke through a megaphone, during the intermission of the
dance, asking everybody to sign a petition he had prepared stating that the place was properly
run, and to sign it in order that he could continue the dance-hall business. I know of one
man who signed a fictitious name to the petition, with the remark that others were doing the
same," etc.

She told much more, some of which was not fit to print, but surely that is sufficient from her.

I was able one night to show a reporter that no erroneous statements had been made. On the
contrary, he was shocked as he noted the wily depravity. His attention was attracted to a good-looking
young man who had slipped one of the reception committee young women a piece of money. Together
we watched the outcome. She made for a pretty, graceful young girl just leaving the dance-ring
and whispered audibly, "There's a swell young fellow wants to have the honor of dancing with
you." Before the girl had time to think or answer, he was right on hand, saying, "May I have
the pleasure of the next waltz? My name is Jones." Then the introducer manufactured a name
for the pretty young girl, the music started up, and the next moment she was gliding over the
perfect dancing-floor in the embrace of this strange fellow. Is that all? Not by any means.
He invited her to an innocent dish of ice-cream. (If a girl does not accept such an invitation,
but she usually does, the would-be seducer knows she is a gold mine if he can ever secure her,
and he works to that end.) She accepted. We watched our opportunity, and, between dances, when
no one was taking notice, we whispered the word of warning. For a moment she looked alarmed,
but did she heed? Evidently not. Possibly she resented the well-meant advice, and, in consequence,
soon paid the fearful price for so doing.

Upon getting out once more into the fresh air, we could not fail to observe the many automobiles
in waiting. Wherefore? Listen! Shortly before this visit when I was accompanied by the Times
reporter, I was a temporary guest in one of Los Angeles' representative families, the mother
of whom was one of my tried and true friends. She had two noble, handsome sons. One of them
came home one day in a high state of indignation. After he had related to his mother an incident
that had just occurred, she besought him to repeat it for my benefit.

While he was resting in the park bounded by Fifth, Sixth, Olive, and Hill Streets, a middle-aged
man of good dress and appearance seated himself on the same bench and, disregarding conventionalities,
began to make himself agreeable, first commenting on the weather and then gradually leading
up to the subject in which he was most interested. Presently he inquired if my young friend
was occupied in business, and received the reply, "No; not at present, but I am on the lookout
for something that will be worth while." As one word always leads to another, the stranger
soon inquired if the young man could dance. Receiving an affirmative answer, he remarked:

"Good! I notice you are a swell dresser also, and a pleasant conversationalist; in fact, have
all the requirements if I'm not mistaken."

"What requirements?" asked my young friend.

"Say, young man," the stranger answered, "I can put you wise to something that will bring you
the quickest returns for the least labor you ever struck, but 'mums the word.'"

"Fire ahead," replied my young friend; "'mums the word.'"

"First, I note that you are agreeable, educated, well dressed, and a dancer, all of which takes
with the majority of girls, at least the girls we have to reach. Next, I need you in the ballrooms.
Perhaps you may occasionally require an automobile. To be sure, that is expensive, but..."

"What is he driving at?" silently wondered my young friend. "Guess I will hear him through.
Here's something out of the ordinary."

"Girls will be girls," the man continued. "It's dead easy to win some, harder with others;
but there's big money in it for each new supply you can furnish."

"Furnish for what?" inquired my young friend.

"The necessary evil, my boy, the necessary evil, of course," was the startling answer.

Trembling with indignation, my young friend quickly arose and unhesitatingly shouted:

"Police! Police!"

The procurer disappeared so suddenly that no one of the small crowd which quickly gathered
knew what was the matter until too late to arrest the scoundrel.

Is that stranger the only procurer? Common sense answers, "No!" My reader, there are thousands.
Therefore if nothing else, no other reason --and they are many--should cause young ladies to
refrain from a practise which means compromise or ruin, often eternal damnation, surely this
illustration should be sufficient.

Permit me to mention another reason, one I am also able to verify, for it came from one shipwrecked
at the age of twenty-two, and now passed into eternity, but then lying in one of the wards
of the county hospital. To be brief, he was a dancer. Honor, however, forbade his making any
improper advances to his girl partners, but the effects of their close proximity were fatal.
All the evil of his nature was stirred, and it would not be suppressed. He yielded; visited
places whose thresholds he would never otherwise have crossed; then followed depravity, disease,
and an untimely death. Who was responsible for this? The unharmed girls with whom he danced.
Surely a word to the wise is sufficient. If dancing causes my brother to err, I will dance
no longer.

CHAPTER XLIV.

SARAH.

Whilst doing a house-to-house work in one of our large coast towns, also filling various pulpits
whenever opportunity permitted, I was on one occasion cordially invited to enter the lodging
of a girl, who, when I was seated, quickly turned the key in the lock, remarking as she did
so: "You're just the kind of a person I have been hoping this long time to meet. Excuse me
for locking you in, but I don't want to be disturbed while you are here, where I'm truly ashamed
to have you find me. I want to tell you my situation and see if you can not immediately get
me out of this awful predicament."

Calling attention to the fact that there was no odor of liquor, no signs of cigarettes about,
and stating that in consequence she was unpopular with the habitues of the other lodgings in
the immediate vicinity, she inquired:

"Do I look like a hardened sinner?"

"You certainly do not," was my reply.

"Oh! I'm so relieved," she rejoined, "so relieved to hear you say so, because I want to get
away from this life, and I am sure you can help me."

"All that is in my power, dear girl," I assured her. "Now tell me your story."

"I've a little brother and sister," she began. "My father, when I was seventeen years of age,
ran off with another woman and deserted poor Mother, who took it so hard that she lived only
two years. This left me to provide for the children. I had to get some help from the county
for the funeral expenses, and it wasn't easy to make a good appearance and provide properly
for the little ones on what I was earning."

"What were you doing for a living, dear?" I asked.

"I was working in a laundry, from early morning till, many times, late at night. I got a dollar
a day and for over-time was paid extra." (If I remember correctly, she said ten cents an hour.)

"Was that sufficient to provide food, clothing, and shelter for all three of you?" I inquired.

"No, mam, though I managed somehow. I boarded them with an old friend of mother's, who was
very kind, and I felt she was never paid enough for her trouble, so you may be sure I was constantly
on the lookout for a better-paying job. At last I thought I had struck one, but for a while
it would take me away from them, for it was away off in Nevada.

"I answered an ad in the morning paper for a situation in a hotel. The man and woman wanted
me right away, as they were leaving on the evening train, and would take me with them, also
two others. So I quickly made all my arrangements. Two days later we were there, and it took
me no time to see that our principal work would be to wait on tables in the saloon and gambling-hall.
I had no money, and was in debt. What could I do but make the best of it? and it is surprising
how soon one can."

"Yes, my child. I've frequently heard others make the same sad remark--but proceed with your
story."

"I was making quite a bit, besides sending money home to keep the children, when something
happened which made me so despondent [she did not say what it was] that one day I quit my job,
and one of the girls said, 'Go down to ----, Sarah. You'll be able to get plenty of honest
work there, at good wages.' So I left; and, believe me, I hadn't struck ---- before some one
on the train recognized me as one of the girls who had worked in the ---- Hotel. It was all
up with me now. In my despair I took this den, for which I pay one dollar and fifty cents a
day. I loathe, I hate the business. I am ready and willing to go into anybody's kitchen and
work, and work hard and well, for I know how. Do you think you could get any one to hire me?"

As she had been brought up by a God-fearing mother, we knelt together in that vile den, where
we both prayed. With the tears streaming down her cheeks, she prayed her mother's God and her
God to forgive her for having been so weak as to yield to the devil, all because she wanted
more money so as to be able to provide better for the little brother and sister, and implored
Him to give her employment where she could have them near her until they were old enough to
do for themselves.

Now listen to how God answered that prayer. On the next evening (Sunday), whilst I was addressing
a large audience in the Congregational church, I related this girl's experience and then requested
honest work for her, emphasizing thus: "She claims to be capable; she looks it; therefore she
can earn good wages. Whoever is in need of such a girl, please privately inform me at the close
of this service." In less than an hour, that girl could have had her choice of five situations
in responsible families. I chose one for her, and for aught I know to the contrary, she may
be there still. (Reader, it is impossible to keep track of different ones, there are so many.)
She gave such excellent satisfaction that erelong her little brother and sister were provided
a good home in her immediate neighborhood, and scarcely any one is the wiser for her unfortunate
error.

Thus the rescue worker occasionally sees happy results of the travail of soul for the lost
ones; but would to God there were many more Christian employers like the one Sarah found, who
treat her so kindly, as well as give her what she is capable of earning, that she makes extra
effort to prove her appreciation and gratitude. "But," you say, "there are not many like Sarah."
True; also there are not many Christians like Sarah's employers. In fact, they are very, very
rare. Many a time have I wearied myself in vain in an endeavor to procure honest employment
for some young girl who has been convicted and imprisoned a short time for her first offense
and who has told me of her capabilities and begged me to procure employment pending her release,
so that she would not have to return to her undesirable home and surroundings, with their accompanying
temptations.

"We dare say she means well enough now, but we could not think of hiring her until some one
has first tested and proved her trustworthy. Besides, there are other members of our family;
they must be taken into consideration," is the frequent excuse. Thus the responsibility is
shifted, and, sick and sad at heart, we go away to inform the poor girl who wants honest work
that our efforts have proved futile. We then implore her to make her home in one of the refuges
until she can once more become established, only to hear her say: "That would hoodoo me for
sure. You know as well as I do that scarcely any wages are offered to a girl who is hired out
of a rescue home, even if she is quite capable." Reader, it is shamefully true. Oh! why will
professed Christians take so mean an advantage of the situation and expect girls who have made
some mistake, but have the courage to live it down, to go to work at menial employment for
little or nothing? Under such circumstances, what inducement have they who, if encouraged,
would do better?

May the dear Lord as never before give us an introspective vision of ourselves as he sees us.
This will surely clothe us with the mantle of Christ-like charity, in the event of our determination
to live up to our profession and numberless privileges.

CHAPTER XLV.

THE WOMEN PRISONERS OF SAN QUENTIN.

The present kind wardens (Hoyle and Reilly) of the two penitentiaries of California have granted
me many more opportunities to enjoy heart-to-heart talks with the prisoners than I am able
to relate. In but one of these places (San Quentin) are the women incarcerated. In this department
let me endeavor to awaken your interest.

It is situated in a remote corner, inside the prison walls, and is accessible only through
the passage-way underneath the central building seen in the illustration on next page. It is
built two stories high around a hollow cemented square, with windows looking into the same.
It affords no view, excepting barely the tops of the hills, the sky, and the matron's house.
Truly these poor women are shut in. Not so with the men, as will be seen in the same picture.
It shows a portion of the beautiful garden into which many a cell door opens. One corner of
these quarters may be seen on the right, the women's being inside of the building near the
tree on the left. Frequently have I, attended by the matron, Mrs. G. G. Smith, a very warm
friend of mine, come through that iron gateway in the wall, always to be greeted with smiles
and warm words, of welcome by my less fortunate sisters. These meetings were, without doubt,
profitable to all concerned. I enjoyed their orchestra (some are very musical), and they enjoyed
the songs to my autoharp accompaniment.

As I have previously mentioned, the present matron, after much intercession and with the warden's
aid, succeeded, a few months following her accession to the matronal office, in prevailing
upon the board of prison directors to grant the women prisoners a monthly walk on God's beautiful
green hills. In order to prove their appreciation of her kindness, the women banded together
to give her an entertainment on the first anniversary of her matronship. To this day they believe
the affair to have been a complete surprise, though she was aware of their preparations from
the beginning.

The day broke warm and beautiful. Immediately after dinner Matron Smith was escorted to a seat
of honor in the yard and the program was opened by an excellent address of welcome (of which
I have an exact copy) by E----, whose offense was--well, we won't say what nor how long her
term of imprisonment. She is a bright young woman, as the following well-worded and touching
speech amply verifies:

Trusting in your graciousness, and with your approval, we, the inmates of the female department
of this institution, have taken the liberty of arranging a program for an entertainment to
be given in the honor of, and to celebrate this, your official natal day.

Just a year ago today you came to us. To you it means just the passing of time in a sphere
of action hitherto unknown to you; but to us a year filled with memories of all things good--easier
times, warmer clothing, and privileges until then unknown.

We have enjoyed, through your kind intercession, and the courtesy of our noble Warden, the
delight of walking forth into the outer world, even if only for a short time; of seeing once
more green fields and hills clothed in nature's gown of green and flowers; of viewing the waters
of the bay and inhaling the salt sea air; and of being entertained in your own sweet way, in
your own sweet home. At last, but not least, to have the intense satisfaction of gazing at
the outside of our prison wall, anticipating the time when we will always be outside of that
old wall. And in our daily life together, you, in the discharge of your duties, have been a
kind and gentle matron, listening always with patience to our tales of woe. And through all
the past year you have been to us our guide, friend, and comrade. We one and all pray that
life will give you health, happiness, and prosperity, and all of heaven's good gifts.

Then followed an enjoyable program.

Who could not be touched by such tender sentiment from those whom the world at large regard
as well-nigh, if not quite, hopeless cases. Because of this and also because of the receipt
of a recent letter (Sept. 14, 1911), I humbly and heartily thank God that I am able to prove
that kindness, coupled with good judgment, is very effectual.

Enclosed in this lengthy, newsy letter from the matron are some excellent up-to-date photos
of the San Quentin prison, two of which you will find between these covers, and also a clipping
from one of San Francisco's daily papers, as follows:

2,000 LEAVE PRISON WALLS.

WARDEN HOYLE GIVES SAN QUENTIN CHARGES AN UNUSUAL PRIVILEGE.

Nearly two thousand convicts at San Quentin prison walked outside the walls on Admission Day
and spent more than three hours in God's out-of-doors, while they rooted for rival hall teams
playing on a diamond beneath the blue Marin County skies.

No extra guards or precautions marked the first time in the history of a California State prison
that convicts have been permitted to leave the walls.

JOKE AND LAUGH.

In orderly procession the men filed out from the prison yard between the great stone gate-posts,
laughing and joking like schoolboys in their joy at seeing once more an unobstructed sweep
of smiling, open country.

From three o'clock until six fifteen every man in the institution except the sick and incorrigibles,
stood or sat on the ground or perched on adjoining sheds while the "Whites" and "Blacks" played
ball that would do credit to a fast bush league.

Over at one side sat a row of condemned prisoners, watching their last ball game and forgetting
for a few blessed moments that the shadow of the scaffold hung over them.

WOMAN FANS, TOO.

From other seats, the women prisoners saw the game.

For four innings neither side scored. Then the "Blacks" pitcher lost his control, and the two
thousand frenzied rooters cheered as man after man slid home. The score at the close stood
7 to 2 in favor of the "Whites."

"It's only part of the new policy of trusting the prisoners and treating them like human beings,"
said Warden Hoyle today. Hoyle is the man who is responsible for the innovation. "We have no
fear for a break for liberty, and the men showed that they appreciate decent treatment. I can't
say that we will take the men outside every holiday, but the experiment was a success and will
be tried again."

What the glimpse of a world outside the prison walls meant for the prisoners can be appreciated
by readers of "The Bulletin" who have read Donald Lowrie's narrative of life within the prison
walls.

The Admission Day game marked a new epoch in the history of California prisons.

What an innovation compared with former policies! Surely practical demonstration of these experiments
in other parts of the country will have a tendency to reduce criminality. If not, pray tell
me what will? Time and again have I heard prisoners and others comment upon the impractical
Christianity portrayed, with seldom any exception. They weary of being only preached to. The
actions of such men as Warden Hoyle and of such women as Matron Smith will probably have more
to do with helping these convicted ones to lead upright lives in the future than will all the
preaching of celebrated divines from now to doomsday, and I, a Christian, do not hesitate for
one moment to say so frankly. In the name of the dear Lord, let us endeavor to practise what
we preach, and thus win numberless blessings from the throne of grace for ourselves and others.

CHAPTER XLVI.

VALLEJO, MARE ISLAND, AND ALCATRAZ.

"I am sure you will enjoy a trip with me to Vallejo and Uncle Sam's great navy yard, adjacent
to it. It is only about an hour's ride from San Francisco and is accessible both by train and
boat," I said to my friend, Mrs. Walter C. Show, of Santa Barbara, whose guest I then was,
in her lovely villa in that beautiful city by the sea. She had been giving me most interesting
accounts of her entertainment of the marines and the cadets at the time when the fleet lay
at anchor in the bay. As I was soon due in San Francisco, she accompanied me. Before starting
we notified friends; consequently, warm welcome and royal entertainment was ours from the time
of arrival.

As this was by no means my first visit, I prepared her for the shock of seeing many, many saloons
and other disreputable places for the purpose of robbing hundreds, nay, thousands of boys,
far from home and mother, of their hard and scanty earnings. Nevertheless, there is an excellent
Marine Y.M.C.A. in Vallejo, with a large membership; but they are in the minority. We saw scores
pouring out of the saloons or hanging around their immediate vicinity; scores more that evening
coming in or going out of the dance-halls and dens of iniquity and vice. Many were in dreadful
stages of intoxication. Alas! the pity, the great pity of it, that Uncle Sam does not wake
up to protect those ready to lay down their lives for home and country, not to speak of the
hundreds of thousands, nay, millions of our floating population. Where will it all eventually
end? where, oh! where?

I contend that the civic clubs of any community hold the key to the situation. If they would
strive for the prevention of crime rather than for the reformation of the criminal, the resultant
good would soon be tenfold that of the present regime.

The day following our arrival we were taken to inspect Mare Island. As heretofore, the prison-ship
was filled with young men serving short terms or awaiting trial for some serious offense. In
almost every instance liquor was responsible for their being in trouble. It was heartrending.
We realized that, aside from speaking a kind word or giving some motherly advice, we could
do little if anything. We were inadequate to cope with the situation. We could pray with them,
poor lads; we could sympathize with them; but we were practically powerless in that or in any
community that tolerates, licenses, and votes for the means of the downfall of men, women,
and children. All we can do is pray and wait, wait and pray. God speed the day when the enemy
of souls shall no longer reign over them and laugh at their calamity. God speed the day.

I again made it my business to visit many lost girls in that city, earnestly pleading with
them to quit the downward path and stop dragging other souls down to hell along with their
own. Most of them appeared to be gospel hardened. One girl, however, seriously impressed me.
She was one of the few who would listen.

"I'll tell you how I'm situated," she said, "and then if you don't think I am to be pitied
more than blamed, you're different from what I think you are. I've the dearest mother on earth.
She lies, a hopeless cripple, in a little cottage in West Oakland. I also have a little brother
not old enough to go to school yet. I hire a woman who has known us for many years to take
care of them. She is elderly, and, for the sake of a good home, works for small wages. She
knows how I live, but would rather die than betray me. Mother thinks I am working in a hotel
where I get plenty of 'tips' besides my wages. I go home every Monday to see her. Mother Roberts,
I would give the world if I could be able to have my pure mother kiss lips that were clean
instead of stained and stained with sin.

"I won't send her to the hospital. I love her better than my life. She'd die there, for the
need of nice little things they never provide, and other necessaries. My little brother would
have to be reared in some charity institution. I couldn't stand it. I'm the most unhappy girl
on earth because of the situation, and don't you forget it; but I can't, I can't earn sufficient
honest money to support them and myself properly."

Later, the mother died, and the poor daughter, who had ruined her life to support her, went
insane and then took her life.

Some of the girls told me that one man owned nearly all the dance-halls there as well as the
girls, and that very few of them had any liberty or money. They were living in hope, but alas!
many were dying in despair. Apparently little if any impression could be made on those we did
have a chance to talk with. We could only sow the seed and trust our merciful God for results.

All the pastors invited us into the pulpits, where we endeavored faithfully to give such messages
as God saw fit to lay on our hearts.

The next day we left for a visit to Alcatraz Island, the isolated military prison situated
midway between San Francisco and Sausalito. Oh, what a gloomy, desolate place! Notwithstanding
its beautiful situation, excellent discipline, etc., its atmosphere is most depressing. Even
before one lands one feels weighted down, despondent for its prisoners, many of whom sit or
stand with hats drawn low over their faces, breaking, ever breaking stones by the roadside.
Nearly all are being punished for desertion. The sympathetic visitor longs to address them,
but is not permitted to do so. He is allowed only a brief visit with whomsoever he has, after
much trouble, received a permit for an interview, and then always in the presence and within
hearing of the officer in charge. Surely the way of the transgressor is hard, and especially
so with the violator of Uncle Sam's rigid army and navy rules and regulations. For this reason
Uncle Sam ought to remove the stumbling-blocks that he countenances and legalizes and that
cause so many of his otherwise obedient servants to fall into disrepute and, in numerous cases,
into untimely graves.

The young man whom we had come to visit, though a refined, intelligent soldier, was a deserter.
He had the usual sad story to relate--wine, women, then desertion. There was so little, with
the exception of Christian sympathy, with which we could encourage him. The future looked gloomy.
I made an effort, through one of my friends in Congress, to obtain this young man's parole,
but as this was his second offense, the attempt was futile. It is hard, very hard on the missionary
to have to be the bearer of discouraging, often heart-breaking, news; but as this is part of
our office, we bear the cross as we alone can, always pointing the disappointed and heavy-hearted
to the Savior, the Burden-bearer; sometimes, but not always, leaving them with the load somewhat
lightened.

From this sad place we, with heavy hearts, proceeded to San Quentin. After spending two hours
(for our time was limited) we then departed for San Francisco, where we visited various points
of interest to the consecrated ones. Then, after an absence of ten days, we returned to beautiful
Santa Barbara, where church and other engagements were awaiting me.

Thence I traveled up the Coast, ever with the one object in view--"the Master's service." I
visited jails and the avenues that lead to that place, and held many meetings, always being
well received by pastors of various denominations, civic societies, etc. In the name of the
Lord, yet with the spirit of love, I endeavored to place the blame for the downfall of the
masses where it belonged and belongs--at the door of the licensed saloon.

When I reached San Luis Obispo, I learned, to my great joy, that the Columbia Park Band Boys
of San Francisco, forty of whom were on a walking tour from that city to Los Angeles, were
due the following day. At Chittenden (my home), just before I left, my friends had delightfully
entertained them with a picnic on their beautiful grounds. There we learned what an effectual
(prevention) work was being carried on for the reputable lads of the public schools of San
Francisco under the leadership of the Piexotto brothers, who arrange for entertainments, outings,
and treats throughout the year, thus appealing to all the better instincts and qualities of
many of the rising generation. It is truly a most practical, worthy enterprise, one which should
be adopted in all large cities for the encouragement and the promotion of better citizenship.

A sad case was awaiting trial in this city--a fifteen-year-old girl prisoner accused of the
murder of her babe. I visited her frequently. She was finally sent to Whittier Reform School.
Much comment on this is out of the question; suffice it to say, the girl, because of her pre
and post-natal environments, was far more to be pitied than blamed.

I was next due at Santa Maria. During my brief sojourn there I was the guest of the president
of the Women's Improvement Club, who, with many others, was making a strenuous effort to abolish
the saloon from their midst. I there became acquainted with a very enthusiastic, fearless child
of God, a converted Jew, whose name I can not recall at the time of this writing, but whose
help I greatly appreciated. He was leaving no stone unturned for the elimination of the local
liquor traffic.

Returning to San Luis Obispo for a brief stay, I was much gratified in renewing the acquaintance
of Dr. Bulgin, a successful evangelist, with whom, in various places, I have had the pleasure
of being more or less associated in the work.

S----, the city where I was on the morning of the earthquake, was once more, for a short time,
my stopping-place. As something that had just occurred, so dreadful yet so interesting, occupied
all my time and attention during my stay there, and as it furnishes ample material for another
story, I will relate it in the following chapter.

CHAPTER XLVII.

IRENE'S AWFUL FATE--"THE WAGES OF SIN."

After very warmly greeting me, the landlady of the hotel in which I was staying at the time
of the earthquake introduced me to several, with the remark, "This is the lady of whom I was
speaking a while ago--the one who occupied the room in my house in which the plaster was not
even broken on that morning of the earthquake. I've always claimed God had a hand in that,
for every other room and everything else here was practically destroyed, as many can testify."
This being corroborated by a number sitting or standing around, she next said:

"Did you come to investigate last night's murder?"

"What murder?" I inquired. "I have not as yet heard of it."

"The awful, cold-blooded murder of a young woman they call Irene, down on ---- Street, by a
drunken lad twenty years of age. It's the worst ever!" she exclaimed.

"Do you know the parties, either of them?" I asked.

"Not the girl, only by sight. She was about twenty, and as pretty as a picture. She and her
sister were leading awful lives. One lies murdered, and, now that you are here, I guess it
won't be hard to induce the other to quit. They have been well reared, in as nice a family
as you could wish to know. It's too bad, too bad!" mourned my landlady.

"What about the lad who has committed this awful deed? Do you know him?" I inquired.

"Yes, almost ever since he was born. He is an only child. His mother is a widow, and one of
the nicest women you ever met. But he always was bad, even when a small boy. Let me tell you
what he once started to do. He took a kitten and was in the very act of skinning it alive,
just as you would a rabbit, when he was caught, and the poor little animal quickly put out
of its misery. He seemed to delight in being cruel to anything that came his way. He'd take
a fly and pick a wing or a leg off at a time, and then turn it loose to enjoy watching it trying
to move about. When he got older, his mother couldn't make him go to school much, although
she did everything to coax or bribe him. He got beyond her control, and would leave home for
days and weeks at a time, then suddenly put in his appearance and demand money from her, which
she always gave him; otherwise she would have no peace. Then off he'd go again, to turn up
again just as he did yesterday morning, when he came in on the train and began to make his
brags that he meant to paint the town red before he left it, and he certainly has--with human
blood."

"Is not his home here?" I inquired.

"Not now. It used to be, but they moved away to ---- ---- some time ago, all owing to his bad
actions," she replied, and then added. "My but I'm awful sorry for his poor mother! One of
the nicest Christian women you ever met, Mother Roberts. I can't understand how God could punish
her with such a child. I can't, indeed!"

Inquiring my way, I soon found myself at the jail, where this twenty-year-old murderer was
being held. The sheriff was very kind; but he considerately informed me that the lad was in
such a shocking state of inebriety as to be loathsome even to them, and also that they preferred
to let his mother, who had not yet arrived, have the first interview.

Thence I wended my way to the district in which this awful crime, at nearly midnight the previous
night, had been perpetrated. I first called at a respectable house in the immediate neighborhood,
in order to get my bearings and necessary preliminary information; then soon I rang the bell
of the door where the poor murdered girl had been lodging, but received no response. Some one
next door, however, heard and answered, then invited me in.

Five girls, all huddled together, their faces still blanched with horror, confronted me when
I entered that room. Never was a missionary more warmly welcomed. Never was a better opportunity
to comfort and warn, then point to the "Lamb of God, who taketh away the sin of the world."
Never were more humble prayers or promises of reformation. Every one of them had homes to go
to, and every one promised to go as soon as the funeral was over. Then I inquired where I could
find the sister of the murdered girl. They told me. They also gave me particulars concerning
the murder.

The lad, it appeared, loitered around that neighborhood before dark, apparently semi-intoxicated,
and then went into one of the houses, where he still more freely indulged. Upon leaving, he
pointed his pistol and carelessly fired, "just for fun," into a window up-stairs. The bullet
missed a girl's head, singeing her pompadour. Returning at dark, he renewed his wild revelries.
About midnight, because his victim would not continue to drink with him, he shot her without
one word of warning. Screaming at the top of her voice, she ran through every room of the house,
he after her, still shooting. He emptied every barrel of his weapon into her poor sinful body.
Every girl and youth under that roof fled at the first shot. The murderer, after doing his
worst, coolly walked out, went up-town, and entered a saloon. There, as he called for a drink,
he laid his weapon on the bar, bragging as he did so of his terrible deed. He was immediately
arrested.

When the officers arrived at the scene of the crime, they found the bloody trace of the victim
in every room, and when they finally discovered her, she was quite dead. She was kneeling by
her bedside, her head buried in the clothes, her hands tightly clasped as though she had been
trying to pray as her poor soul passed out into eternity.

I found her sister and had a heart-to-heart, soul-to-soul talk with her--one that I shall never
forget. She was so silent, so uncommunicative, yet I talked on until I felt the Spirit say,
"Enough." I have seen her since. She was still leading the kind of life which had been instrumental
in sending her sister's soul and others' souls by the thousands to eternal perdition. She received
me kindly, but she would not heed, notwithstanding she admitted that she was haunted the livelong
time. She would give no reason for continuing on the road to hell.

"Who were these sisters?" you ask. Daughters of parents who were in comfortable circumstances
and stood well in their community. I was told that both girls were inveterate novel-readers,
patrons of every show that came to town, good dancers and dressers, and--reader, it is the
same old sad, sad story. They confided in any one rather than their parents; and hence were
easily persuaded to take the first step downward.

And what about that boy, whose mother wept and mourned and questioned why this awful trouble
should have been put upon her, she who had never wronged anybody in all her lifetime.

Listen! poor afflicted mother. You have forgotten that when you were young and newly married
you did not want to be burdened with motherhood for a long time to come. You wanted to continue
to enjoy social functions in the very pretty dresses your fond parents had provided toward
your wedding trousseau; you had no intention for many a long day to settle down to the usual
routine incident to motherhood; in fact, you purposed to have a good time for the next two
or three years, before your pretty clothes went out of fashion; besides, you did not particularly
take to children anyhow, and if you had had your own way, you would never have had any. You
said it, and you know it, that a woman is so tied down who has babies to take care of.

The time came when the greatest boon conferred on woman was to be conferred on you. What did
you do? How angry you were as you, for months nursed your grievance, because God was going
to have his way in spite of all opposition. One day the little babe was laid in your arms.
As he was a goodly child to look upon, you were resigned; but, oh! poor, poor, untutored mother!
you had unawares robbed your darling of his birthright, and, furthermore, you had brought into
the world a being with murderous tendencies. Yes, you were converted at that revival meeting,
and knew that all your past sins were blotted out by the efficacy of the precious blood of
Jesus. Yes, we know you are living a Christian life so far as you know how, but "your sins
have been visited upon" your poor child. The germ was in his being, and now he must pay the
penalty for your crime of a little over twenty years ago. For crime it was, and you can not
call it by any other name. "Others have been alike guilty," you say. Alas, yes! by the thousands;
but that never for a moment excuses you.

You didn't know? No; not altogether, for you were not taking a look, a long look into the future.
You had no instruction from your own fond, indulgent, falsely modest mother regarding these
God-given functions, capable of producing a soul, a wonderful soul; and so you ignorantly,
selfishly erred.

Never was mortal sorrier for another than I am for you. Never was mortal more anxious to help
bear another's burden than I am to help bear yours; but it is well-nigh impossible for me to
do so. Only Jesus can ease your broken heart. Only Jesus can comfort you. Only Jesus can heal
your terrible, terrible wound, poor, weeping, afflicted mother. All I am able to do is to sympathize
with and pray for you.

After this heart-rending experience I was glad to rest a few days at Chittenden and enjoy the
fellowship of its cherished owners. Ah! how kind, how very, very kind they were! but the mail
was constantly bringing calls that were more or less, urgent; sometimes to quickly locate a
wandering girl; sometimes to come to a juvenile court session, or perhaps to a hospital or
jail; and one was to assist in the work at Portland, Ore. Whilst considering the latter call
and praying for leadings, I took time to hold some meetings in an interior town. Following
a mothers' meeting there a young lady urged me to visit her and have a confidential talk with
her upon a matter which was of vital importance. I did so, and this is what she said:

"What I am about to betray would lose me my situation if it were known; therefore I shall rely
on you to respect strictly the confidence I am about to place in you, as to the source from
whence you received it. I have a position in the telephone-office, consequently, I hear many
conversations, some of which are utterly demoralising.

"There is a certain woman in this city whose business it is, at least so I judge, to corrupt,
morally and physically, young school and messenger boys, as you will surmise by a conversation
which took place this very morning, and it is not her first offense. She called for her party,
and as I could not get them at once, I asked for her number, so as to be able to call her as
soon as I could. Presently I succeeded, and soon she was asking:

"'Is this Harry?'

"Some one at the other end of the line replied:

"'Yes. Is that you, Cora?'

"'Of course, you little dunce. When are you coming down again? Didn't you...?'

"'Dandy. But say, Cora, it's awful risky. I'm not fourteen yet. What if I should get nabbed?'

"'No, you won't if you'll mind me. Now listen. Come in at the lower side entrance. I'll give
a tip to the bar-tender. If the coast is clear, you can come up the back stairs; if not, he'll
hide you until I say so.'

"'What time?'

"'Tomorrow after you're out. You know. After three. So long.'"

The case was sickening, revolting; but it demanded immediate action. After prayerfully meditating
for a few minutes, I called up the chief of police, asked for audience without delay, and soon
thereafter was in his private office. After listening attentively to my recital, he at first
thought to wait until the morrow and then arrest all parties concerned; but upon reflection
he decided that that course would never do, as the boy's parents were of high social standing.
The arrest would ruin them. Moreover, it would never do to wait until the morrow. One of his
private detectives was immediately deputized to call on Miss Cora and give her twelve hours
to leave town, bag and baggage. He was to tell her the real reason and to inform her that if
she refused to go she would be arrested and severely punished for enticing and harboring minors.
Short as the time was, she managed to dispose of her things. Her house was permanently closed,
and the saloon soon afterward.

As to the boy, I waylaid him on his way home from school and told him what I had found out,
so that he was perfectly willing to go with me to the chief of police, who, I am satisfied,
gave him much fatherly advice as well as a thorough scare, calculated to last as long as he
lived and also to aid him in warning his schoolmates and friends having similar evil tendencies.

But I must return to Chittenden. Several letters from Oregon had been forwarded. I felt that
I must answer this call, God willing. I decided to help there, at least temporarily. Accordingly,
one morning, bright and early, I started.

As I boarded the train, Mr. and Mrs. Chittenden handed me a letter, the reading of which brought
tears of love and appreciation. Here it is, word for word:

Chittenden, Cal., Nov. 15, 1909. Dear Mrs. Roberts:

We do not wish you to cross the State line into Oregon without carrying a few words from home
with you--that is our excuse for the writing of this letter.

You have been one of us at Chittenden since you were invited to make our home yours last spring.
Our wish was, and is, that Chittenden should be your home in all that the name implies--a place
to which you could always turn for rest and recuperation from your unselfish labors; and from
which you could go forth again to your chosen task to battle against evil, cheered by kind
words, and knowing that warm hearts and a warm welcome were waiting for you when you again
needed rest.

You have been with us now for over half a year, and your presence here has been most agreeable
to us. Our respect for you has ripened into regard, and our regard into affection, and now
that you are leaving us, we realize how much the home spirit has worked to bind us all together,
and we know that we shall miss you and shall often wish to have you with us again.

Well, Oregon can not claim you all the time. Some time you will feel weary and overworked--some
time you will need rest--and when you do, just remember that there is a little green and flowery
spot along the railway down in California--a place where the door stands always open, and where
sincere friends are always waiting to welcome you--and--come home.

Sincerely your friends.

Ida H. Chittenden.

T. Chittenden.

I stopped off at several places: at San Jose and San Francisco, to visit the rescue homes and
dear friends, particularly dear Sister Kauffman, whose house had been dynamited and destroyed
at the time of the fire following the earthquake, but who still sheltered many a girl in temporary
cottages on the land where the home had once stood; next Berkeley, where lives my hospitable
friend, Mrs. J. T. Anderson, whose beautiful home I enjoy the freedom of whenever in her neighborhood;
then Sacramento, to spend one night with dear Mrs. Trefren, already referred to as one of my
warmest friends; then Redding, my old home, where I rescued little Rosa, and which was the
scene of many battles and victories in the name of the Lord. At this latter place there awaited
me a royal reception from my many former friends and associates. It had been more than a decade
since I had held up on the rear platform of the train that Bible with its blessed parting message
from Gal. 6:9. All through the interval the Master had graciously permitted me to sow and to
reap. Though there had been much more sowing than reaping, yet there had not been a great deal
of fainting, for the grace of God had been all sufficient. Hallelujah!

Before I had been many days in Portland, I received a telegram telling of the death of Mr.
Roberts. (Reader, I have refrained from stating in this book under what circumstances and at
what time Mr. Roberts came back into my life, simply because that matter has no direct reference
to the title of the book and also because it recalls too much pain and distress of a private
nature. This I will say: With the other duties an added heavy cross was mine, owing to his
mental and physical condition--a cross which, I regret to say, I did not always bear as patiently
or as cheerfully as I might have borne it. It lasted from February, 1905, to November, 1009.)
A caved-in tunnel near the State line prohibited my return, but Pastor Harper, of San Jose,
and other kind friends relieved me of all final responsibilities regarding my late husband.

Until my return to California three months later, in the direct interests of the prison commission
work, I worked even more laboriously than ever before. As ever, the Lord raised up many friends
for me in Portland and vicinity; yet, at the same time, I was bitterly opposed and well-nigh
overwhelmed by the enemy, who resorted to all sorts of means and devices to crush both soul
and body. Did he succeed? No, indeed; for God was "my refuge and strength, a very present help
in trouble." His not the Lord promised that "when the enemy shall come in like a flood, the
Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him" (Isa. 59:19)? What blessed assurance
for those who truly love and try to serve him! Hallelujah!

My last meeting before leaving Oregon was under the auspices of the Woman's Christian Temperance
Union in a suburb called St. John's. An account of the service was made in the local paper,
The Review, Feb. 4, 1910, as follows:

The Woman's Christian Temperance Union of St Johns planned a treat for the women of this place
which proved a grand success. Mrs. Florence Roberts, better known as "Mother Roberts," spoke
for an hour to over one hundred and fifty women in Bickner's Hall Tuesday afternoon. The most
strict attention as paid, for it was a most solemn message she gave to us. After the meeting
refreshments were served, and the ladies lingered a while to get acquainted. Five new members
were added to the Union.

I left there that same night for California, and the next meeting that I shall mention was
that held the following Sunday evening in the fine hall of the ex-prisoners' home, 110 Silver
Street, San Francisco. On this occasion I had the prayers of many former prisoners that God
would bless me as I went forth to interest the people in their behalf and to open hearts and
purses to aid in lifting the mortgage on this home--"Golden Rule Hall." In this interest I
remained in San Francisco for some time, being occupied exclusively in interviewing responsible
business people and portraying the need of their cooperation, financially and otherwise. During
this time I was the guest of Brother Charles Montgomery, president of the board of prison commissioners,
at his hotel--The Brooklyn. Afterward I visited San Mateo and Burlingame, with the same object
in view. At the former place the young pastor of the Methodist Episcopal church, Rev. C. B.
Sylvester, was just commencing a series of revival meetings. Upon learning my errand to San
Mateo, he and his wife urged my cooperation in the evening services, and to this end invited
me to remain under their roof. As I acceded to their wishes, double duty for the kingdom now
confronted me, but the realization that our Lord never imposed too heavy a burden was now demonstrated.
Those precious meetings closed in two weeks, with most blessed results. This records my first
active, actual revival work.

To the glory of God, let me make mention that hundreds of dollars was the result of the daytime
labor for the payment of the ex-prisoners' home.

During July and August, 1910, I was in an interior town and was laboring under an indescribable
burden for certain souls. I believe I know what untold soul-agony is. Whilst almost sinking
beneath my load, I received a letter from one whom, with his bride, I had been brought into
Christian fellowship with in the early days of rescue experience. The missive had followed
me from one place to another until only the last address could be plainly deciphered, owing
to numerous erasures. Other letters had often miscarried and failed to reach me. This one was,
by the hand of God, safely guided through. The father, with four little helpless children on
his hands, wrote of the mental derangement of their mother, of his inability to find help,
and of his pleading to God to send some one consecrated enough to assist them in their time
of trouble. He was a poor man, but had a home and was working industriously at his trade to
support his little flock, the youngest of whom was not four years old, the eldest ten.

Positively I knew of no one to go to the rescue. Whilst I was praying earnestly for the Lord
to find some good woman to mother those little ones pending their mother's recovering, I received
the impression, "Go yourself." Surely there is work everywhere--just as much in that distant
town as where I was. I admit I shrank from so trying an ordeal, but, do my best, I could not
silence the impression, "Go yourself." I prayed that if no other door opened within the next
three days, God would let me regard this as a sign that his voice was bidding me take up this
cross. Such was his will. I wrote, saying, "Expect me [date] on evening train." For nine weeks
my immediate duty was with those little ones. Still further to try me, there was added to my
domestic labors, measles. No sooner had one child recovered than the next was taken with them,
until all had been similarly afflicted.

Some of the neighbors, having learned that "Mother Roberts" was quietly sojourning at this
brother's house, called; and soon I was assisted with very necessary sewing, etc. After the
three oldest children were once more able to go to school. I received a unanimous invitation
to hold revival meetings in that town. About this time God sent the brother a splendid housekeeper,
an elderly Christian woman, who relieved me of domestic duties, so that I was able to accept
the call mentioned.

On February 1 of this year (1911) I received from Wheeling, W. Va., a telegram which filled
me with indescribable joy, for it informed me of the birth of a little grandson. (My first
grandchild and little namesake I have never seen. God took her when she was nine months old.)
I longed to hold this dear little one in my arms and prayed God to grant my heart's desire,
if according to his will. And he did. Bless his holy name! Following the revival services already
mentioned, came a call from another town not far distant. At the close of this meeting a free-will
offering enabled me to take the desired trip. On March 7, 1911, in company with a lady who
was going within a short distance of my destination, I boarded the train and before long was
with my precious little family. My cup of happiness was now filled to the brim, my heart overflowing
with gratitude to God, as I embraced my dear ones and their precious little son.

CHAPTER XLVIII.

MY RETURN TO THE MISSIONARY FIELD.

In a few weeks a longing to return to missionary work was again taking possession of me. In
vain I sought for the undenominational rescue hall usually to be found in large cities. Apparently
Wheeling had nothing of this kind, though surely very much needed. Moreover, the requisite
encouragement for the starting of one was not forthcoming.

Sundays would find me with my treasured auto-harp in the jail, work house, or infirmary at
the afternoon services, which for years have been conducted by consecrated Christians, longing
as much, nay, even perhaps more than I, for the necessary places of refuge for discharged prisoners
and others. God speed the day when these needed institutions shall be amply supplied.

A lengthy conversation with one of the local judges, who is specially interested in juvenile
offenders, elicited the fact of there being no place of detention for erring children except
with the professed or habitual criminals. Comment upon this is superfluous; it is sufficient
to say that in nine cases out of ten disastrous results are inevitable. Owing to a lack of
interest, of means, or of cooperation, perhaps of sufficient good citizenship, maybe of all
four, the judge and his coworkers seem to be unable at present to cope with or improve the
situation. In a few years hence, this and other cities similarly situated will be facing a
problem well-nigh impossible to solve, unless unusual efforts are made to provide for detention
homes and schools for the delinquent children, now so numerous everywhere, excepting in towns
and States where the awful liquor octopus, so largely responsible for crime and criminal tendencies,
is absolutely abolished. Let us not for a moment forget that these youthful offenders are,
in the main, the offspring of lovers of drink and its accessories. Thus the sins of the parents
are visited upon the children, and upon the children's children, unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate God; but he says that he will show mercy unto thousands of them
that love him and keep his commandments (Deut. 5:9, 10).

A pastor, describing the situation, informed me with the tears in his eyes that, notwithstanding
all the efforts put forth for children's spiritual instruction, the results were very meager,
owing to the indifference of parents--fathers and mothers who send their little ones to Sunday-school
in the morning and then undo all the good in the afternoon by supplying them with nickels and
sending them unchaperoned to the moving-picture shows, in order that they (the parents) may
be free to indulge in worldly pleasures and amusements. Fortunately, a Sunday-closing movement
in this direction has recently been crowned with success.

Some time in April as I was taking a streetcar ride between Wheeling, W. Va., and an adjacent
town just across the river in the State of Ohio, my soul was uplifted when my eyes alighted
upon this sign: "City Gospel Mission." Upon getting off the car at the next corner, I soon
learned from the one who was superintending this work of the need of more consecrated assistants.
I therefore at once volunteered my services. God saw fit to keep me in this field for three
months, or until the time came for him to trust me still further along in his glorious light
and liberty, thus giving me greater realization than ever before of what "the steps to His
throne" mean literally as well as spiritually. To explain: My attention was attracted to a
little band of workers quietly, unostentatiously living remarkable lives of humility faith,
and prayer, depending absolutely upon our heavenly Father for all necessities, health of body
as well as of soul, and, in fact, literally following God's Word, in spirit and in truth. Investigation
convinced me beyond a doubt that my Lord had very much more of his riches for my enjoyment
here on earth than of what I had already partaken, if I would be willing still further to humble
myself.

For days the adversary contended with my soul. Everything calculated to discourage me was brought
to bear, but praise God forever for victory! On the day it was gained, I informed my loved
ones that I was soon to leave them in order to answer the call of God in an entirely new field
of labor, where opportunity would shortly be granted me to give the world the benefit of a
few of the numerous experiences of the past fifteen years. Through the consecrated humble little
band already referred to, I learned of the Gospel Trumpet Home and Publishing Company, situated
at Anderson, Indiana. I wrote to them, and shortly afterwards received a cordial invitation
to visit them for an indefinite period. About the middle of August I was lovingly greeted by
a family of about two hundred and fifty children of God, mostly young people of both sexes,
all consecrated faith workers; all cheerfully and gladly giving the Lord their time and talents
in this beautiful spot and being abundantly provided for materially as well as spiritually.

Here, whilst writing these experiences, I am enjoying blessed rest of both soul and body, such
as I had never dreamed of; for, like many, many others, I had no idea of there being such a
foretaste of heaven oil earth as this which is being daily and hourly demonstrated by the many
members of the church of God (Col. 1:18) sojourning under this roof of prevailing prayer and
practical faith. Best of all, every one is given cordial invitation to investigate personally;
to satisfy himself beyond a doubt that the God who so wonderfully fed the Israelites in the
wilderness in Moses' time, and that the Christ who multiplied the loaves and fishes, who went
about healing all manner of divers diseases as well as speaking the word of life to the sin-sick
soul, is positively, absolutely, "just the same today." These people, so I learn, are to be
found scattered broadcast. Look them up. They are known as the church of God. They are those
who have come out from confusion and sectarianism into the only church God will ever recognize--the
body of his only begotten Son, Jesus Christ. I praise him with all my soul that through his
wondrous grace I am now in this glorious light and liberty.

CHAPTER XLIX.

SOME PRECIOUS LETTERS FROM PRECIOUS CHILDREN.

Many poets have likened life to a dream. Reader, doubtless you are aware, as I am, that life
is but too realistic for the masses, the great masses of suffering, sorrow-stricken humanity,
with so few, comparatively speaking, so few to uplift, comfort, cheer, and sustain; so few
to speak the blessed words of a bright hereafter. Especially is this so with regard to those
of the underworld. We find but few of the home missionaries undertaking this line of work;
still fewer who have the God-given grace and courage, coupled with soul-love, to go to the
fallen sister and help her out of sin; very few who do not shrink from putting a foot across
the threshold of a jail or prison; but many, very many quite willing to fill the easy places;
quite ready to perform tasks, provided these will not cost much inconvenience, comfort, personal
pride, sacrifice, or money. But some (are you among them?) were delegated to go out into the
highways and hedges, the streets, and the lanes, and compel (by the power of divine love) those
found there, to come to the King's banquet, in order that his supper might be furnished with
guests. Most plainly does our Master emphasize the fact that the publicans and the outcasts
will largely be represented on that great day, that day which will positively come, and which
in these perilous times is seemingly right at our very thresholds.

I shall never forget going into the San Jose jail on one occasion and trying to impress a girl
who, as she lay on her cot, seemed utterly indifferent to all advances; even turning her face
to the wall and stopping her ears with her fingers. Imagine my great surprise months afterwards
on receiving the following letter from her:

San Francisco, Cal.,

March 16, 1906.

My dear Mrs. Roberts:

I am feeling so lonesome and blue here tonight all alone in my room.... Somehow my thoughts
turned to you, and I could not keep the tears from my eyes as I realized that I had one friend,
because you were, oh! so kind to me during my imprisonment in San Jose.

Dear Mrs. Roberts, can you bring before your mind's eye this picture? Picture, if you can,
the desolate darkness of the night extending on and on. For months not a ray of light, not
one kind word, not one friendly face, until at last, when almost in despair, a gleam of sunshine
shot across your pathway, a kind, loving voice said. "I will be your friend; I will help you."
Such was my condition, and you, Mrs. Roberts, was that gleam of sunshine. Your voice was the
one that cheered me until I took fresh courage. Mrs. Roberts, God has taken me back.... May
God bless you in your work.... I wish I could see you and talk with you. You are indeed my
spiritual mother. I hope you will allow me to call you so. I wanted to tell you how much you
had helped me. I know you are very busy, but if you have time, please drop me one line. I am
so hungry for a message from you to cheer me up. May God bless you and yours.

A---- M----.

San Francisco, Cal.,

March 20, 1900.

Dear Mrs. Roberts--My Spiritual Mother:

I cried from pure joy when I received your letter and photo. Yes, God is most wonderfully showing
me his way, and at last my spirit is broken, and I am content to obey the voice of my Savior.

Praise God for his wonderful salvation that saves and keeps one enjoying his great blessings!
Praise his name! I have nothing now to fear. Mrs. Roberts, I am glad I did that time in jail,
because it taught me the lesson of patience and submission, and now it is much easier for me
to live a Christian life. I now have a better experience than I could have had otherwise. Pray
for me, Mother Roberts, and I will pray for you. May God give you success in your work.

May God bless you and yours is the prayer of your spiritual child,

A---- M----.

FROM A PRISON BOY.

San Quentin, Cal.,

Sept. 13, ----.

My dear Friend Mother Roberts:

I received your letter of the 4th inst. and was very glad to get it, and will try and drop
you a line in answer now, although there is not much in the way of news. I am much better now
and am working outside around the warden's house, where I can get plenty of fresh air; so I
think the time will pass much more pleasanter than if I was on the inside of the prison walls.
I had quite a siege of sickness (pleuro-pneumonia the doctor pronounced it), but I am getting
better all the time and think soon to be entirely strong again.

I think often of the kindness you showed me while I was in ---- [a county jail], and I will
never forget it or the advice you gave me. You started me on the right path to heaven, and
I do pray to God that he will lead the rest of the way so that when I stand before him on the
judgment-day he will claim me as one of his own children. There is one thing that worries me:
my mother is quite sick, and writes me that she does not expect to live to see me set at liberty,
but I pray to God to spare her until I am free and able to prove to her and every one else
that I am a true child of God and worthy to take my place amongst honest Christian men. Don't
think I can ever forget you, and my thoughts are with you when my words are not.

I will close now, hoping that God will take care of you, which is the prayer of your friend,

A---- G----.

FROM A RECLAIMED WIFE.

San Francisco, Cal.,

Dec. 3,----.

Dear Mother Roberts:

You don't know how glad I was to receive your kind and loving letter. Yes, I can praise God
this very day for his loving-kindness and tender mercy. Yesterday I gave a testimony to some
poor souls at San Quentin, and you don't know how much good it did them. Three gave their hearts
to God. All that I am praying for now is that Jesus may make me a shining light for souls that
know him not. There was one prisoner that knew me in my life of sin, and he told the others
that I looked ten years younger....

Oh, may God forbid that it may ever be so again; for when I think how he has snatched me out
from the pit of hell, oh, how I love my Jesus more and more, dear Mama Roberts!...

What God has done for me, surely he can do for others. I only wish I could turn this wicked
world upside down and make it new again. In one of the Psalms I read, "My soul hath kept thy
testimonies, and I love them exceedingly." May it always be so.

Mama Roberts, I will soon get a letter from Lucy. You don't know how I love to get her letters.
I assure you that when I get blue I take and read one or two lines that her gentle hand has
written, and it does me good.

Now, tomorrow night, you know, is prayer-meeting night, and I know you won't forget me. Pray
that I may, by the grace of God, do some poor soul good by telling them of the life that I
led for twenty and one years [drink, etc.]...

I will close with love from one that dearly loves you and who will always pray for you. I remain
as ever,

Yours in Christ, E---- K----.

P.S. My husband wishes to be remembered to you. I hope that you will come to see me soon. Write
soon.

FROM A THIRTEEN-YEAR-OLD SINNED-AGAINST CHILD.

Dear Mama Roberts:

I am learning about Jesus day by day. I hope you are well and strong.

The Lord will help you....

My little chick is growing, and its mother is showing her little chick to eat....

Pray for me. I am praying for you, too.

From your dear, F---- E----.

FROM ONE IN A HOUSE OF SIN.

M----, Cal.

Mrs. Florence Roberts:

Your very kind letter received yesterday and am glad that your meeting at the church was successful.
I also hope ere this that you have arrived safely in ---- and that your trip was pleasant.

Mrs. Roberts, briefly concerning myself; words can not express my appreciation of the interest
you are taking in me, and I hope I may be spared to prove to you that your efforts have not
been in vain. I hope the day may not be far distant when I may make myself worthy of your friendship
and interest--and hoping that you may think of whatever goodness I may possess, and not of
what my life has been, I beg to remain,

Sincerely yours,

J---- W----.

The foregoing letter was written in a beautiful hand.

FROM A VERY YOUNG MOTHER.

N----. Cal.

My dear Mama Roberts:

