The relations of the benevolent boards of the several denominations to other church organizations
are such that but little can be said concerning methods of relating missionary work to the
larger program of community service. In each case where projects for missionary aid are presented
effort should be made to see that local conditions are made such that the pastor can render
the best service. It must be recognized that the application for outside aid is in itself an
admission of local weakness. The people are poor, or indifferent to the type of service to
which they have been accustomed. There has been unforeseen disaster, as the destruction of
church property by fire or in some other way. Sudden movements of population have temporarily
weakened the support of the church and new resources have not yet been developed. Circuit systems
must be broken up so that people will be willing to support full-time resident pastors with
efficient programs for service. Customs of expecting the pastor to make his living in outside
work and attending to religious service as a side issue must be overcome. The pastor's residence
may be in such condition that families cannot be sacrificed for the sake of missionary communities
and residences must be supplied by liberal outside aid as the preliminary to effective service. The
essential teaching of all these false opinions was that the body was in itself evil, that the
gratification of natural appetites was inherently wrong, and that true holiness consisted in
the complete subjection of the body by self-denial and torture. The demands of any one charge do not compare with the demands
of any other. And methods must be adapted to meet the specific needs of each charge. These
are matters that must be left to those responsible for administration of missionary funds.

When the religious forces of America learn their problems so that a long-time organized program
of religious advance can be worked out, when they learn to cooperate in carrying out this program,
then the haphazard, wasteful, competitive missionary program that has characterized rural religious
work in the past will disappear and we shall see one of the most marked advances in religious
welfare the world has ever known.

CHAPTER XI

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

In the preceding chapters the effort has been made to outline some of the conditions and principles
involved in organizing the rural church for community service. The field has been limited by
distinguishing between that type of service which has to do with man's relation to his Maker
and that which has to do with his relations to his fellow man. The latter service has been
chosen as the field for the present discussion, and the effort has been made to keep within
the field, regardless of the desirability of discussion of the other phases of the work of
the rural church. The field itself both as to size of community and the scope of the entire
field has received attention. An attempt has been made to present the philosophic basis justifying
the church in giving large attention to community service. Some of the more general aspects
of rural life demanding attention on the part of the church have been discussed and the reasons
for assuming that certain phases of rural social activity properly belong to the church rather
than to other agencies have been presented to the reader.

