CHAPTER XVII

THE GYMNASIUM AND THE FIRST PERIOD OF UNIVERSITY LIFE.

It was hard for me to leave Keilhau, but our trip to Rudolstadt, to which my dearest companions
accompanied me, was merry enough.  With Barop's permission we had a banquet in the peasant
tavern there, whose cost was defrayed by the kreutzers which had been paid as fines for offences
against table rules.  At one of these tables where we larger boys sat, only French was spoken;
at another only the purest German; and we had ourselves made the rule that whoever used a word
of his native tongue at one, or a foreign one at the other, should be fined a kreutzer.

How merry were these banquets, at which usually several teachers were welcome guests!

One of the greatest advantages of Keilhau was that our whole lives, and even our pleasures,
were pure enough not to shun a teacher's eyes.  And yet we were true, genuine boys, whose overplus
of strength found vent not only in play, but all sorts of foolish tricks.

A smile still hovers around my lips when I think of the frozen snow-man on whose head we put
a black cap and then placed in one of the younger teacher's rooms to personate a ghost, and
the difficulty we had in transporting the monster, or when I remember our pranks in the dormitory.

I believe I am mentioning these cheerful things here to give myself a brief respite, for the
portion of my life which followed is the one I least desire to describe.

Rousseau says that man's education is completed by art, Nature, and circumstances.  The first
two factors had had their effect upon me, and I was now to learn for the first time to reckon
independently with the last; hitherto they had been watched and influenced in my favour by
others.  This had been done not only by masters of the art of pedagogy, but by their no less
powerful co-educators, my companions, among whom there was not a single corrupt, ill-disposed
boy.  I was now to learn what circumstances I should find in my new relations, and in what
way they would prove teachers to me.

I was to be placed at school in Kottbus, at that time still a little manufacturing town in
the Mark.  My mother did not venture to keep me in Berlin during the critical years now approaching.
Kottbus was not far away, and knowing that I was backward in the science that Dr. Boltze, the
mathematician, taught, she gave him the preference over the heads of the other boarding-schools
in the Mark.

I was not reluctant to undertake the hard work, yet I felt like a colt which is led from the
pastures to the stable.

A visit to my grandmother in Dresden, and many pleasures which I was permitted to share with
my brothers and sisters, seemed to me like the respite before execution.

My mother accompanied me to my new school, and I can not describe the gloomy impression made
by the little manufacturing town on the flat plains of the Mark, which at that time certainly
possessed nothing that could charm a boy born in Berlin and educated in a beautiful mountain
valley.

In front of Dr. Boltze's house we found the man to whose care I was to be entrusted.  At that
time he was probably scarcely forty years old, short in stature and very erect, with a shrewd
face whose features indicated an iron sternness of character, an impression heightened by the
thick, bushy brows which met above his nose.

He himself said that people in Pomerania believed that men with such eyebrows stood in close
relations to Satan.  Once, while on his way in a boat from Greifswald to the island of Rugen,
the superstitious sailors were on the point of throwing him overboard because they attributed
their peril to him as the child of the devil, yet, he added--and he was a thoroughly truthful
man--the power which these strange eyebrows gave him over others, and especially over men of
humble station, induced them to release him. His book, fairly and in good faith, let glimpse find the inner
struggle to surrender two spirits: biblical literalism, which sea ​​makes a thing created by
God at one time, a machine that moves to boost of his hand - and modern feeling, the sympathy
of Nature, for whom the sea is a a soul, a life force and almost individual, where the soul
lover continually creates the Universe.

Peculiar is the author of the book in question, gradually approaching towards the latter view a slope
invincible. While you can, explain the mechanical effects, physically (by weight, heat, density,
etc.). But this is not enough. In some cases, add this or that molecular attraction or magnetic
action. Nor is it enough. Then used frankly to the physiological laws that govern life, giving
the sea a pulse, arteries and to heart. Does this formula of mere language, or work well for
using a simile? Not true. Has (and that's the genius of the author) is in itself a compelling feeling,
invincible personality of the sea.

This is the secret of his power, this is what grabbed the men of science. Before him, the sea
was only one thing in the eyes of countless sailors slid down waters,
thanks to Maury, today is considered person: all recognize him for
an exalted and wonderful friends who love and want to tame.

The U.S. is very much in love of the sea. However, every moment is contained and for, fearing to
cross the boundary that has been proposed. As Swammerdam, Bonnet and many other distinguished
scholars of religious feelings, fears, explaining too Nature God be prejudiced. Shyness is not
very reasonable. The evidence becomes more life, more demonstrates the power of the great
Soul, unit adorable beings that are generated by and create. Where was the danger if the sea
was, in its constant aspiration to organic existence, is the strongest
of the eternal hope that initially evoke the globe in which we live
and it is constantly reproduced?

The sea salt as the blood, which is movement, pulse and heart (so
called Maury to Ecuador) where they renewed their two bloods, a being
that possesses all this, is certain to be one thing, a Inorganic element?

Here

is a great watch, a great steam engine that accurately mimics the movement of vital forces.
Is this a game of nature? Or do we believe exists in such masses with a mixture of animals?


I had supposed him to be a lieutenant in civilian's dress, for his dark mustache, small whiskers,
and the military cut of his hair, which already began to be somewhat thin, made me add a lustrum
to his twenty-one years.

After my new tutor had left us this strange school-fellow entered into conversation with me
very graciously, and after telling me many things about the school and its management which
seemed incredible, he passed on to the pupils, among whom were some "nice fellows," and mentioned
a number of names, principally of noble families whose bearers had come here to obtain the
graduation certificate, the key without which so many doors are closed in Prussia.

Then he proceeded to describe marvels which I was afterwards to witness, but which at that
time I did not know whether I ought to consider delightful or quite the contrary.

Of course, I kept my doubts to myself and joined in when he laughed; but my heart was heavy.
Could I avoid these companions?  Yet I had come to be industrious, prepare quickly for the
university, and give my mother pleasure.

Poor woman!  She had made such careful inquiries before sending me here; and what a dangerous
soil for a precocious boy just entering the years of youth was this manufacturing town and
an institution so badly managed as the Kottbus School!  I had come hither full of beautiful
ideals and animated by the best intentions; but the very first day made me suspect how many
obstacles I should encounter; though I did not yet imagine the perils which lay in my companion's
words.  All the young gentlemen who had been drawn hither by the examination were sons of good
families, but the part which these pupils, and I with them, played in society, at balls, and
in all the amusements of the cultivated circle in the town was so prominent, the views of life
and habits which they brought with them so completely contradicted the idea which every sensible
person has of a grammar-school boy, that their presence could not fail to injure the school.

Of course, all this could not remain permanently concealed from the higher authorities.  The
old head-master was suddenly retired, and one of the best educators summoned in his place man
who quickly succeeded in making the decaying Kottbus School one of the most excellent in all
Prussia.  I had the misfortune of being for more than two years a pupil under the government
of the first head-master, and the good luck of spending nearly the same length of time under
the charge of his successor.

My mother was satisfied with the result of the examination, and the next afternoon she drove
with me to our relatives at Komptendorf.  Frau von Berndt, the youngest daughter of our beloved
kinsman, Moritz von Oppenfeld, united to the elegance of a woman reared in a large city the
cordiality of the mistress of a country home.  Her husband won the entire confidence of every
one who met the gaze of his honest blue eyes. He had given up the legal profession to take
charge of his somewhat impoverished paternal estate, and soon transformed it into one of the
most productive in the whole neighbourhood.

He was pleased that I, a city boy, knew so much about field and forest, so at my very first
visit he invited me to repeat it often.

The next morning I took leave of my mother, and my school life began. In many points I was
in advance of the other pupils in the second class, in others behind them; but this troubled
me very little--school seemed a necessary evil.  My real life commenced after its close, and
here also my natural cheerfulness ruled my whole nature.  The town offered me few attractions,
but the country was full of pleasures.  Unfortunately, I could not go to Komptendorf as often
as I wished, for it was a two hours' walk, and horses and carriages were not always at my disposal.
Yet many a Saturday found me there, enjoying the delight of chatting with my kind hostess about
home news and other pleasant things, or reading aloud to her.

Even in the second year of my stay at Kottbus I went to every dance given on the estates in
the neighbourhood and visited many a delightful home in the town.  Then there were long walks--sometimes
with Dr. Boltze and my school-mates, sometimes with friends, and often alone.

We frequently took a Sunday walk, which often began on Saturday afternoon, usually with merry
companions and in the society of our stern master, who, gayer than the youngest of us, needed
our care rather than we his. This is the least important of the novel, but
the most important thing about it is unfounded.

Benyocdan there is even more exceptional and egregious child for the soul over the body. Sees
nothing, does nothing, nothing seen in another or out of it, which does not think about and pondered.
In his mind is sorting and combining the ideas it receives all clear and distinct, though naked
sound or sign drawn to represent them, because there is to it spoken
or written word.

Only you know and know the number of inarticulate cries of her adoptive mother gazelle.

In my view, is a prodigious miracle of subtlety that makes telling Tofail to go inside development
of thought in the mind of his hero solo and mute.

Not follow in this be here due to space and even more so for lack of sufficient ability in me to extract
without diminishing the worth of the work.

There is first perceived diversity of beings that have life, and then abstracting different
qualities that distinguish them, see what we all agree and that everyone agrees and so is the
genus and species and finally come to the unity of being, stripped of accidents and distinctions,
but understands everything. And being that arrives is not the be empty, which undetermined and
no attributes, is mistaken for anything, but is being in all its fullness and grandeur, it
has come to him, not merely dialectical process, abstracting the different and various, but
the search of the cause and origin of the order of magnificence movement
and life, the universe: because that has failed to find either in
this world of generation and corruption in which we live or in the
air, nor ether, nor in stars apparently incorruptible, nor in the
areas of sky that are turning seized.  A chasm
yawns between these periods of instruction, and I cannot ascribe this circumstance entirely
to the amusements which withdrew my thoughts from study; for they continued under Tzschirner's
rule, though with some restrictions.  I wish I could believe that everything which befel me
then had remained entirely without influence on my inner life.

A demon--I can find no other name--urged me to all sorts of follies, many of which I still
remember with pleasure, and, thank Heaven, not a single one which a strict teacher--supposing
that he had not forgotten how to put himself into the place of a youth--would seriously censure.
The effervescing spirits which did not find vent in such pranks obtained expression in a different
form.

I had begun to write, and every strong emotion was uttered in verses, which I showed to the
companions from whom I could expect sympathy.  My school-mates were very unlike.  Among the
young gentlemen who paid a high price to attend the school not a single one had been really
industrious and accomplished anything.  But neither did any one of the few lads whose fathers
were peasants, or who belonged to the lower ranks, stand at the head of his class.  They were
very diligent, but success rarely corresponded with the amount of labour employed.  The well-educated
but by no means wealthy middle class supplied the school with its best material.

The evolution of the human soul is a strange thing.  The period during which, in my overflowing
mirth, I played all sorts of wild pranks, and at school worked earnestly for one teacher only,
often found me toiling late at night for hours with burning head over a profound creation--I
called it The Poem of the World--in which I tried to represent the origin of cosmic and human life.

Many other verses, from a sonnet to the beautiful ears of a pretty cousin to the commencement
of the tragedy of Panthea and Abradatus, were written at that time; but I owe The Poem of the
World special gratitude, for it kept me from many a folly, and often held me for weeks at my
desk during the evening hours which many of my comrades spent in the tavern. Besides, it attracted
the new head-master's attention to my poetical tastes, for a number of verses had been left
by mistake in an exercise- book.  He read them, and asked to see the rest.  But I could not
fulfil the wish, for they contained many things which could not fail to offend him; so I gave
him only a few of the tamest passages, and can still see him smile in his peculiar way as he
read them in my presence.  He said something about "decided talent," and when preparations
for the celebration of the birthday of King Frederick William IV were made he gave me the task
of composing an original poem.  I gladly accepted it. Writing was a great pleasure, and though
my productions at school were far too irregular for me to call them good, I was certainly the
best declaimer.

                    THE NEW HEAD OF THE SCHOOL.

Before passing on to other subjects, I must devote a few words to the remodelling of the school
and its new head.

At the end of my first term in the first class we learned that we were to have a new teacher,
and one who would rule with a rod of iron.  Terrible stories of his Draconian severity were
in circulation, and his first address gave us reason to fear the worst, for the tall man of
forty in the professor's chair was very imposing in his appearance.  His smoothly shaven upper
lip and brown whiskers, his erect bearing and energetic manner, reminded one of an English
parliamentary leader, but his words sounded almost menacing.  He said that an entirely new
house must be erected.  We and the teachers must help him.  To the obedient he would be a good
friend; but to the refractory, no matter what might be their position, he would----  What followed
made many of us nudge one another, and the young men who attended the school merely for the
sake of the examination left it in a body.  Many a teacher even changed colour.

This reorganizer, Professor Tzschirner, had formerly been principal of the Magdalen Gymnasium
at Breslau.  In energy and authoritative manner he resembled Barop, but he was also an eminent
scholar and a thorough man of the world.  The authorities in Berlin made an excellent choice,
and we members of the first class soon perceived that he not only meant kindly by us, but that
we had obtained in him a teacher far superior to any we had possessed before.  He required
a great deal, but he was a good friend to every one who did his duty.  His kindly intention
and inspiring influence made themselves felt in our lives; for he invited to his house the
members of the first class whom he desired to influence, and his charming, highly educated
wife helped him entertain us, so that we preferred an evening there to almost any other amusements.
Study began to charm us, and I can only repeat that he seemed to recall Langethal's method
and awaken many things which the latter had given me, and which, as it were, had fallen asleep
during the interval.  He again aroused in my soul the love for the ancients, and his interpretations
of Horace or Sophocles were of great service to me in after-years.

Nor did he by any means forget grammar, but in explaining the classics he always laid most
stress upon the contents, and every lesson of his was a clever archaeological, aesthetic, and
historical lecture.  I listened to none more instructive at the university.  Philological and
linguistic details which were not suited for the senior pupils who were being fitted for other
callings than those of the philologist were omitted.  But he insisted upon grammatical correctness,
and never lost sight of his maxim, "The school should teach its pupils to do thoroughly whatever
they do at all."

He urged us especially to think for ourselves, and to express our ideas clearly and attractively,
not only in writing but verbally.

It seemed as though a spring breeze had melted the snow from the land, such bourgeoning and
blossoming appeared throughout the school.

Creative work was done by fits and starts.  If the demon seized upon me, I raved about for
a time as before, but I did my duty for the principal. I not only honoured but loved him, and
censure from his lips would have been unbearable.

The poem which I was to read on the king's birthday has been preserved, and as I glanced over
it recently I could not help smiling.

It was to describe the life of Henry the Fowler, and refer to the reigning king, Frederick
William IV.

The praise of my hero had come from my heart, so the poem found favour, and in circles so wide
that the most prominent man in the neighbourhood, Prince Puckler-Muskau, sent for my verses.

I was perfectly aware that they did not represent my best work, but what father does not find
something to admire in his child?  So I copied them neatly, and gave them to Billy, the dwarf,
the prince's factotum.  A short time after, while I was walking with some friends in Branitz
Park, the prince summoned me, and greeted me with the exclamation, "You are a poet!"

These four words haunted me a long while; nay, at times they even echo in my memory now.  I
had heard a hundred anecdotes of this prince, which could not fail to charm a youth of my disposition.
When a young officer of the Garde-du-Corps in Dresden, after having been intentionally omitted
from the invitations to a court-ball, he hired all the public conveyances in the city, thus
compelling most of the gentlemen and ladies who were invited either to wade through the snow
or forego the dance.

When the war of 1813 began he entered the service of "the liberators," as the Russians were
then called, and at the head of his regiment challenged the colonel of a French one to a duel,
and seriously wounded him.

It was apparently natural to Prince Puckler to live according to his own pleasure, undisturbed
by the opinions of his fellow-men, and this pleasure urged him to pursue a different course
in almost every phase of life.  I said "apparently," because, although he scorned the censure
of the people, he never lost sight of it.  From a child his intense vanity was almost a passion,
and unfortunately this constant looking about him, the necessity of being seen, prevented him
from properly developing an intellect capable of far higher things; yet there was nothing petty
in his character.

His highest merit, however, was the energy with which he understood how to maintain his independence
in the most difficult circumstances in which life placed him.  To one department of activity,
especially, that of gardening, he devoted his whole powers.  His parks can vie with the finest
pleasure-grounds of all countries.

At the time I first met him he was sixty-nine years old, but looked much younger, except when
he sometimes appeared with his hair powdered until it was snow-white.  His figure was tall
and finely proportioned, and though a sarcastic smile sometimes hovered around his lips, the
expression of his face was very kindly.  His eyes, which I remember as blue, were somewhat
peculiar.  When he wished to please, they sparkled with a warm--I might almost say tender-light,
which must have made many a young heart throb faster.  Yet I think he loved himself too much
to give his whole affection to any one.

A great man has always seemed to me the greatest of created things, and though Prince Puckler
can scarcely be numbered among the great men of mankind, he was undoubtedly the greatest among
those who surrounded him at Branitz.  In me, the youth of nineteen, he awakened admiration,
interest, and curiosity, and his "You are a poet" sometimes strengthened my courage, sometimes
disheartened me.  My boyish ambitions in those days had but one purpose, and that was the vocation
of a poet.

I was still ignorant that the Muse kisses only those who have won her love by the greatest
sufferings.  Life as yet seemed a festal hall, and as the bird flies from bough to bough wherever
a red berry tempts him, my heart was attracted by every pair of bright eyes which glanced kindly
at me.  When I entered upon my last term, my Leporello list was long enough, and contained
pictures from many different classes.  But my hour, too, seemed on the point of striking, for
when I went home in my last Christmas vacation I thought myself really in love with the charming
daughter of the pleasant widow of a landed proprietor.  Nay, though only nineteen, I even considered
whether I should not unite her destiny with mine, and formally ask her hand.  My father had
offered himself to my mother at the same age.

In Kottbus I was treated with the respect due to a man, but at home I was still "the boy,"
and the youngest of us three "little ones."  Ludo, as a lieutenant, had a position in society,
while I was yet a schoolboy.  Amid these surroundings I realized how hasty and premature my
intention had been.

Only four of us came to keep Christmas at home, for Martha now lived in Dresden as the wife
of Lieutenant Baron Curt von Brandenstein, the nephew of our Aunt Sophie's husband.  Her wedding
ceremony in the cathedral was, of course, performed by the court-chaplain Strauss.

My grandmother had died, but my Aunt Sophie still lived in Dresden, and spent her summers in
Blasewitz.  Her hospitable house always afforded an atmosphere very stimulating to intellectual
life, so I spent more time there than in my mother's more quiet residence at Pillnitz.

I had usually passed part of the long--or, as it was called, the "dog- day"--vacation in or
near Dresden, but I also took pleasant pedestrian tours in Bohemia, and after my promotion
to the senior class, through the Black Forest.

It was a delightful excursion!  Yet I can never recall it without a tinge of sadness, for my
two companions, a talented young artist named Rothermund, and a law student called Forster,
both died young.  We had met in a railway carriage between Frankfort and Heidelberg and determined
to take the tour together, and never did the Black Forest, with its mountains and valleys,
dark forests and green meadows, clear streams and pleasant villages, seem to me more beautiful.
But still fairer days were in store after parting from my friends.

I went to Rippoldsau, where a beloved niece of my mother with her charming daughter Betsy expected
me.  Here in the excellent Gohring hotel I found a delightful party, which only lacked young
gentlemen. My arrival added a pair of feet which never tired of dancing, and every evening
our elders were obliged to entreat and command in order to put an end to our sport.  The mornings
were occupied in walks through the superb forests around Rippoldsau, and the afternoons in
bowling, playing graces, and running races.  I speedily lost my susceptible heart to a charming
young lady named Leontine, who permitted me to be her Knight, and I fancied myself very unjustly
treated when, soon after our separation, I received her betrothal cards.

The Easter and Christmas vacations I usually spent in Berlin with my mother, where I was allowed
to attend entertainments given by our friends, at which I met many distinguished persons, among
others Alexander von Humboldt.

Of political life in the capital at that time there is nothing agreeable to be said.  I was
always reminded of the state of affairs immediately after my arrival; for during the first
years of my school life at Kottbus no one was permitted to enter the city without a paper proving
identity, which was demanded by constables at the exits of railway stations or in the yards
of post-houses.  Once, when I had nothing to show except my report, I was admitted, it is true,
but a policeman was sent with me to my mother's house to ascertain that the boy of seventeen
was really the person he assumed to be, and not a criminal dangerous to the state.

The beautiful aspirations of the Reichstag in Paulskirche were baffled, the constitution of
the empire had become a noble historical monument which only a chosen few still remembered.
The king, who had had the opportunity to place himself at the head of united Germany, had preferred
to suppress the freedom of his native land rather than to promote its unity.  Yet we need not
lament his refusal.  Blood shed together in mutual enthusiasm is a better cement than the decree
of any Parliament.

The ruling powers at that time saw in the constitution only a cage whose bars prevented them
from dealing a decisive blow, but whatever they could reach through the openings they tore
and injured as far as lay in their power.  The words "reactionary" and "liberal" had become
catch terms which severed families and divided friends.

At Komptendorf, and almost everywhere in the country, there was scarcely any one except Conservatives.
Herr von Berndt had driven into the city to the election.  Pastor Albin, the clergyman of his
village, voted for the Liberal candidate.  When the pastor asked the former, who was just getting
into his carriage, to take him home, the usually courteous, obliging gentleman, who was driving,
exclaimed, "If you don't vote with me you don't ride with me," and, touching the spirited bays,
dashed off, leaving the pastor behind.

Dr. Boltze was a "Liberal," and had to endure many a rebuff because his views were known to
the ministry.  Our religious instruction might serve as a mirror of the opinions which were
pleasing to the minister.  It had made the man who imparted it superintendent when comparatively
young. The term "mob marriage" for "civil marriage" originated with him, and it ought certainly
to be inscribed in the Golden Book above.

He was a fiery zealot, who sought to induce us to share his wrath and scorn when he condemned
Bauer, David Strauss, and Lessing.

When discussing the facts of ecclesiastical history, he understood how to rouse us to the utmost,
for he was a talented man and a clever speaker, but no word of appeal to the heart, no exhortation
to love and peace, ever crossed his lips.

The vacations were the only time which I spent with my mother.  I ceased to think of her in
everything I did, as was the case in Keilhau.  But after I had been with her for a while, the
charm of her personality again mastered my soul, her love rekindled mine, and I longed to open
my whole heart to her and tell her everything which interested me.  She was the only person
to whom I read my Poem of the World, as far as it was completed. 

The hope that the subject of his love, disguised with a friend mantle of dark night, lovers come
to tell her their sorrows with the gifted cadence of the lovely music, waking of restless sleep, I had
the beautiful Indian, all yearning, all impatience, all ears and all eyes, and when he heard
the mournful voice, sweet and serious singing, and concepts the love song, abriéronsela the
guts to get in them on sigh the song was finishing touch, and confirmation of the soul of what
they had said the lips; and saliósela of another as his most loving and deep sigh, that if
you hear the singer, not I had to come to a valley of tears, but to an enchanted paradise and
did not hear him because rang about doing take to justice! of the round, after which came the
knife and tumult.

Dona Guiomar Acongojose with this, and the ground came transposed, if not held in his faithful
maid Florela arms, and when everything happened and the silence was reborn and became calm;
tearful eye candy and beautiful color change of clothes, said in a voice Florela that is clearly
understood that his soul was of fear and hope

- Oh, friend Florela, if this is love, please God I never have loved me life! And who had to
tell myself that the point was to bring me a man who does not more than three times I've seen,
and even as a passing shadow or a dream image lain, is lost when
we wake up?

To which Florela sigh

- Thing is love, lady, who has no need just a point to yield to an empire soul, and so much
more, the more this soul is steeped in sadness, and bereft of sweet affection.

- Hush, Florela - Dona Guiomar said wiping her tears, - I think someone is coming.

He opened the screen about a page, looked out, and told his wife that the family the Holy Office
had been before, had returned, and saying that the lady was come; Dona Guiomar and ordered
him to be brought to the podium, and to wait there rogasen.

Dona Guiomar appeased sought, although this was more for desired than
achieved, and told his damsel

- Look, Florela, if the home team may
find out if something terrible happened in the fight, and if any,
who or who is unlucky, that this right may gain pretext of assisting
those who may have need relief, and again, while I was dressing a
both to go and warn the family that for which I begged him to return,
and do not delay, doubt that he was able to stay in the set, I have
no life.

Florela went out, and Dona Guiomar was to sit at her dressing table, and contemplose the mirror
and found himself, more beautiful than ever, that love makes beautiful eyes even the ugly,
and beautiful the sublime, making them a heaven and a heaven in his eyes Dona Guiomar, because
the love was in her eyes, looked like he saw the image of him for whom love grieved his soul, and
it happened that the more we looked, the more seemed to see in your eyes the fleeting shade of your
desire, and such was his love illusion, he thought he not in his eyes, but behind her on the tresses
of her hair blonde, appeared the image of their longed looking anxious, copied by the mirror,
as if he had been behind her knees.

It seemed also that a trembling hand grasped his hand hanging carelessly, and that burning
lips she posed a loving kiss.

Dona Guiomar shaken he turned and saw that he was kneeling beside
her, not an image vain, nor a shadow, but a man, with the attire of
a soldier, who eagerly watched, and seemed to want to talk and could
not sick but said what he clearly felt the tremor his whole body shook.

Sobresaltose Dona Guiomar, nubláronsela eyes apretósela heart, and melted all to see who was at
his feet and clutching a hand, she had no power to withdraw, against his lips, was the same
for whom she felt love sweet death, and so the two in a silence more eloquent than the best
of the speeches, some time steps, until recovering the beautiful Indian and knowing that his
dignity should express surprise and anger at what was happening,
disengaged his hand from that of her lover, and said the entire voice
and angry:

- What is this?

Who are you? How did you come here?

One was lying prostrate, the other, kneeling, leaned against the wall. We seized the first
one, and staggered towards the spot where the lanterns glimmered, and loud shouts greeted us.

Our example had induced others to leap down too.

As soon as we were released from our burden we returned for the second victim.  My companion
now carried a lantern.  The woman was no longer kneeling, but lay face downward several paces
nearer to the narrow passage choked with stones and lime dust which separated her from us.
She had fainted while trying to follow.  I seized her feet, and we staggered on, but ere we
could leave the passage which led into the larger room I heard a loud rattling and thundering
above, and the next instant something struck my head and everything reeled around me.  Yet
I did not drop the blue yarn stockings, but tottered on with them into the large open space,
where I fell on my knees.

Still I must have retained my consciousness, for loud shouts and cries reached my ears.  Then
came a moment with which few in life can compare --the one when I again inhaled draughts of
the pure air of heaven.

I now felt that my hair was stained with blood, which had flowed from a wound in my head, but
I had no time to think of it, for people crowded around me saying all sorts of pleasant things.
The architect, Winzer, was most cordial of all.  His words, "I approve of such foolhardiness,
Herr Ebers," echoed in my ears long afterwards.

A beam had fallen on my head, but my thick hair had broken the force of the blow, and the wound
in a few days began to heal.

My companion in peril was at my side, and as my blood-stained face looked as if my injuries
were serious he invited me to his house, which was close by the scene of the accident.  On
the way we introduced ourselves to each other.  His name was Hering, and he was the prompter
at the theatre.  When the doctor who had been sent to me had finished his task of sewing up
the wound and left us, an elderly woman entered, whose rank in life was somewhat difficult
to determine.  She wore gay flowers in her bonnet, and a cloak made of silk and velvet, but
her yellow face was scarcely that of a "lady."  She came to get a part for her daughter; it
was one of the prompter's duties to copy the parts for the various actors.

But who was this daughter?

Fraulein Clara, the fair Amalie of The Robbers, the lovely leading lady of the theatre.

My daughter has an autograph of Andersen containing the words, "Life is the fairest fairy tale."

Ay, our lives are often like fairy tales.

The Scheherezade "Fate" had found the bridge to lead the student to the actress, and the means
employed were of no less magnitude than a conflagration, the rescue of a life, and a wound,
as well as the somewhat improbable combined action of a student and a prompter.  True, more
simple methods would scarcely have brought the youth with the examination in his head and a
pretty girl in his heart to seek the acquaintanceship of the fair actress.

Fate urged me swiftly on; for Clara's mother was an enthusiastic woman, who in her youth had
herself been an ornament of the stage, and I can still hear her exclamation, "My dear young
sir, every German girl ought to kiss that wound!"

I can see her indignantly forbid the prompter to tie his gay handkerchief over the injury and
draw a clean one from her own velvet bag to bind my forehead.  Boltze and my school-mates greeted
me very warmly. Director Tzschirner said something very similar to Herr Winzer's remark.

And so matters would have remained, and in a few weeks, after passing the examination, I should
have returned to my happy mother, had not a perverse Fate willed otherwise.

This time a bit of linen was the instrument used to lead me into the path allotted, for when
the wound healed and the handkerchief which Clara's mother had tied round it came back from
the wash, I was uncertain whether to return it in person or send it by a messenger with a few
words of thanks.  I determined on the latter course; but when, that same evening, I saw Clara
looking so pretty as the youthful Richelieu, I cast aside my first resolve, and the next day
at dusk went to call on the mother of the charming actress.  I should scarcely have ventured
to do so in broad daylight, for Herr Ebeling, our zealous religious instructor, lived directly
opposite.

The danger, however, merely gave the venture an added zest and, ere I was aware of it I was
standing in the large and pretty sitting-room occupied by the mother and daughter.

It was a disappointment not to meet the latter, yet I felt a certain sense of relief.  Fate
intended to let me escape the storm uninjured, for my heart had been by no means calm since
I mounted the narrow stairs leading to the apartments of the fair actress.  But just as I was
taking leave the pavement echoed with the noise of hoofs and the rattle of wheels.  Prince
Puckler's coupe stopped in front of the house and the young girl descended the steps.

She entered the room laughing merrily, but when she saw me she became graver, and looked at
her mother in surprise.

A brief explanation, the cry, "Oh, you are the man who was hurt!" and then the proof that the
room did not owe its neat appearance to her, for her cloak flew one way, her hat another, and
her gloves a third.  After this disrobing she stood before me in the costume of the youthful
Richelieu, so bewitchingly charming, so gay and bright, that I could not restrain my delight.

She had come from old Prince Puckler, who, as he never visited the theatre in the city, wished
to see her in the costume whose beauty had been so much praised.  The vigorous, gay old gentleman
had charmed her, and she declared that she liked him far better than any of the young men.
But as she knew little of his former life and works, I told her of his foolish pranks and chivalrous
deeds.

It seemed as if her presence increased my powers of description, and when I at last took leave
she exclaimed: "You'll come again, won't you?  After one has finished one's part, it's the
best time to talk."

Did I wait to be asked a second time?  Oh, no!  Even had I not been the "foolhardy Ebers,"
I should have accepted her invitation.  The very next evening I was in the pleasant sitting-room,
and whenever I could slip away after supper I went to the girl, whom I loved more and more
ardently.  Sometimes I repeated poems of my own, sometimes she recited and acted passages from
her best parts, amid continual jesting and laughter. In sum, There
are, and cosmological dialectic arguments, just to prove the existence of God who fills all,
of a pure intelligence that directs it all and all-pervading, without dimensions and other accidents
own bodies.

When the gazelle dies, his adoptive mother, runs are about life and death. Search the principle
of life that has fled the gazelle. With rough instruments opens the bowels and looking for that principle
in the liver, lungs, heart, blood and nerves. Not found anywhere. It was all very light and as
steam has dissipated. Thus follows that the principle of life is incorporeal, is tenuous resembles
the great being that small recognized by both motor and soul of the
universe.

Then studied the animals with whom he lives and he and they discover radical difference. See
that none has been raised to the idea of ​​a great being that he has risen. He therefore is unique
in its kind.

By taking advantage of modern expression, he alone is a kingdom apart: the human realm. Thinker
substance that is in it can not fail to be immaterial immortal ...

The lone time there is devoted to study hard, Search, Ponder, dispenses of their bodily senses;
disposed of memory itself, forget the material world, even imagination takes off, and now with
the very essence of thought, gloomy sinks trails in the abyss of
his own soul.

There after it appears the radiant and divine light the eternal day. To the immortal essence
of his spirit is diluted and lost in that ocean light, coming to be all one and the same.

Still, however, are again referred to ecstasy and back the visible Universe, but and recognized
around him in a more intense and others less, the light that has been flooded. The rays of
that eternal sun and its radiant image reflected to a greater or lesser extent how many are
the creatures. Thus the sun is reflected material and look in the
mirror, although are misty and murky.

Even in the bottom of our land of corruption shines something divine light, as perhaps in the
midst of storms, lightning ripping the black sun Clouds and breaks and shimmers on the sea
waves excited shooting.

Not a few critics accuse of pantheistic Tofail, but I venture to sustain, albeit with shyness
that I infuse my limited knowledge, which is exempt from pantheism Tofail. The persistent reality
of those beings in the world will be safe with their doctrine.

God pervades everything, but not to be confused with anything. I do not see in Tofail so energetic
expression short or no worth of creatures with the Creator if they are compared, as is a large
Father of the Church: God, if things are a bit is the being that
you give them, and are not nothing because they are what you are!

And when it comes to the intimate union of soul with God and the purpose of mystical science,
not Tofail goes so far as its terms and phrases many Orthodox mystics
of Germany, Italy and Spain.

What it is missing in the mystical Tofail
is because they do not lack, low energy Love sucking and bond most
pure intelligence.

In the second part of the novel is where all good
Muslims, and more so every good Christian, have to censor and shocked. Ah!  yes, it was fortunate that she was going.

March had come, the sun shone brightly, the air was as warm as in May, and I had carried the
mother and daughter some violets which I had gathered myself.  Suddenly I thought how delightful
it would be to drive with Clara in an open carriage through the spring beauty of the country.
The next day was Sunday.  If I went with them and spent the night in Guben I could reach home
in time the next day.  I need only tell Dr. Boltze I was going to Komptendorf, and order the
carriage, to transform the dear girl's departure into a holiday.

Again Fate interfered with the course of this story; for on my way to school that sunny Saturday
morning I met Clara's mother, and at sight of her the wish merged into a resolve.  I followed
her into the shop she entered and explained my plan.  She thought it would be delightful, and
promised to wait for me at a certain place outside of the city.

The plan was carried out.  I found them at the appointed spot, my darling as fresh as a rose.
If love and joy had any substantial weight, the horses would have found it a hard matter to
drag the vehicle swiftly on.

But at the first toll-house, while the toll-keeper was changing some money, I experienced the
envy of the gods which hitherto I had known only in Schiller's ballad.  A pedestrian passed--the
teacher whom I had offended by playing all sorts of pranks during his French lesson.  Not one
of the others disliked me.

He spoke to me, but I pretended not to understand, hastily took the change from the toll-keeper,
and, raising my hat, shouted, "Drive on!"

This highly virtuous gentleman scorned the young actress, and as, on account of my companions,
he had not returned my greeting, Clara flashed into comical wrath, which stifled in its germ
my thought of leaving the carriage and going on foot to Komptendorf, where Dr. Boltze believed
me to be.

Clara rewarded my courageous persistence by special gaiety, and when we had reached Guben,
taken supper with some other members of the company, and spent the evening in merriment, danger
and all the ills which the future might bring were forgotten.

The next morning I breakfasted with Clara and her mother, and in bidding them good-bye added
"Till we meet again," for the way to Berlin was through Guben, where the railroad began.

The carriage which had brought us there took me back to Kottbus.  Several members of the company
entered it and went part of the way, returning on foot.  When they left me twilight was gathering,
but the happiness I had just enjoyed shone radiantly around me, and I lived over for the second
time all the delights I had experienced.

But the nearer I approached Kottbus the more frequently arose the fear that the French teacher
might make our meeting the cause of an accusation.  He had already complained of me for very
trivial delinquencies and would hardly let this pass.  And yet he might.

Was it a crime to drive with a young girl of stainless reputation under her mother's oversight?
No.  I had done nothing wrong, except to say that I was going to Komptendorf--and that offence
concerned only Dr. Boltze, to whom I had made the false statement.

At last I fell asleep, until the wheels rattled on the pavement of the city streets.  Was my
dream concerning the swan to be fulfilled?

I entered the house early.  Dr. Boltze was waiting for me, and his wife's troubled face betrayed
what had happened even more plainly than her husband's frown.

The French teacher had instantly informed my tutor where and with whom he had met me, and urged
him to ascertain whether I had really gone to Komptendorf.  Then he went to Clara's former
residence, questioned the landlady and her servant, and finally interrogated the livery-stable
keeper.

The mass of evidence thus gathered proved that I had paid the actress numerous visits, and
always at dusk.  My dream seemed fulfilled, but after I had told Dr. Boltze and his wife the
whole truth a quiet talk followed.  The former did not give up the cause as lost, though he
did not spare reproaches, while his wife's wrath was directed against the informer rather than
the offence committed by her favourite.

After a restless night I went to Professor Tzschirner and told him everything, without palliation
or concealment.  He censured my frivolity and lack of consideration for my position in life,
but every word, every feature of his expressive face showed that he grieved for what had happened,
and would have gladly punished it leniently.  In after years he told me so.  Promising to make
every effort to save me from exclusion from the examination in the conference which he was
to call at the close of the afternoon session, he dismissed me--and he kept his word.

I know this, for I succeeded in hearing the discussion.  The porter of the gymnasium was the
father of the boy whom my friend Lebenstein and I kept to clean our boots, etc.  He was a conscientious,
incorruptible man, but the peculiar circumstances of the case led him to yield to my entreaties
and admit me to a room next to the one where the conference was held.  I am grateful to him
still, for it is due to this kindness that I can think without resentment of those whose severity
robbed me of six months of my life.

This conference taught me how warm a friend I possessed in Professor Tzschirner, and showed
that Professor Braune was kindly disposed.  I remember how my heart overflowed with gratitude
when Professor Tzschirner sketched my character, extolled my rescue of life at the Kubisch
factory, and eloquently urged them to remember their own youth and judge what had happened
impartially.  I should have belied my nature had I not availed myself of the chain of circumstances
which brought me into association with the actress to make the acquaintance of so charming
a creature.

To my joyful surprise Herr Ebeling agreed with him, and spoke so pleasantly of me and of Clara,
concerning whom he had inquired, that I began to hope he was on my side.

Unfortunately, the end of his speech destroyed all the prospects held out in the beginning.

Space forbids further description of the discussion.  The majority, spite of the passionate
hostility of the informer, voted not to expel me, but to exclude me from the examination this
time, and advise me to leave the school.  If, however, I preferred to remain, I should be permitted
to do so.

At the close of the session I was standing in the square in front of the school when Professor
Tzschirner approached, and I asked his permission to leave school that very day.  A smile of
satisfaction flitted over his manly, intellectual face, and he granted my request at once.

So my Kottbus school-days ended, and, unfortunately, in a way unlike what I had hoped.  When
I said farewell to Professor Tzschirner and his wife I could not restrain my tears.  His eyes,
too, were dim, and he repeated to me what I had already heard him say in the conference, and
wrote the same thing to my mother in a letter explaining my departure from the school. The
report which he sent with it contains not a single word to indicate a compulsory withdrawal
or the advice to leave it.

When I had stopped at Guben and said goodbye to Clara my dream was literally fulfilled.  Our
delightful intercourse had come to a sudden end.  Fortunately, I was the only sufferer, for
to my great joy I heard a few months after that she had made a successful debut at the Dresden
court theatre.

I was, of course, less joyfully received in Berlin than usual, but the letters from Professor
Tzschirner and Frau Boltze put what had occurred in the right light to my mother--nay, when
she saw how I grieved over my separation from the young girl whose charms still filled my heart
and mind, her displeasure was transformed into compassion.  She also saw how difficult it was
for me to meet the friends and guardian who had expected me to return as a graduate, and drew
her darling, whom for the first time she called her "poor boy," still closer to her heart.

Then we consulted about the future, and it was decided that I should graduate from the gymnasium
of beautiful Quedlinburg.  Professor Schmidt's house was warmly recommended, and was chosen
for my home.

I set out for my new abode full of the best resolutions.  But at Magdeburg I saw in a show
window a particularly tasteful bonnet trimmed with lilies of the valley and moss-rose buds.
The sight brought Clara's face framed in it vividly be fore my eyes, and drew me into the shop.
It was a Paris pattern-hat and very expensive, but I spent the larger part of my pocket-money
in purchasing it and ordered it to be sent to the girl whose image still filled my whole soul.
Hitherto I had given her nothing except a small locket and a great many flowers.

CHAPTER XX.

AT THE QUEDLINBURG GYMNASIUM

The atmosphere of Quedlinburg was far different from that of the Mark factory town of Kottbus.
How fresh, how healthful, how stimulating to industry and out-door exercise it was!

Everything in the senior class was just as it should be.

In Kottbus the pupils addressed each other formally.  There were at the utmost, I think, not
more than half a dozen with whom I was on terms of intimacy.  In Quedlinburg a beautiful relation
of comradeship united all the members of the school.  During study hours we were serious, but
in the intervals we were merry enough. And this is not stubborn, because I see that I will not leave
you for all men in the world and those who are giants in the books of chivalry found, and that
if I leave it on me and provocarame come and put me in a trance I put that so that more harm
than it has done can not make anyone in this world and otrosí, madam, that Dona Guiomar that
I have promised to punish the recalcitrant and dangerous otherwise.

And it was Cervantes could not help thinking Dona Guiomar, or, to put better, he was in it,
because neither one point she had forgotten, unless it was in those moments when nothing else
was, or lived for more than for Margarita, and were choking and, though he disguised Cervantes,
because the absence of Dona Guiomar became so long, which gave occasion to all assumptions
of the suspicious and jealous bulky, and anger and fear I got the heart, and restless was no longer
mediate circumspection, to look It seemed gone to the beautiful Indian, then, because of his
jealousy and poisoned imaginations that troubled them in mind stirring, it seemed more and more beautiful,
and freak out, because I saw that, instead of being absent Dona Guiomar, would have been Margaret
conturbádose have similarly and equally angry and irritated, and could not explain why strange
and to him unknown reason, love and equal or nearly equal term commitment by two women I was, and
did not know how hard that was to go out, he with two non- could marry, or to detract from his soul
to the one on the other, with one marrying and taking the other for friends, that they were
both proud and honored, and if the power had failed Margarita point, because of the love that
was crazy and had about Dona Guiomar forget their status under his love, which meant nothing
for them to deem his honor in a like manner, that the woman he loves, and love, his honor is
forgotten, no believes that his honor has been lost, but that tank has been the master of his
soul, and obligation He is considered to restore it in his honor, making him, his wife and partner.


Like the Thuringian Mountains, the Hartz are also wreathed with a garland of legends and historical
memories.  Some of its fairest blossoms are in the immediate vicinity of Quedlinburg.  These
and the delight in nature with which I here renewed my old bond tempted more than one of us
to write, and very different poems, deeper and with more true feeling, than those produced
in Kottbus.  A poetic atmosphere from the Hercynian woods and the monuments of ancient days
surrounded our lives.  It was delightful to dream under the rustling beeches of the neighbouring
forest; and in the church with its ancient graves and the crypt of St. Wiperti Cloister, the
oldest specimen of Christian art in that region, we were filled with reverence for the days of old.

The life of the great Henry, which I had celebrated in verse at Kottbus, became a reality to
me here; and what a powerful influence a visit to the ancient cloister exerted on our young
souls!  The nearest relatives of mighty sovereigns had dwelt as abbesses within its walls.
But two generations ago Anna Amalie, the hapless sister of Frederick the Great, died while
holding this office.

A strange and lasting impression was wrought upon me by a corpse and a picture in this convent.
Both were in a subterranean chamber which possessed the property of preserving animal bodies
from corruption.  In this room was the body of Countess Aurora von Konigsmark, famed as the
most beautiful woman of her time.  After a youth spent in splendour she had retired to the
cloister as superior, and there she now lay unveiled, rigid, and yellow, although every feature
had retained the form it had in death.  Beside the body hung her portrait, taken at the time
when a smile on her lips, a glance from her eyes, was enough to fire the heart of the coldest man.

A terrible antithesis!

Here the portrait of the blooming, beautiful husk of a soul exulting in haughty arrogance;
yonder that husk itself, transformed by the hand of death into a rigid, colourless caricature,
a mummy without embalming.

Art, too, had a place in Quedlinburg.  I still remember with pleasure Steuerwald's beautiful
winter landscapes, into which he so cleverly introduced the mediaeval ruins of the Hartz region. 

My blood flowed across the heart, feeling like an impulse of religious respect.

Great name and an old man! Is the same as if the tombs of Saint-Denis was read the name of Clovis.
The glory of his successors, the empire, their discussions, have obscured the fact back to the
one who came forward, at least a century to his age. Lamarck was, that blind Homer Museum, which
by the instinct of genius created, organized, gave name to what is
still was enveloped in darkness: the class of invertebrates.

Gutsmuths, the founder of the gymnastic system, Bosse, the present Minister of Public Worship
and Instruction, and Julius Wolff, are children of Quedlinburg and pupils of its gymnasium.

The long vacation came between the written and verbal examinations, and as I had learned privately
that my work had been sufficiently satisfactory, my mother gave me permission to go to the
Black Forest, to which pleasant memories attracted me.  But my friend Hey had seen nothing
of the world, so I chose a goal more easily attained, and took him with me to the Rhine.  I
went home by the way of Gottingen, and what I saw there of the Saxonia corps filled me with
such enthusiasm that I resolved to wear the blue, white, and blue ribbon.

The oral was also successfully examination passed, and I returned to my mother, who received
me at Hosterwitz with open arms.  The resolve to devote myself to the study of law and to commence
in Gottingen was formed, and received her approval.

For what reason I preferred the legal profession it would be hard to say. Neither mental bias
nor interest gained by any searching examination of the science to which I wished to devote
myself, turned the scale. For the troubled heart and trembling waiting times have not changed, and through the
darkness of night, who cry and pray at the lighthouse is the altar and the same God.

BOOK TWO

GENESIS OF THE SEA

I

Fertility.

The night of San Juan (from 24 to 25 June), five minutes after giving the average open night
great fishing for herring in the North Sea. Fluorescent lights undulate
or dancing on the waves, "is lightning herring," consecrated signal
of all vessels.

     [It should never contain more than seventy pupils.  Barop, when I
     met him after I attained my maturity, named sixty as the largest
     number which permitted the teacher to know and treat individually
     the boys confided to his care.  He would never receive more at
     Keilhau.]

Of course I imagine this man not only a teacher but an educator, familiar not alone with the
school exercises, but with the mental and physical characteristics of those who are to graduate
from the university.

Had not the heads of the Keilhau Institute lost their pupils so young, they would undoubtedly
have succeeded in guiding the majority to the right profession.

