441)

I.  The empire, which had been long thrown into a disturbed and unsetted state, by the rebellion
and violent death of its three last rulers, was at length restored to peace and security by
the Flavian family, whose descent was indeed obscure, and which boasted no ancestral honours;
but the public had no cause to regret its elevation; though it is acknowledged that Domitian
met with the just reward of his avarice and cruelty.  Titus Flavius Petro, a townsman of Reate
[721], whether a centurion or an evocatus [722] of Pompey's party in the civil war, is uncertain,
fled out of the battle of Pharsalia and went home; where, having at last obtained his pardon
and discharge, he became a collector of the money raised by public sales in the way of auction.
His son, surnamed Sabinus, was never engaged in the military service, though some say he was
a centurion of the first order, and others, that whilst he held that rank, he was discharged
on account of his bad state of health: this Sabinus, I say, was a publican, and received the
tax of the fortieth penny in Asia.  And there were remaining, at the time of the advancement
of the family, several statues, which had been erected to him by the cities of that province,
with this inscription: "To the honest Tax-farmer." [723]  He afterwards turned usurer amongst
the Helvetii, and there died, leaving behind him his wife, Vespasia Pella, and two sons by
her; the elder of whom, Sabinus, came to be prefect of the city, and the younger, Vespasian,
to be emperor.  Polla, descended of a good family, at Nursia [724], had for her father Vespasius
Pollio, thrice appointed (442) military tribune, and at last prefect of the camp; and her brother
was a senator of praetorian dignity.  There is to this day, about six miles from Nursia, on
the road to Spoletum, a place on the summit of a hill, called Vespasiae, where are several
monuments of the Vespasii, a sufficient proof of the splendour and antiquity of the family.
I will not deny that some have pretended to say, that Petro's father was a native of Gallia
Transpadana [725], whose employment was to hire workpeople who used to emigrate every year
from the country of the Umbria into that of the Sabines, to assist them in their husbandry
[726]; but who settled at last in the town of Reate, and there married.  But of this I have
not been able to discover the least proof, upon the strictest inquiry.

II.  Vespasian was born in the country of the Sabines, beyond Reate, in a little country-seat
called Phalacrine, upon the fifth of the calends of December [27th November], in the evening,
in the consulship of Quintus Sulpicius Camerinus and Caius Poppaeus Sabinus, five years before
the death of Augustus [727]; and was educated under the care of Tertulla, his grandmother by
the father's side, upon an estate belonging to the family, at Cosa [728].  After his advancement
to the empire, he used frequently to visit the place where he had spent his infancy; and the
villa was continued in the same condition, that he might see every thing about him just as
he had been used to do.  And he had so great a regard for the memory of his grandmother, that,
upon solemn occasions and festival days, he constantly drank out of a silver cup which she
had been accustomed to use.  After assuming the manly habit, he had a long time a distaste
for the senatorian toga, though his brother had obtained it; nor could he be persuaded by any
one but his mother to sue for that badge of honour.  She at length drove him to it, more by
taunts and reproaches, than by her entreaties (443) and authority, calling him now and then,
by way of reproach, his brother's footman.  He served as military tribune in Thrace.  When
made quaestor, the province of Crete and Cyrene fell to him by lot.  He was candidate for the
aedileship, and soon after for the praetorship, but met with a repulse in the former case;
though at last, with much difficulty, he came in sixth on the poll-books.  But the office of
praetor he carried upon his first canvass, standing amongst the highest at the poll.  Being
incensed against the senate, and desirous to gain, by all possible means, the good graces of
Caius [729], he obtained leave to exhibit extraordinary [730] games for the emperor's victory
in Germany, and advised them to increase the punishment of the conspirators against his life,
by exposing their corpses unburied. So
when I say that in the same circle or in equal circles, equal arcs are subtended for equal strings,
implicitly assume the condition, "if there is a circle."

[48.] As this way of explaining the knowledge of the essential relations of things, may seem strange,
I will present the point of view more clearly than I can. When I affirm or deny an essential
relationship of two things, do you affirm or deny of my ideas or of things? Clear is that things
and not my ideas. If I say "the ellipse is a curve" I mean not my idea, but the object of my
idea. We know that our ideas are not ellipses, which in our heads do not exist, and that when
we think for example, Earth's orbit, the orbit of the Earth is not in us. What are we talking
then? Nó the idea, but its object, not what is in us, but what is outside us.

[49.] Not mean that we will see it: we mean is this: when I say circumference is longer than
the diameter does not mean that they see, but is well. Both disto to talk about my idea, which
affirm the same thing be true, but I do not see it, although I did not exist. Only talk about the
idea, when we doubt his correspondence with the object: it's not about reality but the appearance,
and in such cases language is in itself an admirable accuracy: do not say it, but I think.

[50.]
Our claims and denials, therefore relate to the objects.

Now I argue thus: so that there is a pure nothing so that nothing, nothing can affirm or deny,
because has no property, no relationship of any kind, is a pure negation of everything, then nothing
can affirm or deny, nothing to combine, compare anything, feel anything but under the condition
of existence.
  Afterwards he got by lot the province of Africa, which he governed with great reputation,
excepting that once, in an insurrection at Adrumetum, he was pelted with turnips.  It is certain
that he returned thence nothing richer; for his credit was so low, that he was obliged to mortgage
his whole property to his brother, and was reduced to the necessity of dealing in mules, for
the support of his rank; for which reason he was commonly called "the Muleteer."  He is said
likewise to have been convicted of extorting from a young man of fashion two hundred thousand
sesterces for procuring him the broad-stripe, contrary to the wishes of his father, and was
severely reprimanded for it.  While in attendance upon Nero in Achaia, he frequently withdrew
from the theatre while Nero was singing, and went to sleep if he remained, which gave so much
(445) offence, that he was not only excluded from his society, but debarred the liberty of
saluting him in public.  Upon this, he retired to a small out-of-the-way town, where he lay
skulking in constant fear of his life, until a province, with an army, was offered him.

A firm persuasion had long prevailed through all the East [735], that it was fated for the
empire of the world, at that time, to devolve on some who should go forth from Judaea.  This
prediction referred to a Roman emperor, as the event shewed; but the Jews, applying it to themselves,
broke out into rebellion, and having defeated and slain their governor [736], routed the lieutenant
of Syria [737], a man of consular rank, who was advancing to his assistance, and took an eagle,
the standard, of one of his legions.  As the suppression of this revolt appeared to require
a stronger force and an active general, who might be safely trusted in an affair of so much
importance, Vespasian was chosen in preference to all others, both for his known activity,
and on account of the obscurity of his origin and name, being a person of whom (446) there
could be not the least jealousy.  Two legions, therefore, eight squadrons of horse, and ten
cohorts, being added to the former troops in Judaea, and, taking with him his eldest son as
lieutenant, as soon as he arrived in his province, he turned the eyes of the neighbouring provinces
upon him, by reforming immediately the discipline of the camp, and engaging the enemy once
or twice with such resolution, that, in the attack of a castle [738], he had his knee hurt
by the stroke of a stone, and received several arrows in his shield.

V.  After the deaths of Nero and Galba, whilst Otho and Vitellius were contending for the sovereignty,
he entertained hopes of obtaining the empire, with the prospect of which he had long before
flattered himself, from the following omens.  Upon an estate belonging to the Flavian family,
in the neighbourhood of Rome, there was an old oak, sacred to Mars, which, at the three several
deliveries of Vespasia, put out each time a new branch; evident intimations of the future fortune
of each child.  The first was but a slender one, which quickly withered away; and accordingly,
the girl that was born did not live long.  The second became vigorous, which portended great
good fortune; but the third grew like a tree.  His father, Sabinus, encouraged by these omens,
which were confirmed by the augurs, told his mother, "that her grandson would be emperor of
Rome;" at which she laughed heartily, wondering, she said, "that her son should be in his dotage
whilst she continued still in full possession of her faculties."

Afterwards in his aedileship, when Caius Caesar, being enraged at his not taking care to have
the streets kept clean, ordered the soldiers to fill the bosom of his gown with dirt, some
persons at that time construed it into a sign that the government, being trampled under foot
and deserted in some civil commotion, would fall under his protection, and as it were into
his lap.  Once, while he was at dinner, a strange dog, that wandered about the streets, brought
a man's hand [739], and laid it under the table.  And another time, while he was at supper,
a plough-ox throwing the yoke off his neck, broke into the room, and after he had frightened
away all the attendants, (447) on a sudden, as if he was tired, fell down at his feet, as he
lay still upon his couch, and hung down his neck.  A cypress-tree likewise, in a field belonging
to the family, was torn up by the roots, and laid flat upon the ground, when there was no violent
wind; but next day it rose again fresher and stronger than before.

He dreamt in Achaia that the good fortune of himself and his family would begin when Nero had
a tooth drawn; and it happened that the day after, a surgeon coming into the hall, showed him
a tooth which he had just extracted from Nero.  In Judaea, upon his consulting the oracle of
the divinity at Carmel [740], the answer was so encouraging as to assure him of success in
anything he projected, however great or important it might be.  And when Josephus [741], one
of the noble prisoners, was put in chains, he confidently affirmed that he should be released
in a very short time by the same Vespasian, but he would be emperor first [742]. Some omens
were likewise mentioned in the news from Rome, and among others, that Nero, towards the close
of his days, was commanded in a dream to carry Jupiter's sacred chariot out of the sanctuary
where it stood, to Vespasian's house, and conduct it thence into the circus.  Also not long
afterwards, as Galba was going to the election, in which he was created consul for the second
time, a statue of the Divine Julius [743] turned towards the east.  And in the field of Bedriacum
[744], before the battle began, two eagles engaged in the sight of the army; and one of them
being beaten, a third came from the east, and drove away the conqueror.

(448) VI.  He made, however, no attempt upon the sovereignty, though his friends were very
ready to support him, and even pressed him to the enterprise, until he was encouraged to it
by the fortuitous aid of persons unknown to him and at a distance.  Two thousand men, drawn
out of three legions in the Moesian army, had been sent to the assistance of Otho.  While they
were upon their march, news came that he had been defeated, and had put an end to his life;
notwithstanding which they continued their march as far as Aquileia, pretending that they gave
no credit to the report.  There, tempted by the opportunity which the disorder of the times
afforded them, they ravaged and plundered the country at discretion; until at length, fearing
to be called to an account on their return, and punished for it, they resolved upon choosing
and creating an emperor.  "For they were no ways inferior," they said, "to the army which made
Galba emperor, nor to the pretorian troops which had set up Otho, nor the army in Germany,
to whom Vitellius owed his elevation."  The names of all the consular lieutenants, therefore,
being taken into consideration, and one objecting to one, and another to another, for various
reasons; at last some of the third legion, which a little before Nero's death had been removed
out of Syria into Moesia, extolled Vespasian in high terms; and all the rest assenting, his
name was immediately inscribed on their standards.  The design was nevertheless quashed for
a time, the troops being brought to submit to Vitellius a little longer.

However, the fact becoming known, Tiberius Alexander, governor of Egypt, first obliged the
legions under his command to swear obedience to Vespasian as their emperor, on the calends
[the 1st] of July, which was observed ever after as the day of his accession to the empire;
and upon the fifth of the ides of the same month [the 28th July], the army in Judaea, where
he then was, also swore allegiance to him.  What contributed greatly to forward the affair,
was a copy of a letter, whether real or counterfeit, which was circulated, and said to have
been written by Otho before his decease to Vespasian, recommending to him in the most urgent
terms to avenge his death, and entreating him to come to the aid of the commonwealth; as well
as a report which was circulated, that Vitellius, after his success against Otho, proposed
to change the winter quarters of the legions, and remove those in Germany to a less (449) hazardous
station and a warmer climate.  Moreover, amongst the governors of provinces, Licinius Mucianus
dropping the grudge arising from a jealousy of which he had hitherto made no secret, promised
to join him with the Syrian army, and, among the allied kings, Volugesus, king of the Parthians,
offered him a reinforcement of forty thousand archers.

VII.  Having, therefore, entered on a civil war, and sent forward his generals and forces into
Italy, he himself, in the meantime, passed over to Alexandria, to obtain possession of the
key of Egypt [745].  Here having entered alone, without attendants, the temple of Serapis,
to take the auspices respecting the establishment of his power, and having done his utmost
to propitiate the deity, upon turning round, [his freedman] Basilides [746] appeared before
him, and seemed to offer him the sacred leaves, chaplets, and cakes, according to the usage
of the place, although no one had admitted him, and he had long laboured under a muscular debility,
which would hardly have allowed him to walk into the temple; besides which, it was certain
that at the very time he was far away.  Immediately after this, arrived letters with intelligence
that Vitellius's troops had been defeated at Cremona, and he himself slain at Rome.  Vespasian,
the new emperor, having been raised unexpectedly from a low estate, wanted something which
might clothe him with divine majesty and authority.  This, likewise, was now added.  A poor
man who was blind, and another who was lame, came both together before him, when he was seated
on the tribunal, imploring him to heal them [747], and saying that they were admonished (450)
in a dream by the god Serapis to seek his aid, who assured them that he would restore sight
to the one by anointing his eyes with his spittle, and give strength to the leg of the other,
if he vouchsafed but to touch it with his heel.  At first he could scarcely believe that the
thing would any how succeed, and therefore hesitated to venture on making the experiment. 
At length, however, by the advice of his friends, he made the attempt publicly, in the presence
of the assembled multitudes, and it was crowned with success in both cases [748].  About the
same time, at Tegea in Arcadia, by the direction (451) of some soothsayers, several vessels
of ancient workmanship were dug out of a consecrated place, on which there was an effigy resembling
Vespasian.

VIII.  Returning now to Rome, under these auspices, and with a great reputation, after enjoying
a triumph for victories over the Jews, he added eight consulships [749] to his former one.
He likewise assumed the censorship, and made it his principal concern, during the whole of
his government, first to restore order in the state, which had been almost ruined, and was
in a tottering condition, and then to improve it.  The soldiers, one part of them emboldened
by victory, and the other smarting with the disgrace of their defeat, had abandoned themselves
to every species of licentiousness and insolence.  Nay, the provinces, too, and free cities,
and some kingdoms in alliance with Rome, were all in a disturbed state.  He, therefore, disbanded
many of Vitellius's soldiers, and punished others; and so far was he from granting any extraordinary
favours to the sharers of his success, that it was late before he paid the gratuities due to
them by law.  That he might let slip no opportunity of reforming the discipline of the army,
upon a young man's coming much perfumed to return him thanks (452) for having appointed him
to command a squadron of horse, he turned away his head in disgust, and, giving him this sharp
reprimand, "I had rather you had smelt of garlic," revoked his commission.  When the men belonging
to the fleet, who travelled by turns from Ostia and Puteoli to Rome, petitioned for an addition
to their pay, under the name of shoe-money, thinking that it would answer little purpose to
send them away without a reply, he ordered them for the future to run barefooted; and so they
have done ever since.  He deprived of their liberties, Achaia, Lycia, Rhodes, Byzantium, and
Samos; and reduced them into the form of provinces; Thrace, also, and Cilicia, as well as Comagene,
which until that time had been under the government of kings. He stationed some legions in
Cappadocia on account of the frequent inroads of the barbarians, and, instead of a Roman knight,
appointed as governor of it a man of consular rank.  The ruins of houses which had been burnt
down long before, being a great desight to the city, he gave leave to any one who would, to
take possession of the void ground and build upon it, if the proprietors should hesitate to
perform the work themselves.  He resolved upon rebuilding the Capitol, and was the foremost
to put his hand to clearing the ground of the rubbish, and removed some of it upon his own
shoulder.  And he undertook, likewise, to restore the three thousand tables of brass which
had been destroyed in the fire which consumed the Capitol; searching in all quarters for copies
of those curious and ancient records, in which were contained the decrees of the senate, almost
from the building of the city, as well as the acts of the people, relative to alliances, treaties,
and privileges granted to any person.

IX.  He likewise erected several new public buildings, namely, the temple of Peace [750] near
the Forum, that of Claudius on the (453) Coelian mount, which had been begun by Agrippina,
but almost entirely demolished by Nero [751]; and an amphitheatre [752] in the middle of the
city, upon finding that Augustus had projected such a work. This is what they all
began to do to remain sound of mind. Some of them. agreeing with Bringas, hoped to exhibit their dislike
about the revolution. They did not like to stay in a house that was not their own. As I grew to
understand the wishes of the people of the city, I inherited the duty of guarding the colossus
and was fully expected to manage all of the things pertaining to the Crown. Whether this was
a form of luck or not made no difference. At the point that I moved into my office, I needed
to make time for hearing the people's worries about the city. Some of them knew details of
the former virtue of this office and what key parts of the administration needed to be preserved. Some
of the things involved in this instance were the working rangers, the clothing and the office furniture.
Some of the insight behind the idea of staying on stemmed from subtle issues. Those who lack revolutionary
merit enough to be tenants are the same as those who lacked enough merit to be of the monarchy.
Each of them brought letters of recommendation with different credentials, or properties explained.
Some of these papers also provided extensions for moving.

Garcia Grande left behind a widow who still has an intimidating collection
of cards and letters that I had given him to read. He could do what
he wanted, reading them in whatever time frame suited his fancy. I
wanted to leave as nothing could change things. It was then that his
wife asked me to let them stay a month at the Palace so they could
search for a house. He liked this idea very much.  He, therefore, obtained a decree of the senate, that a woman who formed an union with
the slave of another person, should be considered (454) a bondwoman herself; and that usurers
should not be allowed to take proceedings at law for the recovery of money lent to young men
whilst they lived in their father's family, not even after their fathers were dead.

XII.  In other affairs, from the beginning to the end of his government, he conducted himself
with great moderation and clemency.  He was so far from dissembling the obscurity of his extraction,
that he frequently made mention of it himself.  When some affected to trace his pedigree to
the founders of Reate, and a companion of Hercules [753], whose monument is still to be seen
on the Salarian road, he laughed at them for it.  And he was so little fond of external and
adventitious ornaments, that, on the day of his triumph [754], being quite tired of the length
and tediousness of the procession, he could not forbear saying, "he was rightly served, for
having in his old age been so silly as to desire a triumph; as if it was either due to his
ancestors, or had ever been expected by himself." Nor would he for a long time accept of the
tribunitian authority, or the title of Father of his Country.  And in regard to the custom
of searching those who came to salute him, he dropped it even in the time of the civil war.

XIII.  He bore with great mildness the freedom used by his friends, the satirical allusions
of advocates, and the petulance of philosophers. Licinius Mucianus, who had been guilty of
notorious acts of lewdness, but, presuming upon his great services, treated him very rudely,
he reproved only in private; and when complaining of his conduct to a common friend of theirs,
he concluded with these words, "However, I am a man." Salvius Liberalis, in pleading the cause
of a rich man under prosecution, presuming to say, "What is it to Caesar, if Hipparchus possesses
a hundred millions of sesterces?" he commended him for it.  Demetrius, the Cynic philosopher
[755], (455) who had been sentenced to banishment, meeting him on the road, and refusing to
rise up or salute him, nay, snarling at him in scurrilous language, he only called him a cur.

XIV.  He was little disposed to keep up the memory of affronts or quarrels, nor did he harbour
any resentment on account of them.  He made a very splendid marriage for the daughter of his
enemy Vitellius, and gave her, besides, a suitable fortune and equipage.  Being in a great
consternation after he was forbidden the court in the time of Nero, and asking those about
him, what he should do? or, whither he should go? one of those whose office it was to introduce
people to the emperor, thrusting him out, bid him go to Morbonia [756].  But when this same
person came afterwards to beg his pardon, he only vented his resentment in nearly the same
words.  He was so far from being influenced by suspicion or fear to seek the destruction of
any one, that, when his friends advised him to beware of Metius Pomposianus, because it was
commonly believed, on his nativity being cast, that he was destined by fate to the empire,
he made him consul, promising for him, that he would not forget the benefit conferred.

XV.  It will scarcely be found, that so much as one innocent person suffered in his reign,
unless in his absence, and without his knowledge, or, at least, contrary to his inclination,
and when he was imposed upon. Although Helvidius Priscus [757] was the only man who presumed
to salute him on his return from Syria by his private name of Vespasian, and, when he came
to be praetor, omitted any mark of honour to him, or even any mention of him in his edicts,
yet he was not angry, until Helvidius proceeded to inveigh against him with the most scurrilous
language. (456) Though he did indeed banish him, and afterwards ordered him to be put to death,
yet he would gladly have saved him notwithstanding, and accordingly dispatched messengers to
fetch back the executioners; and he would have saved him, had he not been deceived by a false
account brought, that he had already perished.  He never rejoiced at the death of any man;
nay he would shed tears, and sigh, at the just punishment of the guilty.

XVI.  The only thing deservedly blameable in his character was his love of money.  For not
satisfied with reviving the imposts which had been repealed in the time of Galba, he imposed
new and onerous taxes, augmented the tribute of the provinces, and doubled that of some of
them. He likewise openly engaged in a traffic, which is discreditable [758] even to a private
individual, buying great quantities of goods, for the purpose of retailing them again to advantage.
Nay, he made no scruple of selling the great offices of the state to candidates, and pardons
to persons under prosecution, whether they were innocent or guilty.  It is believed, that he
advanced all the most rapacious amongst the procurators to higher offices, with the view of
squeezing them after they had acquired great wealth.  He was commonly said, "to have used them
as sponges," because it was his practice, as we may say, to wet them when dry, and squeeze
them when wet.  It is said that he was naturally extremely covetous, and was upbraided with
it by an old herdsman of his, who, upon the emperor's refusing to enfranchise him gratis, which
on his advancement he humbly petitioned for, cried out, "That the fox changed his hair, but
not his nature."  On the other hand, some are of opinion, that he was urged to his rapacious
proceedings by necessity, and the extreme poverty of the treasury and exchequer, of which he
took public notice in the beginning of his reign; declaring that "no less than four hundred
thousand millions of sesterces were wanting to carry on the government."  This is the more
likely to be true, because he applied to the best purposes what he procured by bad means.

XVII.  His liberality, however, to all ranks of people, was excessive. He made up to several
senators the estate required (457) by law to qualify them for that dignity; relieving likewise
such men of consular rank as were poor, with a yearly allowance of five hundred thousand sesterces
[759]; and rebuilt, in a better manner than before, several cities in different parts of the
empire, which had been damaged by earthquakes or fires.

XVIII.  He was a great encourager of learning and the liberal arts.  He first granted to the
Latin and Greek professors of rhetoric the yearly stipend of a hundred thousand sesterces [760]
each out of the exchequer. He also bought the freedom of superior poets and artists [761],
and gave a noble gratuity to the restorer of the Coan of Venus [762], and to another artist
who repaired the Colossus [763].  Some one offering to convey some immense columns into the
Capitol at a small expense by a mechanical contrivance, he rewarded him very handsomely for
his invention, but would not accept his service, saying, "Suffer me to find maintenance for
the poor people." [764]

XIX.  In the games celebrated when the stage-scenery of (458) the theatre of Marcellus [765]
was repaired, he restored the old musical entertainments.  He gave Apollinaris, the tragedian,
four hundred thousand sesterces, and to Terpinus and Diodorus, the harpers, two hundred thousand;
to some a hundred thousand; and the least he gave to any of the performers was forty thousand,
besides many golden crowns.  He entertained company constantly at his table, and often in great
state and very sumptuously, in order to promote trade.  As in the Saturnalia he made presents
to the men which they were to carry away with them, so did he to the women upon the calends
of March [766]; notwithstanding which, he could not wipe off the disrepute of his former stinginess.
The Alexandrians called him constantly Cybiosactes; a name which had been given to one of their
kings who was sordidly avaricious.  Nay, at his funeral, Favo, the principal mimic, personating
him, and imitating, as actors do, both his manner of speaking and his gestures, asked aloud
of the procurators, "how much his funeral and the procession would cost?" And being answered
"ten millions of sesterces," he cried out, "give him but a hundred thousand sesterces, and
they might throw his body into the Tiber, if they would."

XX.  He was broad-set, strong-limbed, and his features gave the idea of a man in the act of
straining himself.  In consequence, one of the city wits, upon the emperor's desiring him "to
say something droll respecting himself," facetiously answered, "I will, when you have done
relieving your bowels." [767]  He enjoyed a good state of health, though he used no other means
to preserve it, than repeated friction, as much (459) as he could bear, on his neck and other
parts of his body, in the tennis-court attached to the baths, besides fasting one day in every
month.

XXI.  His method of life was commonly this.  After he became emperor, he used to rise very
early, often before daybreak.  Having read over his letters, and the briefs of all the departments
of the government offices; he admitted his friends; and while they were paying him their compliments,
he would put on his own shoes, and dress himself with his own hands.  Then, after the dispatch
of such business as was brought before him, he rode out, and afterwards retired to repose,
lying on his couch with one of his mistresses, of whom he kept several after the death of Caenis
[768].  Coming out of his private apartments, he passed to the bath, and then entered the supper-room.
They say that he was never more good-humoured and indulgent than at that time: and therefore
his attendants always seized that opportunity, when they had any favour to ask.

XXII.  At supper, and, indeed, at other times, he was extremely free and jocose.  For he had
humour, but of a low kind, and he would sometimes use indecent language, such as is addressed
to young girls about to be married.  Yet there are some things related of him not void of ingenious
pleasantry; amongst which are the following.  Being once reminded by Mestrius Florus, that
plaustra was a more proper expression than plostra, he the next day saluted him by the name
of Flaurus [769].  A certain lady pretending to be desperately enamoured of him, he was prevailed
upon to admit her to his bed; and after he had gratified her desires, he gave her [770] four
hundred (460) thousand sesterces.  When his steward desired to know how he would have the sum
entered in his accounts, he replied, "For Vespasian's being seduced."

XXIII.  He used Greek verses very wittily; speaking of a tall man, who had enormous parts:

    Makxi bibas, kradon dolichoskion enchos;
    Still shaking, as he strode, his vast long spear.

And of Cerylus, a freedman, who being very rich, had begun to pass himself off as free-born,
to elude the exchequer at his decease, and assumed the name of Laches, he said:

               ----O Lachaes, Lachaes,
    Epan apothanaes, authis ex archaes esae Kaerylos.

    Ah, Laches, Laches! when thou art no more,
    Thou'lt Cerylus be called, just as before.

He chiefly affected wit upon his own shameful means of raising money, in order to wipe off
the odium by some joke, and turn it into ridicule.  One of his ministers, who was much in his
favour, requesting of him a stewardship for some person, under pretence of his being his brother,
he deferred granting him his petition, and in the meantime sent for the candidate, and having
squeezed out of him as much money as he had agreed to give to his friend at court, he appointed
him immediately to the office.  The minister soon after renewing his application, "You must,"
said he, "find another brother; for the one you adopted is in truth mine."

Suspecting once, during a journey, that his mule-driver had alighted to shoe his mules, only
in order to have an opportunity for allowing a person they met, who was engaged in a law-suit,
to speak to him, he asked him, "how much he got for shoeing his mules?" and insisted on having
a share of the profit.  When his son Titus blamed him for even laying a tax upon urine, he
applied to his nose a piece of the money he received in the first instalment, and asked him,
"if it stunk?"  And he replying no, "And yet," said he, "it is derived from urine."

Some deputies having come to acquaint him that a large statue, which would cost a vast sum,
was ordered to be erected for him at the public expense, he told them to pay it down immediately,
(461) holding out the hollow of his hand, and saying, "there was a base ready for the statue."
Not even when he was under the immediate apprehension and peril of death, could he forbear
jesting.  For when, among other prodigies, the mausoleum of the Caesars suddenly flew open,
and a blazing star appeared in the heavens; one of the prodigies, he said, concerned Julia
Calvina, who was of the family of Augustus [771]; and the other, the king of the Parthians,
who wore his hair long.  And when his distemper first seized him, "I suppose," said he, "I
shall soon be a god." [772]

