[3] By "natural law" in the useful arts is meant that uniformity of action which is manifested
whenever any particular substance in any particular condition is brought into such relation
with any particular manifestation of energy that the force exerted modifies or prevents modification
of the form, nature, condition, or locus of the substance or modifies the manifestation of
energy or both.

[4] A "property" may be described as any quality common and essential to the whole of a class
but not necessary to mark out that class from other classes. Thus, all wheel tires may be said
to possess annularity; but washers and finger rings are also annular. A "peculiar property"
is one that not only always belongs to a class of objects but belongs to that class alone;
thus a circle has the peculiar property of containing the greatest space within a line of given
length, and catalytic substances have the power of setting up chemical reaction without themselves
being changed.

[5] An "accident" is any quality that may indifferently belong or not belong to a class without
affecting the other qualities of the class. That a man's name is James is an accident telling
nothing of the man's physique or character.

[6] "Effect" or "result" is the consequence of a process of the useful arts practiced with
or without instruments. The effect of an instrument is the effect of its operation. Effects
may be direct or indirect, proximate or remote, necessary or accidental.

"Product" is an effect consequent upon a process that changes the form, state, or ingredients
of matter perceptibly and permanently, as distinguished from effects that are fleeting or involve
no change in perceptible form, state, or ingredients of matter.

"Function" is the "action of means upon an object while producing the effect." (Robinson.)
Functions may be direct or indirect, proximate or remote, necessary or accidental. The direct,
proximate, or necessary function of the hammer in normal operation is impacting. Indirect,
remote, or accidental functions of a hammer may be comminuting, forging, driving, etc.

[7] Classification of the Sciences.

[8] Logical division is the process by which the species of which a genus is composed are distinguished
and set apart. Physical division or partition is the process by which the parts of any object
are distinguished and set apart. Metaphysical division is the process by which the qualities
of a thing are segregated and set apart in thought.

[9] Any class of objects may be called a "genus" if it be regarded as made up of two or more
different kinds of objects or of two or more species. "Motors" is a genus when the class "Motors"
is considered as divided into electric motors and nonelectric motors, or electric motors, spring
motors, weight motors, current motors fluid pressure motors, etc. A genus is more extensive
than any of its species but less intensive.

A "species" is any class that is regarded as forming a part of the next larger class, "electric
motors" being a species of "motors" and "motors" being a species of "energy transformers."
A species is more intensive than the genus to which it belongs but less extensive.

Every species may be a genus to another species until no further subdivisions can be made.
This last indivisible species is termed the infima species. Every genus may be a species to
another genus until a point is reached where no further generalization may be made or the summum
genus is attained. In the Patent Office classification of the useful arts, the summum genus
is useful arts. The summum genus of the plastic arts would be plastics. The infima species
in the useful arts evidently never can be attained.

"Proximate species" and "proximate genus" indicate, respectively, those species that are divided
from a genus without intermediate genera, and those genera from which the species are directly
divided. Motors, and not energy transformers, is the proximate genus to the species, fluid
motors, electric motors, etc., while fluid motors, electric motors, etc., and not steam engines,
alternating current motors, etc., are proximate species to motors.

[10] In the Manual of Classification of the U. S. Patent Office the arrangement of subclasses
has always been alphabetical, although in the Supplement containing definitions of revised
classes the arrangement is numerical. If the latter schedule of "Balls" in the text had been
printed in alphabetical order, it is apparent that the species "Aluminum" and "Zinc" of the
genus Metal would be as widely separated as possible. In the former schedule of "Balls," in
which the genus Metal is printed, "Aluminum" and "Zinc" come together. It is apparent that
in an alphabetical arrangement allied species can not be kept together without printing every
proximate genus. This fact, among others, indicates the advisability of abandoning the alphabetical
arrangement in the classification manual and adopting the idea arrangement in the schedules
of revised classes, supplemented by a consolidated alphabetical index of all subclasses.

[11] A species contains all the qualities of the genus and more. These additional qualities
form the "difference." The electric motor has the qualities that are common to motors and is
differentiated by reason of the fact that electric energy is thereby converted to mechanical
motion.

[12] Classification of a patent is said to be "original" in the class and subclass which receives
the most intensive claimed disclosure, and in which the patent is indexed in the official classification
indexes. "Original classification" is referred to as opposed to "classification by cross-reference."

A "cross-reference" is a copy of a patent placed in a subclass other than that in which the
classification is made original, in order to make available for search inventions disclosed
therein and additional to that by which the patent has been diagnosed and classified.

A "digest cross-reference" is a cross-reference formed from abstracts or extracts from a patent
consisting of illustration and text cut from a photolithograph of a patent and mounted.

A "search-card" is a sheet of the size of a photolithograph of a patent placed with the photolithographs
of patents forming a subclass in the examining division and public search room, and containing
suggestions for further search, and on the copy for the search room, a definition of the subclass.

"Search notes" are addenda to class and subclass definitions comparing other classes and subclasses
with the one defined and giving directions for search when necessary to prosecute search beyond
the defined class or subclass.

(C) RULES OF CLASSIFICATION.

BASIS OF CLASSIFICATION.

(1) The basis of subdivision and assemblage of the means of the "useful arts" in the Patent
Office classification is "art" within the meaning of "art" in section 4886, Revised Statutes.
The direct, proximate or necessary art, operation or effect, rather than some accidental and
remote use or application, should be selected. In all cases qualities or characteristics that
persist through all accidental uses and that can be identified as permanent are to be preferred.

(2) The operative, instrumental, or manipulative arts, including machines, tools, and manufacturing
processes, should be classified according to whether a single operation of one kind applicable
to various materials to be used for various purposes is carried out by the claimed means, or
whether plural operations are performed, which, combined, produce a special effect or special
product.

   Example: An instrument performing a plurality of operations
   peculiar to shoe-manufacture would be classified on the
   basis of shoemaking, because that instrument would be
   incapable of other use, while an instrument peculiarly
   adapted to drive nails would be classified on the basis of
   nailing, whether for nailing shoe-heels or other objects,
   and a hammer would be classified on the basis of its
   function as an impact tool even though described as for
   driving nails, and even into shoe-heels.

(3) Structures (passive instruments) will, in general, be classified on the basis of structure,
either of special or general application, the essential functions and effects of static structures
being resistive or the maintaining of forces in equilibrium.

   Example: A structure recognized as peculiar to barriers of
   the kind known as fences would be classified in the special
   class of Fences, but posts, joints, beams, etc., recognized
   as having use in general building, even though described as
   used in fences, would be classified in a more general
   building class, such as Wooden Buildings or Metallic
   Building Structures.

(4) Compositions of matter and manufactured or formed stock or materials will be classified
in accordance with the inherent character of the substance or material where possible, otherwise
according to special use.

   Example: A pure chemical is expected to be classified on
   the basis of its chemical structure and constituents, even
   though useful as a food, medicine, dyestuff, explosive,
   etc., and alloys on the basis of metallic composition, even
   though used for bearings, coins, tools, etc.; whereas a
   physical composition having no reason for existence except
   to function as a cleansing composition or a paint might
   have to be classified on the basis of its function as a
   detergent or a coating composition, respectively. Also a
   bimetallic layered foil, plate, or wire would be expected
   to be classified as metal stock even though designed for
   use for dental filler, plowshare, or electric conductor,
   and a woven textile fabric as a fabric even though
   described as used for a filter or apron for a paper-making
   machine.

DIVISION AND ARRANGEMENT.

(5) The divisions or subclasses of a class should be made exhaustive, i. e., they should be
susceptible of receiving any future invention that may fall within the scope of the class.
The rule as usually phrased is: "The constituent species must be equal, when added together,
to the genus." Exhaustive division may be secured by maintaining always a residual or miscellaneous
subclass. The miscellaneous subclass represents the remainder of the original undivided material
undefined except as the class is defined and may be accurately treated as if it had the class
title.

(6) A second rule respecting the subdivision of a class is: "The constituent species must exclude
each other." That is, the divisions or subclasses must not overlap. (See exception in Rule 8.)

   Example: If a number of balls of several different
   materials, several different conformations, or
   constructions, several different colors, were to be divided
   into glass balls, hollow balls, and red balls, this rule
   would be violated, because some balls would be glass,
   hollow, and red.

(7) A third rule respecting subdivision is: "The divisions must be founded on one principle
or basis." The application of this rule will generally form divisions that do not overlap.
(See exception in Rule 8.)

   Example: If a number of balls of several different
   constructions, several different materials, and several
   different colors were to be classified so as to provide a
   place for each kind of characteristic, they should be
   divided first, for example, according to construction into
   hollow balls and solid balls, each of these according to
   materials into glass balls, rubber balls, metal balls,
   wooden balls, etc., and each of the latter into red balls,
   blue balls, green balls, etc.

(8) When it is found that division into overlapping subclasses and on different characteristics
is a lesser evil than an unwieldy number of subclasses that would otherwise result, then those
subclasses based on characteristics deemed more important for purposes of search should precede
in the list of subclasses those based upon characteristics deemed less important. (See Rule 6.)

(9) In arrangement of subclasses or subdivisions the miscellaneous groups containing material
not falling within any of the specifically entitled subclasses, should stand first; those subclasses
defined by effect or special use should precede those defined by function or general use; those
containing matter that is related to the matter of other subclasses as whole to part should
precede those subclasses that contain the part; and those defined by a characteristic deemed
more important or significant for search purposes should precede those defined by characteristics
deemed less important.

Whenever superior rank has been assigned to any selected characteristic by placing divisions
based upon it in advance of divisions based upon other characteristics, this superiority should
be maintained throughout.

   Example: A partial schedule of Class 80 follows to
   illustrate the arrangement of subclasses:

    Class 80.--METAL ROLLING.

     1. Miscellaneous.        | 24. Die rolling--
     2. Heating and rolling.  | 25.   Oscillating rolls.
     3. Cutting and rolling.  | ..    ...
     4. Drawing and rolling.  |     Mills--
     5. Annular bodies.       | 32.   Coiling.
     6. Screw threads--       | 33.   Work reversing.
     7.   Concave and roll.   | 34.   Three or more coacting rolls.
     8.   Platen rolling--    | 35.   Continuous--
     9.     Dies.             | 36.     Inclined trains.
    10.   Rods and wires.     | ..      ...
    11. Tubes--               | 41. Roll cooling and heating.
    12.   Idle rolls.         | 42. Cooling beds.
    13.   Axial rolling.      | 43. Feeding--
    14.   Segmental rolls.    | 44.   Tables.
    15.   Skelping.           | ..    ...
    16. Wheels and disks.     | 55. Housings.
    17. Reworking.            | 56. Roll adjustments--
    18. Concave and roll.     | 57.   Relief devices.
    19. Platen and roll.      | 58. Rolls--
    20. Platen rolling--      | ..  ...
    21.   Disk platens.       | 60. Processes--
    22. Axial rolling--       | ..    ...
    23.   Pattern rolls.      | 66.   Flanged bars.

   In this schedule the miscellaneous subclass is numbered 1,
   then follow three subclasses (2-4) of rolling plus another
   function, then four major subclasses (5-16) of rolling,
   merely, but applied to blanks of special form producing
   special products, then one special subclass (17) based upon
   a special class of material treated, then five subclasses
   (18-31) specialized in type and mode of operation, then
   general types of rolling mills (32-40), then various parts
   and accessories (41-59), then processes (60-66). This is
   the usual arrangement and is an exhaustive division for the
   art of metal rolling. Had there been miscellaneous
   subclasses for all combined operations of rolling plus some
   other function, a miscellaneous subclass for all mere
   rolling machines, either special or general, and a
   miscellaneous subclass for all parts and accessories, the
   requirements of exhaustive division would have been also
   satisfied.

   In the illustrative schedule, there being no miscellaneous
   subclass for means having combined functions of rolling and
   another, any patent having claims for the combination of a
   means for rolling and a means for cooling would fall in
   subclass 1, Miscellaneous. In that subclass would also fall
   all "Mills," such as for rolling spiral conveyer-flights,
   the same not falling under any of the subclasses 32-40, no
   miscellaneous subclass of "Mills" and no special
   article-rolling subclass having been provided; also all
   parts or accessories, such as a water-cooled screen,
   peculiarly adapted to rolling-mills, there being no
   existing subclass of screens therein and no miscellaneous
   subclass of parts. The arrangement of subclasses in Class
   80 requires that the combination of a furnace and a
   rolling-mill shall be placed in subclass 2, even if the
   combination be designed and adapted for rolling annular
   bodies (subclass 5) or tubes (subclass 11). Means special
   to rolling a tube between a concave and roll must be placed
   in subclass 13 rather than in subclass 18. A work-reversing
   mill must be placed in subclass 33 rather than in subclass
   34 even though it have three or more coacting rolls.

   The rolling of "Screw-threads" having been given higher
   rank than a "Concave and roll" mechanism, any concave and
   roll mechanism limited for use in rolling screw-threads
   should be formed into a subclass indented under
   "Screw-threads" and not into a subclass "Screw-threads"
   indented under "Concave and roll."

(10) Class schedules are arranged with certain subclasses appropriately indented according
to a commonly understood expedient. In a properly indented schedule subclasses in column at
the extreme left are the main species (the proximate species) of the class. The titles and
definitions of all subclasses proximate to the class (at extreme left) must be read with the
title and definition of the class, as if indented under the class title one space to the right;
so also with the titles and definitions of subclasses indented under other subclasses. If a
title has no number (as in Class 80, "Mills"), it represents merely a subject-matter to be
divided, assumed to have no representatives other than those in the species indented under
it. If a title having indented species under it has a number, it not only represents a subject
to be divided but also a subclass including all other species not falling within the indented
titles. Indention does not indicate superiority or inferiority, but merely that the title and
the definition of the indented subclass must be read with the title and definition of the subclass
under which it is indented. A title selected in a scheme of subdivision to be of first importance
and placed, therefore, in advance, should not thereafter be indented under a title selected
to be of secondary importance and, therefore, having a lower position. (See Rule 8.)

(11) A group of material may be divided on several different bases. "Use" or "purpose" or "object
treated" may be adopted only when the "use" or "purpose" or "object treated" stamps upon the
invention such peculiarities of operation or construction as to limit the applicability of
the invention to the use or purpose named. (See Basis of Classification, Rule 1.) A group based
upon mode of operation also may be divided into subclasses (1) with a "functional" title, usually
participial in form, and adapted therefore to receive machines, processes, and tools; (2) with
special use, purpose, or object-treated title containing the name of the use, purpose, or object;
(3) with "type" title, usually a name or a name with a qualifying adjective; (4) with a title
of a part or subcombination, also a name.

   Example: In Class 90, Gear-Cutting, Milling, and Planing,
   are to be found subclasses entitled "Gear-cutting," certain
   machines being peculiar to that use; also other subclasses
   with the general functional title "Planing," subordinate to
   which are the special use subclass "Planing, Soft metal,"
   and the type subclass "Planers" divided into two coordinate
   subclasses, "Reciprocating bed" and "Reciprocating cutter,"
   and several subordinate "part" subclasses, including
   "Tool-feeds" and "Tool-heads." The adjective form of the
   title "Planers, Reciprocating bed," indicates a type
   subclass. If the title had been Planers, Reciprocating
   beds, the indication would be that the subclass was a part
   subclass to receive planer beds only. In the class referred
   to for illustration, "Tool-feeds" and "Tool-heads" indicate
   subclasses for parts and not for types of planers having
   tool feeds.

(12) In arranging the divisions of a class, such arrangement should be sought as will minimize
the need of cross-references. Search for any particular matter can not always be limited to
one group without such extensive cross-referencing as would in some cases defeat the purpose
of classification. Forming the subdivisions of a class according to the total similarities
of the inventions, rather than according to some selected more or less important characteristic,
and arranging them in the correct order of superiority and inferiority, with care to maintain
throughout the schedule the relative positional values of the several selected bases of division,
will ordinarily in a closely bonded class limit the search for any single invention to the
subclass particularly suited to receive it and some subclasses preceding that one, excluding
from the necessity of search the subclasses succeeding.

   Example: In Class 80, Metal-Rolling, it would not be
   expected to find any tube-rolling mill lower in the
   schedule than the tube-rolling subclasses, but a tube-mill
   might be found higher up in "Heating and rolling," "Drawing
   and rolling," etc. No concave and roll combination should
   be found succeeding the subclass of "Concave and roll," but
   it may be found under subclasses above, such as "Tubes,
   Screw-threads," etc. No rolls should be found lower than
   the subclass of "Rolls," but they may be found in many
   subclasses above.

DEFINITION.

(13) Having some knowledge of the nature of the materials about to be classified, a tentative
definition of a class to be formed may be framed, which may be either written down or merely
carried in mind, to serve as a tentative guide. This tentative definition must be considered
as subject to change to any extent by the fuller knowledge obtained by careful consideration
of the material. After a full knowledge of the materials to be classified has been acquired,
it will be necessary to frame a careful definition of the class, and also of each subclass
whose title does not unequivocally indicate what is contained in it.

(14) A definition of any class should state the "qualities and circumstances possessed by all
the objects that are intended to be included in the class and not possessed completely by any
other objects." A proper definition should not ordinarily contain the name of the thing defined.
"Definitions in a circle" are, of course, worthless. A definition should be exactly equivalent
to the species defined and should not be expressed in obscure or ambiguous language, but should
employ terms already defined or perfectly understood. It should not be in negative form where
it can be affirmative. If the class of objects has a peculiar property, the naming of that
may serve as a definition. If no peculiar property can be detected, the definition should name
more than one quality or property. Several different classes may have one or more properties
alike, but as the number is increased the likelihood of there being others having the same
properties is decreased. The briefest possible statement of such properties or qualities as
are possessed by all the objects of a class and not completely possessed by any other objects,
which will suffice to distinguish the class from other classes and determine its position in
the general classification, will be most satisfactory. To define any species, the genus having
been defined, the genus should be named and the difference added. Of course, no generic definition
should contain any limitation not characteristic of every species of the defined genus. In
seeking qualities by which to describe a genus or species, no accident should be selected.

   Example: Suppose there be marked out and defined as a genus
   all means whereby one form of energy is transformed into
   another form of energy and no more, and the genus be named
   energy-transformers. We may then name, as species,
   energy-transformers that are motors and energy-transformers
   that are not motors. Motors may be defined by merely naming
   the genus energy-transformers, and stating the difference,
   to wit, continuously transforming energy into cyclical
   mechanical motion. Then the definition will be:
   Energy-transformers that are adapted to continuously
   transform energy into cyclical mechanical motion. The
   non-motor division will retain the genus definition.

   It would not be illuminating for a searcher having little
   familiarity with the textile arts to look under the title
   "Carding" and find that carding is defined as a means for
   carding fiber.

   Even though the first steam-engine invented had been used
   to run a gristmill, the accident of its use as a part of a
   gristmill would hardly warrant the definition of a
   steam-engine as a means to grind corn. Nor would a hammer
   be properly defined as an instrument to drive nails or to
   crack nuts or to forge horseshoes, even though a patent
   should not mention any use other than one of these and
   should lay heavy emphasis on the special value of the
   hammer as a nut cracker, nail driver, etc.

(15) In those cases where the title is so obvious that definition is superfluous, explanatory
notes may be substituted and will usually be found helpful.

CROSS-REFERENCES AND SEARCH-NOTES.

(16) Inasmuch as nearly every patent discloses unclaimed matter that is classifiable separately
from the claimed matter, it is clearly impossible to cross-reference every disclosure of every
means in every patent. Many things must be taken as conventional, obvious, or well known, and
the good judgment of the classifier is bound to be exercised in cross-referencing matter disclosed
but not claimed to be the invention of the patentee.

(17) A mere part or element should rarely be cross-referenced from an element class to a superior
combination class. An element forming part of a combination in a superior class should, if
claimed, be cross-referenced to the element class and also if not claimed if it seems to be
not merely a conventional form, and patents having claims for more than one differently classifiable
invention should always be cross-referenced unless such an arrangement of subclasses with search-notes
is substituted as will guide the searcher to all places where the material may be found. Claimed
matter additional to that which controls the classification, if belonging in the same class,
should be cross-referenced into a succeeding subclass. Cross-references of unclaimed disclosure
may be in either direction.

(18) To supplement or take the place of cross-referencing, more or less elaborate search-notes
are needed, giving directions and suggestions for further search, setting out the relationship
between classes and subclasses, and drawing distinctions by example. Search-notes should indicate
other classes or subclasses in which the subject-matter of the group to which the search-notes
are appended is likely to form a part of a more intensive combination, also analogous matter
that might serve as a reference for a broad claim. They need not, in general, indicate where
parts or elements of the subject-matter which are common also to other classes can be found,
because the index of classes contains the necessary information. For example, it is not necessary
in every machine-class to indicate by search-notes where machine-elements and static parts
may be found, nor in a class of wooden boxes to point out where the nails, screws, hinges,
or locks that may form a part of the box are classified.

DIAGNOSIS TO DETERMINE CLASSIFICATION.

(19) Inasmuch as nearly every patent contains disclosure that is claimed and also disclosure
that is not claimed, it has been deemed advisable to establish the general rule that where
the claimed and unclaimed disclosures are classified in different classes or subclasses the
invention both disclosed and claimed shall determine the placing of a patent (or a pending
application) rather than any selected invention that may be disclosed but not claimed. "Not
claimed" covers means that may form an element only of a claim as well as means not referred
to in any claim. (See exceptions in Rules 21 to 22 inclusive.)

   Example: A patent discloses and claims a dash-pot but
   illustrates it in such relation to a metal-planing machine
   as to utilize it for checking the movement of the bed at
   one end of its path, or in connection with an electric
   generator to aid in effecting the brush adjustment; the
   patent should be classified in the subclass of Dash-pots.
   If the classifier finds the disclosed organization of
   dash-pots and planer or dash-pot and generator more than a
   conventional illustration of an obvious use, he should note
   a cross-reference to Planers or Electricity, Generation. A
   patent discloses an internal-combustion engine associated
   with a specific form of carbureter; the claims relate to
   the engine parts only; the class of Internal-Combustion
   Engines should receive the patent, and a cross-reference
   should be placed in Carbureters. A patent discloses and
   specifically claims the combination of a rail-joint
   comprising abutting rails, fishplates, and specific bolts;
   the patent goes to an appropriate class of rail-joints, and
   if the bolt is more than a mere obvious conventional bolt,
   a cross-reference should be noted for the appropriate
   subclass of Bolts.

(20) The totality of the claimed invention should be selected when possible to determine the
appropriate class in which to place a patent. The entire expression of the invention will usually
be set forth in the most relatively intensive claim.[1] In a properly drawn patent there is
at least one claim that will serve as a mark to indicate the classification of that patent.

(21) Where a patent discloses but does not claim a combination of proper scope to be classified
in a combination subclass and claims merely a detail classified in a subclass lower in the
schedule, both in the same class, if the subclasses are so related that the combination always
involves the detail so that a search for the detail must necessarily be made in the combination
subclass, the patent may be placed in the combination subclass. This avoids the need of a cross
reference into the combination subclass, and a lack of a copy in the detail subclass is immaterial,
as it is seen in the completion of the search through the combination subclass. (See Rule 19.)

   Example: A patent for a saw-making machine discloses
   dressing, jointing, and gaging mechanisms; it claims
   dressing and jointing only. There is a subclass for
   dressing, jointing, and gaging, and a subclass for dressing
   and jointing. In this case the patent may be placed in the
   first-mentioned subclass, as that must be searched always
   when the second-mentioned one is searched, cross
   referencing in this situation being of little value.

