The quarrel grew more hot between the Jesuits and Port Royal, and was telling against the former,
when the Pere Tellier brought all his influence to bear, to change the current of success.
He was, as I have said, an ardent man, whose divinity was his Molinism, and the company to
which he belonged.  Confessor to the King, he saw himself in a good position to exercise unlimited
authority.  He saw that the King was very ignorant, and prejudiced upon all religious matters;
that he was surrounded by people as ignorant and as prejudiced as himself, Madame de Maintenon,
M. de Beauvilliers, M. de Chevreuse, and others, and he determined to take good advantage of
this state of things.

Step by step he gained over the King to his views, and convinced him that the destruction of
the monastery of Port Royal des Champs was a duty which he owed to his conscience, and the
cause of religion.  This point gained, the means to destroy the establishment were soon resolved
on.

There was another monastery called Port Royal, at Paws, in addition to the one in question.
It was now pretended that the latter had only been allowed to exist by tolerance, and that
it was necessary one should cease to exist.  Of the two, it was alleged that it was better
to preserve the one, at Paris.  A decree in council was, therefore, rendered, in virtue of
which, on the night from the 28th to the 29th of October, the abbey of Port Royal des Champs
was secretly invested by troops, and, on the next morning, the officer in command made all
the inmates assemble, showed them a 'lettre de cachet', and, without giving them more than
a quarter of an hour's warning, carried off everybody and everything.  He had brought with
him many coaches, with an elderly woman in each; he put the nuns in these coaches, and sent
them away to their destinations, which were different monasteries, at ten, twenty, thirty,
forty, and even fifty leagues distant, each coach accompanied by mounted archers, just as public
women are carried away from a house of ill-fame!  I pass in silence all the accompaniments
of this scene, so touching and so strangely new.  There have been entire volumes written upon it.

The treatment that these nuns received in their various prisons, in order to force them to
sign a condemnation of themselves, is the matter of other volumes, which, in spite of the vigilance
of the oppressors, were soon in everybody's hands; public indignation so burst out, that the
Court and the Jesuits even were embarrassed with it.  But the Pere Tellier was not a man to
stop half-way anywhere.  He finished this matter directly; decree followed decree, 'Lettres
de cachet' followed 'lettres de cachet'.  The families who had relatives buried in the cemetery
of Port Royal des Champs were ordered to exhume and carry them elsewhere. All the others were
thrown into the cemetery of an adjoining parish, with the indecency that may: be imagined.
Afterwards, the house, the church, and all the buildings were razed to the ground, so that
not one stone was left upon another.  All the materials were sold, the ground was ploughed
up, and sown--not with salt, it is true, but that was all the favour it received!  The scandal
at this reached even to Rome.  I have restricted myself to this simple and short recital of
an expedition so military and so odious.