THE GHOST-SHIP

by Richard Middleton

            Thanks are due to the Editors of The Century,
        English Review, Vanity Fair, and The Academy, for
     permission to reproduce most of the stories in this volume.

Preface

The other day I said to a friend, "I have just been reading in proof a volume of short stories
by an author named Richard Middleton. He is dead. It is an extraordinary book, and all the
work in it is full of a quite curious and distinctive quality. In my opinion it is very fine
work indeed."

It would be so simple if the business of the introducer or preface-writer were limited to such
a straightforward, honest, and direct expression of opinion; unfortunately that is not so.
For most of us, the happier ones of the world, it is enough to say "I like it," or "I don't
like it," and there is an end: the critic has to answer the everlasting "Why?" And so, I suppose,
it is my office, in this present instance, to say why I like the collection of tales that follows.

I think that I have found a hint as to the right answer in two of these stories. One is called
"The Story of a Book," the other "The Biography of a Superman." Each is rather an essay than
a tale, though the form of each is narrative. The first relates the sad bewilderment of a successful
novelist who feels that, after all, his great work was something less than nothing.

    He could not help noticing that London had discovered the
    secret which made his intellectual life a torment. The
    streets were more than a mere assemblage of houses,
    London herself was more than a tangled skein of streets,
    and overhead heaven was more than a meeting-place of
    individual stars. What was this secret that made words
    into a book, houses into cities, and restless and
    measurable stars into an unchanging and immeasurable
    universe?

Then from "The Biography of a Superman" I select this very striking passage:--

    Possessed of an intellect of great analytic and
    destructive force, he was almost entirely lacking
    in imagination, and he was therefore unable
    to raise his work to a plane in which the mutually
    combative elements of his nature might have been
    reconciled. His light moments of envy, anger, and
    vanity passed into the crucible to come forth
    unchanged. He lacked the magic wand, and his work
    never took wings above his conception.

Now compare the two places; "the streets were more than a mere assemblage of houses;" . . .
"his light moments . . . passed into the crucible to come forth unchanged. He lacked the magic
wand." I think these two passages indicate the answer to the "why" that I am forced to resolve;
show something of the secret of the strange charm which "The Ghost-Ship" possesses.

It delights because it is significant, because it is no mere assemblage of words and facts
and observations and incidents, it delights because its matter has not passed through the crucible
unchanged. On the contrary, the jumble of experiences and impressions which fell to the lot
of the author as to us all had assuredly been placed in the athanor of art, in that furnace
of the sages which is said to be governed with wisdom. Lead entered the burning of the fire,
gold came forth from it.

This analogy of the process of alchemy which Richard Middleton has himself suggested is one
of the finest and the fittest for our purpose; but there are many others. The "magic wand"
analogy comes to much the same thing; there is the like notion of something ugly and insignificant
changed to something beautiful and significant. Something ugly; shall we not say rather something
formless transmuted into form! After all, the Latin Dictionary declares solemnly that "beauty"
is one of the meanings of "forma" And here we are away from alchemy and the magic wand ideas,
and pass to the thought of the first place that I have quoted: "the streets were more than
a mere assemblage of houses," The puzzle is solved; the jig-saw--I think they call it--has
been successfully fitted together, There in a box lay all the jagged, irregular pieces, each
in itself crazy and meaningless and irritating by its very lack of meaning: now we see each
part adapted to the other and the whole is one picture and one purpose.

But the first thing necessary to this achievement is the recognition of the fact that there
is a puzzle. There are many people who go through life persuaded that there isn't a puzzle
at all; that it was only the infancy and rude childhood of the world which dreamed a vain dream
of a picture to be made out of the jagged bits of wood, There never has been a picture, these
persons say, and there never will be a picture, all we have to do is to take the bits out of
the box, look at them, and put them back again. Or, returning to Richard Middleton's excellent
example: there is no such thing as London, there are only houses. No man has seen London at
any time; the very word (meaning "the fort on the lake") is nonsensical; no human eye has ever
beheld aught else but a number of houses; it is clear that this "London" is as mythical and
monstrous and irrational a concept as many others of the same class. "She ought to have a kind
of second mourning," he explained to Puttany, who received his word on any matter as law. "Joe
La France wasn't worth wearing first mourning for, but second mourning is decent for her, and
it won't show in the camp like bright colors would."

The world of city-maddened people who swarmed to this lake for their annual immersion in nature
did not often intrude on the camp. Yet the fact of a woman's presence there could not be concealed,
and Puttany was disciplined to say to strangers, "Dot vas my sister and her little poy."

A tiny cabin was built for Françoise, with the luxuries of a puncheon floor and one glazed window.
She inhabited it in primitive gladness, as a child adorns a play-house, and was careful to
keep it in that trim, military state which Brown demanded. Françoise had a regard for M'sieu' Put-tanee,
who was neat and ladylike in all his doings, and smiled amiably at her over her boy's head; but
her veneration of M'sieu' Brownee extended beyond the reach of humor. If he had been a priest
he could have had no more authority. She used to watch him secretly from her window at dawn, as
he put himself through a morning drill to limber his muscles. Some spectators might have laughed,
but she heard as seriously as if they were the motions of her own soul his tactics with a stick:

"Straight
out--across the shoulder--under the arm--down on the turf!"

There were days when the misty gray lake, dim and delicious, lay veiled within its irregular shores.
Then the lowering sun stood on tree-tops, a pale red wraith like
the ghost of an Indian.

And there were days of sharp, clear shine, when Black Point seemed to approach across the water,
and any moving object could be seen in the Burning--a growth of green springing where the woods
had been swept by fire. The men were often away, guiding fishing parties from dawn until sunset,
or hunting parties from sunset half the night. Françoise and Gou-gou dwelt in the camp, having
the dogs as their protectors, though neither primitive nor civilized life menaced them there
with any danger. Some evenings, when few affairs had crowded the day, Brown sat like a patriarch
in the midst of his family, and took Gougou on his knee to hear bear stories. He supervised the
youngster's manners like a mother, and Gougou learned to go down to the washing-place and use soap
when the signs were strong for bear-dens and deer-stalking.

"I saw a bear come out on the beach once," Brown would tell him, "when I was stalking for deer and
had a doe and fawn in the lake. I smelt him, but couldn't get him to turn his eyes towards me.
I killed both deer, and skinned them, and cut up one. And that bear went into the woods and
howled for hours. I took all the venison I could carry, but left part of the carcasses. When
we went after them in the morning, the bear had eaten all up clean."

Bear-dens, Gougou was informed, might be found where there was a windfall. The bears stuffed cracks
between the fallen trees with moss, and so made themselves a tight house in which to hibernate.
If you were obliged to have bear meat that season when the game was thin, you could cut a hole
into a den, stand by it with an axe, and lop off the inquiring head
stuck out to investigate disturbances.

Bears had very small stomachs, but whatever they ate went to fat. They walked much on their hind feet,
and browsed on nuts or mast when their hunting was not successful, being able to thrive on little.
Usually a father, a mother, and a cub formed one household in one den.

Brown's mind ran on the subject of households; and he sometimes talked to Françoise about his
mother.

"My mother Gaelics like the Scotch," he said. Françoise could not imagine what it was to Gaelic.
People had not Gaelic-ed on the Chaudière, where she was brought up until the children were obliged
to scatter from the narrow farm.

                                                        But the priest had never warned her against it, and since
M'sieu' Brownee's mother was addicted to the practice, it must be something excellent, perhaps even
religious.

She secretly invoked St. Francis, her patron saint, to obtain for
her that mysterious power of Gaelic-ing of which M'sieu' Brownee spoke
so tenderly.

                                  

So the summer passed, and frost was already ripening to glory the
ranks on ranks of dense forest pressing to the lake borders. Brown
and Puttany rowed home through an early September evening, lifted
their boat to its cross-piece dock, and pulled the plug out of the
bottom to let it drain. There was no sound, even of the dogs, as they
flung their spoil ashore. It was the very instant of moon-rise. At
first a copper rim was answered by the faintest line in the water. The long train journey
in the morning, the walk through Farringdon Meat Market, which æsthetic butchers made hideous
with mosaics of the intestines of animals, as if the horror of suety pavements and bloody sawdust
did not suffice, the weariness of inventing lies that no one believed to account for my lateness
and neglected homework, and the monotonous lessons that held me from my dreams without ever
for a single instant capturing my interest--all these things made me ill with repulsion. Worst
of all was the society of my cheerful, contented comrades, to avoid which I was compelled to
mope in deserted corridors, the prey of a sorrow that could not be enjoyed, a hatred that was
in no way stimulating. At the best of times the atmosphere of the place disgusted me. Desks,
windows, and floors, and even the grass in the quadrangle, were greasy with London soot, and
there was nowhere any clean air to breathe or smell. I hated the gritty asphalt that gave no
peace to my feet and cut my knees when my clumsiness made me fall. I hated the long stone corridors
whose echoes seemed to me to mock my hesitating footsteps when I passed from one dull class
to another. I hated the stuffy malodorous classrooms, with their whistling gas-jets and noise
of inharmonious life. I would have hated the yellow fogs had they not sometimes shortened the
hours of my bondage. That five hundred boys shared this horrible environment with me did not
abate my sufferings a jot; for it was clear that they did not find it distasteful, and they
therefore became as unsympathetic for me as the smell and noise and rotting stones of the school
itself.

The masters moved as it were in another world, and, as the classes were large, they understood
me as little as I understood them. They knew that I was idle and untruthful, and they could
not know that I was as full of nerves as a girl, and that the mere task of getting to school
every morning made me physically sick. They punished me repeatedly and in vain, for I found
every hour I passed within the walls of the school an overwhelming punishment in itself, and
nothing I made any difference to me. I lied to them because they expected it, and because I
had no words in which to express the truth if I knew it, which is doubtful. For some reason
I could not tell them at home why I got on so badly at school, or no doubt they would have
taken me away and sent me to a country school, as they did afterwards. Nearly all the real
sorrows of childhood are due to this dumbness of the emotions; we teach children to convey
facts by means of words, but we do not teach them how to make their feelings intelligible.
Unfortunately, perhaps, I was very happy at night with my story-books and my dreams, so that
the real misery of my days escaped the attention of the grown-up people. Of course I never
even thought of doing my homework, and the labour of inventing new lies every day to account
for my negligence became so wearisome that once or twice I told the truth and simply said I
had not done it; but the masters held that this frankness aggravated the offence, and I had
to take up anew my tiresome tale of improbable calamities. Sometimes my stories were so wild
that the whole class would laugh, and I would have to laugh myself; yet on the strength of
this elaborate politeness to authority I came to believe myself that I was untruthful by nature.

The boys disliked me because I was not sociable, but after a time they grew tired of bullying
me and left me alone. I detested them because they were all so much alike that their numbers
filled me with horror. I remember that the first day I went to school I walked round and round
the quadrangle in the luncheon-hour, and every boy who passed stopped me and asked me my name
and what my father was. When I said he was an engineer every one of the boys replied, "Oh!
the man who drives the engine." The reiteration of this childish joke made me hate them from
the first, and afterwards I discovered that they were equally unimaginative in everything they
did. Sometimes I would stand in the midst of them, and wonder what was the matter with me that
I should be so different from all the rest. When they teased me, repeating the same questions
over and over again, I cried easily, like a girl, without quite knowing why, for their stupidities
could not hurt my reason; but when they bullied me I did not cry, because the pain made me
forget the sadness of my heart. Perhaps it was because of this that they thought I was a little
mad.

Grey day followed grey day, and I might in time have abandoned all efforts to be faithful to
my dreams, and achieved a kind of beast-like submission that was all the authorities expected
of notorious dunces. I might have taught my senses to accept the evil conditions of life in
that unclean place; I might even have succeeded in making myself one with the army of shadows
that thronged in the quadrangle and filled the air with meaningless noise.

But one evening when I reached home I saw by the faces of the grown-up people that something
had upset their elaborate precautions for an ordered life, and I discovered that my brother,
who had stayed at home with a cold, was ill in bed with the measles. For a while the significance
of the news escaped me; then, with a sudden movement of my heart, which made me feel ill, I
realised that probably I would have to stay away from school because of the infection. My feet
tapped on the floor with joy, though I tried to appear unconcerned. Then, as I nursed my sudden
hope of freedom, a little fearfully lest it should prove an illusion, a new and enchanting
idea came to me. I slipped from the room, ran upstairs to my bedroom and, standing by the side
of my bed, tore open my waistcoat and shirt with clumsy, trembling fingers. One, two, three,
four, five! I counted the spots in a triumphant voice, and then with a sudden revulsion sat
down on the bed to give the world an opportunity to settle back in its place. I had the measles,
and therefore I should not have to go back to school! I shut my eyes for a minute and opened
them again, but still I had the measles. The cup of happiness was at my lips, but I sipped
delicately because it was full to the brim, and I would not spill a drop.

This mood did not last long. I had to run down the house and tell the world the good news.
The grown-up people rebuked my joyousness, while admitting that it might be as well that I
should have the measles then as later on. In spite of their air of resignation I could hardly
sit still for excitement. I wanted to go into the kitchen and show my measles to the servants,
but I was told to stay where I was in front of the fire while my bed was moved into my brother's
room. So I stared at the glowing coals till my eyes smarted, and dreamed long dreams. I would
be in bed for days, all warm from head to foot, and no one would interrupt my pleasant excursions
in the world I preferred to this. If I had heard of the beneficent microbe to which lowed my
happiness, I would have mentioned it in my prayers.

Late that night, I called over to my brother to ask how long measles lasted. He told me to
go to sleep, so that I knew he did not know the answer to my question. I lay at ease tranquilly
turning the problem over in my mind. Four weeks, six weeks, eight weeks; why, if I was lucky,
it would carry me through to the holidays! At all events, school was already very far away,
like a nightmare remembered at noon. I said good-night to my brother, and received an irritated
grunt in reply. I did not mind his surliness; tomorrow when I woke up, I would begin my dreams.

                                  II

When I found myself in bed in the morning, already sick at heart because even while I slept
I could not forget the long torment of my life at school, I would lie still for a minute or
two and try to concentrate my shuddering mind on something pleasant, some little detail of
the moment that seemed to justify hope. Perhaps I had some money to spend or a holiday to look
forward to; though often enough I would find nothing to save me from realising with childish
intensity the greyness of the world in which it was my fate to move. I did not want to go out
into life; it was dull and gruel and greasy with soot. I only wanted to stop at home in any
little quiet corner out of everybody's way and think my long, heroic thoughts. But even while
I mumbled my hasty breakfast and ran to the station to catch my train the atmosphere of the
school was all about me, and my dreamer's courage trembled and vanished.

When I woke from sleep the morning after my good fortune, I did not at first realise the extent
of my happiness; I only knew that deep in my heart I was conscious of some great cause for
joy. Then my eyes, still dim with sleep, discovered that I was in my brother's bedroom, and
in a flash the joyful truth was revealed to me. I sat up and hastily examined my body to make
sure that the rash had not disappeared, and then my spirit sang a song of thanksgiving of which
the refrain was, "I have the measles!" I lay back in bed and enjoyed the exquisite luxury of
thinking of the evils that I had escaped. For once my morbid sense of atmosphere was a desirable
possession and helpful to my happiness. It was delightful to pull the bedclothes over my shoulders
and conceive the feelings of a small boy who should ride to town in a jolting train, walk through
a hundred kinds of dirt and a hundred disgusting smells to win to prison at last, where he
should perform meaningless tasks in the distressing society of five hundred mocking apes. It
was pleasant to see the morning sun and feel no sickness in my stomach, no sense of depression
in my tired brain. Across the room my brother gurgled and choked in his sleep, and in some
subtle way contributed to my ecstasy of tranquillity. I was no longer concerned for the duration
of my happiness. I felt that this peace that I had desired so long must surely last for ever.

To the grown-up folk who came to see us during the day--the doctor, certain germ-proof unmarried
aunts, truculently maternal, and the family itself--my brother's case was far more interesting
than mine because he had caught the measles really badly. I just had them comfortably; enough
to be infectious, but not enough to feel ill, so I was left in pleasant solitude while the
women competed for the honour of smoothing my brother's pillow and tiptoeing in a fidgeting
manner round his bed. I lay on my back and looked with placid interest at the cracks in the
ceiling. They were like the main roads in a map, and I amused myself by building little houses
beside them--houses full of books and warm hearthrugs, and with a nice pond lively with tadpoles
in the garden of each. From the windows of the houses you could watch all the traffic that
went along the road, men and women and horses, and best of all, the boys going to school in
the morning--boys who had not done their homework and who would be late for prayers. When I
talked about the cracks to my brother he said that perhaps the ceiling would give way and fall
on our heads. I thought about this too, and found it quite easy to picture myself lying in
the bed with a smashed head, and blood all over the pillow. Then it occurred to me that the
plaster might smash me all over, and my impressions of Farringdon Meat Market added a gruesome
vividness to my conception of the consequences. I always found it pleasant to imagine horrible
things; it was only the reality that made me sick.

Towards nightfall I became a little feverish, and I heard the grown-ups say that they would
give me some medicine later on. Medicine for me signified the nauseous powders of Dr. Gregory,
so I pretended to be asleep every time anyone came into the room, in order to escape my destiny,
until at last some one stood by my bedside so long that I became cramped and had to pretend
to wake up. Then I was given the medicine, and found to my surprise that it was delicious and
tasted of oranges. I felt that there had been a mistake somewhere, but my head sat a little
heavily on my shoulders, and I would not trouble to fix the responsibility. This time I fell
asleep in earnest, and woke in the middle of the night to find my brother standing by my bed,
making noises with his mouth. I thought that he had gone mad, and would kill me perhaps, but
after a time he went back to bed saying all the bad words he knew. The excitement had made
me wide awake, and I tossed about thinking of the cracked ceiling above my head. The room was
quite dark, and I could see nothing, so that it might be bulging over me without my knowing
it. I stood up in bed and stretched up my arm, but I could not reach the ceiling; yet when
I lay down again I felt as though it had sunk so far, that it was touching my hair, and I found
it difficult to breathe in such a small space. I was afraid to move for fear of bringing it
down upon me, and in a short while the pressure upon my body became unbearable, and I shrieked
out for help. Some one came in and lit the gas, and found me looking very foolish and my brother
delirious. I fell asleep almost immediately, but was conscious through my dreams that the gas
was still alight and that they were watching by my brother's bedside.

In the morning he was very ill and I was no longer feverish, so it was decided to move me back
into my own bedroom. I was wrapped up in the bedclothes and told to sit still while the bed
was moved. I sat in an armchair, feeling like a bundle of old clothes, and looking at the cracks
in the ceiling which seemed to me like roads. I knew that I had already lost all importance
as an invalid, but I was very happy nevertheless. For from the window of one of my little houses
I was watching the boys going to school, and my heart was warm with the knowledge of my own
emancipation. As my legs hung down from the chair I found it hard to keep my slippers on my
stockingless feet.

                                 III

There followed for me a period of deep and unbroken satisfaction. I was soon considered well
enough to get up, and I lived pleasantly between the sofa and the fireside waiting on my brother's
convalescence, for it had been settled that I should go away with him to the country for a
change of air. I read Dickens and Dumas in English, and made up long stories in which I myself
played important but not always heroic parts. By means of intellectual exercises of this kind
I achieved a tranquillity like that of an old man, fearing nothing, desiring nothing, regretting
nothing. I no longer reckoned the days or the hours, I content to enjoy a passionless condition
of being that asked no questions and sought none of me, nor did I trouble to number my journeys
in the world of infinite shadows. But in that long hour of peace I realised that in some inexplicable
way I was interested in the body of a little boy, whose hands obeyed my unspoken wishes, whose
legs sprawled before me on the sofa. I knew that before I met him, this boy, whose littleness
surprised me, had suffered ill dreams in a nameless world, and now, worn out with tears and
humiliation and dread of life, he slept, and while he slept I watched him dispassionately,
as I would have looked at a crippled daddy-long-legs. To have felt compassion for him would
have disturbed the tranquillity that was a necessary condition of my existence, so I contented
myself with noticing his presence and giving him a small part in the pageant of my dreams.
He was not so beautiful as I wished all my comrades to be, and he was besides very small; but
shadows are amiable play-friends, and they did not blame him because he cried when he was teased
and did not cry when he was beaten, or because the wild unreason of his sorrow made him find
cause for tears in the very fullness of his rare enjoyment. For the first time in my life it
seems to me I saw this little boy as he was, squat-bodied, big-headed, thick-lipped, and with
a face swept clean of all emotions save where his two great eyes glowed with a sulky fire under
exaggerated eyebrows. I noticed his grimy nails, his soiled collar, his unbrushed clothes,
the patent signs of defeat changing to utter rout, and from the heights of my great peace I
was not sorry for him. He was like that, other boys were different, that was all.

And then on a day fear returned to my heart, and my newly discovered Utopia was no more. I
do not know what chance word of the grown-up people or what random thought of mine did the
mischief; but of a sudden I realised that for all my dreaming I was only separated by a measurable
number of days from the horror of school. Already I was sick with fear, and in place of my
dreams I distressed myself by visualising the scenes of the life I dreaded--the Meat Market,
the dusty shadows of the gymnasium, the sombre reticence of the great hall. All that my lost
tranquillity had given me was a keener sense of my own being; my smallness, my ugliness, my
helplessness in the face of the great cruel world. Before I had sometimes been able to dull
my emotions in unpleasant circumstances and thus achieve a dogged calm; now I was horribly
conscious of my physical sensations, and, above all, of that deadly sinking in my stomach called
fear. I clenched my hands, telling myself that I was happy, and trying to force my mind to
pleasant thoughts; but though my head swam with the effort, I continued to be conscious that
I was afraid. In the midst of my mental struggles I discovered that even if I succeeded in
thinking happy things I should still have to go back to school after all, and the knowledge
that thought could not avert calamity was like a bruise on my mind. I pinched my arms and legs,
with the idea that immediate pain would make me forget my fears for the future; but I was not
brave enough to pinch them really hard, and I could not forget the motive for my action. I
lay back on the sofa and kicked the cushions with my feet in a kind of forlorn anger. Thought
was no use, nothing was any use, and my stomach was sick, sick with fear. And suddenly I became
aware of an immense fatigue that overwhelmed my mind and my body, and made me feel as helpless
as a little child. The tears that were always near my eyes streamed down my face, making my
cheek sore against the wet cushion, and my breath came in painful, ridiculous gulps. For a
moment I made an effort to control my grief; and then I gave way utterly, crying with my whole
body like a little child, until, like a little child, I fell asleep.

When I awoke the room was grey with dusk, and I sat up with a swaying head, glad to hide the
shame of my foolish swollen face amongst the shadows. My mouth was still salt with tears, and
I was very thirsty, but I was always anxious to hide my weakness from other people, and I was
afraid that if I asked for something to drink they would see that I had been crying. The fire
had gone out while I slept, and I felt cold and stiff, but my abandonment of restraint had
relieved me, and my fear was now no more than a vague unrest. My mind thought slowly but very
clearly. I saw that it was a pity that I had not been more ill than I was, for then, like my
brother, I should have gone away for a month instead of a fortnight. As it was, everybody laughed
at me because I looked so well, and said they did not believe that I had been ill at all. If
I had thought of it earlier I might have been able to make myself worse somehow or other, but
now it was too late. When the maid came in and lit the gas for tea she blamed me for letting
the fire out, and told me that I had a dirty face. I was glad of the chance to slip away and
wash my burning cheeks in cold water. When I had finished and dried my face on the rough towel
I looked at myself in the glass. I looked as if I had been to the seaside for a holiday, my
cheeks were so red!

That night as I lay sleepless in my bed, seeking for a cool place between the sheets in which
to rest my hot feet, the sickness of fear returned to me, and I knew that I was lost. He was bright
and active, kind-hearted and generous. I never saw him do a mean or selfish thing. But he
had a free, rather reckless spirit and a will that was stubbornness itself when aroused. Kindness
softened, but anger hardened, him.

Neddy's father and mother were both dead, and the boy lived with his
grandmother, who was rather a hard woman, and believed more in the
power of force than in the power of kindness.

As soon as I understood the case I put on my bonnet hastily and ran after Mrs. Oram, hoping to
come up with her before she reached the school-room. I was a few moments too late for this, but
in time to have a word with Mr. Jonas, who stood at the door holding the struggling boy firmly
by the arm.

                                  "I want you to promise me one thing," I said, laying my hand on the
schoolmaster's. I spoke in as quiet a voice as I could assume, but
very seriously.

My words and manner threw Mr. Jonas off of his guard. His hold on the boy relaxed, and in the
next instant Neddy was beyond his reach and running off as fast as his feet could carry him.

"After
him!" cried the schoolmaster, greatly excited. "After him, John Wilkins!"

A large, coarse-looking boy started forward, and was about passing through the door, when I put
my hand on him, and pressing him back said,

"Wait a moment, John. Maybe, after I've said a word to Mr. Jonas, he'll not want you to go. Tell him
to wait, Mr. Jonas; do, now, because I want you."

I softened my voice to a persuasive tone, and so made my interference effectual. The schoolmaster
told John Wilkins to go back to his seat.

Mrs. Oram had started after her troublesome grandson on the instant of his escape, and so I was
left alone with the excited teacher.

"Now, don't be angry with me," said I, "nor tell me to go away and mind my own business. Two
heads are sometimes better than one; and it's my opinion that if you and I put our heads together,
we can save this poor boy from being ruined. There is a great deal of good in him, but as things
go now I'm afraid it will be lost. With natures like his, 'love has readier will than fear.'
His grandmother doesn't know how to manage him. Let us try to show her a better way."

By the time I had said this the thoughts of Mr. Jonas had become clearer and his anger against
Neddy much abated. I saw this in his face.

"Let the boy go now," I added. "After school come and see me, and we'll have a long talk over
the matter. But promise me one thing."

"What is that?" he asked.

"If old Mrs. Oram brings Neddy back to-day, don't punish him."

"Very well. It shall be as you say," answered the schoolmaster.

That evening Mr. Jonas called to see me. He was a better man, on the whole, than he was a schoolmaster.
Out of school he was kind and genial, but as a teacher he was not always as wise and as patient
as he should be. Like Neddy's grandmother, he believed more in the power of force than he
did in the power of kindness. His rod was always in sight, and too often in his hand. He ruled
by fear, and not by love.

"Did Neddy come back to school?" I asked.

Mr. Jonas shook his head gravely.

"Oh, mother," cried my little girl, rushing into the room just at this moment, "Neddy Oram's
lost or run away!"

She stopped on seeing Mr. Jonas; her face, that had been a little pale, flushed deeply, and
her eyes had an angry flash. "And it's all your fault!" she added, with a sudden brave indignation
in her tiny voice as she turned on the schoolmaster and looked at him steadily.

"My fault!" said the schoolmaster, in a startled voice.

"Yes, sir. It's all your fault.

If you hadn't made him stand on one leg until he was almost tired
to death, and switched him when he put the other down, and if you
hadn't said you'd cut the skin off of him, he wouldn't have run away."

                                  

And here little Carrie burst out crying, and buried her face, sobbing, in my lap.

"Brave talk for my timid little girl, Mr. Jonas," I said, in an undertone, "but all true, I'm
afraid."

"What is true?" he asked, looking bewildered.

"All that Carrie has said. This way you have of flogging children does more harm than good. A
man of your clear mind and kindly nature might surely find some better way to govern your scholars."

Mr.
Jonas did not answer. There was a look of pained surprise on his face.

"Run away, lost!" he exclaimed, after a few moments, rising to his feet. His manner had become
suddenly agitated. "Poor boy! I must see about this;" and he went out hastily.

When Neddy Oram, who was only ten years old, escaped from the schoolmaster, he went directly
home and hid himself in the garret, behind some boxes and old furniture. He ran so much faster
than his grandmother that she lost sight of him and did not see him go into the house. So no
search was made for him in the garret. Like some poor hunted animal that had gained a place of
safety, he crouched panting in his hiding-place, enjoying for a time a sweet sense of security.
But Neddy could not long forget how small and weak and dependent he was. It was all very well
to hide away from his grandmother, but how was he to get anything to eat?

"Run away!" said a voice that spoke inside of him, but so loud and clear that he almost started.
"Run away!" repeated the voice. "Grandmother Oram will find you out up here and take you back
to school, and Mr. Jonas will switch you half to death."

I wonder who it was that said this, or how a voice could speak inside of Neddy Oram? It was a bad
spirit, I think, that wished to do him harm. We may often hear these bad spirits speaking in our
thoughts and telling us to do naughty things. Good spirits speak in our thoughts as well as bad ones,
and they tell us to do what is right, to be kind and generous and loving and true.

I am sorry to say that Neddy, who was not only angry with his grandmother
and the schoolmaster, but on account of his wrong-doings and disobedience
afraid of them, listened to this voice, and as he listened the bad
spirit made the voice seem so like his own thoughts that he knew not
but that all came from himself.

So under this wrong influence he planned an escape from the house, which was to be made as
soon as his grandmother went out. For an hour or two he heard her moving around. At last all
was still. Then he stole from his hiding-place and listened at the head of the stairs. Not
the slightest sound broke the deep silence. Grandmother had gone away. Then he took a loaf
of bread, a large slice of cake and some apples, which he tied up in a handkerchief; and stealing
out of the back door, he ran through the garden and out of a gate that opened into a lane. At
the end of this lane was a piece of woods, and beyond this wood a deep hollow, along which
it was easy to go without danger of being seen by any one.

How strangely the little boy's heart beat as he hurried along, going he knew not whither! It
was not long before he reached the hollow beyond the woods. After crossing this hollow, he entered
another wood by a narrow path made by the cattle. The trees in this wood were very tall and
close together, and the underbrush grew so thick that he could see before him only for a short
distance.

The silence and darkness of this heavy forest caused a lonely feeling to come over Neddy. All
at once the thought of bears and wolves came into his mind, and with the thought fear crept into
his heart. A weakness fell upon him, and he stood still with drops of cold sweat on his forehead.
Then he turned and ran back, but in doing so missed the way and took a path that, instead of
taking him out of the forest, led him farther into it. He ran and ran, panting for breath,
until he was so tired that he had to sit down to rest.

"What if I am lost?" he said to himself, a cold chill running over
him at the thought.

Lost! How wildly the poor little boy's heart began to beat! As he sat there, feeling too weak
from weariness and fear to arise, he heard not far off the sound of feet cracking the dry
sticks and rustling the leaves that lay upon the ground. He held his breath in terror, for
he was sure it was a bear or wolf. Nearer and nearer the animal came, passing only a few rods
from where he sat motionless.

"Oh, oh!" exclaimed Neddy, in tones of relief, starting to his feet as he saw a young heifer
which was astray in the woods.

At sight of the boy the heifer, scared by his sudden appearance, started off at a run and was
soon out of sight, leaving Neddy again alone. He tried to follow her, but was not able to get
on her track. Oh how he did wish himself at home! How sorry he was that he had played truant
on the day before!

In trying to follow the heifer, Neddy left the narrow path along which he had been going, and now
he was among the thick undergrowth of the forest, his hands and face scratched with briars. The
trees stood so close together that no sunshine came down through their thick branches. All was
dim and shadowy.

Poor Neddy! A great fear and loneliness fell on him again; and sitting down on the limb of a fallen
tree, he began to cry bitterly. But crying was of no use. It wouldn't get him out of the woods
and safely home again. So he dried his tears and started on again, hoping to find the path
he had left. But he tried in vain. All at once he noticed that the light was fading rapidly and
the air growing cold. The sun had gone down, and night was falling. Neddy's heart began to
beat wildly; he could feel the throbs all over him; there was a great pressure as if a hand
were laid on his breast; he could scarcely breathe, so strong was the feeling of suffocation
that oppressed him. He tried to run, but his foot caught in a vine, and he fell upon the ground,
where he lay for a long time before he had strength enough to arise.

In his weakness and exhaustion the poor boy found strength and courage.

How! Think, my little reader. What would you have done if lost in the woods as Neddy was lost?
Where would you have looked for help? You would have done, I am very sure, just as he did.
And what did he do? Why, he put his little hands together, and lifting his tearful eyes upward
prayed that God would take care of him, and not let any wild beasts eat him up.

As soon as he had done this the dreadful fear from which he was suffering went out of his heart.
Just a little way beyond the spot where Neddy had fallen was a small clear place in the forest,
where grew a bed of soft green moss. A few rays of light came down through an opening in the
trees and showed him this cosy nook. Once in it, there seemed to grow all about him a wall of
darkness. So he sat down upon the moss with a strange feeling of peace and security in his heart.

And
now, for the first time, Neddy felt hungry. So he opened the bundle of bread and cake which he
had brought with him, and ate with a keen relish.

Then he began to feel tired and heavy. The soft moss on which he was resting was just the bed
for a poor tired boy like him, and before he had time to think of
his loneliness and danger he was fast asleep.

But sleep sometimes
gives us frightful dreams, and one of these came to Neddy. He still
thought himself a poor lost boy in the woods trying to find his way
out. He heard wolves howling, and saw bears and tigers and all kinds
of wild beasts. At last a wolf with great red jaws came after him,
and he started to run, but his terror was so great that he could scarcely
move his feet. A fearful growl ran through the woods, and the dreadful
beast came rushing down upon him. At this frightful moment he heard
his name called; and turning, he saw Mr. Jonas, the schoolmaster,
running toward him with an axe in his hand, with which he struck the
wolf just as he was about seizing him. The wolf fell dead, and the
schoolmaster, catching Neddy up in his arms, said, tenderly, "My poor,
poor boy!" and hugged him tightly to his breast.

Was all this a dream?
No, not all, for Neddy awoke and found himself in the schoolmaster's
arms, with two or three men around holding lanterns in their hands.

"My
poor, poor boy!" said the schoolmaster again, laying his hand tenderly
on his recovered scholar; and this time Neddy heard the words in full
wakefulness.

He did not stir, but lay with his head close against
Mr. Jonas, who, guided by the men with lanterns, walked hurriedly
through the forest, and soon came to the road that led to the village.

I
was at Grandmother Oram's, waiting anxiously for news of the lost
boy, when the schoolmaster came in with Neddy in his arms. I had been
talking long and seriously with the frightened old lady about her
way of treating Neddy, and she had promised me not to say a hard or
angry word to him when he came home, if that ever should be. She was
very much softened, and her real love for Neddy was having its full
course.

It was after ten o'clock when we heard the sound of coming
feet. The poor old lady started up and stood pale and breathless.
The door opened and Mr. Jonas came in, carrying Neddy in his arms.
His face was softer in expression than I had ever seen it. He did
not say a word until he came close up to Mrs. Oram, when, holding
out the boy, he said, in a low voice that was broken and tender, "Be
kind to the poor child, Mrs. Oram. I will see you about him in the
morning," then merely adding, as he turned to leave, "We found him
asleep in the woods," went out hastily.

There was a new order of
things in the village school after that. The rod fell from Mr. Jonas'
hand, never to be lifted again, and he soon learned that in kindness
was greater power than in fear. Neddy was in his place on the next
day, and from that time onward was one of the most obedient and faithful
scholars in school. Mr. Jonas' manner toward him was kind and gentle,
and Neddy felt drawn toward him by a strange attraction that gave
the schoolmaster the power over him of a wise and loving father. No
thought of disobedience crossed the boy's mind. It was his delight
to obey.

All this happened many years ago, and now the boy Neddy
has grown to be a strong, wise, good man, an honor to the position
he holds, and one of the best of citizens. He had the opportunity
of doing Mr. Jonas many kind acts; and when at last the old man grew
too feeble to earn his living, Mr. Oram made his last days comfortable
by placing him above the reach of want.

Archaic spelling is preserved
as printed. Variable spelling and inconsistent hyphenation is preserved
as printed across different pieces, but has been made consistent within
pieces if there was a prevalence of one form. Punctuation and printer
errors (e.g. omitted or transposed letters) have been repaired.

The
following amendments have also been made:

Page 133--omitted word
'the' added--""Tell mother we want to make coffee in the field, too"
..."

Page 341--mud amended to snow, based on the context--"... enable
it to wade through the deep snow, ..." I think it was the first time in my life a boy had spoken
kindly to me. He asked me my name, and told me that it would be supper-time in five minutes,
so that I could go and sit in the dining-hall and wait. "You'll be all right, you know," he
said, as he passed on; "they're not a bad lot of chaps." The revulsion nearly brought on a
catastrophe, for the tears rose to my eyes and I gazed after him with a swimming head. I had
prepared myself to receive blows and insults with a calm brow, but I had no armour with which
to oppose the noble weapons of sympathy and good fellowship. They overcame the stubborn hatred
with which I was accustomed to meet life, and left me defenceless. I felt as if I had been
face to face with the hero of a dream.

As I sat at supper before a long table decorated with plates of bread-and-butter and cheese
I saw my friend sitting at the other end of the room, so I asked the boy next to me to tell
me his name. "Oh," he said, looking curiously at my blushes, "you mean old mother F----. He's
pious, you know; reads the Bible and funks at games and all that."

There are some things which no self-respecting schoolboy can afford to forgive. I had made
up my mind that it was not pleasant to be an Ishmael, that as far as possible I would try to
be an ordinary boy at my new school. My experiences in London had taught me caution, and I
was anxious not to compromise my position at the outset by making an unpopular friend. So I
nodded my head sagely in reply, and looked at my new-discovered hero with an air of profound
contempt.

                                  II

The days that followed were not so uncomfortable as my first grey impression of the place had
led me to expect. I proved to my own intense astonishment to be rather good at lessons, so
that I got on well with the masters, and the boys were kind enough in their careless way. I
had plenty of pocket-money, and though I did not shine at Association football, for in London
I had only watched the big boys playing Rugby, I was not afraid of being knocked about, which
was all that was expected of a new boy. Most of my embarrassments were due to the sensitiveness
that made me dislike asking questions--a weakness that was always placing me in false positions.
But my efforts to make myself agreeable to the boys were not unsuccessful, and while I looked
in vain for anything like the romantic adventures of which my brother had spoken, I sometimes
found myself almost enjoying my new life.

And then, as the children say in the streets of London, I woke up, and discovered that I was
desperately home-sick. Partly no doubt this was due to a natural reaction, but there were other
more obvious causes. For one thing my lavish hospitality had exhausted my pocket-money in the
first three weeks, and I was ashamed to write home for more so soon. This speedy end to my
apparent wealth certainly made it easier for the boys to find out that I was not one of themselves,
and they began to look at me askance and leave me out of their conversations. I was made to
feel once more that I had been born under a malignant star that did not allow me to speak or
act as they did. I had not their common sense, their blunt cheerfulness, their complete lack
of sensibility, and while they resented my queerness they could not know how anxious I was
to be an ordinary boy. When I saw that they mistrusted me I was too proud to accept the crumbs
of their society like poor mother F----, and I withdrew myself into a solitude that gave me
far too much time in which to examine my emotions. I found out all the remote corners of the
school in which it was possible to be alone, and when the other boys went for walks in the
fields, I stayed in the churchyard close to the school, disturbing the sheep in their meditations
among the tomb-stones, and thinking what a long time it would be before I was old enough to die.

Now that the first freshness of my new environment had worn off, I was able to see my life
as a series of grey pictures that repeated themselves day by day. In my mind these pictures
were marked off from each other by a sound of bells. I woke in the morning in a bed that was
like all the other beds, and lay on my back listening to the soft noises of sleep that filled
the air with rumours of healthy boys. The bell would ring and the dormitory would break into
an uproar, splashing of water, dropping of hair-brushes and shouts of laughter, for these super-boys
could laugh before breakfast. Then we all trooped downstairs and I forced myself to drink bad
coffee in a room that smelt of herrings. The next bell called us to chapel, and at intervals
during the morning other bells called us from one class to another. Dinner was the one square
meal we had during the day, and as it was always very good, and there was nothing morbid about
my appetite, I looked forward to it with interest. After dinner we played football. I liked
the game well enough, but the atmosphere of mud and forlorn grey fields made me shudder, and
as I kept goal I spent my leisure moments in hardening my æesthetic impressions. I never see
the word football today without recalling the curious sensation caused by the mud drying on
my bare knees. After football were other classes, classes in which it was sometimes very hard
to keep awake, for the school was old, and the badly ventilated class-rooms were stuffy after
the fresh air. Then the bell summoned us to evening chapel and tea--a meal which we were allowed
to improve with sardines and eggs and jam, if we had money to buy them or a hamper from home.
After tea we had about two hours to ourselves and then came preparation, and supper and bed.
Everything was heralded by a bell, and now and again even in the midst of lessons I would hear
the church-bell tolling for a funeral.

I think my hatred of bells dated back to my early childhood, when the village church, having
only three bells, played the first bar of "Three Blind Mice" a million times every Sunday evening,
till I could have cried for monotony and the vexation of the thwarted tune. But at school I
had to pay the penalty for my prejudice every hour of the day. Especially I suffered at night
during preparation, when they rang the curfew on the church bells at intolerable length, for
these were tranquil hours to which I looked forward eagerly. We prepared our lessons for the
morrow in the Great Hall, and I would spread my books out on the desk and let my legs dangle
from the form in a spirit of contentment for the troubled day happily past. Over my head the
gas stars burned quietly, and all about me I heard the restrained breathing of comrades, like
a noise of fluttering moths. And then, suddenly, the first stroke of the curfew would snarl
through the air, filling the roof with nasal echoes, and troubling the quietude of my mind
with insistent vibrations. I derived small satisfaction from cursing William the Conqueror,
who, the history book told me, was responsible for this ingenious tyranny. The long pauses
between the strokes held me in a state of strained expectancy until I wanted to howl. I would
look about me for sympathy and see the boys at their lessons, and the master on duty reading
quietly at his table. The curfew rang every night, and they did not notice it at all.

The only bell I liked to hear was the last bell that called us to our brief supper and to bed,
for once the light was out and my body was between the sheets I was free to do what I would,
free to think or to dream or to cry. There was no real difference between being in bed at school
or anywhere else; and sometimes I would fill the shadows of the dormitory with the familiar
furniture of my little bedroom at home, and pretend that I was happy. But as a rule I came
to bed brimming over with the day's tears, and I would pull the bedclothes over my head so
that the other boys should not know that I was homesick, and cry until I was sticky with tears
and perspiration.

The discipline at school did not make us good boys, but it made us civilised; it taught us
to conceal our crimes. And as home-sickness was justly regarded as a crime of ingratitude to
the authorities and to society in general, I had to restrain my physical weakness during the
day, and the reaction from this restraint made my tears at night almost a luxury. My longing
for home was founded on trifles, but it was not the less passionate. I hated this life spent
in walking on bare boards, and the blank walls and polished forms of the school appeared to
me to be sordid. When now and again I went into one of the master's studies and felt a carpet
under my feet, and saw a pleasant litter of pipes and novels lying on the table, it seemed
to me that I was in a holy place, and I looked at the hearthrug, the wallpaper, and the upholstered
chairs with a kind of desolate love for things that were nice to see and touch. I suppose that
if we had been in a workhouse, a prison, or a lunatic asylum, our æesthetic environment would
have been very much the same as it was at school; and afterwards when I went with the cricket
and football teams to other grammar schools they all gave me the same impression of clean ugliness.
It is not surprising that few boys emerge from their school life with that feeling for colour
and form which is common to nearly all children.

There was something very unpleasant to me in the fact that we all washed with the same kind
of soap, drank out of the same kind of cup, and in general did the same things at the same
time. The school timetable robbed life of all those accidental variations that make it interesting.
Our meals, our games, even our hours of freedom seemed only like subtle lessons. We had to
eat at a certain hour whether we were hungry or not, we had to play at a certain hour when
perhaps we wanted to sit still and be quiet. The whole school discipline tended to the formation
of habits at the expense of our reasoning faculties. Yet the astonishing thing to me was that
the boys themselves set up standards of conduct that still further narrowed the possibilities
of our life. It was bad form to read too much, to write home except on Sundays, to work outside
the appointed hours, to talk to the day-boys, to cultivate social relationships with the masters,
to be Cambridge in the boat-race, and in fine to hold any opinion or follow any pursuit that
was not approved by the majority. It was only by hiding myself away in corners that I could
enjoy any liberty of spirit, and though my thoughts were often cheerless when I remembered
the relative freedom of home life, I preferred to linger with them rather than to weary myself
in breaking the little laws of a society for which I was in no way fitted.

These were black days, rendered blacker by my morbid fear of the physical weakness that made
me liable to cry at any moment, sometimes even without in the least knowing why. I was often
on the brink of disaster, but my fear of the boys' ridicule prevented me from publicly disgracing
myself. Once the headmaster called a boy into his study, and he came out afterwards with red
eyelids and a puffed face. When they heard that his mother had died suddenly in India, all
the boys thought that these manifestations of sorrow were very creditable, and in the best
of taste, especially as he did not let anybody see him crying. For my part I looked at him
with a kind of envy, this boy who could flaunt his woe where he would. I, too, had my unassuageable
sorrow for the home that was dead to me those forlorn days; but I could only express it among
the tombs in the churchyard, or at night, muffled between the blankets, when the silent dormitory
seemed to listen with suspicious ears.

                                 III

A consoling scrap of wisdom which unfortunately children do not find written large in their
copybooks is that sorrow is as transitory as happiness. Although my childhood was strewn with
the memorial wreaths of dead miseries, I always had a morbid sense that my present discomforts
were immortal. So I had quite made up my mind that I would continue to be unhappy at school,
when the intervention of two beings whom I had thought utterly remote from me, gave me a new
philosophy and reconciled me to life. The first was a master, who found me grieving in one
of my oubliettes and took me into his study and tried to draw me out. Kindness always made
me ineloquent, and as I sat in his big basket chair and sniffed the delightful odour of his
pipe, I expressed myself chiefly in woe-begone monosyllables and hiccoughs. Nevertheless he
seemed to understand me very well, and though he did not say much, I felt by the way in which
he puffed out great, generous clouds of smoke, that he sympathised with me. He told me to come
and see him twice a week, and that I was at liberty to read any of his books, and in general
gave me a sense that I was unfortunate rather than criminal. This did me good, because a large
part of my unhappiness was due to the fact that constant suppression by majorities had robbed
me of my self-respect. It is better for a boy to be conceited than to be ashamed of his own
nature, and to shudder when he sees his face reflected in a glass.

My second benefactor was nominally a boy, though in reality he was nearly as old as the master,
and was leaving at the end of the term to go up to Oxford. He took me by the shoulder one evening
in the dusk, and walked me round and round the big clump of rhododendrons that stood in the
drive in front of the school. I did not understand half he said, but to my great astonishment
I heard him confessing that he had always been unhappy at school, although at the end he was
captain in lessons, in games, in everything. I was, of course, highly flattered that this giant
should speak to me as an equal, and admit me to his confidences. But I was even more delighted
with the encouraging light he threw on school life. "You're only here for a little spell, you
know; you'll be surprised how short it is. And don't be miserable just because you're different.
I'm different; it's a jolly good thing to be different." I was not used, to people who took
this wide view of circumstance, and his voice in the shadows sounded like some one speaking
in a story-book. Yet although his monologue gave me an entirely new conception of life, no
more of it lingers in my mind, save his last reflective criticism. "All the same, I don't see
why you should always have dirty nails." He never confided in me again, and I would have died
rather than have reminded him of his kindly indiscretion; but when he passed me in the playground
he seemed to look at me with a kind of reticent interest, and it occurred to me that after
all my queerness might not be such a bad thing, might even be something to be proud of.

The value of this discovery to me can hardly be exaggerated. Hitherto in my relationships with
the boys I had fought nothing but losing battles, for I had taken it for granted that they
were right and I was wrong. But now that I had hit on the astonishing theory that the individual
has the right to think for himself, I saw quite clearly that most of their standards of conduct
sprang from their sheep-like stupidity. They moved in flocks because they had not the courage
to choose a line for themselves. The material result of this new theory of life was to make
me enormously conceited, and I moved among my comrades with a mysterious confidence, and gave
myself the airs of a Byron in knickerbockers. My unpopularity increased by leaps and bounds,
but so did my moral courage, and I accepted the belated efforts of my school-fellows to knock
the intelligence out of me as so many tributes to the force of my individuality. I no longer
cried in my bed at night, but lay awake enraptured at the profundity of my thoughts. After
years of unquestioning humility I enjoyed a prolonged debauch of intellectual pride, and I
marvelled at the little boy of yesterday who had wept because he could not be an imbecile.
It was the apotheosis of the ugly duckling, and I saw my swan's plumage reflected in the placid
faces of the boys around me, as in the vacant waters of a pool. As yet I did not dream of a
moulting season, still less that a day would come when I should envy the ducks their domestic
ease and the unthinking tranquillity of their lives. A little boy may be excused for not realising
that Hans Andersen's story is only the prelude to a sadder story that he had not the heart
to write.

My new freedom of spirit gave me courage to re-examine the emotional and æesthetic values of
my environment. I could not persuade myself that I liked the sound of bells, and the greyness
of the country in winter-time still revolted me, as though I had not yet forgotten the cheerful
reds and greens and blues of the picture-books that filled my mind as a child with dreams of
a delightful world. But now that I was wise enough to make the best of my unboyish emotionalism,
I began to take pleasure in certain phases of school-life. Though I was devoid of any recognisable
religious sense I liked the wide words in the Psalms that we read at night in the school chapel.
This was not due to any precocious recognition of their poetry, but to the fact that their
intense imagery conjured up all sorts of precious visions in my mind, I could see the hart
panting after the water-brooks, in the valleys of Exmoor, where I had once spent an enchanted
holiday. I could see the men going down to the sea in ships, and the stormy waves, and the
staggering, fearful mariners, for I had witnessed a great tempest off Flamborough Head. Even
such vague phrases as "the hills" gave me an intense joy. I could see them so clearly, those
hills, chalky hills covered with wild pansies, and with an all-blue sky overhead, like the
lid of a chocolate-box. I liked, too, the services in the old church on Sunday nights, when
the lights were lowered for the sermon, and I would put my hands over my ears and hear the
voice of the preacher like the drone of a distant bee. After church the choral society used
to practise in the Great Hall, and as I walked round the school buildings, snatches of their
singing would beat against my face like sudden gusts of wind. When I listened at the doors
of my form-room I heard the boys talking about football matches, or indulging their tireless
passion for unimaginative personalities; I would stand on the mat outside wondering whether
I would be allowed to read if I went in.

I looked forward to Tuesday night, which was my bath-night, almost as much as to Sunday. The
school sanitary arrangements were primitive, and all the water had to be fetched in pails,
and I used to like to see the man tipping the hot water into the bath and flinging his great
body back to avoid the steam that made his grey flannel shirt-sleeves cling to his hairy arms.
Most of the boys added a lot of cold water, but I liked to boil myself because the subsequent
languor was so pleasant. The matron would bring our own bath towels warm from the fire, and
I would press mine against my face because it smelt of childhood and of home. I always thought
my body looked pretty after a really hot bath; its rosiness enabled me to forgive myself for
being fat.

One very strong impression was connected with the only master in the school whom I did not
like. He was a German, and as is the case with others of his nationality, a spray of saliva
flew from his lips when he was angry, and seeing this, I would edge away from him in alarm.
Perhaps it was on this account that he treated me with systematic unfairness and set himself
the unnecessary task of making me ridiculous in the eyes of the other boys. One night I was
wandering in the playground and heard him playing the violin in his study. My taste in music
was barbarian; I liked comic songs, which I used to sing to myself in a lugubrious voice, and
in London the plaintive clamour of the street-organs had helped to make my sorrows rhythmical.
But now, perhaps for the first time, I became aware of the illimitable melancholy that lies
at the heart of all great music. It seemed to me that the German master, the man whom I hated,
had shut himself up alone in his study, and was crying aloud. I knew that if he was unhappy,
it must be because he too was an Ishmael, a personality, one of the different ones. A great
sympathy woke within me, and I peeped through the window and saw him playing with his face
all shiny with perspiration and a silk handkerchief tucked under his chin. I would have liked
to have knocked at his door and told him that I knew all about these things, but I was afraid
that he would think me cheeky and splutter in my face.

The next day in his class, I looked at him hopefully, in the light of my new understanding,
but it did not seem to make any difference. He only told me to get on with my work.

The term drew to a close, and most of the boys in my form-room ticked off the days on lists,
in which the Sundays were written in red ink to show that they did not really count. As time
went on they grew more and more boisterous, and wherever I went I heard them telling one another
how they were going to spend their holidays. It was surprising to me that these boys who were
so ordinary during term-time should lead such adventurous lives in the holidays, and I felt
a little envious of their good fortune. They talked of visiting the theatre and foreign travel
in a matter-of-fact way that made me think that perhaps after all my home-life was incomplete.
I had never been out of England, and my dramatic knowledge was limited to pantomimes, for which
these enthusiastic students of musical comedy expressed a large contempt. Some of them were
allowed to shoot with real guns in the holidays, which reminded me of the worst excesses of
my brother in Yorkshire. Examining my own life, I had often come to the conclusion that adventures
did not exist outside books. But the boys shook this comforting theory with their boastful
prophecies, and I thought once more that perhaps it was my misfortune that they did not happen
to me. I began to fear that I would find the holidays tame.

There were other considerations that made me look forward to the end of the term with misgiving.
Since it had been made plain to me that I was a remarkable boy, I had rather enjoyed my life
at school. I had conceived myself as strutting with a measured dignity before a background
of the other boys--a background that moved and did not change, like a wind-swept tapestry;
but I was quite sure that I would not be allowed to give myself airs at home. It seemed to
me that a youngest brother's portion of freedom would compare but poorly with the measure of
intellectual liberty that I had secured for myself at school. My brothers were all very well
in their way, but I would be expected to take my place in the background and do what I was
told. I should miss my sense of being superior to my environment, and my intensely emotional
Sundays would no longer divide time into weeks. The more I thought of it, the more I realised
that I did not want to go home.

On the last night of the term, when the dormitory had at length become quiet, I considered
the whole case dispassionately in my bed. The labour of packing my play-box and writing labels
for my luggage had given me a momentary thrill, but for the rest I had moved among my insurgent
comrades with a chilled heart. I knew now that I was too greedy of life, that I always thought
of the pleasant side of things when they were no longer within my grasp; but at the I same
time my discontent was not wholly unreasonable. I had learnt more of myself in three months
than I had in all my life before, and from being a nervous, hysterical boy I had arrived at
a complete understanding of my emotions, which I studied with an almost adult calmness of mind.
I knew that in returning to the society of my healthy, boyish brothers, I was going back to
a kind of life for which I was no longer fitted. I had changed, but I had the sense to see
that it was a change that would not appeal to them, and that in consequence I would have another
and harder battle to fight before I was allowed to go my own way.

I saw further still. I saw that after a month at home I would not want to come back to school,
and that I should have to endure another period of despondency. I saw that my whole school
life would be punctuated by these violent uprootings, that the alternation of term-time and
holidays would make it impossible for me to change life into a comfortable habit, and that
even to the end of my school-days it would be necessary for me to preserve my new-found courage.

As I lay thinking in the dark I was proud of the clarity of my mind, and glad that I had at
last outwitted the tears that had made my childhood so unhappy. I heard, the boys breathing
softly around me--those wonderful boys who could sleep even when they were excited--and I felt
that I was getting the better of them in thinking while they slept. I remembered the prefect
who had told me that we were there only for a spell, but I did not speculate as to what would
follow afterwards. All that I had to do was to watch myself ceaselessly, and be able to explain
to myself everything that I felt I and did. In that way I should always be strong I enough
to guard my weaknesses from the eyes of the jealous world in which I moved.

The church bells chimed the hour, and I turned over and went to sleep.

On the Brighton Road

Slowly the sun had climbed up the hard white downs, till it broke with little of the mysterious
ritual of dawn upon a sparkling world of snow. There had been a hard frost during the night,
and the birds, who hopped about here and there with scant tolerance of life, left no trace
of their passage on the silver pavements. In places the sheltered caverns of the hedges broke
the monotony of the whiteness that had fallen upon the coloured earth, and overhead the sky
melted from orange to deep blue, from deep blue to a blue so pale that it suggested a thin
paper screen rather than illimitable space. Across the level fields there came a cold, silent
wind which blew a fine dust of snow from the trees, but hardly stirred the crested hedges.
Once above the skyline, the sun seemed to climb more quickly, and as it rose higher it began
to give out a heat that blended with the keenness of the wind.

It may have been this strange alternation of heat and cold that disturbed the tramp in his
dreams, for he struggled tor a moment with the snow that covered him, like a man who finds
himself twisted uncomfortably in the bed-clothes, and then sat up with staring, questioning
eyes. "Lord! I thought I was in bed," he said to himself as he took in the vacant landscape,
"and all the while I was out here." He stretched his limbs, and, rising carefully to his feet,
shook the snow off his body. As he did so the wind set him shivering, and he knew that his
bed had been warm.

"Come, I feel pretty fit," he thought. "I suppose I am lucky to wake at all in this. Or unlucky--it
isn't much of a business to come back to." He looked up and saw the downs shining against the
blue, like the Alps on a picture-postcard. "That means another forty miles or so, I suppose,"
he continued grimly. "Lord knows what I did yesterday. Walked till I was done, and now I'm
only about twelve miles from Brighton. Damn the snow, damn Brighton, damn everything!" The
sun crept higher and higher, and he started walking patiently along the road with his back
turned to the hills.

"Am I glad or sorry that it was only sleep that took me, glad or sorry, glad or sorry?" His
thoughts seemed to arrange themselves in a metrical accompaniment to the steady thud of his
footsteps, and he hardly sought an answer to his question. It was good enough to walk to.

Presently, when three milestones had loitered past, he overtook a boy who was stooping to light
a cigarette. He wore no overcoat, and looked unspeakably fragile against the snow, "Are you
on the road, guv'nor?" asked the boy huskily as he passed.

"I think I am," the tramp said.

"Oh! then I'll come a bit of the way with you if you don't walk too fast. It's bit lonesome
walking this time of day."

The tramp nodded his head, and the boy started limping along by his side.

"I'm eighteen," he said casually. "I bet you thought I was younger."

"Fifteen, I'd have said."

"You'd have backed a loser. Eighteen last August, and I've been on the road six years. I ran
away from home five times when I was a little 'un, and the police took me back each time. Very
good to me, the police was. Now I haven't got a home to run away from."

"Nor have I," the tramp said calmly.

"Oh, I can see what you are," the boy panted; "you're a gentleman come down. It's harder for
you than for me." The tramp glanced at the limping, feeble figure and lessened his pace.

"I haven't been at it as long as you have," he admitted.

"No, I could tell that by the way you walk. You haven't got tired yet. Perhaps you expect something
at the other end?"

The tramp reflected for a moment. "I don't know," he said bitterly, "I'm always expecting things."

"You'll grow out of that;" the boy commented. "It's warmer in London, but it's harder to come
by grub. There isn't much in it really."

"Still, there's the chance of meeting somebody there who will understand--"

"Country people are better," the boy interrupted. "Last night I took a lease of a barn for
nothing and slept with the cows, and this morning the farmer routed me out and gave me tea
and toke because I was so little. Of course, I score there; but in London, soup on the Embankment
at night, and all the rest of the time coppers moving you on."

"I dropped by the roadside last night and slept where I fell. It's a wonder I didn't die,"
the tramp said. The boy looked at him sharply.

"How did you know you didn't?" he said.

"I don't see it," the tramp said, after a pause.

"I tell you," the boy said hoarsely, "people like us can't get away from this sort of thing
if we want to. Always hungry and thirsty and dog-tired and walking all the while. And yet if
anyone offers me a nice home and work my stomach feels sick. Do I look strong? I know I'm little
for my age, but I've been knocking about like this for six years, and do you think I'm not
dead? I was drowned bathing at Margate, and I was killed by a gypsy with a spike; he knocked
my head and yet I'm walking along here now, walking to London to walk away from it again, because
I can't help it. Dead! I tell you we can't get away if we want to."

The boy broke off in a fit of coughing, and the tramp paused while he recovered.

"You'd better borrow my coat for a bit, Tommy," he said, "your cough's pretty bad."

"You go to hell!" the boy said fiercely, puffing at his cigarette; "I'm all right. I was telling
you about the road. You haven't got down to it yet, but you'll find out presently. We're all
dead, all of us who're on it, and we're all tired, yet somehow we can't leave it. There's nice
smells in the summer, dust and hay and the wind smack in your face on a hot day--and it's nice
waking up in the wet grass on a fine morning. I don't know, I don't know--" he lurched forward
suddenly, and the tramp caught him in his arms.

"I'm sick," the boy whispered--"sick."

The tramp looked up and down the road, but he could see no houses or any sign of help. Yet
even as he supported the boy doubtfully in the middle of the road a motor car suddenly flashed
in the middle distance, and came smoothly through the snow.

"What's the trouble?" said the driver quietly as he pulled up. "I'm a doctor." He looked at
the boy keenly and listened to his strained breathing.

"Pneumonia," he commented. "I'll give him a lift to the infirmary, and you, too, if you like."

The tramp thought of the workhouse and shook his head "I'd rather walk," he said.

The boy winked faintly as they lifted him into the car.

"I'll meet you beyond Reigate," he murmured to the tramp. "You'll see." And the car vanished
along the white road.

All the morning the tramp splashed through the thawing snow, but at midday he begged some bread
at a cottage door and crept into a lonely barn to eat it. It was warm in there, and after his
meal he fell asleep among the hay. It was dark when he woke, and started trudging once more
through the slushy roads.

Two miles beyond Reigate a figure, a fragile figure, slipped out of the darkness to meet him.

"On the road, guv'nor?" said a husky voice.

"But the pneumonia!" cried the tramp, aghast.

"I died at Crawley this morning," said the boy.

A Tragedy In Little

                                  I

Jack, the postmaster's little son, stood in the bow-window of the parlour and watched his mother
watering the nasturtiums in the front garden. A certain intensity of purpose was expressed
by the manner in which she handled the water-pot. For though it was a fine afternoon the carrier's
man had called over the hedge to say that there would be a thunderstorm during the night, and
every one knew that he never made a mistake about the weather. Nevertheless, Jack's mother
watered the plants as if he had not spoken, for it seemed to her that this meteorological gift
smacked a little of sorcery and black magic; but in spite of herself she felt sure that there
would be a thunderstorm and that her labour was therefore vain, save perhaps as a protest against
idle superstition. It was in the same spirit that she carried an umbrella on the brightest
summer day.

Jack had been sent indoors because he would get his legs in the way of the watering-pot in
order to cool them, so now he had to be content to look on, with his nose pressed so tightly
against the pane that from outside it looked like the base of a sea-anemone growing in a glass
tank. He could no longer hear the glad chuckle of the watering-pot when the water ran out,
but, on the other hand, he could write his name on the window with his tongue, which he could
not have done if he had been in the garden. Also he had some sweets in his pocket, bought with
a halfpenny stolen from his own money-box, and as the window did not taste very nice he slipped
one into his mouth and sucked it with enjoyment. He did not like being in the parlour, because
he had to sit there with his best clothes on every Sunday afternoon and read the parish magazine
to his sleepy parents. But the front window was lovely, like a picture, and, indeed, he thought
that his mother, with the flowers all about her and the red sky overhead, was like a lady on
one of the beautiful calendars that the grocer gave away at Christmas. He finished his sweet
and started another; he always meant to suck them right through to make them last longer, but
when the sweet was half finished he invariably crunched it up. His father had done the same
thing as a boy.

The room behind him was getting dark, but outside the sky seemed to be growing lighter, and
mother still stooped from bed to bed, moving placidly, like a cow. Sometimes she put the watering-pot
down on the gravel path, and bent to uproot a microscopic weed or to pull the head off a dead
flower. Sometimes she went to the well to get some more water, and then Jack was sorry that
he had been shut indoors, for he liked letting the pail down with a run and hearing it bump
against the brick sides. Once he tapped upon the window for permission to come out, but mother
shook her head vigorously without turning round; and yet his stockings were hardly wet at all.

Suddenly mother straightened herself, and Jack looked up and saw his father leaning over the
gate. He seemed to be making grimaces, and Jack made haste to laugh aloud in the empty room,
because he knew that he was good at seeing his father's jokes. Indeed it was a funny thing
that father should come home early from work and make faces at mother from the road. Mother,
too, was willing to join in the fun, for she knelt down among the wet flowers, and as her head
drooped lower and lower it looked, for one ecstatic moment, as though she were going to turn
head over heels. But she lay quite still on the ground, and father came half-way through the
gate, and then turned and ran off down the hill towards the station. Jack stood in the window,
clapping his hands and laughing; it was a strange game, but not much harder to understand than
most of the amusements of the grown-up people.

And then as nothing happened, as mother did not move and father did not come back, Jack grew
frightened. The garden was queer and the room was full of darkness, so he beat on the window
to change the game. Then, since mother did not shake her head, he ran out into the garden,
smiling carefully in case he was being silly. First he went to the gate, but father was quite
small far down the road, so he turned back and pulled the sleeve of his mother's dress, to
wake her. After a dreadful while mother got up off the ground with her skirt all covered with
wet earth. Jack tried to brush it off with his hands and made a mess of it, but she did not
seem to notice, looking across the garden with such a desolate face, that when he saw it he
burst into tears. For once mother let him cry himself out without seeking to comfort him; when
he sniffed dolefully, his nostrils were full of the scent of crushed marigolds. He could not
help watching her hands through his tears; it seemed as though they were playing together at
cat's-cradle; they were not still for a moment. But it was her face that at once frightened
and interested him. One minute it looked smooth and white as if she was very cross, and the
next minute it was gathered up in little folds as if she was going to sneeze. Deep down in
him something chuckled, and he jumped for fear that the cross part of her had heard it. At
intervals during the evening, while mother was getting him his supper, this chuckle returned
to him, between unnoticed fits of crying. Once she stood holding a plate in the middle of the
room for quite five minutes, and he found it hard to control his mirth. If father had been
there they would have had good fun together, teasing mother, but by himself he was not sure
of his ground. And father did not come back, and mother did not seem to hear his questions.

He had some tomatoes and rice-pudding for his supper, and as mother left him to help himself
to brown sugar he enjoyed it very much, carefully leaving the skin of the rice-pudding to the
last, because that was the part he liked best. After supper he sat nodding at the open window,
looking out over the plum-trees to the sky beyond, where the black clouds were putting out
the stars one by one. The garden smelt stuffy, but it was nice to be allowed to sit up when
you felt really sleepy. On the whole he felt that it had been a pleasant, exciting sort of
day, though once or twice mother had frightened him by looking so strange. There had been other
mysterious days in his life, however; perhaps he was going to have another little dead sister.
Presently he discovered that it was delightful to shut your eyes and nod your head and pretend
that you were going to sleep; it was like being in a swing that went up and up and never came
down again. It was like being in a rowing-boat on the river after a steamer had gone by. It
was like lying in a cradle under a lamplit ceiling, a cradle that rocked gently to and fro
while mother sang far-away songs.

He was still a baby when he woke up, and he slipped off his chair and staggered blindly across
the room to his mother, with his knuckles in his eyes like a little, little boy. He climbed
into her lap and settled himself down with a grunt of contentment. There was a mutter of thunder
in his ears, and he felt great warm drops of rain falling on his face. And into his dreams
he carried the dim consciousness that the thunderstorm had begun.

                                 II

The next morning at breakfast-time father had not come back, and mother said a lot of things
that made Jack feel very uncomfortable. After greeting Brown the guest resumed her seat on one
of the camp-chairs, a box worn smooth by much use, having a slit cut in the top through which the
hand could be thrust to lift it.

The camp, in a small clearing, consisted of two tents, both of the wedge-shaped kind. The sleeping-tent
was nearly filled by the bed it contained; and this, lifted a few inches above the ground on
pole supports, was of browse or brush and straw, covered with blankets. A square canopy of
mosquito-netting protected it. The cooking-tent had a foundation of logs and a canvas top. The
floor was of pure white sand. Boxes like lockers were stored under the eaves to hold food, and
in one corner a cylindrical camp-stove with an oven thrust its pipe through a tinned hole in the
roof.

Plenty of iron skillets, kettles, and pans hung above the lockers on pegs in the logs; and
the camp dinner service of white ware, black-handled knives and forks, and metal spoons, neatly washed,
stood on a table. Jess, the Scotch collie, who was always left to guard the tents in their owners'
absence, sat at her usual post within the door; and she and Brown exchanged repressed growls
at the strangers. Jess, being freed from her chain, trotted at his heels when he went back to
the beach to clean fish for supper. She sat and watched his deft and work-hardened hands as he
dipped and washed and drew and scaled his spoil. He was a clean-skinned, blue-eyed Canadian
Irishman, well made and sinewy, bright and open of countenance. His blond hair clung in almost flaxen
tendrils to his warm forehead. No ill-nature was visible about him, yet he turned like a man
in fierce self-defence on his partner, who followed Jess and stood also watching him.

"Puttany, you fool! what have you brought these cursed patois into camp for?"

"Joe La France vas my old pardner," softly pleaded the German.

"Damn you, man, we can't start an orphan-asylum and widows' home! We'll get a bad name at the hotels.
The real good people won't have us for guides."

"She told me in Allanville she had no place to stay. She did not
know what to do. At the old voman's, where Joe put her, they have
need of her bed. The old voman is too poor to keep her any more."

"I'd
have done just what you did; that's what makes me so mad. How long
is she going to stay?"

"I don't know," sheepishly responded his partner.

"A
Dutchman ought to have more sense than to load up with a lot of cursed
patois. Nothing but French and Indian! We'll have to put the precious
dears in the sleeping-tent, and bunk down ourselves with blankets
in the other. Did you air the blankets good this morning, Frank?"

"They
vos veil aired."

"You're a soft mark, Frank! One of us will have
to marry Joe La France's widow--that's what it will come to!" She made more noise when she cried than
mother; in fact he was afraid that in a minute he would have to laugh at her snortings, so
he went into the parlour and sat there in the dark, eating his sweets, and knitting his brow
over the complexities of life. He could see five stars, and there was a light behind the red
curtain of the front bedroom at Arber's farm. It was about twelve times as large as a star,
and a much prettier colour. By nearly closing his eyes he could see everything double, so that
there were ten stars and two red lights; he was trying to make everything come treble when
the gate clicked and he saw his father's shadow. He was delighted with this happy end to a
tiresome day, and as he ran through the passage he called out to mother to say that father
was back. Mother did not answer, but he heard a bit of noise in the kitchen as he opened the
front door.

He said "Good evening" in the grown-up voice that father encouraged, but father slipped in
and shut the door without saying a word. Every night when he came back from the post-office
he brought Jack the gummed edgings off the sheets of stamps, and Jack held out his hand for
them as a matter of course. Automatically father felt in his overcoat pocket and pulled out
a great handful. "Take care of them, they're the last you'll get," he said; but when Jack asked
why, his father looked at him with the same hopeless expression that he had found in his mother's
eyes a short while before. Jack felt a little cross that every one should be so stupid.

When they went into the kitchen everybody looked very strange, and Jack sat down in the corner
and listened for an explanation. As a rule the conversation of the grown-up people did not
amuse him, but tonight he felt that something had happened, and that if he kept quiet he might
find out what it was. He had noticed before that when the grown-ups talked they always said
the same things over and over again, and now they were worse than usual. Father said, "It's
no good, I've got to go through it;" the mill-woman said, "Whatever made you do it, George?"
And mother said, "Nothing will ever happen to me again!" They all went on saying these things
till Jack grew tired of listening, and started plaiting his stamp-paper into a mat. If you
did it very neatly it was almost as good as an ordinary sheet of paper by the time you had
finished. By and by, while he was still at work, the mill-woman brought him his supper on a
plate, and raising his head he saw that father and mother were sitting close together, looking
at each other, and saying nothing at all. He was very disappointed that although father had
come home they had not had any jokes all the evening, and as they were all so dull he did not
very much mind being sent to bed when he had finished his supper. When he said good-night to
father, he noticed that his boots were very muddy, as if he had walked a long way like a common
postman. He made a joke about this, but they all looked at him as if he had said something
wrong, so he hurried out of the room, glad to get away from these people whose looks had no
reasonable significance, and whose words had no discoverable meaning. It had been a bad day,
and he hoped mother would let him go back to school the next morning.

And yet though he took off his clothes and got into bed, the day was not quite over. He had
only dozed for a few minutes when he was roused by a noise down below, and slipping out on
to the staircase he heard the mill-woman saying good-night in the passage. When she had gone
and the door had banged behind her, he listened still, and heard his mother crying and his
father talking on and on in a strange, hoarse voice. Somehow these incomprehensible sounds
made him feel lonely, and he would have liked to have gone downstairs and sat on his mother's
lap and blinked drowsily in his father's face, as he had done often enough before. But he was
always shy in the presence of strangers, and he felt that he did not know this woman who wept
and this man who did not laugh. His father was his play-friend, the sharer of all his fun;
his mother was a quiet woman who sat and sewed, and sometimes told them not to be silly, which
was the best joke of all. It was not right for people to alter. But the thought of his bedroom
made him desolate, and at last he plucked up his courage, and crept downstairs on bare feet.
Father and mother had gone back into the kitchen, and he peeped through the crack of the door
to see what they were doing. Mother was still crying, always crying, but he had to change his
position before he could see father. Then he turned on his heels and ran upstairs trembling
with fear and disgust. For father, the man of all the jokes, the man of whom burglars were
afraid and compared with whom all other little boys' fathers were as dirt, was crying like
a little girl.

He jumped into bed and pulled the bedclothes over his face to shut out the ugliness of the world.

                                 III

When Jack woke up the next morning he found that the room was full of sunshine, and that father
was standing at the end of the bed. The moment Jack opened his eyes, he began telling him something
in a serious voice, which was alone sufficient to prevent Jack from understanding what he said.
Besides, he used a lot of long words, and Jack thought that it was silly to use long words
before breakfast, when nobody could be expected to remember what they meant. Father's body
neatly fitted the square of the window, and the sunbeams shone in all round it and made it
look splendid; and if Jack had not already forgotten the unfortunate impression of the night
before, this would have enabled him to overcome it. Every now and then father stopped to ask
him if he understood, and he said he did, hoping to find out what it was all about later on.
It seemed, however, that father was not going to the post-office any more, and this caused
Jack to picture a series of delightfully amusing days. When father had finished talking he
appeared to expect Jack to say something, but Jack contented himself with trying to look interested,
for he knew that it was always very stupid of little boys not to understand things they didn't
understand. In reality he felt as if he had been listening while his father argued aloud with
himself, talking up and down like an earthquake map.

At breakfast they were still subdued, but afterwards, as the morning wore on, father became
livelier and helped Jack to build a hut in the back garden. They built it of bean-sticks against
the wall at the end, and father broke up a packing-case to get planks for the roof. Only mother
still had a sad face, and it made Jack angry with her, that she should be such a spoil-fun.
After dinner, while Jack was playing in the hut, Mr. Simmons, of the police-station, and another
gentleman called to take father for a walk, and Jack went down to the front to see them off.
Jack knew Mr. Simmons very well; he had been to tea with his little boy, but though he thought
him a fine sort of man he could not help feeling proud of his father when he saw them side
by side. Mr. Simmons looked as if he were ashamed of himself, while father walked along with
square shoulders and a high head as if he had just done something splendid. The other gentleman
looked like nothing at all beside father.

When they were out of sight Jack went into the house and found mother crying in the kitchen.
As he felt more tolerant in his after-dinner mood, he tried to cheer her up by telling her
how fine father had looked beside the other two men. Mother raised her face, all swollen and
spoilt with weeping, and gazed at her son in astonishment. "They are taking him to prison,"
she wailed, "and God knows what will become of us."

For a moment Jack felt alarmed. Then a thought came to him and he smiled, like a little boy
who has just found a new and delightful game. "Never mind, mother," he said, "we'll help him
to escape."

But mother would not stop crying.

Shepherd's Boy

The path climbed up and up and threatened to carry me over the highest point of the downs till
it faltered before a sudden outcrop of chalk and swerved round the hill on the level. I was
grateful for the respite, for I had been walking all day and my knapsack was growing heavy.
Above me in the blue pastures of the skies the cloud-sheep were grazing, with the sun on their
snowy backs, and all about me the grey sheep of earth were cropping the wild pansies that grew
wherever the chalk had won a covering of soil.

Presently I came upon the shepherd standing erect by the path, a tall, spare man with a face
that the sun and the wind had robbed of all expression. The dog at his feet looked more intelligent
than he. "You've come up from the valley," he said as I passed; "perhaps you'll have seen my boy?"

"I'm sorry, I haven't," I said, pausing.

"Sorrow breaks no bones," he muttered, and strode away with his dog at his heels. It seemed
to me that the dog was apologetic for his master's rudeness.

I walked on to the little hill-girt village, where I had made up my mind to pass the night.
The man at the village shop said he would put me up, so I took off my knapsack and sat down
on a sackful of cattle cake while the bacon was cooking.

"If you came over the hill, you'll have met shepherd," said the man, "and he'll have asked
you for his boy."

"Yes, but I hadn't seen him."

The shopman nodded. "There are clever folk who say you can see him, and clever folk who say
you can't. The simple ones like you and me, we say nothing, but we don't see him. Shepherd
hasn't got no boy."

"What! is it a joke?"

"Well, of course it may be," said the shop-man guardedly, "though I can't say I've heard many
people laughing at it yet. You see, shepherd's boy he broke his neck. . . .

"That was in the days before they built the fence above the big chalk-pit that you passed on
your left coming down. A dangerous place it used to be for the sheep, so shepherd's boy he
used to lie along there to stop them dropping into it, while shepherd's dog he stopped them
from going too far. And shepherd he used to come down here and have his glass, for he took
it then like you or me. He's blue ribbon now.

"It was one night when the mists were out on the hills, and maybe shepherd had had a glass
too much, or maybe he got a bit lost in the smoke. But when he went up there to bring them
home, he starts driving them into the pit as straight as could be. Shepherd's boy he hollered
out and ran to stop them, but four-and-twenty of them went over, and the lad he went with them.
You mayn't believe me, but five of them weren't so much as scratched, though it's a sixty feet
drop. Likely they fell soft on top of the others. But shepherd's boy he was done.

"Shepherd he's a bit spotty now, and most times he thinks the boy's still with him. And there
are clever folk who'll tell you that they've seen the boy helping shepherd's dog with the sheep.
That would be a ghost now, I shouldn't wonder. I've never seen it, but then I'm simple, as
you might say.

"But I've had two boys myself, and it seems to me that a boy like that, who didn't eat and
didn't get into mischief, and did his work, would be the handiest kind of boy to have about
the place."

The Passing of Edward

I found Dorothy sitting sedately on the beach, with a mass of black seaweed twined in her hands
and her bare feet sparkling white in the sun. Even in the first glow of recognition I realised
that she was paler than she had been the summer before, and yet I cannot blame myself for the
tactlessness of my question.

"Where's Edward?" I said; and I looked about the sands for a sailor suit and a little pair
of prancing legs.

While I looked Dorothy's eyes watched mine inquiringly, as if she wondered what I might see.

"Edward's dead," she said simply. "He died last year, after you left."

For a moment I could only gaze at the child in silence, and ask myself what reason there was
in the thing that had hurt her so. Now that I knew that Edward played with her no more, I could
see that there was a shadow upon her face too dark for her years, and that she had lost, to
some extent, that exquisite carelessness of poise which makes children so young. Her voice
was so calm that I might have thought her forgetful had I not seen an instant of patent pain
in her wide eyes.

"I'm sorry," I said at length "very, very, sorry indeed. I had brought down my car to take
you for a drive, as I promised."

"Oh! Edward would have liked that," she answered thoughtfully; "he was so fond of motors."
She swung round suddenly and looked at the sands behind her with staring eyes.

"I thought I heard--" she broke off in confusion.

I, too, had believed for an instant that I had heard something that was not the wind or the
distant children or the smooth sea hissing along the beach. During that golden summer which
linked me with the dead, Edward had been wont, in moments of elation, to puff up and down the
sands, in artistic representation of a nobby, noisy motor-car. But the dead may play no more,
and there was nothing there but the sands and the hot sky and Dorothy.

"You had better let me take you for a run, Dorothy," I said. "The man will drive, and we can
talk as we go along."

She nodded gravely, and began pulling on her sandy stockings.

"It did not hurt him," she said inconsequently.

The restraint in her voice pained me like a blow.

"Oh, don't, dear, don't!" I cried, "There is nothing to do but forget."

"I have forgotten, quite," she answered, pulling at her shoe-laces with calm fingers. "It was
ten months ago."

We walked up to the front, where the car was waiting, and Dorothy settled herself among the
cushions with a little sigh of contentment, the human quality of which brought me a certain
relief. If only she would laugh or cry! I sat down by her side, but the man waited by the open
door.

"What is it?" I asked.

"I'm sorry, sir," he answered, looking about him in confusion, "I thought I saw a young gentleman
with you."

He shut the door with a bang, and in a minute we were running through the town. I knew that
Dorothy was watching my face with her wounded eyes; but I did not look at her until the green
fields leapt up on either side of the white road.

"It is only for a little while that we may not see him," I said; "all this is nothing."

"I have forgotten," she repeated. "I think this is a very nice motor."

I had not previously complained of the motor, but I was wishing then that it would cease its
poignant imitation of a little dead boy, a boy who would play no more. By the touch of Dorothy's
sleeve against mine I knew that she could hear it too. And the miles flew by, green and brown
and golden, while I wondered what use I might be in the world, who could not help a child to
forget, Possibly there was another way, I thought.

"Tell me how it happened," I said.

Dorothy looked at me with inscrutable eyes, and spoke in a voice without emotion.

"He caught a cold, and was very ill in bed. I went in to see him, and he was all white and
faded. I said to him, `How are you Edward?' and he said, `I shall get up early in the morning
to catch beetles.' I didn't see him any more."

"Poor little chap!" I murmured.

"I went to the funeral," she continued monotonously, "It was very rainy, and I threw a little
bunch of flowers down into the hole. There was a whole lot of flowers there; but I think Edward
liked apples better than flowers."

"Did you cry?" I said cruelly.

She paused. "I don't know. I suppose so. It was a long time ago; I think I have forgotten."

Even while she spoke I heard Edward puffing along the sands: Edward who had been so fond of apples.

"I cannot stand this any longer," I said aloud. "Let's get out and walk in the woods for a change."

She agreed, with a depth of comprehension that terrified me; and the motor pulled up with a
jerk at a spot where hardly a post served to mark where the woods commenced and the wayside
grass stopped. We took one of the dim paths which the rabbits had made and forced our way through
the undergrowth into the peaceful twilight of the trees.

"You haven't got very sunburnt this year," I said as we walked.

"I don't know why. I've been out on the beach all the days. Sometimes I've played, too."

I did not ask her what games she had played, or who had been her play-friend. Yet even there
in the quiet woods I knew that Edward was holding her back from me. It is true that, in his
boy's way, he had been fond of me; but I should not have dared to take her out without him
in the days when his live lips had filled the beach with song, and his small brown body had
danced among the surf. Now it seemed that I had been disloyal to him.

And presently we came to a clearing where the leaves of forgotten years lay brown and rotten
beneath our feet, and the air was full of the dryness of death.

"Let's be going back. What do you think, Dorothy?" I said.

"I think," she said slowly,--"I think that this would be a very good place to catch beetles."

A wood is full of secret noises, and that is why, I suppose, we heard a pair of small quick
feet come with a dance of triumph through the rustling bracken. For a minute we listened deeply,
and then Dorothy broke from my side with a piercing call on her lips.

"Oh, Edward, Edward!" she cried; "Edward!"

But the dead may play no more, and presently she came back to me with the tears that are the
riches of childhood streaming down her face.

"I can hear him, I can hear him," she sobbed; "but I cannot see him. Never, never again."

And so I led her back to the motor. But in her tears I seemed to find a promise of peace that
she had not known before.

Now Edward was no very wonderful little boy; it may be that he was jealous and vain and greedy;
yet now, it seemed as he lay in his small grave with the memory of Dorothy's flowers about
him, he had wrought this kindness for his sister. Yes, even though we heard no more than the
birds in the branches and the wind swaying the scented bracken; even though he had passed with
another summer, and the dead and the love of the dead may rise no more from the grave.

The Story Of A Book

                            I. THE WRITER

The history of a book must necessarily begin with the history of its author, for surely in
these enlightened days neither the youngest nor the oldest of critics can believe that works
of art are found under gooseberry-bushes or in the nests of storks. In truth, I am by no means
sure that everybody knew this before the publication of "The Man Shakespeare," and for the
sake of a mystified posterity it may be well to explain that there was once a school of criticism
that thought it indecent to pry into that treasure-house of individuality from which, if we
reject the nursery hypotheses mentioned above, it is clearly obvious that authors derive their
works. That the drama must needs be closely related to the dramatist is just one of those simple
discoveries that invariably elude the subtle professional mind; but in this wiser hour I may
be permitted to assume that the author was the conscious father of his novel, and that he did
not find it surprisingly in his pocket one morning, like a bad shilling taken in change from
the cabman overnight.

Before he published his novel at the ripe age of thirty-seven the author had lived an irreproachable
and gentlemanly life. Born with at least a German-silver spoon in his mouth, he passed, after
a normally eventful childhood, through a respectable public school, and spent several agreeable
years at Cambridge without taking a degree. He then went into his uncle's office in the City,
where he idled daily from ten to four, till in due course he was admitted to a partnership,
which enabled him to reduce his hours of idleness to eleven to three. These details become
important when we reflect that from his childhood on the author had a great deal of time at
his disposal. If he had been entirely normal, he would have accepted the conventions of the
society to which he belonged, and devoted himself to motoring, bridge, and the encouragement
of the lighter drama. But some deep-rooted habit of his childhood, or even perhaps some remote
hereditary taint, led him to spend an appreciable fraction of his leisure time in the reading
of works of fiction. Unlike most lovers of light literature, he read with a certain mental
concentration, and was broad-minded enough to read good novels as well as bad ones.

It is a pleasant fact that it is impossible to concentrate one's mind on anything without in
time becoming wiser, and in the course of years the author became quite a skilful critic of
novels. From the first he had allowed his reading to colour his impressions of life, and had
obediently lived in a world of blacks and whites, of heroes and heroines, of villains and adventuresses,
until the grateful discovery of the realistic school of fiction permitted him to believe that
men and women were for the most part neither good nor bad, but tabby. Moreover, the leisurely
reading of many sentences had given him some understanding of the elements of style. He perceived
that some combinations of words were illogical, and that others were unlovely to the ear; and
at the same time he acquired a vocabulary and a knowledge of grammar and punctuation that his
earlier education had failed to give him. He read new novels at his writing-table, and took
pleasure in correcting the mistakes of their authors in ink. When he had done this, he would
hand them to his wife, who always read the end first, and, indeed, rarely pursued her investigation
of a book beyond the last chapter.

We buy knowledge with illusions, and pay a high price for it, for the acquirement of quite
a small degree of wisdom will deprive us of a large number of pleasant fancies. So it was with
the author, who found his joy in novel-reading diminishing rapidly as his critical knowledge
increased. He was no longer able to lose himself between the covers of a romance, but slid
his paper-knife between the pages of a book with an unwholesome readiness to be irritated by
the ignorance and folly of the novelist. His destructive criticism of works of fiction became
so acute that it was natural that his unlettered friends should suggest that he himself ought
to write a novel. For a long while he was content to receive the flattering suggestion with
a reticent smile that masked his conviction that there was a difference between criticism and
creation. But as he grew older the imperfections in the books he read ceased to give him the
thrill of the successful explorer in sight of the expected, and time began to trickle too slowly
through his idle fingers. One day he sat down and wrote "Chapter I." at the head of a sheet
of quarto paper.

It seemed to him that the difficulty was only one of selection, and he wrote two-thirds of
a novel with a breathless ease of creation that made him marvel at himself and the pitiful
struggles of less gifted novelists. Then in a moment of insight he picked up his manuscript
and realised that what he had written was childishly crude. He had felt his story while he
wrote it, but somehow or other he had failed to get his emotions on paper, and he saw quite
clearly that it was worse and not better than the majority of the books which he had held up
to ridicule.

There was a certain doggedness in his character that might have made him a useful citizen but
for that unfortunate hereditary spoon, and he wrote "Chapter I." at the head of a new sheet
of quarto paper long before the library fire had reached the heart of his first luckless manuscript.
This time he wrote more slowly, and with a waning confidence that failed him altogether when
he was about half-way through. Reading the fragment dispassionately he thought there were good
pages in it, but, taken as a whole, it was unequal, and moved forward only by fits and starts.
He began again with his late manuscript spread about him on the table for reference. At the
fifth attempt he succeeded in writing a whole novel.

In the course of his struggles he had acquired a philosophy of composition. Especially he had
learned to shun those enchanted hours when the labour of creation became suspiciously easy,
for he had found by experience that the work he did in these moments of inspiration was either
bad in itself or out of key with the preceding chapters. He thought that inspiration might
be useful to poets or writers of short stories, but personally as a novelist he found it a
nuisance. By dint of hard work, however, he succeeded in eliminating its evil influence from
his final draft. He told himself that he had no illusions as to the merits of his book. He
knew he was not a man of genius, but he knew also that the grammar and the punctuation of his
novel were far above the average of such works, and although he could not read Sir Thomas Browne
or Walter Pater with pleasure, he felt sure that his book was written in a straightforward
and gentlemanly style. He was prepared to be told that his use of the colon was audacious,
and looked forward with pleasure to an agreeable controversy on the question.

He read his book to his friends, who made suggestions that would have involved its rewriting
from one end to the other. He read it to his enemies, who told him that it was nearly good
enough to publish; he read it to his wife, who said that it was very nice, and that it was
time to dress for dinner. No one seemed to realise that it was the most important thing he
had ever done in his life. This quickened his eagerness to get it published--an eagerness only
tempered by a very real fear of those knowing dogs, the critics. He could not forget that he
had criticised a good many books himself in terms that would have made the authors abandon
their profession if they had but heard his strictures; and he had read notices in the papers
that would have made him droop with shame if they had referred to any work of his. When these
sombre thoughts came to him he would pick up his book and read it again, and in common fairness
he had to admit to himself that he found it uncommonly good.

One day, after a whole batch of ungrammatical novels had reached him from the library, he posted
his manuscript to his favourite publisher. He had heard stories of masterpieces many times
rejected, so he did not tell his wife what he had done.

                      II. The Sleepy Publisher

The publisher to whom our author had confided his manuscript stood, like all publishers, at
the very head of his profession. His business was conducted on sound conservative lines, which
means that though he had regretfully abandoned the three-volume novel for the novel published
at six shillings, he was not among the intrepid revolutionaries who were beginning to produce
new fiction at a still lower price. Besides novels he published solid works of biography at
thirty-one and six, art books at a guinea, travel books at fifteen shillings, flighty historical
works at twelve-and-sixpence, and cheap editions of Montaigne's Essays and "Robinson Crusoe"
at a shilling. Some idea of his business methods may be derived from the fact that it pleased
him to reflect that all the other publishers were producing exactly the same books as he was.
And though he would admit that the trade had been ruined by competition and the outrageous
royalties demanded by successful authors, and, further, that he made a loss on every separate
department of his business, in some mysterious fashion the business as a whole continued to
pay him very well. He left the active part of the management to a confidential clerk, and contented
himself with signing cheques and interviewing authors.

With such a publisher the fate of our author's book was never in doubt. If it was lacking in
those qualities that might be expected to commend it to the reading public, it was conspicuously
rich in those merits that determine the favourable judgment of publishers' readers. It was
above all things a gentlemanly book, without violence and without eccentricities. It was carefully
and grammatically written; but it had not that exotic literary flavour which is so tiresome
on a long railway journey. It could be put into the hands of any schoolgirl, and at most would
merely send her to sleep. The only thing that could be said against it was that the author's
dread of inspiration had made it grievously dull, but it was the publisher's opinion that after
a glut of sensational fiction the six-shilling public had come to regard dullness as the hall-mark
of literary merit. He had no illusions as to its possible success, but, on the other hand,
he knew that he could not lose any money on it, so he wrote a letter to the author inviting
him to an interview.

As soon as he had read the letter the author told himself that he had been certain all along
that his book would be accepted. Nevertheless, he went to the interview moved by certain emotional
flutterings against which circumstance had guarded him ever since his boyhood. He found this
mild excitation of the nervous system by no means unpleasant. It was like digesting a new and
subtle liqueur that made him light-footed and tingled in the tips of his fingers. He recalled
a phrase that had greatly pleased him in the early days of his novel. "As the sun colours flowers,
so Art colours life." It seemed to him that this was beginning to come true, and that life
was already presenting itself to him in a gayer, brighter dress. He reached the publisher's
office, therefore, in an unwontedly receptive mood, and was tremendously impressed by the rudeness
of the clerks, who treated authors as mendicants and expressed their opinion of literature
by handling books as if they were bundles of firewood. 

If their author has a great capacity for unsatisfactory writing he has capacities not less great
for writing that is satisfactory in the highest degree. He has the tragic instinct and endowment,
and he has the comic as well; he is an ardent student of character and life; he has wit of the
swiftest, the most comprehensive, the most luminous, and humour that can be fantastic or ironical
or human at his pleasure; he has passion and he has imagination; he has considered sex--the
great subject, the leaven of imaginative art--with notable audacity and insight. He is as capable
of handling a vice or an emotion as he is of managing an affectation. He can be trivial, or grotesque,
or satirical, or splendid; and whether his milieu be romantic or actual, whether his personages
be heroic or sordid, he goes about his task with the same assurance
and intelligence.

In his best work he takes rank with the world's novelists. He is a companion for Balzac and
Richardson, an intimate for Fielding and Cervantes. His figures fall into their place beside the
greatest of their kind; and when you think of Lucy Feverel and Mrs. Berry, of Evan Harrington's
Countess Saldanha and the Lady Charlotte of Emilia in England, of the two old men in Harry
Richmond and the Sir Everard Romfrey of Beauchamp's Career, of Renee and Cecilia, of Emilia
and Rhoda Fleming, of Rose Jocelyn and Lady Blandish and Ripton Thompson,
they have in the mind's eye a value scarce inferior to that of Clarissa
and Lovelace, of Bath and Western and Booth, of Andrew Fairservice
and Elspeth Mucklebacket, of Philippe Bridau and Vautrin and Balthasar
Claes.

In the world of man's creation his people are citizens to match the noblest; they are of the aristocracy
of the imagination, the peers in their own right of the society of romance. And for all that, their
state is mostly desolate and lonely and forlorn.

His Defects.

For Mr. Meredith is one of the worst and least attractive of great writers as well as one of the best
and most fascinating. He is a sun that has broken out into innumerable spots. The better half
of his genius is always suffering eclipse from the worse half. He writes with the pen of a great
artist in his left hand and the razor of a spiritual suicide in his right. He is the master and the
victim of a monstrous cleverness which is neither to hold nor to bind, and will not permit him to
do things as an honest, simple person of genius would. As Shakespeare, in Johnson's phrase,
lost the world for a quibble and was content to lose it, so does Mr. Meredith discrown himself
of the sovereignty of contemporary romance to put on the cap and bells of the professional wit.
He is not content to be plain Jupiter: his lightnings are less to
him than his fireworks; and his pages so teem with fine sayings and
magniloquent epigrams and gorgeous images and fantastic locutions
that the mind would welcome dulness as a bright relief.

He is tediously amusing; he is brilliant to the point of being obscure; his helpfulness is
so extravagant as to worry and confound. That is the secret of his unpopularity. His stories
are not often good stories and are seldom well told; his ingenuity and intelligence are always misleading
him into treating mere episodes as solemnly and elaborately as main incidents; he is ever ready
to discuss, to ramble, to theorise, to dogmatise, to indulge in a little irony or a little reflection
or a little artistic misdemeanour of some sort. But other novelists have done these things before
him, and have been none the less popular, and are actually none the less readable. None, however,
has pushed the foppery of style and intellect to such a point as Mr. Meredith. Not infrequently
he writes page after page of English as ripe and sound and unaffected as heart could wish; and you
can but impute to wantonness and recklessness the splendid impertinences that intrude elsewhere.
To read him at the rate of two or three chapters a day is to have a sincere and hearty admiration
for him and a devout anxiety to forget his defects and make much of his merits. But they are
few who can take a novel on such terms as these, and to read your Meredith straight off is to
have an indigestion of epigram, and to be incapable of distinguishing good from bad: the author
of the parting between Richard and Lucy Feverel--a high- water mark of novelistic passion and emotion--from
the creator of Mr. Raikes and Dr. Shrapnel, which are two of the most flagrant unrealities ever
perpetrated in the name of fiction by an artist of genius.

Another Way.

On the whole, I think, he does not often say anything not worth hearing. He is too wise for
that; and, besides, he is strenuously in earnest about his work. He has a noble sense of the
dignity of art and the responsibilities of the artist; he will set down nothing that is to his
mind unworthy to be recorded; his treatment of his material is distinguished by the presence
of an intellectual passion (as it were) that makes whatever he does considerable and deserving of
attention and respect. But unhappily the will is not seldom unequal to the deed: the achievement
is often leagues in rear of the inspiration; the attempt at completeness is too laboured and
too manifest--the feat is done but by a painful and ungraceful process.

                       There is genius, but there is not felicity: that, one is inclined
to say, is the distinguishing note of Mr. Meredith's work, in prose
and verse alike.

There are magnificent exceptions, of course, but they prove the rule and, broken though it be,
there is no gainsaying its existence. To be concentrated in form, to be suggestive in material,
to say nothing that is not of permanent value, and only to say it in such terms as are charged to
the fullest with significance--this would seem to be the aim and end of Mr. Meredith's ambition.
Of simplicity in his own person he appears incapable. The texture of his expression must be stiff
with allusion, or he deems it ill spun; there must be something of antic in his speech, or he
cannot believe he is addressing himself to the Immortals; he has praised with perfect understanding
the lucidity, the elegance, the ease, of Moliere, and yet his aim in art (it would appear)
is to be Moliere's antipodes, and to vanquish by congestion, clottedness, an anxious and determined
dandyism of form and style. There is something bourgeois in his intolerance of the commonplace,
something fanatical in the intemperance of his regard for artifice. 'Le dandy,' says Baudelaire, 'doit
aspirer a etre sublime sans interruption. Il doit vivre et dormir devant un miroir.' That,
you are tempted to believe, is Mr. Meredith's theory of expression. 'Ce qu'il y a dans le mauvais
gout,' is elsewhere the opinion of the same unamiable artist in paradox, 'c'est le plaisir aristocratique
de deplaire.' Is that, you ask yourself, the reason why Mr. Meredith is so contemptuous of
the general public?--why he will stoop to no sort of concession nor permit himself a mite of patience
with the herd whose intellect is content with such poor fodder as Scott and Dickens and Dumas?
Be it as it may, the effect is the same.

Our author is bent upon being 'uninterruptedly sublime'; and we must take him as he wills and
as we find him. He loses of course; and we suffer. But none the less do we cherish his society,
and none the less are we interested in his processes, and enchanted (when we are clever enough)
by his results. He lacks felicity, I have said; but he has charm as well as power, and, once
his rule is accepted, there is no way to shake him off. The position is that of the antique
tyrant in a commonwealth once republican and free.

You resent the domination, but you enjoy it too, and with or against your will you admire the
author of your slavery.

Rhoda Fleming.

Rhoda Fleming is one of the least known of the novels, and in a sense it is one of the most disagreeable.
To the general it has always been caviare, and caviare it is likely to remain; for the general
is before all things respectable, and no such savage and scathing attack upon the superstitions
of respectability as Rhoda Fleming has been written. And besides, the emotions developed are
too tragic, the personages too elementary in kind and too powerful in degree, the effects too poignant
and too sorrowful. In these days people read to be amused. They care for no passion that is
not decent in itself and whose expression is not restrained. It irks them to grapple with problems capable
of none save a tragic solution. And when Mr. Meredith goes digging in a very bad temper with
things in general into the deeper strata, the primitive deposits, of human nature, the public
is the reverse of profoundly interested in the outcome of his exploration and the results of his
labour. But for them whose eye is for real literature and such literary essentials as character
largely seen and largely presented and as passion deeply felt and poignantly expressed there
is such a feast in Rhoda Fleming as no other English novelist alive has spread. The book, it is
true, is full of failures.

There is, for instance, the old bank porter Anthony, who is such a failure as only a great
novelist may perpetrate and survive; who suggests (with some other of Mr. Meredith's creations)
a close, deliberate, and completely unsuccessful imitation of Dickens: a writer with whom Mr. Meredith
is not averse from entering into competition, and who, so manifest on these occasions is his
superiority, may almost be described as the other's evil genius. Again, there is Algernon the
fool, of whom his author is so bitterly contemptuous that he is never once permitted to live and
move and have any sort of being whatever and who, though he bears a principal part in the
intrigue, like the Blifil of Tom Jones is so constantly illuminated by the lightnings of the
ironical mode of presentation as always to seem unreal in himself and seriously to imperil
the reality of the story. And, lastly, there are the chivalrous Percy Waring and the inscrutable
Mrs. Lovell, two gentle ghosts whose proper place is the shadow-land of the American novel. But
when all these are removed (and for the judicious reader their removal is far from difficult)
a treasure of reality remains. What an intensity of life it is that hurries and throbs and burns
through the veins of the two sisters--Dahlia the victim, Rhoda the executioner! Where else in
English fiction is such a 'human oak log' as their father, the Kentish yeoman William Fleming? And where
in English fiction is such a problem presented as that in the evolution of which these three--with
a following so well selected and achieved as Robert Armstrong and Jonathan Eccles and the evil
ruffian Sedgett, a type of the bumpkin gone wrong, and Master Gammon, that type of the bumpkin old and
obstinate, a sort of human saurian--are dashed together, and ground
against each other till the weakest and best of the three is broken
to pieces?

Mr. Meredith may and does fail conspicuously to interest you in Anthony Hackbut and Algernon Blancove
and Percy Waring; but he knows every fibre of the rest, and he makes your knowledge as intimate
and comprehensive as his own. With these he is never at fault and never out of touch. They have
the unity of effect, the vigorous simplicity, of life that belong to great creative art; and
at their highest stress of emotion, the culmination of their passion, they appeal to and affect
you with a force and a directness that suggest the highest achievement of Webster. Of course
this sounds excessive. The expression of human feeling in the coil of a tragic situation is not
a characteristic of modern fiction. It is thought to be not consistent with the theory and practice
of realism; and the average novelist is afraid of it, the average reader is only affected by
it when he goes to look for it in poetry. But the book is there to show that such praise is deserved;
and they who doubt it have only to read the chapters called respectively 'When the Night is
Darkest' and 'Dahlia's Frenzy' to be convinced and doubt no longer. It has been objected to the climax
of Rhoda Fleming that it is unnecessarily inhumane, and that Dahlia
dead were better art than Dahlia living and incapable of love and joy.

But the book, as I have said, is a merciless impeachment of respectability; and as the spectacle
of a ruined and broken life is infinitely more discomforting than that of a noble death, I take
it that Mr. Meredith was right to prefer his present ending to the alternative, inasmuch as
the painfulness of that impression he wished to produce and the potency of that moral he chose
to draw are immensely heightened and strengthened thereby.

The Tragic Comedians.

Opinions differ, and there are those, I believe, to whom Alvan and Clotilde von Rudiger--'acrobats
of the affections' they have been called--are pleasant companions, and the story of those
feats in the gymnastics of sentimentalism in which they lived to shine is the prettiest reading
imaginable.

But others not so fortunate or, to be plain, more honestly obtuse persist in finding that story
tedious, and the bewildering appearances it deals with not human
beings--not of the stock of Rose Jocelyn and Sir Everard Romfrey,
of Dahlia Fleming and Lucy Feverel and Richmond Roy--but creatures
of gossamer and rainbow, phantasms of spiritual romance, abstractions
of remote, dispiriting points in sexual philosophy.

                              

The Egoist.

Just as Moliere in the figures of Alceste and Tartuffe has summarised and embodied all that
we need to know of indignant honesty and the false fervour of sanctimonious animalism, so in the
person of Sir Willoughby Patterne has Mr. Meredith succeeded in expressing the qualities of
egoism as the egoist appears in his relations with women and in his conception and exercise of
the passion of love. Between the means of the two men there is not, nor can be, any sort of
comparison. Moliere is brief, exquisite, lucid: classic in his union of ease and strength, of purity
and sufficiency, of austerity and charm. In The Egoist Mr. Meredith is even more artificial and
affected than his wont: he bristles with allusions, he teems with hints and side-hits and false
alarms, he glitters with phrases, he riots in intellectual points and philosophical fancies;
and though his style does nowhere else become him so well, his cleverness is yet so reckless
and indomitable as to be almost as fatiguing here as everywhere. But in their matter the great Frenchman
and he have not much to envy each other. Sir Willoughby Patterne is a 'document on humanity'
of the highest value; and to him that would know of egoism and the egoist the study of Sir Willoughby
is indispensable. There is something in him of us all. He is a compendium of the Personal in man;
and if in him the abstract Egoist have not taken on his final shape and become classic and
typical it is not that Mr. Meredith has forgotten anything in his composition but rather that
there are certain defects of form, certain structural faults and weaknesses, which prevent
you from accepting as conclusive the aspect of the mass of him. But the Moliere of the future
(if the future be that fortunate) has but to pick and choose with discretion here to find
the stuff of a companion figure to Arnolphe and Alceste and Celimene.

In Metre.

His verse has all the faults and only some of the merits of his prose. Thus he will rhyme you off
a ballad, and to break the secret of that ballad you have to take to yourself a dark lantern and
a case of jemmies. I like him best in The Nuptials of Attila. If he always wrote as here, and
were always as here sustained in inspiration, rapid of march, nervous of phrase, apt of metaphor,
and moving in effect, he would be delightful to the general, and that without sacrificing on
the vile and filthy altar of popularity. Here he is successfully himself, and what more is there
to say?

You clap for Harlequin, and you kneel to Apollo. Mr. Meredith doubles the parts, and is irresistible
in both. Such fire, such vision, such energy on the one hand and on the other such agility
and athletic grace are not often found in combination.

The Fashion of Art.

This is the merit and distinction of art: to be more real than reality, to be not nature but
nature's essence. It is the artist's function not to copy but to synthesise: to eliminate from
that gross confusion of actuality which is his raw material whatever is accidental, idle, irrelevant,
and select for perpetuation that only which is appropriate and immortal. Always artistic, Mr.
Meredith's work is often great art.
BYRON

Byron and the World.

Two obvious reasons why Byron has long
been a prophet more honoured abroad than at home are his life and
his work. He is the most romantic figure in the literature of the
century, and his romance is of that splendid and daring cast which
the people of Britain--'an aristocracy materialised and null, a middle
class purblind and hideous, a lower class crude and brutal'--prefers
to regard with suspicion and disfavour. He is the type of them that
prove in defiance of precept that the safest path is not always midway,
and that the golden rule is sometimes unspeakably worthless: who set
what seems a horrible example, create an apparently shameful precedent,
and yet contrive to approve themselves an honour to their country
and the race. It
seemed to him that in his first book he had only aimed at good sentences, but he knew no one
with whom he could discuss such matters.

One day he found a copy of "The Improbable Marquis" in the Charing Cross Road, and was glancing
through it with absent-minded interest, when a voice at his elbow said, "I shouldn't buy that
if I were you, sir. It's no good!" He looked up and saw a wild young man, with bright eyes
and an untidy black beard. "But it's mine; I wrote it," cried the author. The young man stared
at him in dismay. "I'm sorry; I didn't know," he blurted out, and faded away into the crowd.
The author gazed after him wistfully, regretting that he had not had presence of mind enough
to ask him to lunch. Perhaps the young man could have told him how he ought to write his second
book.

For somehow or other, at the very moment when his literary position seemed most secure in the
eyes of his wife and his friends, the author had lost all confidence in his own powers. He
shut himself up in his study every night, and was supposed by an admiring and almost timorous
household to be producing masterpieces, when in reality he was conducting a series of barren
skirmishes between the critical and the creative elements of his nature. He would write a chapter
or two in a fine fury of composition, and then would read what he had written with intense
disgust. He felt that his second book ought to be better than his first, and he doubted whether
he would even be able to write anything half so good. In his hour of disillusionment he recalled
the anonymous critic who had treated "The Improbable Marquis" with such scant respect, and
he wrote to him asking him to expand his judgment. He was prepared to be wounded by the answer,
but the form it took surprised him. In reply to his temperate and courteous letter the critic
sent a postcard bearing only five short words--"Why did you write it?"

This was bad manners, but the author was sensible enough to see that it might be good criticism,
especially as he found some difficulty in answering the question. Why had he written a book?
Not for money, or for fame, or to express a personality of which he saw no reason to be proud.
All his friends had said that he ought to write a novel, and he had thought that he could write
a better one than the average. But he had to admit that such motives seemed to him insufficient.
There was, perhaps, some mysterious force that drove men to create works of art, and the critic
had seen that his book had lacked this necessary impulse. In the light of this new theory the
author was roused by a sense of injustice. He felt that it should be possible for anyone to
write a good book if they took sufficient pains, and he set himself to work again with a savage
and unproductive energy.

It seemed to him that in spite of his effort to bear in mind that the whole should be greater
than any part, his chapters broke up into sentences and his sentences into forlorn and ungregarious
words. When he looked to his first book for comfort he found the same horrid phenomenon taking
place in its familiar pages. Sometimes when he was disheartened by his fruitless efforts he
slipped out into the streets, fixing his attention on concrete objects to rest his tired mind.

The Bird In The Garden

The room in which the Burchell family lived in Love Street, S.E., was underground and depended
for light and air on a grating let into the pavement above.

Uncle John, who was a queer one, had filled the area with green plants and creepers in boxes
and tins hanging from the grating, so that the room itself obtained very little light indeed,
but there was always a nice bright green place for the people sitting in it to look at. Toby,
who had peeped into the areas of other little boys, knew that his was of quite exceptional
beauty, and it was with a certain awe that he helped Uncle John to tend the plants in the morning,
watering them and taking the pieces of paper and straws that had fallen through the grating
from their hair. "It is a great mistake to have straws in ones hair," Uncle John would say
gravely; and Toby knew that it was true.

It was in the morning after they had just been watered that the plants looked and smelt best,
and when the sun shone through the grating and the diamonds were shining and falling through
the forest, Toby would tell the baby about the great bird who would one day come flying through
the trees--a bird of all colours, ugly and beautiful, with a harsh sweet voice. "And that will
be the end of everything," said Toby, though of course he was only repeating a story his Uncle
John had told him.

There were other people in the big, dark room besides Toby and Uncle John and the baby; dark
people who flitted to and fro about secret matters, people called father and mother and Mr.
Hearn, who were apt to kick if they found you in their way, and who never laughed except at
nights, and then they laughed too loudly.

"They will frighten the bird," thought Toby; but they were kind to Uncle John because he had
a pension. Toby slept in a corner on the ground beside the baby, and when father and Mr. Hearn
fought at nights he would wake up and watch and shiver; but when this happened it seemed to
him that the baby was laughing at him, and he would pinch her to make her stop. One night,
when the men were fighting very fiercely and mother had fallen asleep on the table, Uncle John
rose from his bed and began singing in a great voice. It was a song Toby knew very well about
Trafalgar's Bay, but it frightened the two men a great deal because they thought Uncle John
would be too mad to fetch the pension any more. Next day he was quite well, however, and he
and Toby found a large green caterpillar in the garden among the plants.

"This is a fact of great importance," said Uncle John, stroking it with a little stick. "It
is a sign!"

Toby used to lie awake at nights after that and listen for the bird, but he only heard the
clatter of feet on the pavement and the screaming of engines far away.

Later there came a new young woman to live in the cellar--not a dark person, but a person you
could see and speak to. She patted Toby on the head; but when she saw the baby she caught it
to her breast and cried over it, calling it pretty names.

At first father and Mr. Hearn were both very kind to her, and mother used to sit all day in
the corner with burning eyes, but after a time the three used to laugh together at nights as
before, and the woman would sit with her wet face and wait for the coming of the bird, with
Toby and the baby and Uncle John, who was a queer one.

"All we have to do," Uncle John would say, "is to keep the garden clean and tidy, and to water
the plants every morning so that they may be very green." And Toby would go and whisper this
to the baby, and she would stare at the ceiling with large, stupid eyes.

There came a time when Toby was very sick, and he lay all day in his corner wondering about
wonder. Sometimes the room in which he lay became so small that he was choked for lack of air,
sometimes it was so large that he screamed out because he felt lonely. He could not see the
dark people then at all, but only Uncle John and the woman, who told him in whispers that her
name was "Mummie." She called him Sonny, which is a very pretty name, and when Toby heard it
he felt a tickling in his sides which he knew to be gladness. Mummie's face was wet and warm
and soft, and she was very fond of kissing. Every morning Uncle John would lift Toby up and
show him the garden, and Toby would slip out of his arms and walk among the trees and plants.
And the place would grow bigger and bigger until it was all the world, and Toby would lose
himself; amongst the tangle of trees and flowers and creepers. He would see butterflies there
and tame animals, and the sky was full of birds of all colours, ugly and beautiful; but he
knew that none of these was the bird, because their voices were only sweet. Sometimes he showed
these wonders to a little boy called Toby, who held his hand and called him Uncle John, sometimes
he showed them to his mummie and he himself was Toby; but always when he came back he found
himself lying in Uncle John's arms, and, weary from his walk, would fall into a pleasant dreamless
sleep.

It seemed to Toby at this time that a veil hung about him which, dim and unreal in itself,
served to make all things dim and unreal. He did not know whether he was asleep or awake, so
strange was life, so vivid were his dreams. Mummie, Uncle John, the baby, Toby himself came
with a flicker of the veil and disappeared vaguely without cause. It would happen that Toby
would be speaking to Uncle John, and suddenly he would find himself looking into the large
eyes of the baby, turned stupidly towards the ceiling, and again the baby would be Toby himself,
a hot, dry little body without legs or arms, that swayed suspended as if by magic a foot above
the bed.

Then there was the vision of two small feet that moved a long way off, and Toby would watch
them curiously as kittens do their tails, without knowing the cause of their motion. It was
all very wonderful and very strange, and day by day the veil grew thicker; there was no need
to wake when the sleeptime was so pleasant; there were no dark people to kick you in that dreamy
place.

And yet Toby woke--woke to a life and in a place which he had never known before.

He found himself on a heap of rags in a large cellar which depended for its light on a grating
let into the pavement of the street above. On the stone floor of the area and swinging from
the grating were a few sickly, grimy plants in pots. There must have been, a fine sunset up
above, for a faint red glow came through the bars and touched the leaves of the plants.

There was a lighted candle standing in a bottle on the table, and the cellar seemed full of
people. At the table itself two men and a woman were drinking, though they were already drunk,
and beyond in a corner Toby could see the head and shoulders of a tall old man. Beside him
there crouched a woman with a faded, pretty face, and between Toby and the rest of the room
there stood a box in which lay a baby with large, wakeful eyes.

Toby's body tingled with excitement, for this was a new thing; he had never seen it before,
he had never seen anything before.

The voice of the woman at the table rose and fell steadily without a pause; she was abusing
the other woman, and the two drunken men were laughing at her and shouting her on; Toby thought
the other woman lacked spirit because she stayed crouching on the floor and said nothing.

At last the woman stopped her abuse, and one of the men turned and shouted an order to the
woman on the floor. She stood up and came towards him, hesitating; this annoyed the man and
he swore at her brutally; when she came near enough he knocked her down with his fist, and
all the three burst out laughing.

Toby was so excited that he knelt up in his corner and clapped his hands, but the others did
not notice because the old man was up and swaying wildly over the woman. He seemed to be threatening
the man who had struck her, and that one was evidently afraid of him, for he rose unsteadily
and lifted the chair on which he had been sitting above his head to use as a weapon.

The old man raised his fist and the chair fell heavily on to his wrinkled forehead and he dropped
to the ground.

The woman at the table cried out, "The pension!" in her shrill voice, and then they were all
quiet, looking.

Then it seemed to Toby that through the forest there came flying, with a harsh sweet voice
and a tumult of wings, a bird of all colours, ugly and beautiful, and he knew, though later
there might be people to tell him otherwise, that that was the end of everything.

Children Of The Moon

The boy stood at the place where the park trees stopped and the smooth lawns slid away gently
to the great house. He was dressed only in a pair of ragged knickerbockers and a gaping buttonless
shirt, so that his legs and neck and chest shone silver bare in the moonlight. By day he had
a mass of rough golden hair, but now it seemed to brood above his head like a black cloud that
made his face deathly white by comparison. On his arms there lay a great heap of gleaming dew-wet
roses and lilies, spoil of the park flower-beds. Their cool petals touched his cheek, and filled
his nostrils with aching scent. He felt his arms smarting here and there, where the thorns
of the roses had torn them in the dark, but these delicate caresses of pain only served to
deepen to him the wonder of the night that wrapped him about like a cloak. Behind him there
dreamed the black woods, and over his head multitudinous stars quivered and balanced in space;
but these things were nothing to him, for far across the lawn that was spread knee-deep, with
a web of mist there gleamed for his eager eyes the splendour of a fairy palace. Red and orange
and gold, the lights of the fairy revels shone from a hundred windows and filled him with wonder
that he should see with wakeful eyes the jewels that he had desired so long in sleep. He could
only gaze and gaze until his straining eyes filled with tears, and set the enchanted lights
dancing in the dark. On his ears, that heard no more the crying of the night-birds and the
quick stir of the rabbits in the brake, there fell the strains of far music. The flowers in
his arms seemed to sway to it, and his heart beat to the deep pulse of the night.

So enraptured were his senses that he did not notice the coming of the girl, and she was able
to examine him closely before she called to him softly through the moonlight.

"Boy! Boy!"

At the sound of her voice he swung round and looked at her with startled eyes. He saw her excited
little face and her white dress.

"Are you a fairy?" he asked hoarsely, for the night-mist was in his voice.

"No," she said, "I'm a little girl. You're a wood-boy, I suppose?"

He stayed silent, regarding her with a puzzled face. Who was this little white creature with
the tender voice that had slipped so suddenly out of the night?

"As a matter of fact," the girl continued, "I've come out to have a look at the fairies. There's
a ring down in the wood. You can come with me if you like, wood-boy."

He nodded his head silently, for he was afraid to speak to her, and set off through the wood
by her side, still clasping the flowers to his breast.

"What were you looking at when I found you?" she asked.

"The palace--the fairy palace," the boy muttered.

"The palace?" the girl repeated. "Why, that's not a palace; that's where I live."

The boy looked at her with new awe; if she were a fairy---- But the girl had noticed that his
feet made no sound beside her shoes.

"Don't the thorns prick your feet, wood-boy?" she asked; but the boy said nothing, and they
were both silent for a while, the girl looking about her keenly as she walked, and the boy
watching her face. Presently they came to a wide pool where a little tinkling fountain threw
bubbles to the hidden fish.

"Can you swim?" she said to the boy.

He shook his head.

"It's a pity," said the girl; "we might have had a bathe. It would be rather fun in the dark,
but it's pretty deep there. We'd better get on to the fairy ring."

The moon had flung queer shadows across the glade in which the ring lay, and when they stood
on the edge listening intently the wood seemed to speak to them with a hundred voices.

"You can take hold of my hand, if you like," said the girl, in a whisper.

The boy dropped his flowers about his white feet and felt for the girl's hand in the dark.
Soon it lay in his own, a warm live thing, that stirred a little with excitement.

"I'm not afraid," the girl said; and so they waited.

                          *   *   *   *   *

The man came upon them suddenly from among the silver birches. He had a knapsack on his back
and his hair was as long as a tramp's. At sight of him the girl almost screamed, and her hand
trembled in the boy's. Some instinct made him hold it tighter.

"What do you want?" he muttered, in his hoarse voice.

The man was no less astonished than the children.

"What on earth are you doing here?" he cried. His voice was mild and reassuring, and the girl
answered him promptly.

"I came out to look for fairies."

"Oh, that's right enough," commented the man; "and you," he said, turning to the boy, "are
you after fairies, too? Oh, I see; picking flowers. Do you mean to sell them?"

The boy shook his head.

"For my sister," he said, and stopped abruptly.

"Is your sister fond of flowers?"

"Yes; she's dead."

The man looked at him gravely.

"That's a phrase," he said, "and phrases are the devil. Who told you that dead people like
flowers?"

"They always have them," said the boy, blushing for shame of his pretty thought.

"And what are you looking for?" the girl interrupted.

The man made a mocking grimace, and glanced around the glade as if he were afraid of being
overheard.

"Dreams," he said bluntly.

The girl pondered this for a moment.

"And your knapsack?" she began.

"Yes," said the man, "it's full of them."

The children looked at the knapsack with interest, the girl's fingers tingling to undo the
straps of it.

"What are they like?" she asked.

The man gave a short laugh.

"Very like yours and his, I expect; when you grow older, young woman, you'll find there's really
only one dream possible for a sensible person. But you don't want to hear about my troubles.
This is more in your line!" He put his hand in his pocket and pulled out a flageolet, which
he put to his lips.

"Listen!" he said.

To the girl it seemed as though the little tune had leapt from the pipe, and was dancing round
the ring like a real fairy, while echo came tripping through the trees to join it. The boy
gaped and said nothing.

At last, when the fairy was beginning to falter and echo was quite out of breath, the man took
the flageolet from his lips.

"Well," he said, with a smile.

"Thank you very much," said the girl politely. "I think that was very nice indeed. Oh, boy!"
she broke off, "you're hurting my hand!"

The boy's eyes were shining strangely, and he was waving his arms in dismay.

"All the wasted moonlight!" he cried; "the grass is quite wet with it."

The girl turned to him in surprise.

"Why, boy, you've found your voice."

"After that," said the man gravely, as he put his flageolet back in his pocket, "I think I
will show you the inside of my knapsack."

The girl bent down eagerly, while he loosened the straps, but gave a cry of disappointment
when she saw the contents.

"Pictures!" she said.

"Pictures," echoed the man drily,--"pictures of dreams. I don't know how you're going to see
them. Perhaps the moon will do her best."

The girl looked at them nicely, and passed them on one by one to the boy. Presently she made
a discovery.

"Oh, boy!" she cried, "your tears are spoiling all the pictures."

"I'm sorry," said the boy huskily; "I can't help it."

"I know," the man said quickly; "it doesn't matter a bit. I expect you've seen these pictures
before."

"I know them all," said the boy, "but I have never seen them."

The man frowned.

"It's the devil," he said to himself, "when boys speak English." He turned suddenly to the
girl, who was puzzling over the boy's tears. "It's time you went back to bed," he said; "there
won't be any fairies tonight. It's too cold for them."

The girl yawned.

"I shall get into a row when I get back if they've found it out. I don't care."

"The moon is fading," said the boy suddenly; "there are no more shadows."

"We will see you through the wood," the man continued, "and say good-night."

He put his pictures back in his knapsack and then walked silently through the murmuring wood.
At the edge of the wood the girl stopped.

"You are a wood-boy," she said to the boy, "and you mustn't come any farther. You can give
me a kiss if you like."

The boy did not move, but stayed regarding her awkwardly.

"I think you are a very silly boy," said the girl, with a toss of her head, and she stalked
away proudly into the mist.

"Why didn't you kiss her?" asked the man.

"Her lips would burn me," said the boy.

The man and the boy walked slowly across the park.

"Now, boy," said the man, "since civilisation has gone to bed the time has come for you to
hear your destiny."

"I am only a poor boy," the boy replied simply. "I don't think I have any destiny."

"Paradox," said the man, "is meant to conceal the insincerity of the aged, not to express the
simplicity of youth. But I wander. You have made phrases tonight."

"What are phrases?"

"What are dreams? What are roses? What, in fine, is the moon? Boy, I take you for a moon-child.
You hold her pale flowers in your arms, her white beams have caressed your limbs, you prefer
the kisses of her cool lips to those of that earth-child; all this is very well. But, above
all, you have the music of her great silence; above all, you have her tears. When I played
to you on my pipe you recognised the voice of your mother. When I showed you my pictures you
recalled the tales with which she hushed you to sleep. And so I knew that you were her son
and my little brother."

"The moon has always been my friend," said the boy; "but I did not know that she was my mother."

"Perhaps your sister knows it; the happy dead are glad to seek her for a mother; that is why
they are so fond of white flowers."

"We have a mother at home. She works very hard for us."

"But it is your mother among the clouds who makes your life beautiful, and the beauty of your
life is the measure of your days."

While the boy reflected on these things they had reached the gates of the park, and they stole
past the silent lodge on to the high road. A man was waiting there in the shadows, and when
he saw the boy's companion he rushed out and seized him by the arm.

"So I've got you," he said; "I don't think I'll let you go again in a hurry."

The son of the moon gave a queer little laugh.

"Why, it's Taylor!" he said pleasantly; "but, Taylor, you know you're making a great mistake."

"Very possibly," said the keeper, with a laugh.

"You see this boy here, Taylor; I assure you he is much madder than I am."

Taylor looked at the boy kindly.

"Time you were in bed, Tommy," he said.

"Taylor," said the man earnestly, "this boy has made three phrases. If you don't lock him up
he will certainly become a poet. He will set your precious world of sanity ablaze with the
fire of his mother, the moon. Your palaces will totter, Taylor, and your kingdoms become as
dust. I have warned you."

"That's right, sir; and now you must come with me."

"Boy," said the man generously, "keep your liberty. By grace of Providence, all men in authority
are fools. We shall meet again under the light of the moon."

With dreamy eyes the boy watched the departure of his companion. He had become almost invisible
along the road when, miraculously as it seemed, the light of the moon broke through the trees
by the wayside and lit up his figure. For a moment it fell upon his head like a halo, and touched
the knapsack of dreams with glory. Then all was lost in the blackness of night.

As he turned homeward the boy felt a cold wind upon his cheek. It was the first breath of dawn.

The Coffin Merchant

                                  I

London on a November Sunday inspired Eustace Reynolds with a melancholy too insistent to be
ignored and too causeless to be enjoyed. The grey sky overhead between the house-tops, the
cold wind round every street-corner, the sad faces of the men and women on the pavements, combined
to create an atmosphere of ineloquent misery. Eustace was sensitive to impressions, and in
spite of a half-conscious effort to remain a dispassionate spectator of the world's melancholy,
he felt the chill of the aimless day creeping over his spirit. Why was there no sun, no warmth,
no laughter on the earth? What had become of all the children who keep laughter like a mask
on the faces of disillusioned men? The wind blew down Southampton Street, and chilled Eustace
to a shiver that passed away in a shudder of disgust at the sombre colour of life. A windy
Sunday in London before the lamps are lit, tempts a man to believe in the nobility of work.

At the corner by Charing Cross Telegraph Office a man thrust a handbill under his eyes, but
he shook his head impatiently. The blueness of the fingers that offered him the paper was alone
sufficient to make him disinclined to remove his hands from his pockets even for an instant.
But, the man would not be dismissed so lightly.

"Excuse me, sir," he said, following him, "you have not looked to see what my bills are."

"Whatever they are I do not want them."

"That's where you are wrong, sir," the man said earnestly. "You will never find life interesting
if you do not lie in wait for the unexpected. As a matter of fact, I believe that my bill contains
exactly what you do want."

Eustace looked at the man with quick curiosity. His clothes were ragged, and the visible parts
of his flesh were blue with cold, but his eyes were bright with intelligence and his speech
was that of an educated man. It seemed to Eustace that he was being regarded with a keen expectancy,
as though his decision I on the trivial point was of real importance.

"I don't know what you are driving at," he said, "but if it will give you any pleasure I will
take one of your bills; though if you argue with all your clients as you have with me, it must
take you a long time to get rid of them."

"I only offer them to suitable persons," the man said, folding up one of the handbills while
he spoke, "and I'm sure you will not regret taking it," and he slipped the paper into Eustace's
hand and walked rapidly away.

Eustace looked after him curiously for a moment, and then opened the paper in his hand. When
his eyes comprehended its significance, he gave a low whistle of astonishment. "You will soon
be warning a coffin!" it read. "At 606, Gray's Inn Road, your order will be attended to with
civility and despatch. Call and see us!!"

Eustace swung round quickly to look for the man, but he was out of sight. The wind was growing
colder, and the lamps were beginning to shine out in the greying streets. Eustace crumpled
the paper into his overcoat pocket, and turned homewards.

"How silly!" he said to himself, in conscious amusement. The sound of his footsteps on the
pavement rang like an echo to his laugh.

                                 II

Eustace was impressionable but not temperamentally morbid, and he was troubled a little by
the fact that the gruesomely bizarre handbill continued to recur to his mind. The thing was
so manifestly absurd, he told himself with conviction, that it was not worth a second thought,
but this did not prevent him from thinking of it again and again. What manner of undertaker
could hope to obtain business by giving away foolish handbills in the street? Really, the whole
thing had the air of a brainless practical joke, yet his intellectual fairness forced him to
admit that as far as the man who had given him the bill was concerned, brainlessness was out
of the question, and joking improbable. There had been depths in those little bright eyes which
his glance had not been able to sound, and the man's manner in making him accept the handbill
had given the whole transaction a kind of ludicrous significance.

"You will soon be wanting a coffin----!"

Eustace found himself turning the words over and over in his mind. If he had had any near relations
he might have construed the thing as an elaborate threat, but he was practically alone in the
world, and it seemed to him that he was not likely to want a coffin for anyone but himself.

"Oh damn the thing!" he said impatiently, as he opened the door of his flat, "it isn't worth
worrying about. I mustn't let the whim of some mad tradesman get on my nerves. I've got no
one to bury, anyhow."

Nevertheless the thing lingered with him all the evening, and when his neighbour the doctor
came in for a chat at ten o'clock, Eustace was glad to show him the strange handbill. The doctor,
who had experienced the queer magics that are practised to this day on the West Coast of Africa,
and who, therefore, had no nerves, was delighted with so striking an example of British commercial
enterprise.

"Though, mind you," he added gravely, smoothing the crumpled paper on his knee, "this sort
of thing might do a lot of harm if it fell into the hands of a nervous subject. I should be
inclined to punch the head of the ass who perpetrated it. Have you turned that address up in
the Post Office Directory?"

Eustace shook his head, and rose and fetched the fat red book which makes London an English
city. Together they found the Gray's Inn Road, and ran their eyes down to No. 606.

"'Harding, G. J., Coffin Merchant and Undertaker.' Not much information there," muttered the
doctor.

"Coffin merchant's a bit unusual, isn't it?" queried Eustace.

"I suppose he manufactures coffins wholesale for the trade. Still, I didn't know they called
themselves that. Anyhow, it seems, as though that handbill is a genuine piece of downright
foolishness. The idiot ought to be stopped advertising in that way."

"I'll go and see him myself tomorrow," said Eustace bluntly.

"Well, he's given you an invitation," said the doctor, "so it's only polite of you to go. I'll
drop in here in the evening to hear what he's like. I expect that you'll find him as mad as
a hatter."

"Something like that," said Eustace, "or he wouldn't give handbills to people like me. I have
no one to bury except myself."

"No," said the doctor in the hall, "I suppose you haven't. Don't let him measure you for a
coffin, Reynolds!"

Eustace laughed.

"We never know," he said sententiously.

                                 III

Next day was one of those gorgeous blue days of which November gives but few, and Eustace was
glad to run out to Wimbledon for a game of golf, or rather for two. It was therefore dusk before
he made his way to the Gray's Inn Road in search of the unexpected. His attitude towards his
errand despite the doctor's laughter and the prosaic entry in the directory, was a little confused.
He could not help reflecting that after all the doctor had not seen the man with the little
wise eyes, nor could he forget that Mr. G. J. Harding's description of himself as a coffin
merchant, to say the least of it, approached the unusual. Yet he felt that it would be intolerable
to chop the whole business without finding out what it all meant. On the whole he would have
preferred not to have discovered the riddle at all; but having found it, he could not rest
without an answer.

No. 606, Gray's Inn Road, was not like an ordinary undertaker's shop. The window was heavily
draped with black cloth, but was otherwise unadorned. There were no letters from grateful mourners,
no little model coffins, no photographs of marble memorials. Even more surprising was the absence
of any name over the shop-door, so that the uninformed stranger could not possibly tell what
trade was carried on within, or who was responsible for the management of the business. This
uncommercial modesty did not tend to remove Eustace's doubts as to the sanity of Mr. G. J.
Harding; but he opened the shop-door which started a large bell swinging noisily, and stepped
over the threshold. The shop was hardly more expressive inside than out. A broad counter ran
across it, cutting it in two, and in the partial gloom overhead a naked gas-burner whistled
a noisy song. Beyond this the shop contained no furniture whatever, and no stock-in-trade except
a few planks leaning against the wall in one corner. There was a large ink-stand on the counter.
Eustace waited patiently for a minute or two, and then as no one came he began stamping on
the floor with his foot. This proved efficacious, for soon he heard the sound of footsteps
ascending wooden stairs, the door behind the counter opened and a man came into the shop.

He was dressed quite neatly now, and his hands were no longer blue with cold, but Eustace knew
at once that it was the man who had given him the handbill. Nevertheless he looked at Eustace
without a sign of recognition.

"What can I do for you, sir?" he asked pleasantly.

Eustace laid the handbill down on the counter.

"I want to know about this," he said. "It strikes me as being in pretty bad taste, and if a
nervous person got hold of it, it might be dangerous."

"You think so, sir? Yet our representative," he lingered affectionately on the words, "our
representative told you, I believe, that the handbill was only distributed to suitable cases."

"That's where you are wrong," said Eustace sharply, "for I have no one to bury."

"Except yourself," said the coffin merchant suavely.

Eustace looked at him keenly. "I don't see----" he began. But the coffin merchant interrupted him.

"You must know, sir," he said, "that this is no ordinary undertaker's business. We possess
information that enables us to defy competition in our special class of trade."

"Information!"

"Well, if you prefer it, you may say intuitions. If our representative handed you that advertisement,
it was because he knew you would need it."

"Excuse me," said Eustace, "you appear to be sane, but your words do not convey to me any reasonable
significance. You gave me that foolish advertisement yourself, and now you say that you did
so because you knew I would need it. I ask you why?"

The coffin merchant shrugged his shoulders. "Ours is a sentimental trade," he said, "I do not
know why dead men want coffins, but they do. For my part I would wish to be cremated."

"Dead men?"

"Ah, I was coming to that. You see Mr.----?"

"Reynolds."

"Thank you, my name is Harding--G. J. Harding. You see, Mr. Reynolds, our intuitions are of
a very special character, and if we say that you will need a coffin, it is probable that you
will need one."

"You mean to say that I----"

"Precisely. In twenty-four hours or less, Mr. Reynolds, you will need our services."

The revelation of the coffin merchant's insanity came to Eustace with a certain relief. For
the first time in the interview he had a sense of the dark empty shop and the whistling gas-jet
over his head.

"Why, it sounds like a threat, Mr. Harding!" he said gaily.

The coffin merchant looked at him oddly, and produced a printed form from his pocket. "If you
would fill this up," he said.

Eustace picked it up off the counter and laughed aloud. It was an order for a hundred-guinea
funeral.

"I don't know what your game is," he said, "but this has gone on long enough."

"Perhaps it has, Mr. Reynolds," said the coffin merchant, and he leant across the counter and
looked Eustace straight in the face.

For a moment Eustace was amused; then he was suddenly afraid. "I think it's time I----" he
began slowly, and then he was silent, his whole will intent on fighting the eyes of the coffin
merchant. The song of the gas-jet waned to a point in his ears, and then rose steadily till
it was like the beating of the world's heart. The eyes of the coffin merchant grew larger and
larger, till they blended in one great circle of fire. Then Eustace picked a pen off the counter
and filled in the form.

"Thank you very much, Mr. Reynolds," said the coffin merchant, shaking hands with him politely.
"I can promise you every civility and despatch. Good-day, sir."

Outside on the pavement Eustace stood for a while trying to recall exactly what had happened.
There was a slight scratch on his hand, and when he automatically touched it with his lips,
it made them burn. The lit lamps in the Gray's Inn Road seemed to him a little unsteady, and
the passers-by showed a disposition to blunder into him.

"Queer business," he said to himself dimly; "I'd better have a cab."

He reached home in a dream.

It was nearly ten o'clock before the doctor remembered his promise, and went upstairs to Eustace's
flat. The outer door was half-open so that he thought he was expected, and he switched on the
light in the little hall, and shut the door behind him with the simplicity of habit. But when
he swung round from the door he gave a cry of astonishment. Eustace was lying asleep in a chair
before him with his face flushed and drooping on his shoulder, and his breath hissing noisily
through his parted lips. The doctor looked at him quizzically, "If I did not know you, my young
friend," he remarked, "I should say that you were as drunk as a lord."

And he went up to Eustace and shook him by the shoulder; but Eustace did not wake.

"Queer!" the doctor muttered, sniffing at Eustace's lips; "he hasn't been drinking."

The Soul Of A Policeman

                                  I

Outside, above the uneasy din of the traffic, the sky was glorious with the far peace of a
fine summer evening. Through the upper pane of the station window Police-constable Bennett,
who felt that his senses at the moment were abnormally keen, recognised with a sinking heart
such reds and yellows as bedecked the best patchwork quilt at home. By contrast the lights
of the superintendent's office were subdued, so that within the walls of the police-station
sounds seemed of greater importance. Somewhere a drunkard, deprived of his boots, was drumming
his criticism of authority on the walls of his cell. From the next room, where the men off
duty were amusing themselves, there came a steady clicking of billiard-balls and dominoes,
broken now and again by gruff bursts of laughter. And at his very elbow the superintendent
was speaking in that suave voice that reminded Bennett of grey velvet.

"You see, Bennett, how matters stand. I have nothing at all against your conduct. You are steady
and punctual, and I have no doubt that you are trying to do your duty. But it's very unfortunate
that as far as results go you have nothing to show for your efforts. During the last three
weeks you have not brought in a charge of any description, and during the same period I find
that your colleagues on the beat have been exceptionally busy. I repeat that I do not accuse
you of neglecting your duty, but these things tell with the magistrates and convey a general
suggestion of slackness."

Bennett looked down at his brightly polished boots. His fingers were sandy and there was soft
felt beneath his feet.

"I have been afraid of this for some time, sir," he said, "very much afraid."

The superintendent looked at him questioningly.

"You have nothing to say?" he said.

"I have always tried to do my duty, sir."

"I know, I know. But you must see that a certain number of charges, if not of convictions,
is the mark of a smart officer."

"Surely you would not have me arrest innocent persons?"

"That is a most improper observation," said the superintendent severely. "I will say no more
to you now. But I hope you will take what I have said as a warning. You must bustle along,
Bennett, bustle along."

Outside in the street, Police-constable Bennett was free to reflect on his unpleasant interview.
The superintendent was ambitious and therefore pompous; he, himself, was unambitious and therefore
modest. Left to himself he might have been content to triumph in the reflection that he had
failed to say a number of foolish things, but the welfare of his wife and children bound him,
tiresomely enough for a dreamer, tightly to the practical. It was clear that if he did not
forthwith produce signs of his efficiency as a promoter of the peace that welfare would be
imperilled. Yet he did not condemn the chance that had made him a policeman or even the mischance
that brought no guilty persons to his hands. Rather he looked with a gentle curiosity into
the faces of the people who passed him, and wondered why he could not detect traces of the
generally assumed wickedness of the neighbourhood. These unkempt men and women were thieves
and even murderers, it appeared; but to him they shone as happy youths and maidens, joyous
victims of love's tyranny.

As he drew near the street in which he lived this sense of universal love quickened in his
blood and stirred him strangely. It did not escape his eyes that to the general his uniform
was an unfriendly thing. Men and women paused in their animated chattering till he had passed,
and even the children faltered in their games to watch him with doubtful eyes. And yet his
heart was warm for them; he knew that he wished them well.

Nevertheless, when he saw his house shining in a row of similar houses, he realised that their
attitude was wiser than his. If he was to be a success as a breadwinner he must wage a sterner
war against these happy, lovable people. It was easy, he had been long enough in the force
to know how easy, to get cases. An intolerant manner, a little provocative harshness, and the
thing was done. Yet with all his heart he admired the poor for their resentful independence
of spirit. To him this had always been the supreme quality of the English character; how could
he make use of it to fill English gaols?

He opened the door of his house, with a sigh on his lips. There came forth the merry shouting
of his children.

                                  II

Above the telephone wires the stars dipped at anchor in the cloudless sky. Down below, in one
of the dark, empty streets, Police-constable Bennett turned the handles of doors and tested
the fastenings of windows, with a complete scepticism as to the value of his labours. Gradually,
he was coming to see that he was not one of the few who are born to rule--to control--their
simple neighbours, ambitious only for breath. Where, if he had possessed this mission, he would
have been eager to punish, he now felt no more than a sympathy that charged him with some responsibility
for the sins of others. He shared the uneasy conviction of the multitude that human justice,
as interpreted by the inspired minority, is more than a little unjust. The very unpopularity
with which his uniform endowed him seemed to him to express a severe criticism of the system
of which he was an unwilling supporter. He wished these people to regard him as a kind of official
friend, to advise and settle differences; yet, shrewder than he, they considered him as an
enemy, who lived on their mistakes and the collapse of their social relationships.

There remained his duty to his wife and children, and this rendered the problem infinitely
perplexing.

Why should he punish others because of his love for his children; or, again, why should his
children suffer for his scruples? Yet it was clear that, unless fortune permitted him to accomplish
some notable yet honourable arrest, he would either have to cheat and tyrannise with his colleagues
or leave the force. And what employment is available for a discharged policeman?

As he went systematically from house to house the consideration of these things marred the
normal progress of his dreams. Conscious as he was of the stars and the great widths of heaven
that made the world so small, he nevertheless felt that his love for his family and the wider
love that determined his honour were somehow intimately connected with this greatness of the
universe rather than with the world of little streets and little motives, and so were not lightly
to be put aside. Yet, how can one measure one love against another when all are true?

When the door of Gurneys', the moneylenders, opened to his touch, and drew him abruptly from
his speculations, his first emotion was a quick irritation that chance should interfere with
his thoughts. But when his lantern showed him that the lock had been tampered with, his annoyance
changed to a thrill of hopeful excitement. What if this were the way out? What if fate had
granted him compromise, the opportunity of pitting his official virtue against official crime,
those shadowy forces in the existence of which he did not believe, but which lay on his life
like clouds?

He was not a physical coward, and it seemed quite simple to him to creep quietly through the
open door into the silent office without waiting for possible reinforcements. He knew that
the safe, which would be the, natural goal of the presumed burglars, was in Mr. Gurney's private
office beyond, and while he stood listening intently he seemed to hear dim sounds coming from
the direction of that room. For a moment he paused, frowning slightly as a man does when he
is trying to catalogue an impression. When he achieved perception, it came oddly mingled with
recollections of the little tragedies of his children at home. For some one was crying like
a child in the little room where Mr. Gurney brow-beat recalcitrant borrowers. Dangerous burglars
do not weep, and Bennett hesitated no longer, but stepped past the open flaps of the counter,
and threw open the door of the inner office.

The electric light had been switched on, and at the table there sat a slight young man with
his face buried in his hands, crying bitterly. Behind him the safe stood open and empty, and
the grate was filled with smouldering embers of burnt paper. Bennett went up to the young man
and placed his hand on his shoulder. But the young man wept on and did not move.

Try as he might Bennett could not help relaxing the grip of outraged law, and patting the young
man's shoulder soothingly as it rose and fell. He had no fit weapons of roughness and oppression
with which to oppose this child-like grief; he could only fight tears with tears.

"Come," he said gently, "you must pull yourself together."

At the sound of his voice the young man gave a great sob and then was silent, shivering a little.

"That's better," said Bennett encouragingly, "much better."

"I have burnt everything," the young man said suddenly, "and now the place is empty. I was
nearly sick just now."

Bennett looked at him sympathetically, as one dreamer may look at another, who is sad with
action dreamed too often for scatheless accomplishment. "I'm afraid you'll get into serious
trouble," he said.

"I know," replied the young man, "but that blackguard Gurney--" His voice rose to a shrill
scream and choked him for a moment. Then he went on quietly "But it's all over now. Finished!
Done with!"

"I suppose you owed him money?"

The young man nodded. "He lives on fools like me. But he threatened to tell my father, and
now I've just about ruined him. Pah! Swine!"

"This won't be much better for your father," said Bennett gravely.

"No, it's worse; but perhaps it will help some of the others. He kept on threatening and I
couldn't wait any longer. Can't you see?"

Over the young man's shoulder the stars becked and nodded to Bennett through the blindless window.

"I see," he said; "I see."

"So now you can take me."

Bennett looked doubtfully at the outstretched wrists. "You are only a fool," he said, "a dreaming
fool like me, and they will give you years for this. I don't see why they should give a man
years for being a fool."

The young man looked up, taken with a sudden hope. "You will let me go?" he said, in astonishment.
"I know I was an ass just now. I suppose I was a bit shaken. But you will let me go?"

"I wish to God I had never seen you!" said Bennett simply. "You have your father, and I have
a wife and three little children. Who shall judge between us?"

"My father is an old man."

"And my children are little. You had better go before I make up my mind."

Without another word the young man crept out of the room, and Bennett followed him slowly into
the street. This gallant criminal whose capture would have been honourable, had dwindled to
a hysterical foolish boy; and aided by his own strange impulse this boy had ruined him. The
burglary had taken place on his beat; there would be an inquiry; it did not need that to secure
his expulsion from the force. Once in the street he looked up hopefully to the heavens; but
now the stars seemed unspeakably remote, though as he passed along his beat his wife and his
three little children were walking by his side.

                                 III

Bennett had developed mentally without realising the logical result of his development until
it smote him with calamity. Of his betrayal of trust as a guardian of property he thought nothing;
of the possibility of poverty for his family he thought a great deal--all the more that his
dreamer's mind was little accustomed to gripping the practical. It was strange, he thought,
that his final declaration of war against his position should have been a little lacking in
dignity. He had not taken the decisive step through any deep compassion of utter poverty bravely
borne. His had been no more than trivial pity of a young man's folly; and this was a frail
thing on which to make so great a sacrifice. Yet he regretted nothing. His task of moral guardian
of men and women had become impossible to him, and sooner or later he must have given it up.
And there was also his family. "I must come to some decision," he said to himself firmly.

And then the great scream fell upon his ears and echoed through his brain for ever and ever.
It came from the house before which he was standing, and he expected the whole street to wake
aghast with the horror of it. But there followed a silence that seemed to emphasise the ugliness
of the sound. Far away an engine screamed as if in mocking imitation; and that was all. Bennett
had counted up to a hundred and seventy before the door of the house opened, and a man came
out on to the steps.

"Oh, constable," he said coolly, "come inside, will you? I have something to show you."

Bennett mounted the steps doubtfully.

"There was a scream," he said.

The man looked at him quickly. "So you heard it," he said. "It was not pretty."

"No, it was not," replied Bennett.

The man led him down the dim passage into the back sitting-room. The body of a man lay on the
sofa; it was curled like a dry leaf.

"That is my brother," said the man, with a little emphatic nod; "I have killed him. He was
my enemy."

Bennett stared dully at the body, without believing it to be really there.

"Dead!" he said mechanically.

"And anything I say will be used against me in evidence! As if you could compress my hatred
into one little lying notebook."

"I don't care a damn about your hatred," said Bennett, with heat. "An hour ago, perhaps, I
might have arrested you; now I only find you uninteresting."

The man gave a long, low whistle of surprise.

"A philosopher in uniform," he said, "God! sir, you have my sympathy."

"And you have my pity. You have stolen your ideas from cheap melodrama, and you make tragedy
ridiculous. Were I a policeman, I would lock you up with pleasure. Were I a man, I should thrash
you joyfully. As it is I can only share your infamy. I too, I suppose, am a murderer."

"You are in a low, nervous state," said the man; "and you are doing me some injustice. It is
true that I am a poor murderer; but it appears to me that you are a worse policeman."

"I shall wear the uniform no more from tonight."

"I think you are wise, and I shall mar my philosophy with no more murders. If, indeed, I have
killed him; for I assure you that beyond administering the poison to his wretched body I have
done nothing. Perhaps he is not dead. Can you hear his heart beating?"

"I can hear the spoons of my children beating on their empty platters!"

"Is it like that with you? Poor devil! Oh, poor, poor devil! Philosophers should have no wives,
no children, no homes, and no hearts."

Bennett turned from the man with unspeakable loathing.

"I hate you and such as you!" he cried weakly. "You justify the existence of the police. You
make me despise myself because I realise that your crimes are no less mine than yours. I do
not ask you to defend the deadness of that thing lying there. I shall stir no finger to have
you hanged, for the thought of suicide repels me, and I cannot separate your blood and mine.
We are common children of a noble mother, and for our mother's sake I say farewell."

And without waiting for the man's answer he passed from the house to the street.

                                  IV

Haggard and with rebellious limbs, Police-constable Bennett staggered into the superintendent's
office in the early morning.

"I have paid careful attention to your advice," he said to the superintendent, "and I have
passed across the city in search of crime. In its place I have found but folly--such folly
as you have, such folly as I have myself--the common heritage of our blood. It seems that in
some way I have bound myself to bring criminals to justice. I have passed across the city,
and I have found no man worse than myself. Do what you will with me."

The superintendent cleared his throat.

"There have been too many complaints concerning the conduct of the police," he said; "it is
time that an example was made. You will be charged with being drunk and disorderly while on duty."

"I have a wife and three little children," said Bennett softly--"and three pretty little children."
And he covered his tired face with his hands.

The Conjurer

Certainly the audience was restive. In the first place it felt that it had been defrauded,
seeing that Cissie Bradford, whose smiling face adorned the bills outside, had, failed to appear,
and secondly, it considered that the deputy for that famous lady was more than inadequate.
To the little man who sweated in the glare of the limelight and juggled desperately with glass
balls in a vain effort to steady his nerve it was apparent that his turn was a failure. And
as he worked he could have cried with disappointment, for his was a trial performance, and
a year's engagement in the Hennings' group of music-halls would have rewarded success. Yet
his tricks, things that he had done with the utmost ease a thousand times, had been a succession
of blunders, rather mirth-provoking than mystifying to the audience. Presently one of the glass
balls fell crashing on the stage, and amidst the jeers of the gallery he turned to his wife,
who served as his assistant.

"I've lost my chance," he said, with a sob; "I can't do it!"

"Never mind, dear," she whispered. "There's a nice steak and onions at home for supper."

"It's no use," he said despairingly. "I'll try the disappearing trick and then get off. I'm
done here." He turned back to the audience.

"Ladies and gentlemen," he said to the mockers in a wavering voice, "I will now present to
you the concluding item of my entertainment. I will cause this lady to disappear under your
very eyes, without the aid of any mechanical contrivance or artificial device." This was the
merest showman's patter, for, as a matter of fact, it was not a very wonderful illusion. But
as he led his wife forward to present her to the audience the conjurer was wondering whether
the mishaps that had ruined his chance would meet him even here. Besides these letters, I've had word
that plant-hair is put to the following uses: On some plants it catches insects and helps to
eat them; in others, the hair sends out a kind of juice which keeps away insects that might harm
the plant; on the mulleins, the stiff hairs are supposed to prevent cattle from browsing on them;
and on yet others, the hairs suck in gases and liquids as part of the food of the plants.
And there may be other uses for these hairs that I haven't heard of yet.

DARK SUNS.

Here's something strange,--so strange that, may be, you 'd better inquire further into it.
I give you the paragram just as it comes to me:

"The bright star Sirius, itself a vast flaming sun, has a companion which is also a sun,--nearly
seven times as large as our own,--but which is dark, and gives no light at all. This dark sun
was seen through a very powerful telescope in 1862, and it is thought that there are a great
many like it, although no others have been found."

THE LETTER-BOX.

To the little girl who asks if Bryant wrote any poem that would interest "us children" and to
all young readers of ST. NICHOLAS:

Yes, indeed. You will find in the collected works of this beloved American writer many songs
and poems that you can understand with ease and read with delight.

A good, pure-hearted man, like William Cullen Bryant; a man so honest,
so simple and earnest, so truly great, that with a deep knowledge
of the world about him he worshiped God, honored his fellow-man, and
loved nature as a child loves its mother--such a man could not be
far removed from young sympathies.

He could not be a poet without singing, sometimes, just the song
that little folks would love to hear.

And children, themselves, were dear to him.

More than once in the course of an acquaintance that dates back to
our own early youth, we have seen his eyes light with pleasure at
some incident of boy and girl life.

Often his kindly interest and hearty words about St. Nicholas have given us better hope and courage
to try to make the magazine just what it should be.

"Good!" from his quiet lips was well worth striving for. His standard in everything was high.
Hear "The Old Man's Counsel," which, through his own verse, he once gave to his own heart.

But Bryant was not always solemn in his teaching.

And while the poet is telling you of these singers of the air, read "The Return of The Birds," written
in the early spring of 1864, when, as you know, the country was in great trouble, and the
birds saw many a sorry sight. If you like a beautiful fairy-tale in verse, all about children and
the elves or sprites that children love, read his "Little People of The Snow." There also is
the pretty legend of "The White-footed Deer"; or if you bigger boys and girls wish something more
weird and exciting, read his tragic story of "The Strange Lady." Then, on some lovely autumn
day, when "the melancholy days are come," and the procession of flowers
has nearly passed by, read his verses "To the Fringed Gentian."

There are other poems in the collection quite as easy to understand as these. Some of the most
admired indeed, that would seem "hard" to many a tall youngster at the head of the school-class,
were written in the poet's own boyhood. His most famous poem, "Thanatopsis," was composed
when he was but eighteen years of age. When you, too, are eighteen you will more than enjoy
it, if you do not do so already.

Another beautiful poem, called "Waiting by the Gate," will be quite
clear to many of you; and one and all can understand "An Invitation
to the Country," addressed to Julia, the poet's devoted daughter,
the joy of his old age, who brightened his declining years, and to
the last was the faithful companion of his home.

You remember the story of his boyhood days that Mr. Bryant told you
in these pages nearly two years ago?

Good as that story is, there is a picture in his lovely home at Roslyn
that could tell you even better things.

It is the portrait of his beautiful young mother, which for years has shone upon him from the
walls of his bedroom with such a strong, sweet, loving look in her face that it makes one feel
sure that he was reared in a happy home, that his noble, useful manhood sprang from a sunny,
well-directed boyhood.

Long ago the good mother passed from earth, and now the gate through which she passed has
opened for him in his serene old age, the gate of which he wrote:

"And some approach the threshold whose looks are blank with fear,
And some whose temples brighten with joy in drawing near, As if they
saw dear faces, and caught the gracious eye Of Him, the Sinless Teacher,
who came for us to die.

"I mark the joy, the terror; yet these, within my heart, Can neither
wake the dread nor the longing to depart; And, in the sunshine streaming
on quiet wood and lea, I stand and calmly wait till the hinges turn
for me."

* * * * *

DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: One of your little readers has found the word "mutch" in one of my poems, and inquires
its meaning, and I was rather surprised, on looking into the dictionaries,
to discover that it was not there.

I have heard it used from childhood,--applied to anything tied around
the head in kerchief fashion.

The word is in use in old legends, and possibly comes from the French mouchoir, "handkerchief;"
but some better linguist than myself must say whether this suggestion is correct. To show, how
the word is used, I can refer my questioner to the little story of
"Gertrude's Bird," or the woodpecker, that is said to "fly about with
a red mutch on her head."

The legend is in Dasent's "Popular Tales from the Norse."

                                  And I may say here that I am almost glad I made that mistake about
the white-throated sparrow, since receiving a note from a lady who
writes from among the Berkshire hills, where the sweet call of this
bird is constantly repeated.

It is very pleasant to know that a little girl out in that beautiful region honors me so much
as to recite my verse when she hears the fresh note of this charming songster, as this lady
tells me her little daughter does.

Surely the songs of our wild birds are far better than any songs that
can be made about them; but if these serve to remind us how delightful
the winged singers of the deep forests and lonely mountain-sides are,
they are perhaps worth while.--Truly your friend,

LUCY LARCOM.

* * * * *

Arlington Hotel, Cobourg, Canada, July 10, 1878.

MY DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: Do you remember the little boy who traveled with you on the train last month
from Meadville, Pa., to Jamestown, N.Y., when you were returning
from California, and who promised to write you all about his visit
to Niagara Falls?

I have not forgotten my promise, but we have only just settled down
for the rest of the summer at Cobourg, Canada.

Well, we reached Niagara that night and staid there two or three days, and I enjoyed it so
much.

The fall on the American side is much smaller than the Canadian, and I remembered what you told
me about part of the rock having fallen away, so that now, instead
of being shaped like a horseshoe, it is like a Y. The old table rock
has fallen away too.

We drove every day over Goat Island, the new Park, around all the
beautiful drives, and across the bridges.

The best view is on the Canadian side, just after you cross the bridge, and then you have a
grand view of all the falls at once. We drove out to Lundy's Lane, and a man came out and invited
us to go up Scott's Tower and see the battle-field.

Papa and mamma had been up some years ago, so said they did not care to go again, as the stairs
were hard to climb.

I said I would go, so the man took me up and showed me the battle-field
and the lakes through an opera-glass.

When I got into the carriage I thanked him for his kindness, and you may imagine my surprise
when he asked me for fifty cents: of course I had to give it to him,
but it was all I had.

Papa and mamma laughed at me all the way home, but papa gave me the half dollar back afterward.
We spent a week at St. Catherine's Wells, visited Toronto, Belleville, Napanee and Kingston, and
went over on a lake steamer to spend the Fourth of July at Oswego,
such a pretty town in New York on Lake Ontario.

Cobourg is a pretty little town, too, right on the lake, and the
Arlington Hotel, where we are staying, is very nice, with nice shade-trees
and lawns.

Do you know, dear St. Nicholas, I always thought of you as an old gray-bearded man, like the
pictures of Santa Claus; but now that I know you and have talked to you, I shall enjoy St. Nicholas
more than ever.--Your friend and constant reader,

CALVERT WILSON.

* * * * *

New York.

DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: I thought I would tell you about some people I
heard of who like to talk to each other, and everything they say begins
with the same letter.

How queer it must sound. I send you a sentence: Sarah said she saw
Susy sewing small shoes swiftly.

I wish some of your scholars would try it, and see who could send you a sentence with the words
beginning with Z.--I remain, your loving

MAUD.

                                 

* * * * *

Albany, N.Y.

DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: Perhaps some of your other boys, who, like myself, wish to grow big and
strong, would like to hear about the largest human being ever known,--Goliath
of Gath,--a person almost large enough to need introduction by installments,
but he is so well known that the ceremony is needless.

As nearly as I can make out, he was between ten and eleven feet high.

When he went to battle he wore a coat-of-mail weighing one hundred
and fifty-six pounds,--as heavy as a good-sized man; and the rest
of his armor amounted to at least one hundred and fifteen pounds more.

The head of his spear weighed eighteen pounds,--as heavy as six three-pound
cans of preserved fruit,--and this he carried at the end of a long
and heavy shaft!

Think what might happen if a man equally big and strong should live
among us now, and insist on taking part in our games and sports!

If he joined a boat-club, a curious six-oared crew could be made up, with him at one side and
five other men opposite.

And just imagine him "booming along" on a velocipede! If he joined the champion Nine, and hit
a ball, where would that ball go to?

If he called for a "shoulder-high" ball, wouldn't the catcher have
to climb a stepladder to catch behind the giant?

And if he threw a ball to a baseman, wouldn't he be apt to throw it clean through him?

Probably no one can answer these questions, but they are interesting, all the same, to yours sincerely,

R.V.D.

*
* * * *

Lancaster, Pa.

DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: Can you please tell me whether there are fire-flies
in England or not?

We have had several discussions, and I would like so much to know.--Yours truly,

AMY.

According to all accounts within our reach there are in England no
fire-flies like those of the United States.

But there are glow-worms there, and, sometimes, the male glow-worm (which has wings), has been
called a "fire-fly."

It belongs to a branch (genus) of the family Lampyridæ, which is
also the family of its fire-fly cousins, but it is not shaped quite
like them, and bears a different scientific name.

                                 

* * * * *

Philadelphia, Pa.

DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: I have seen so many little stories written by girls of my age, that I thought
I would write also--about iron.

It is a very useful metal, without which we would be very much at
a loss.

Without iron, we could not cook very well; we could not build such houses as we do, because
the nails are made of iron, and some of the tools; nor could we have
gas, for the gas is conveyed through the different parts of the houses
and city by iron pipes.

Nor could we have steam-boats, for the machinery which makes them
move is made of iron.

The buckets which we have to carry water in have iron hoops. The doors have iron locks. The
ink with which we write has iron in it.

Last, but not least, we have iron in our blood, enough to make a
ten-penny nail.

I will tell you of a trip we took to the lead mines.

We were spending the summer of 1877 in Wythville, Virginia, and there became acquainted with a family
boarding in the same hotel as ourselves. One day they invited us to go with them to see the
mines; we had a very long but pleasant ride, and ate our lunch on
the grass in the woods, then went on, and at last arrived at the mines.

The man who was outside told us that he was "going to harness the
ladies' sleeping car;" the mouth of the cave was so low that a man
of ordinary height could hardly stand upright in it: when we started
they hitched two carts which were used to carry the ore out of the
mine, and put a little donkey to it; the man called the donkey Jenny;
we had two or three tallow candles which would not stay lighted; as
we advanced further, the water began to leak from the rocks, and the
car ran off track; but when we were inside the mine, we were more
than rewarded for what we had suffered.

The men were working in groups, each group having a lantern, and
the lead itself shined; a few men went up a pair of stairs to nearly
the top of the mine; but all these beauties could not induce me stay
a minute longer than I was obliged, and I can assure you we were all
very thankful when we arrived at the hotel, to find a nice supper
and warm beds waiting for us.--Your little friend,

JOYCE.

* * * * *

Junction City, Kansas.

DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: I like to read you very much, especially "Under
the Lilacs" and "Dab Kinzer."

I live in Junction City, and have a very pleasant home.

We have a great many wild flowers growing on the prairies. One of them is called the soap plant.
Our teacher says its name is "Yucca."

It has long slim leaves with sharp edges, and the flower grows on
all sides of the stalk, which sometimes is four feet high: the flowers
are white.

Then we have a sensitive rose. The rose looks like a round purple silk tassel. We have lots
more of odd flowers, which I will tell you about some other time.--Yours
truly,

MARY KEYS.

                                 

* * * * *

Bunker Hill.

DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: I read an article lately against nicknames and
spelling names with "ie," but I don't agree with it.

I think when people are grown up their real names look better, but
at home, among one's own friends, a pet name is pretty.

I don't like to see a nickname in a marriage or death notice, but
I do like it for young folks and in the family.

They say it is a French fashion to spell names "ie."


"I knew that before," he said.

So then the boy sang his wonderful song of the sky that is so blue. And when he had finished
the magistrate scowled. "And what are we to learn from that!" he said.

So then the boy lost his temper and sang some naughty doggerel he had made up in his cell that
morning. He abused the town and townsmen, but especially the townsmen. He damned their morals,
their customs, and their institutions. He said that they had ugly faces, raucous voices, and
that their bodies were unclean. He said they were thieves and liars and murderers, that they
had no ear for music and no sense of humour. Oh, he was bitter!

"Good God!" said the magistrate, "that's what I call real improving poetry. Why didn't you
sing that first? There might have been a miscarriage of justice."

Then the baker, the tailor, the butcher, the cobbler, the milkman, and the maker of candlesticks
rose in court and said--

"Ah, but we all knew there was something in him."

So the magistrate gave the boy a certificate that showed that he was a real singer, and the
tradesmen gave him a purse of gold, but the tailor's little daughter gave him one of her golden
ringlets. "You won't forget, boy, will you?" she said.

"Oh, no," said the boy; "but I wish you had liked my songs."

Presently, when he had come a little way out of the town, he put his hand in his wallet and
drew out the magistrate's certificate and tore it in two; and then he took out the gold pieces
and threw them into the ditch, and they were not half as bright as the buttercups. But when
he came to the ringlet he smiled at it and put it back.

"Yet she was as bad as the rest of them," he thought with a sigh.

And he went across the world with his songs.

And Who Shall Say----?

It was a dull November day, and the windows were heavily curtained, so that the room was very
dark. In front of the fire was a large arm-chair, which shut whatever light there might be
from the two children, a boy of eleven and a girl about two years younger, who sat on the floor
at the back of the room. The boy was the better looking, but the girl had the better face.
They were both gazing at the arm-chair with the utmost excitement.

"It's all right. He's asleep," said the boy.

"Oh, do be careful! you'll wake him," whispered the girl.

"Are you afraid?"

"No, why should I be afraid of my father, stupid?"

"I tell you he's not father any more. He's a murderer," the boy said hotly. "He told me, I
tell you. He said, `I have killed your mother, Ray,' and I went and looked, and mother was
all red. I simply shouted, and she wouldn't answer. That means she's dead. His hand was all
red, too."

"Was it paint?"

"No, of course it wasn't paint. It was blood. And then he came down here and went to sleep."

"Poor father, so tired."

"He's not poor father, he's not father at all; he's a murderer, and it is very wicked of you
to call him father," said the boy.

"Father," muttered the girl rebelliously.

"You know the sixth commandment says `Thou shalt do no murder,' and he has done murder; so
he'll go to hell. And you'll go to hell too if you call him father. It's all in the Bible."

The boy ended vaguely, but the little girl was quite overcome by the thought of her badness.

"Oh, I am wicked!" she cried. "And I do so want to go to heaven."

She had a stout and materialistic belief in it as a place of sheeted angels and harps, where
it was easy to be good.

"You must do as I tell you, then," he said. "Because I know. I've learnt all about it at school."

"And you never told me," said she reproachfully.

"Ah, there's lots of things I know," he replied, nodding his head.

"What must we do?" said the girl meekly. "Shall I go and ask mother?"

The boy was sick at her obstinacy.

"Mother's dead, I tell you; that means she can't hear anything. It's no use talking to her;
but I know. You must stop here, and if father wakes you run out of the house and call `Police!'
and I will go now and tell a policeman now."

"And what happens then?" she asked, with round eyes at her brother's wisdom.

"Oh, they come and take him away to prison. And then they put a rope round his neck and hang
him like Haman, and he goes to hell."

"Wha-at! Do they kill him?"

"Because he's a murderer. They always do."

"Oh, don't let's tell them! Don't let's tell them!" she screamed.

"Shut up!" said the boy, "or he'll wake up. We must tell them, or we go to hell--both of us."

But his sister did not collapse at this awful threat, as he expected, though the tears were
rolling down her face. "Don't let's tell them," she sobbed.

"You're a horrid girl, and you'll go to hell," said the boy, in disgust. But the silence was
only broken by her sobbing. "I tell you he killed mother dead. You didn't cry a bit for mother;
I did."

"Oh, let's ask mother! Let's ask mother! I know she won't want father to go to hell. Let's
ask mother!"

"Mother's dead, and can't hear, you stupid," said the boy. "I keep on telling you. Come up
and look."

They were both a little awed in mother's room. It was so quiet, and mother looked so funny.
And first the girl shouted, and then the boy, and then they shouted both together, but nothing
happened. The echoes made them frightened.

"Perhaps she's asleep," the girl said; so her brother pinched one of mother's hands--the white
one, not the red one--but nothing happened, so mother was dead.

"Has she gone to hell?" whispered the girl.

"No! she's gone to heaven, because she's good. Only wicked people go to hell. And now I must
go and tell the policeman. Don't you tell father where I've gone if he wakes up, or he'll run
away before the policeman comes."

"Why?"

"So as not to go to hell," said the boy, with certainty; and they went downstairs together,
the little mind of the girl being much perturbed because she was so wicked. What would mother
say tomorrow if she had done wrong?

The boy put on his sailor hat in the hall. "You must go in there and watch," he said, nodding
in the direction of the sitting-room. "I shall run all the way."

The door banged, and she heard his steps down the path, and then everything was quiet.

She tiptoed into the room, and sat down on the floor, and looked at the back of the chair in
utter distress. She could see her father's elbow projecting on one side, but nothing more.
For an instant she hoped that he wasn't there--hoped that he had gone--but then, terrified,
she knew that this was a piece of extreme wickedness.

So she lay on the rough carpet, sobbing hopelessly, and seeing real and vicious devils of her
brother's imagining in all the corners of the room.

Presently, in her misery, she remembered a packet of acid-drops that lay in her pocket, and
drew them forth in a sticky mass, which parted from its paper with regret. So she choked and
sucked her sweets at the same time, and found them salt and tasteless.

Ray was gone a long time, and she was a wicked girl who would go to hell if she didn't do what
he told her. Those were her prevailing ideas.

And presently there came a third. Ray had said that if her father woke up he would run away,
and not go to hell at all. Now if she woke him up--.

She knew this was dreadfully naughty; but her mind clung to the idea obstinately. You see,
father had always been so fond of mother, and he would not like to be in a different place.
Mother wouldn't like it either. She was always so sorry when father did not come home or anything.
And hell is a dreadful place, full of things. She half convinced herself, and started up, but
then there came an awful thought.

If she did this she would go to hell for ever and ever, and all the others would be in heaven.

She hung there in suspense, sucking her sweet and puzzling it over with knit brows.

How can one be good?

She swung round and looked in the dark corner by the piano; but the Devil was not there.

And then she ran across the room to her father, and shaking his arm, shouted, tremulously--

"Wake up, father! Wake up! The police are coming!"

And when the police came ten minutes later, accompanied by a very proud and virtuous little
boy, they heard a small shrill voice crying, despairingly--

"The police, father! The police!"

But father would not wake.

The Biography Of A Superman

 "O limèd soul that struggling to be free
 Art more engaged!"

Charles Stephen Dale, the subject of my study, was a dramatist and, indeed, something of a
celebrity in the early years of the twentieth century. That he should be already completely
forgotten is by no means astonishing in an age that elects its great men with a charming indecision
of touch. The general prejudice against the granting of freeholds has spread to the desired
lands of fame; and where our profligate ancestors were willing to call a man great in perpetuity,
we, with more shrewdness, prefer to name him a genius for seven years. We know that before
that period may have expired fate will have granted us a sea-serpent with yet more coils, with
a yet more bewildering arrangement of marine and sunset tints, and the conclusion of previous
leases will enable us to grant him undisputed possession of Parnassus. If our ancestors were
more generous they were certainly less discriminate; and it cannot be doubted that many of
them went to their graves under the impression that it is possible for there to be more than
one great man at a time! We have altered all that.

For two years Dale was a great man, or rather the great man, and it is probable that if he
had not died he would have held his position for a longer period. When his death was announced,
although the notices of his life and work were of a flattering length, the leaderwriters were
not unnaturally aggrieved that he should have resigned his post before the popular interest
in his personality was exhausted. The Censor might do his best by prohibiting the performance
of all the plays that the dead man had left behind him; but, as the author neglected to express
his views in their columns, and the common sense of their readers forbade the publication of
interviews with him, the journals could draw but a poor satisfaction from condemning or upholding
the official action. Dale's regrettable absence reduced what might have been an agreeable clash
of personalities to an arid discussion on art. The consequence was obvious. The end of the
week saw the elevation of James Macintosh, the great Scotch comedian, to the vacant post, and
Dale was completely forgotten. That this oblivion is merited in terms of his work I am not
prepared to admit; that it is merited in terms of his personality I indignantly wish to deny.
Whatever Dale may have been as an artist, he was, perhaps in spite of himself, a man, and a
man, moreover, possessed of many striking and unusual traits of character. It is to the man
Dale that I offer this tribute.

Sprung from an old Yorkshire family, Charles Stephen Dale was yet sufficient of a Cockney to
justify both his friends and his enemies in crediting him with the Celtic temperament. Nevertheless,
he was essentially a modern, insomuch that his contempt for the writings of dead men surpassed
his dislike of living authors. To these two central influences we may trace most of the peculiarities
that rendered him notorious and ultimately great. Thus, while his Celtic æstheticism permitted
him to eat nothing but raw meat, because he mistrusted alike "the reeking products of the manure-heap
and the barbaric fingers of cooks," it was surely his modernity that made him an agnostic,
because bishops sat in the House of Lords. Smaller men might dislike vegetables and bishops
without allowing it to affect their conduct; but Dale was careful to observe that every slightest
conviction should have its place in the formation of his character. Conversely, he was nothing
without a reason.

These may seem small things to which to trace the motive forces of a man's life; but if we
add to them a third, found where the truth about a man not infrequently lies, in the rag-bag
of his enemies, our materials will be nearly complete. "Dale hates his fellow-human- beings,"
wrote some anonymous scribbler, and, even expressed thus baldly, the statement is not wholly
false. But he hated them because of their imperfections, and it would be truer to say that
his love of humanity amounted to a positive hatred of individuals, and, pace the critics, the
love was no less sincere than the hatred. He had drawn from the mental confusion of the darker
German philosophers an image of the perfect man--an image differing only in inessentials from
the idol worshipped by the Imperialists as "efficiency." He did not find--it was hardly likely
that he would find--that his contemporaries fulfilled this perfect conception, and he therefore
felt it necessary to condemn them for the possession of those weaknesses, or as some would
prefer to say, qualities, of which the sum is human nature.

I now approach a quality, or rather the lack of a quality, that is in itself of so debatable
a character, that were it not of the utmost importance in considering the life of Charles Stephen
Dale I should prefer not to mention it. I refer to his complete lack of a sense of humour,
the consciousness of which deficiency went so far to detract from his importance as an artist
and a man. The difficulty which I mentioned above lies in the fact that, while every one has
a clear conception of what they mean by the phrase, no one has yet succeeded in defining it
satisfactorily. Here I would venture to suggest that it is a kind of magnificent sense of proportion,
a sense that relates the infinite greatness of the universe to the finite smallness of man,
and draws the inevitable conclusion as to the importance of our joys and sorrows and labours.
I am aware that this definition errs on the side of vagueness; but possibly it may be found
to include the truth. Obviously, the natures of those who possess this sense will tend to be
static rather than dynamic, and it is therefore against the limits imposed by this sense that
intellectual anarchists, among whom I would number Dale, and poets, primarily rebel. But--and
it is this rather than his undoubted intellectual gifts or his dogmatic definitions of good
and evil that definitely separated Dale from the normal men--there can be no doubt that he
felt his lack of a sense of humour bitterly. "Have you two camp?"

"Yes--a winter camp and a summer camp. But we have stayed comfortably here in the cook-tent until
the thermometer went fourteen degrees below zero. We'll sleep in it till we get your house done,
and you can take the tent. If there are no parties wanting guides, we might as well begin
it in the morning."

"But," faltered Françoise, "afterw'iles when de ice is t'ick, and you go to de hudder camp--"

"Oh, we'll take care of you," he promised. "You and Gougou will go with us. We couldn't leave you
on this side."

"In de dark nights," shuddered Françoise.

"You needn't be afraid, any time. When we are off during the day we always leave Jess and Jim
to guard the camp. Jess is a Scotch collie and Jim is a blood-hound. He's there in the kennel.
Neither man nor varmint would have any chance with them."

"I been use' to live alone when my husban' is away, M'sieu' Brownee. I not 'fraid like you t'ink.
But if Gougou be cold and hongry."

"Now that's enough," said Brown, with gentle severity. "Gougou will never be cold and hungry
again while there's a stick of wood to be cut on the shores of this lake, or any game to bag,
or a 'lunge to spear through the ice. We get about two days' lumbering a week down by St.
Ignace.

No use to work more than two days a week," he explained, jocosely. "That gives us enough to
live on; and everybody around here owes us from fifty to a hundred dollars back pay for work,
anyhow. I've bought this ground, twenty acres of it, and another year I'm going to turn it into a garden."

"Oh,
a garden, M'sieu' Brownee! Me, I love some garden! I plant honion once, salade also."

"But I want to get my fences built before I put in improvements. You
know what the silver rule is, don't you?"

"No, m'sieu'," answered
Françoise, vaguely. She knew little of any rule.

"The silver rule
is different from the golden rule. It's 'Do your neighbors, or your
neighbors will do you.' If I don't protect myself, all the loose cattle
around Brevoort will graze over me. Every fellow for himself. We can't
keep the golden rule. We'd never get rich if we did."

"You are rich
mans?" interrogated Françoise, focussing her curiosity on that invisible
power of wealth.

"Millionaires," brazenly claimed the young man,
as he put an earthen-ware pitcher on the table. "Set there, you thousand-dollar
dish! We don't have a yacht on the lake because we prefer small boats,
and we go out as guides to have fun with the greenhorns. The cooking
at the hotels is good enough for common hunters and fishermen who
come here from the cities to spend their money, but it isn't good
enough for me. You've come to the right place, you may make your mind
easy on that."
He could only employ his curiously perfect technique in reproducing the wayward flashes of
a mind incapable of consecutive thought. He never attempted--and this is a hard saying--to
produce any work beautiful in itself; while the confusion of his mind, and the vanity that
never allowed him to ignore the effect his work might produce on his audience, prevented him
from giving clear expression to his creed. His work will appeal rather to the student of men
than to the student of art, and, wantonly incoherent though it often is, must be held to constitute
a remarkable human document.

It is strange to reflect that among his contemporary admirers Dale was credited with an intellect
of unusual clarity, for the examination of any of his plays impresses one with the number and
mutual destructiveness of his motives for artistic expression. A noted debater, he made frequent
use of the device of attacking the weakness of the other man's speech, rather than the weakness
of the other man's argument. His prose was good, though at its best so impersonal that it recalled
the manner of an exceptionally well-written leading article. At its worst it was marred by
numerous vulgarities and errors of taste, not always, it is to be feared, intentional. His
attitude on this point was typical of his strange blindness to the necessity of a pure artistic
ideal. He committed these extravagances, he would say, in order to irritate his audience into
a condition of mental alertness. As a matter of fact, he generally made his readers more sorry
than angry, and he did not realise that even if he had been successful it was but a poor reward
for the wanton spoiling of much good work. He proclaimed himself to be above criticism, but
he was only too often beneath it. Revolting against the dignity, not infrequently pompous,
of his fellow-men of letters, he played the part of clown with more enthusiasm than skill.
It is intellectual arrogance in a clever man to believe that he can play the fool with success
merely because he wishes it.

There is no need for me to enter into detail with regard to Dale's personal appearance; the
caricaturists did him rather more than justice, the photographers rather less. In his younger
days he suggested a gingerbread man that had been left too long in the sun; towards the end
he affected a cultured and elaborate ruggedness that made him look like a duke or a market
gardener. Like most clever men, he had good eyes.

Nor is it my purpose to add more than a word to the published accounts of his death. There
is something strangely pitiful in that last desperate effort to achieve humour. We have all
read the account of his own death that he dictated from the sick-bed--cold, epigrammatic, and,
alas! characteristically lacking in taste. And once more it was his fate to make us rather
sorry than angry.

In the third scene of the second act of "Henry V.," a play written by an author whom Dale pretended
to despise, Dame Quickly describes the death of Falstaff in words that are too well known to
need quotation. It was thus and no otherwise that Dale died. It is thus that every man dies.

Blue Blood

He sat in the middle of the great café with his head supported on his hands, miserable even
to bitterness. Inwardly he cursed the ancestors who had left him little but a great name and
a small and ridiculous body. He thought of his father, whose expensive eccentricities had amused
his fellow-countrymen at the cost of his fortune; his mother, for whom death had been a blessing;
his grandparents and his uncles, in whom no man had found any good. But most of all he cursed
himself, for whose follies even heredity might not wholly account. He recalled the school where
he had made no friends, the University where he had taken no degree. Since he had left Oxford,
his aimless, hopeless life, profligate, but dishonourable, perhaps, only by accident, had deprived
even his title of any social value, and one by one his very acquaintances had left him to the
society of broken men and the women who are anything but light. And these, and here perhaps
the root of his bitterness lay, even these recognised him only as a victim for their mockery,
a thing more poor than themselves, whereon they could satisfy the anger of their tortured souls.
And his last misery lay in this: that he himself could find no day in his life to admire, no
one past dream to cherish, no inmost corner of his heart to love. The lowest tramp, the least-heeded
waif of the night, might have some ultimate pride, but he himself had nothing, nothing whatever.
He was a dream-pauper, an emotional bankrupt.

With a choked sob he drained his brandy and told the waiter to bring him another. There had
been a period in his life when he had been able to find some measure of sentimental satisfaction
in the stupor of drunkenness. In those days, through the veil of illusion which alcohol had
flung across his brain, he had been able to regard the contempt of the men as the intimacy
of friendship, the scorn of the women as the laughter of light love. But now drink gave him
nothing but the mordant insight of morbidity, which cut through his rotten soul like cheese.
Yet night after night he came to this place, to be tortured afresh by the ridicule of the sordid
frequenters, and by the careless music of the orchestra which told him of a flowerless spring
and of a morning which held for him no hope. For his last emotion rested in this self-inflicted
pain; he could only breathe freely under the lash of his own contempt.

Idly he let his dull eyes stray about the room, from table to table, from face to face. Many
there he knew by sight, from none could he hope for sympathy or even companionship. In his
bitterness he envied the courage of the cowards who were brave enough to seek oblivion or punishment
in death. Dropping his eyes to his soft, unlovely hands, he marvelled that anything so useless
should throb with life, and yet he realised that he was afraid of physical pain, terrified
at the thought of death. There were dim ancestors of his whose valour had thrilled the songs
of minstrels and made his name lovely in the glowing folly of battles. But now he knew that
he was a coward, and even in the knowledge he could find no comfort. It is not given to every
man to hate himself gladly. 

"Now you lope out and find them--do you hear?"

Jim, crouching on his belly in acknowledgment that his apprehension had been at fault during some
late encounter, slunk across the camp and took the path to the hotels.

Brown turned on Puttany following at his heels: "Frank, are you sure Joe La France is dead?"

"Oh
yes, he is det."

"Did you see him die? Were you there when he was buried?

Was he put underground with plenty of dirt on top of him, or did he merely drop in the water?"

"I
vas not there."

"Maybe the lazy hound has resurrected. I've seen these lumbermen dropped into the water and drowned
too often.

You can never be sure they won't be up drinking and fighting to-morrow unless you run a knife
through them."

"He is a det man," affirmed Puttany.

"Then somebody else has carried
her off, and I'm going to know all about it before I come back to
camp. If I never come back, you may have the stuff and land. I'm in
this heels over head, and I don't care how soon things end with me."

"But,
Prowny, old poy, I vill help you--"

"You stay here. This is my hunt."

Jim
passed the rustic guest-houses without turning aside from the trail.
Brown took no thought of inquiring at their doors, for throughout
the summer Françoise had not once been seen at the hotels. He did,
however, hastily borrow a horse from the stable where he was privileged,
and pursuing the blood-hound along the lake shore, he cantered over
a causeway of logs and earth which had been raised above a swamp. Sometimes they threw him against men, who cursed him and bruised his soft body
with their fists. Sometimes they tripped him up and hurled him upon the stones of the pavement.
Still he held on, till the Embankment broke before him with the sudden peace of space, and
he leant against the parapet, panting and sick with pain, but free from the tyranny of the houses.

Beneath him the river rolled towards the sea, reticent but more alive, it seemed, than the
deeply painful thing which fate had attached to his brain. He pictured himself tangled in the
dark perplexity of its waters, he fancied them falling upon his face like a girl's hair, till
they darkened his eyes and choked the mouth which, even now, could not breathe fast enough
to satisfy him. The thought displeased him, and he turned away from the place that held peace
for other men but not for him. From the shadow of one of the seats a woman's voice reached
him, begging peevishly for money.

"I have none," he said automatically. Then he remembered and flung coins, all the money he
had, into her lap. "I give it to you because I hate you!" he shrieked, and hurried on lest
her thanks should spoil his spite.

Then the black houses and the warped streets had him in their grip once more, and sported with
him till his consciousness waxed to one white-hot point of pain. Overhead the stars were laughing
quietly in the fields of space, and sometimes a policeman or a chance passer-by looked curiously
at his lurching figure, but he only knew that life was hurting him beyond endurance, and that
he yet endured. Up and down the ice-cold corridors of his brain, thought, formless and timeless,
passed like a rodent flame. Now he was the universe, a vast thing loathsome with agony, now
he was a speck of dust, an atom whose infinite torment was imperceptible even to God. Always
there was something--something conscious of the intolerable evil called life, something that
cried bitterly to be uncreated. Always, while his soul beat against the bars, his body staggered
along the streets, a thing helpless, unguided.

There is an hour before dawn when tired men and women die, and with the coming of this hour
his spirit found a strange release from pain. Once more he realised that he was a man, and,
bruised and weary as he was, he tried to collect the lost threads of reason, which the night
had torn from him. Facing him he saw a vast building dimly outlined against the darkness, and
in some way it served to touch a faint memory in his dying brain. For a while he wandered amongst
the shadows, and then he knew that it was the keep of a castle, his castle, and that high up
where a window shone upon the night a girl was waiting for him, a girl with a face of pearls
and roses. Presently she came to the window and looked out, dressed all in white for her love's
sake. He stood up in his armour and flashed his sword towards the envying stars.

"It is I, my love!" he cried. "I am here."

And there, before the dawn had made the shadows of the Law Courts grey, they found him; bruised
and muddy and daubed with blood, without the sword and spurs of his honour, lacking the scented
token of his love. A thing in no way tragic, for here was no misfortune, but merely the conclusion
of Nature's remorseless logic. For century after century those of his name had lived, sheltered
by the prowess of their ancestors from the trivial hardships and afflictions that make us men.
And now he lay on the pavement, stiff and cold, a babe that had cried itself to sleep because
it could not understand, silent until the morning.

Fate And The Artist

The workmen's dwellings stood in the northwest of London, in quaint rivalry with the comfortable
ugliness of the Maida Vale blocks of flats. They were fairly new and very well built, with
wide stone staircases that echoed all day to the impatient footsteps of children, and with
a flat roof that served at once as a playground for them and a drying-ground for their mothers'
washing. In hot weather it was pleasant enough to play hide-and-seek or follow-my-leader up
and down the long alleys of cool white linen, and if a sudden gust of wind or some unexpected
turn of the game set the wet sheets flapping in the children's faces, their senses were rather
tickled than annoyed.

To George, mooning in a corner of the railings that seemed to keep all London in a cage, these
games were hardly more important than the shoutings and whistlings that rose from the street
below. It seemed to him that all his life--he had lived eleven years--he had been standing
in a corner watching other people engaging in meaningless ploys and antics. The sun was hot,
and yet the children ran about and made themselves hotter, and he wondered, as when he had
been in bed with one of his frequent illnesses he had wondered at the grown-up folk who came
and went, moving their arms and legs and speaking with their mouths, when it was possible to
lie still and quiet and feel the moments ticking themselves off in one's forehead. As he rested
in his corner, he was conscious of the sharp edge of the narrow stone ledge on which he was
sitting and the thin iron railings that pressed into his back; he smelt the evil smell of hot
London, and the soapy odour of the washing; he saw the glitter of the dust, and the noises
of the place beat harshly upon his ears, but he could find no meaning in it all. Life spoke
to him with a hundred tongues, and all the while he was longing for silence. To the older inhabitants
of the tenements he seemed a morbid little boy, unhappily too delicate for sense to be safely
knocked into him; his fellow-children would have ignored him completely if he had not had strange
fancies that made interesting stories and sometimes inspired games. On the whole, George was
lonely without knowing what loneliness meant. 

But in a day both he and Jess had adopted the new members of the family and walked at Gougou's heels.

Gougou
existed in wonderland. He regarded the men as great and amiable powers, who could do what they
pleased with the elements and with the creatures of the earth. They had a fawn, which had followed
Brown home along the beach, feeding on leaves from his hand. They had built it a sylvan home
of cedar boughs behind the camp, from which it wandered at will. And though at first shy of
Gougou, the pretty thing was soon induced to stand upon its hind feet and dance for bits of
cake. His Indian blood vearned towards the fawn; but Me-thuselah, the mighty turtle, was more
exciting. Methuselah lived a prisoner in one side of the bait-tank, from which he was lifted
by a rope around his tail.

He was so enormous that it required both Brown and Puttany to carry him up the bank, and as
he hung from the pole the sudden projection of his snapping head was a danger. When he fastened
his teeth into a stick, the stick was hopelessly his as long as he
chose to keep it.

He was like an elephant cased in mottled shell, and the serrated ridge on his tail resembled
a row of huge brown teeth. Methuselah was a many-wrinkled turtle. When he contracted, imbedding
head in shoulders and legs in body, revealing all his claws and showing wicked little eyes
near the point of his nose, his helpless rage stirred all the Indian; he was the most deliciously
devilish thing that Gougou had ever seen.

Then there was the joy of wintergreen, which both men brought to the child, and he learned
to forage for it himself. The fleshy dark green leaves and red berries clustered thickly in
the woods. He and his mother went in the boat when the day was to be given to bass or pickerel
fishing, and he learned great lessons of water-lore from the two men. If they trusted a troll
line to his baby hands, he was in a state of beatitude. His object in life was to possess a bear
cub, and many a porcupine creeping along the beach he mistook for that desirable property, until taught
to distinguish quills from fur. Gougou heard, and he believed, that all porcupines were old
lumbermen, who never died, but simply contracted to that shape. He furtively stoned them when
he could, reflecting that they were tough, and delighting to see
the quills fly.

Françoise would sit in the camp like a picture of still life, glowing and silent at her appointed
labor. She sewed for all of them, looking womanly and unhurried, with a pink-veined moccasin-flower
in her hair; while Brown, cooking and baking, rushed from tent to wood-pile, his sleeves turned
back from his white, muscular arms. He lived more intensely than any other member of the sylvan
household. His blue eyes shone, and his face was vivid as he talked
to her. He was a common man, blunted in the finer nature by a life
of hardship, yet his shrewd spirit seized on much that less facile
people like Puttany learned slowly or not at all. But no one ever saw it clearly except George, though most
of the children thought they had seen its tail disappearing in the shadows at one time or another.

It was doubtful how far the children believed his stories; probably, not having acquired the
habit of examining evidence, they were content to accept ideas that threw a pleasant glamour
on life. But the coming of Jimmy Simpson altered this agreeable condition of mind. Jimmy was
one of those masterful stupid boys who excel at games and physical contests, and triumph over
intellectual problems by sheer braggart ignorance. From the first he regarded George with contempt,
and when he heard him telling his stories he did not conceal his disbelief.

"It's a lie," he said; "there ain't no fish in the tank."

"I have seen it, I tell you," said George.

Jimmy spat on the asphalt rudely.

"I bet no one else has," he said.

George looked round his audience, but their eyes did not meet his. They felt that they might
have been mistaken in believing that they had seen the tail of the fish. And Jimmy was a very
good man with his fists. "Liar!" said Jimmy at last triumphantly, and walked away. Being masterful,
he led the others with him, and George brooded by the tank for the rest of the evening in solitude.

Next day George went up to Jimmy confidently. "I was right about the fish," he said. "I dreamed
about it last night."

"Rot!" said Jimmy; "dreams are only made-up things; they don't mean anything."

George crept away sadly. How could he convince such a man? All day long he worried over the
problem, and he woke up in the middle of the night with it throbbing in his brain. And suddenly,
as he lay in his bed, doubt came to him. Supposing he had been wrong, supposing he had never
seen the fish at all? This was not to be borne. He crept quietly out of the flat, and tiptoed
upstairs to the roof. The stone was very cold to his feet.

There were so many things in the tank that at first, George could not see the fish, but at
last he saw it gleaming below the moon and the stars, larger and even more beautiful than he
had said. "I knew I was right," he whispered, as he crept back to bed. In the morning he was
very ill.

Meanwhile blue day succeeded blue day, and while the water grew lower in the tank, the children,
with Jimmy for leader, had almost forgotten the boy who had told them stories. Now and again
one or other of them would say that George was very, very ill, and then they would go on with
their game. No one looked in the tank now that they knew there was nothing in it, till it occurred
one day to Jimmy that the dry weather should have brought final confirmation of his scepticism.
Leaving his comrades at the long jump, he went to George's neglected corner and peeped into
the tank. Sure enough it was almost dry, and, he nearly shouted with surprise, in the shallow
pool of sooty water there lay a large fish, dead, but still gleaming with rainbow colours.

Jimmy was strong and stupid, but not ill-natured, and, recalling George's illness, it occurred
to him that it would be a decent thing to go and tell him he was right. He ran downstairs and
knocked on the door of the flat where George lived. George's big sister opened it, but the
boy was too excited to see that her eyes were wet. "Oh, miss," he said breathlessly, "tell
George he was right about the fish. I've seen it myself!"

"Georgy's dead," said the girl.

The Great Man

To the people who do not write it must seem odd that men and women should be willing to sacrifice
their lives in the endeavour to find new arrangements and combinations of words with which
to express old thoughts and older emotions, yet that is not an unfair statement of the task
of the literary artist. Words--symbols that represent the noises that human beings make with
their tongues and lips and teeth--lie within our grasp like the fragments of a jig-saw puzzle,
and we fit them into faulty pictures until our hands grow weary and our eyes can no longer
pretend to see the truth. In order to illustrate an infinitesimal fraction of our lives by
means of this preposterous game we are willing to sacrifice all the rest. While ordinary efficient
men and women are enjoying the promise of the morning, the fulfilment of the afternoon, the
tranquillity of evening, we are still trying to discover a fitting epithet for the dew of dawn.
For us Spring paves the woods with beautiful words rather than flowers, and when we look into
the eyes of our mistress we see nothing but adjectives. Love is an occasion for songs; Death
but the overburdened father of all our saddest phrases. We are of those who are born crying
into the world because they cannot speak, and we end, like Stevenson, by looking forward to
our death because we have written a good epitaph. Sometimes in the course of our frequent descents
from heaven to the waste-paper basket we feel that we lose too much to accomplish so little.
Does a handful of love-songs really outweigh the smile of a pretty girl, or a hardly-written
romance compensate the author for months of lost adventure? We have only one life to live,
and we spend the greater part of it writing the history of dead hours. Our lives lack balance
because we find it hard to discover a mean between the triolet we wrote last I night and the
big book we are going to start tomorrow, and also because living only with our heads we tend
to become top-heavy. We justify our present discomfort with the promise of a bright future
of flowers and sunshine and gladdest life, though we know that in the garden of art there are
many chrysalides and few butterflies. Few of us are fortunate enough to accomplish anything
that was in the least worth doing, so we fall back on the arid philosophy that it is effort
alone that counts.

Luckily--or suicide would be the rule rather than the exception for artists--the long process
of disillusionment is broken by hours when even the most self-critical feel nobly and indubitably
great; and this is the only reward that most artists ever have for their labours, if we set
a higher price on art than money. On the whole, I am inclined to think that the artist is fully
rewarded, for the common man can have no conception of the Joy that is to be found in belonging,
though but momentarily and illusively, to the aristocracy of genius. To find the just word
for all our emotions, to realise that our most trivial thought is illimitably creative, to
feel that it is our lot to keep life's gladdest promises, to see the great souls of men and
women, steadfast in existence as stars in a windless pool--these, indeed, are no ordinary pleasures.
Moreover, these hours of our illusory greatness endow us in their passing with a melancholy
that is not tainted with bitteress. We have nothing to regret; we are in truth the richer for
our rare adventure. We have been permitted to explore the ultimate possibilities of our nature,
and if we might not keep this newly-discovered territory, at least we did not return from our
travels with empty hands. Something of the glamour lingers, something perhaps of the wisdom,
and it is with a heightened passion, a fiercer enthusiasm, that we set ourselves once more
to our life-long task of chalking pink salmon and pinker sunsets on the pavements of the world.

I once met an Englishman in the forest that starts outside Brussels and stretches for a long
day's journey across the hills. We found a little café under the trees, and sat in the sun
talking about modern English literature all the afternoon. In this way we discovered that we
had a common standpoint from which we judged works of art, though our judgments differed pleasantly
and provided us with materials for agreeable discussion. By the time we had divided three bottles
of Gueze Lambic, the noble beer of Belgium, we had already sketched out a scheme for the ideal
literary newspaper. In other words, we had achieved friendship.

When the afternoon grew suddenly cold, the Englishman led me off to tea at his house, which
was half-way up the hill out of Woluwe. It was one of those modern country cottages that Belgian
architects steal openly and without shame from their English confreres. We were met at the
garden gate by his daughter, a dark-haired girl of fifteen or sixteen, so unreasonably beautiful
that she made a disillusioned scribbler feel like a sad line out of one of the saddest poems
of Francis Thompson. In my mind I christened her Monica, because I did not like her real name.
The house, with its old furniture, its library, where the choice of books was clearly dictated
by individual prejudices and affections, and its unambitious parade of domestic happiness,
heightened my melancholy. While tea was being prepared Monica showed me the garden. Only a
few daffodils and crocuses were in bloom, but she led me to the rose garden, and told me that
in the summer she could pick a great basket of roses every day. I pictured Monica to myself,
gathering her roses on a breathless summer afternoon, and returned to the house feeling like
a battened version of the Reverend Laurence Sterne. I knew that I had gathered all my roses,
and I thought regretfully of the chill loneliness of the world that lay beyond the limits of
this paradise.

This mood lingered with me during tea, and it was not till that meal was over that the miracle
happened. I do not know whether it was the Englishman or his wife that wrought the magic: or
perhaps it was Monica, nibbling "speculations" with her sharp white teeth; but at all events
I was led with delicate diplomacy to talk about myself, and I presently realised that I was
performing the grateful labour really well. My words were warmed into life by an eloquence
that is not ordinarily mine, my adjectives were neither commonplace nor far-fetched, my adverbs
fell into their sockets with a sob of joy. I spoke of myself with a noble sympathy, a compassion
so intense that it seemed divinely altruistic. And gradually, as the spirit of creation woke
in my blood, I revealed, trembling between a natural sensitiveness and a generous abandonment
of restraint, the inner life of a man of genius.

I passed lightly by his misunderstood childhood to concentrate my sympathies on the literary
struggles of his youth. I spoke of the ignoble environment, the material hardships, the masterpieces
written at night to be condemned in the morning, the songs of his heart that were too great
for his immature voice to sing; and all the while I bade them watch the fire of his faith burning
with a constant and quenchless flame. I traced the development of his powers, and instanced
some of his poems, my poems, which I recited so well that they sounded to me, and I swear to
them also, like staves from an angelic hymn-book. I asked their compassion for the man who,
having such things in his heart, was compelled to waste his hours in sordid journalistic labours.

So by degrees I brought them to the present time, when, fatigued by a world that would not
acknowledge the truth of his message, the man of genius was preparing to retire from life,
in order to devote himself to the composition of five or six masterpieces. I described these
masterpieces to them in outline, with a suggestive detail dashed in here and there to show
how they would be finished. Certainly, anyhow, the United States do not so far utter poetry, first-rate
literature, or any of the so-call'd arts, to any lofty admiration or advantage--are not dominated
or penetrated from actual inherence or plain bent to the said poetry and arts. Other work, other needs,
current inventions, productions, have occupied and to-day mainly occupy them. They are very
'cute and imitative and proud--can't bear being left too glaringly away far behind the other
high-class nations--and so we set up some home "poets," "artists,"
painters, musicians, literati, and so forth, all our own (thus claim'd.)
The whole matter has gone on, and exists to-day, probably as it should
have been, and should be; as, for the present, it must be.

To all which we conclude, and repeat the terrible query: American National Literature--is there
distinctively any such thing, or can there ever be?

Note:

[46] The essay was for the North American Review, in answer to the formal request of the editor.
It appear'd in March, 1891.

GATHERING THE CORN

Last of October.--Now mellow, crisp, Autumn days, bright moonlight nights, and gathering the corn--"cutting
up," as the farmers call it.

Now, or of late, all over the country, a certain green and brown-drab eloquence seeming to call out,
"You that pretend to give the news, and all that's going, why not give us a notice?" Truly, O
fields, as for the notice,

"Take, we give it willingly."

Only we must do it our own way. Leaving the domestic, dietary, and commercial parts of the question
(which are enormous, in fact, hardly second to those of any other
of our great soil-products), we will just saunter down a lane we know,
on an average West Jersey farm, and let the fancy of the hour itemize
America's most typical agricultural show and specialty.

Gathering the Corn--the British call it Maize, the old Yankee farmer Indian Corn. The great plumes,
the ears well-envelop'd in their husks, the long and pointed leaves, in summer, like green
or purple ribands, with a yellow stem line in the middle, all now turn'd dingy; the sturdy
stalks, and the rustling in the breeze--the breeze itself well tempering the sunny noon--The varied
reminiscences recall'd--the ploughing and planting in spring--(the whole family in the field,
even the little girls and boys dropping seed in the hill)--the gorgeous sight through July and
August--the walk and observation early in the day--the cheery call of the robin, and the low
whirr of insects in the grass--the Western husking party, when ripe--the November moonlight
gathering, and the calls, songs, laughter of the young fellows.

Not to forget, hereabouts, in the Middle States, the old worm fences,
with the gray rails and their scabs of moss and lichen--those old
rails, weather beaten, but strong yet. Why not come down from literary
dignity, and confess we are sitting on one now, under the shade of
a great walnut tree? Why not confide that these lines are pencill'd
on the edge of a woody bank, with a glistening pond and creek seen
through the trees south, and the corn we are writing about close at
hand on the north? Why not put in the delicious scent of the "life
everlasting" that yet lingers so profusely in every direction--the
chromatic song of the one persevering locust (the insect is scarcer
this fall and the past summer than for many years) beginning slowly,
rising and swelling to much emphasis, and then abruptly falling--so
appropriate to the scene, so quaint, so racy and suggestive in the
warm sunbeams, we could sit here and look and listen for an hour?

Standing at the window this morning and watching the rain, I suddenly became conscious of a
wet morning long ago when I stood as I stood now and saw the drops sliding one after another
down the steamy panes. I was a boy of eight years old, dressed in a sailor suit, and with my
hair clipped quite short like a French boy's, and my right knee was stiff with a half-healed
cut where I had fallen on the gravel path under the schoolroom window, it was a really wet,
grey day. I could hear the rain dripping from the fir-trees on to the scullery roof, and every
now and then a gust of wind drove the rain down on the soaked lawn with a noise like breaking
surf. I could hear the water gurgling in the pipe that was hidden by the ivy, and I saw with
interest that one of the paths was flooded, so that a canal ran between the standard rose bushes
and recalled pictures of Venice. I thought it would be nice if it rained truly hard and flooded
the house, so that we should all have to starve for three weeks, and then be rescued excitingly
in boats; but I had not really any hope. Behind me in the schoolroom my two brothers were playing
chess, but had not yet started quarrelling, and in a corner my little sister was patiently
beating a doll. There was a fire in the grate, but it was one of those sombre, smoky fires
in which it is impossible to take any interest. The clock on the mantelpiece ticked very slowly,
and I realised that an eternity of these long seconds separated me from dinner-time. I thought
I would like to go out.

The enterprise presented certain difficulties and dangers, but none that could not be surpassed.
I would have to steal down to the hall and get my boots and waterproof on unobserved. I would
have to open the front door without making too much noise, for the other doors were well guarded
by underlings, and I would have to run down the front drive under the eyes of many windows.
Once beyond the gate I would be safe, for the wetness of the day would secure me from dangerous
encounters. Walking in the rain would be pleasant than staying in the dull schoolroom, where
life remained unchanged for a quarter of an hour at a time; and I remembered that there was
a little wood near our house in which I had never been when it was raining hard. Perhaps I
would meet the magician for whom I had looked so often in vain on sunny days, for it was quite
likely that he preferred walking in bad weather when no one else was about. It would be nice
to hear the drops of rain falling on the roof of the trees, and to be quite warm and dry underneath.
Perhaps the magician would give me a magic wand, and I would do things like the conjurer last
Christmas.

Certainly I would be punished when I got home, for even if I were not missed they would see
that my boots were muddy and that my waterproof was wet. I would have no pudding for dinner
and be sent to bed in the afternoon: but these things had happened to me before, and though
I had not liked them at the time, they did not seem very terrible in retrospect. And life was
so dull in the schoolroom that wet morning when I was eight years old!

And yet I did not go out, but stood hesitating at the window, while with every gust earth seemed
to fling back its curls of rain from its shining forehead. To stand on the brink of adventure
is interesting in itself, and now that I could think over the details of my expedition was
no longer bored. So I stayed dreaming till the golden moment for action was passed, and a violent
exclamation from one of the chess-players called me back to a prosaic world. In a second the
board was overturned and the players were locked in battle. My little sister, who had already
the feminine craving for tidiness, crept out of her corner and meekly gathered the chessmen
from under the feet of the combatants. I had seen it all before, and while I led my forces
to the aid of the brother with whom at the moment I had some sort of alliance, I reflected
that I would have done better to dare the adventure and set forth into the rainy world.

And this morning when I stood at my window, and my memory a little cruelly restored to this
vision of a day long dead, I was still of the same opinion. Oh! I should have put on my boots
and my waterproof and gone down to the little wood to meet the enchanter! He would have given
me the cap of invisibility, the purse of Fortunatus, and a pair of seven-league boots. He would
have taught me to conquer worlds, and to leave the easy triumphs of dreamers to madmen, philosophers,
and poets, He would have made me a man of action, a statesman, a soldier, a founder of cities
or a digger of graves. For there are two kinds of men in the world when we have put aside the
minor distinctions of shape and colour. There are the men who do things and the men who dream
about them. No man can be both a dreamer and a man of action, and we are called upon to determine
what rôle we shall play in life when we are too young to know what to do. 

"Oh, M'sieu' Brownee, I t'ink maybe you come!"

"But, Françoise, what made you leave?"

"It is my husban's brudder.
I not know what to do! He bring us to dese folks to stay all night
till de cars go."

"Why didn't he show himself to us, and take you
like a man?" It seems to me likely enough that that moment of hesitation before the schoolroom
window determined a habit of mind that has kept me dreaming ever since. For all my life I have
preferred thought to action; I have never run to the little wood; I have never met the enchanter.
And so this morning, when Fate played me this trick and my dream was chilled for an instant
by the icy breath of the past, I did not rush out into the streets of life and lay about me
with a flaming sword. No; I picked up my pen and wrote some words on a piece of paper and lulled
my shocked senses with the tranquillity of the idlest dream of all.

