The nine-light window over the dais has its original glass, made, it is believed, by the John
Thornton of Coventry who is known as the maker of the east window of York Minster. The upper
part has numerous coats of arms of kings, cities, and princes, while the nine lights are filled
with "portraitures of several kings in their surcotes," William I, Richard I, Henry III, IV,
V, VI, King Arthur, the Emperor Constantine, and another unnamed. The windows on either side
of the hall have suffered grievously. Those on the west (left) were deprived of their heraldry
and portraits in 1785. In those on the east new glass with poor imitations of the ancient series
of figures and coats-of-arms was placed in 1824. At the same time the wainscotting painted
in 1580 with inscriptions and heraldry was cleared away and replaced with cement. The inscriptions
were copied with care, but "the ornamentation was followed without any very fastidious copying
of the uncouth ancient style"![8] The timber roof is of low pitch, with traceried spandrels
above the tie-beams. Angels playing on a variety of instruments are placed at the centre of
each tie-beam and there is much good carving of foliage and animals at the intersections of
the timbers. The most famous adornment of the hall is the tapestry behind the dais. The following
views as to its origin and subject are those of George Scharf the antiquary. It is of Flemish
design but probably of English manufacture, is woven, not embroidered, and was made in the
early sixteenth century for the place it occupies, its compartments corresponding with those
of the window. It is in six compartments in two rows. The upper central has a figure of Justice,
an insertion probably in the place of Christ, angels with the instruments of the Passion being
on either side. The lower central represents the Assumption of the Virgin in presence of the
apostles. The upper left in order from the centre has eleven saints, SS. John Baptist, Matthias
(?), Paul, Adrian, Peter, George, Andrew, No. 8(?), Bartholomew, Simon, Thaddeus. The corresponding
female saints on the right are SS. Katherine, Barbara, Dorothy, Mary Magdalen, No. 5 (?), Margaret,
Agnes, Gertrude of Nivelle, Anne, Apollonia.

The lower left has a king kneeling at a prie-dieu on which is his crown and an open book. A
cardinal kneels behind him but there is no other ecclesiastic among the seventeen courtiers
standing behind. In the opposite compartment is a queen kneeling with a number of ladies, among
whom are two in monastic dress. Although the work belongs to the reign of Henry VII, the king
and queen are almost certainly Henry VI and Margaret of Anjou.

On the walls are portraits of later sovereigns from William III to George IV, that of George
III being by Lawrence. The Mayoress' Parlour opening from the dais has been drastically restored.
It contains portraits of Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, James I, and Charles I, and four benefactors
to the city, John Hales, founder of the Free School, Sir Thomas White, Thomas Jesson and Christopher
Davenport.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 8: "Coventry: its History and Antiquities," B. Poole, 1870.]

THE CARTHUSIAN MONASTERY

