    Peter Porcupine is one of those writers who attempt to deal in
      wit--and to bear down every Republican principle by satire--but he
      miserably fails in both, for his wit is as stale as his satire,
      and his satire as insipid as his wit. He attempts to ridicule Dr.
      Franklin, but can any man of sense conceive any poignancy in
      styling this great philosopher, "poor Richard," or "the old
      lightning rod." Franklin, whose researches in philosophy have
      placed him preeminent among the first characters in this country,
      or in Europe: is it possible then that such a contemptible wretch
      as Peter Porcupine, (who never gave any specimen of his
      philosophy, but in bearing with Christian patience a severe
      whipping at the public post) can injure the exalted reputation of
      this great philosopher? The folly of the Editor of the Centinal,
      is the more conspicuous, in inserting his billingsgate abuse in a
      Boston paper, when this town, particularly the TRADESMAN of it are
      reaping such advantages from Franklin's liberality. The Editor of
      the Centinal ought to blush for his arrogance in vilifying this
      TRADESMEN'S FRIEND, by retailing the scurrility of so wretched a
      puppy as Peter Porcupine.

    As to Dr. Priestley, the Editor was obliged to apologise in this
      particular--but colours it over as the effusions of genius--poor
      apology, indeed to stain his columns with scurrility and abuse,
      and after finding the impression too notoriously infamous,
      attempts to qualify it, sycophantic parenthesis.

    The names of Franklin and Priestley will be enrolled in the
      catalogue of worthies, while the wretched Peter Porcupine, and
      his more wretched supporters, will sink into oblivion, unless the
      register of Newgate should be published, and their memories be
      raked from the loathsome rubbish as spectres of universal
      destestation.

And the London Monthly Review (August 10, 1796) commented as follows on Porcupine's animadversions
upon Priestley:

    Frequently as we have differed in opinion from Dr. Priestley, we
      should think it an act of injustice to his merit, not to say that
      the numerous and important services which he has rendered to
      science, and the unequivocal proofs which he has given of at least
      honest intention towards religion and Christianity ought to have
      protected him from such gross insults as are poured upon him in
      this pamphlet. Of the author's literary talent, we shall say but
      little: the phrases, "setting down to count the cost"--"the rights
      of the man the greatest bore in nature"--the appellation of
      rigmarole ramble, given to a correct sentence of Dr.
      Priestley--which the author attempts to criticise--may serve as
      specimens of his language.

    The pitiful attempt at wit, in his vulgar fable of the pitcher
      haranguing the pans and jordans, will give him little credit as a
      writer, with readers of an elegant taste.--No censure, however,
      can be too severe for a writer who suffers the rancour of party
      spirit to carry him so far beyond the bounds of justice, truth and
      decency, as to speak of Dr. Priestley as an admirer of the
      massacres of France, and who would have wished to have seen the
      town of Birmingham like that of Lyons, razed, and all its
      industrious and loyal inhabitants butchered as a man whose conduct
      proves that he has either an understanding little superior to that
      of an idiot, or the heart of Marat: in short, as a man who fled
      into banishment covered with the universal destestation of his
      countrymen. The spirit, which could dictate such outrageous abuse,
      must disgrace any individual and any party.

Even before Porcupine began his abuse of Priestley, there appeared efforts intended no doubt
to arouse opposition to him and dislike for him. One such, apparently very innocent in its
purpose, appeared shortly after Priestley's settlement in Northumberland. It may be seen in
the Advertiser, and reads thus:

    The divinity of Jesus Christ proved in a publication to be sold by
      Francis Bayley in Market Street, between 3rd and 4th Streets, at
      the sign of the Yorick's Head--being a reply to Dr. Joseph
      Priestley's appeal to the serious and candid professors of
      Christianity.

The New York addresses clearly indicated the generous sympathy of hosts of Americans for Priestley.
They were not perfunctory, but genuinely genuine. This brought joy to the distinguished emigrant,
and a sense of fellowship, accompanied by a feeling of security.

More than a century has passed since these occurrences, and the reader of today is scarcely
stirred by their declarations and appeals. Changes have come, in the past century, on both
sides of the great ocean. Almost everywhere reigns the freedom so devoutly desired by the fathers
of the long ago. It is so universal that it does not come as a first thought. Other changes,
once constantly on men's minds have gradually been made.

How wonderful has been the development of New York since Priestley's brief sojourn in it. How
marvelously science has grown in the great interim. What would Priestley say could he now pass
up and down the famous avenues of our greatest City?

His decision to live in America, his labors for science in this land, have had a share in the
astounding unfolding of the dynamical possibilities of America's greatest municipality.

The Priestleys were delighted with New York. They were frequent dinner guests of Governor Clinton,
whom they liked very much and saw often, and they met with pleasure Dr. Samuel L. Mitchill,
the Professor of Chemistry in Columbia.

Amidst the endless fetes, attendant upon their arrival, there existed a desire to go forward.
The entire family were eager to arrive at their real resting place--the home prepared by the
sons who had preceded them to this Western world. Accordingly, on June 18, 1794, they left
New York, after a fortnight's visit, and the Advertiser of Philadelphia, June 21, 1794, contained
these lines:

    Last Thursday evening arrived in town from New York the justly
      celebrated philosopher Dr. Joseph Priestley.

Thus was heralded his presence in the City of his esteemed, honored friend, Franklin, who,
alas! was then in the spirit land, and not able to greet him as he would have done had he still
been a living force in the City of Brotherly Love. However, a very prompt welcome came from
the American Philosophical Society, founded (1727) by the immortal savant, Franklin.

The President of this venerable Society, the oldest scientific Society in the Western hemisphere,
was the renowned astronomer, David Rittenhouse, who said for himself and his associates:

    THE American Philosophical Society, held at Philadelphia for
      promoting useful knowledge, offer you their sincere
      congratulations on your safe arrival in this country. Associated
      for the purposes of extending and disseminating those improvements
      in the sciences and the arts, which most conduce to substantial
      happiness of Man, the Society felicitate themselves and their
      country, that your talents and virtues, have been transferred to
      this Republic. Considering you as an illustrious member of this
      institution: Your colleagues anticipate your aid, in zealously
      promoting the objects which unite them; as a virtuous man,
      possessing eminent and useful acquirements, they contemplate with
      pleasure the accession of such worth to the American Commonwealth,
      and looking forward to your future character of a citizen of this,
      your adopted country, they rejoice in greeting, as such, an
      enlightened Republican.

    In this free and happy country, those unalienable rights, which
      the Author of Nature committed to man as a sacred deposit, have
      been secured: Here, we have been enabled, under the favour of
      Divine Providence, to establish a government of Laws, and not of
      Men; a government, which secures to its citizens equal Rights, and
      equal Liberty, and which offers an asylum to the good, to the
      persecuted, and to the oppressed of other climes.

    May you long enjoy every blessing which an elevated and highly
      cultivated mind, a pure conscience, and a free country are capable
      of bestowing.

And, in return, Priestley remarked.

    IT is with peculiar satisfaction that I receive the
      congratulations of my brethren of the Philosophical Society in
      this City, on my arrival in this country. It is, in great part,
      for the sake of pursuing our common studies without molestation,
      though for the present you will allow, with far less advantage,
      that I left my native country, and have come to America; and a
      Society of Philosophers, who will have no objection to a person on
      account of his political or religious sentiments, will be as
      grateful, as it will be new to me. My past conduct, I hope, will
      show, that you may depend upon my zeal in promoting the valuable
      objects of your institution; but you must not flatter yourself, or
      me, with supposing, that, at my time of life, and with the
      inconvenience attending a new and uncertain settlement, I can be
      of much service to it.

    I am confident, however, from what I have already seen of the
      spirit of the people of this country, that it will soon appear
      that Republican governments, in which every obstruction is removed
      to the exertion of all kinds of talent, will be far more
      favourable to science, and the arts, than any monarchical
      government has ever been. The patronage to be met with there is
      ever capricious, and as often employed to bear down merit as to
      promote it, having for its real object, not science or anything
      useful to mankind, but the mere reputation of the patron, who is
      seldom any judge of science. Whereas a Public which neither
      flatters nor is to be flattered will not fail in due time to
      distinguish true merit and to give every encouragement that it is
      proper to be given in the case. Besides by opening as you
      generously do an asylum to the persecuted and "oppressed of all
      climes," you will in addition to your own native stock, soon
      receive a large accession of every kind of merit, philosophical
      not excepted, whereby you will do yourselves great honour and
      secure the most permanent advantage to the community.

Doubtless in the society of so many worthy Philadelphians, the Priestleys were happy, for they
had corresponded with not a few of them.

The longing for Northumberland became very great and one smiles on reading that the good Doctor
thought "Philadelphia by no means so agreeable as New York ... Philadelphia would be very irksome
to me.... It is only a place for business and to get money in." But in this City he later spent
much of his time.

It was about the middle of July, 1794, that the journey to Northumberland began, and on September
14, 1794, Priestley wrote of Northumberland "nothing can be more delightful, or more healthy
than this place."

