I was the only one of our party who saw this grand sight; the others were attitudinizing, for
the benefit of the long rank of young ladies who were promenading on the bank, and so they
lost it. But I helped to fish them out of the river, down below the bridge, and then described
it to them as well as I could.

They were not interested, though. They said they were wet and felt ridiculous and did not care
anything for descriptions of scenery. The young ladies, and other people, crowded around and
showed a great deal of sympathy, but that did not help matters; for my friends said they did
not want sympathy, they wanted a back alley and solitude.

CHAPTER XX

[My Precious, Priceless Tear-Jug]

Next morning brought good news--our trunks had arrived from Hamburg at last. Let this be a
warning to the reader. The Germans are very conscientious, and this trait makes them very particular.
Therefore if you tell a German you want a thing done immediately, he takes you at your word;
he thinks you mean what you say; so he does that thing immediately--according to his idea of
immediately--which is about a week; that is, it is a week if it refers to the building of a
garment, or it is an hour and a half if it refers to the cooking of a trout. Very well; if
you tell a German to send your trunk to you by "slow freight," he takes you at your word; he
sends it by "slow freight," and you cannot imagine how long you will go on enlarging your admiration
of the expressiveness of that phrase in the German tongue, before you get that trunk. The hair
on my trunk was soft and thick and youthful, when I got it ready for shipment in Hamburg; it
was baldheaded when it reached Heidelberg. However, it was still sound, that was a comfort,
it was not battered in the least; the baggagemen seemed to be conscientiously careful, in Germany,
of the baggage entrusted to their hands. There was nothing now in the way of our departure,
therefore we set about our preparations.

Naturally my chief solicitude was about my collection of Ceramics. Of course I could not take
it with me, that would be inconvenient, and dangerous besides. I took advice, but the best
brick-a-brackers were divided as to the wisest course to pursue; some said pack the collection
and warehouse it; others said try to get it into the Grand Ducal Museum at Mannheim for safe
keeping. So I divided the collection, and followed the advice of both parties. I set aside,
for the Museum, those articles which were the most frail and precious.

Among these was my Etruscan tear-jug. I have made a little sketch of it here; that thing creeping
up the side is not a bug, it is a hole. I bought this tear-jug of a dealer in antiquities for
four hundred and fifty dollars. It is very rare. The man said the Etruscans used to keep tears
or something in these things, and that it was very hard to get hold of a broken one, now.

I also set aside my Henri II. plate. See sketch from my pencil; it is in the main correct,
though I think I have foreshortened one end of it a little too much, perhaps. This is very
fine and rare; the shape is exceedingly beautiful and unusual. It has wonderful decorations
on it, but I am not able to reproduce them. It cost more than the tear-jug, as the dealer said
there was not another plate just like it in the world. He said there was much false Henri II
ware around, but that the genuineness of this piece was unquestionable.

He showed me its pedigree, or its history, if you please; it was a document which traced this
plate's movements all the way down from its birth--showed who bought it, from whom, and what
he paid for it--from the first buyer down to me, whereby I saw that it had gone steadily up
from thirty-five cents to seven hundred dollars. He said that the whole Ceramic world would
be informed that it was now in my possession and would make a note of it, with the price paid.
[Figure 8]

There were Masters in those days, but, alas--it is not so now. Of course the main preciousness
of this piece lies in its color; it is that old sensuous, pervading, ramifying, interpolating,
transboreal blue which is the despair of modern art. The little sketch which I have made of
this gem cannot and does not do it justice, since I have been obliged to leave out the color.
But I've got the expression, though.

However, I must not be frittering away the reader's time with these details. I did not intend
to go into any detail at all, at first, but it is the failing of the true ceramiker, or the
true devotee in any department of brick-a-brackery, that once he gets his tongue or his pen
started on his darling theme, he cannot well stop until he drops from exhaustion. He has no
more sense of the flight of time than has any other lover when talking of his sweetheart. The
very "marks" on the bottom of a piece of rare crockery are able to throw me into a gibbering
ecstasy; and I could forsake a drowning relative to help dispute about whether the stopple
of a departed Buon Retiro scent-bottle was genuine or spurious.

Many people say that for a male person, bric-a-brac hunting is about as robust a business as
making doll-clothes, or decorating Japanese pots with decalcomania butterflies would be, and
these people fling mud at the elegant Englishman, Byng, who wrote a book called THE BRIC-A-BRAC
HUNTER, and make fun of him for chasing around after what they choose to call "his despicable
trifles"; and for "gushing" over these trifles; and for exhibiting his "deep infantile delight"
in what they call his "tuppenny collection of beggarly trivialities"; and for beginning his
book with a picture of himself seated, in a "sappy, self-complacent attitude, in the midst
of his poor little ridiculous bric-a-brac junk shop."

It is easy to say these things; it is easy to revile us, easy to despise us; therefore, let
these people rail on; they cannot feel as Byng and I feel--it is their loss, not ours. For
my part I am content to be a brick-a-bracker and a ceramiker--more, I am proud to be so named.
I am proud to know that I lose my reason as immediately in the presence of a rare jug with
an illustrious mark on the bottom of it, as if I had just emptied that jug. "Where is Tom?"

"Going to college at Reno."

"College, eh? He's a smart boy, is he?"

"Yes, indeed! We're both smart." He laughed at her naive reply, and her face flushed, but she
continued convincingly, "I am almost as far as I can get in school here. I am ready for Latin.
Mrs. Carson says if I can't go to boarding school next fall, she will teach me herself, so
I can keep up with Carrie."

"Why didn't you go this year?"

"There wasn't any money."

"Would you like to go?"

"Wouldn't I!" was the emphatic exclamation, as she clasped her hands
in rapturous longing.

"If you could have one wish granted what would it be?"

"What do you
mean?"

"If you were told that you could have any one thing you wanted,
what would you choose?"

"Only one?"

"Yes."

"Well, it would be pretty
hard to choose. I want to go to boarding school awfully bad, but--I
believe--I would choose a home like Carrie Carson's."

"Carrie Carson's!
What is the matter with your own? Isn't your house as big as theirs
or as nice?"

"No, but I wasn't thinking of houses just now. A house
isn't a home always. Our house isn't. Tom and I are the home part
of our house. Aunt Maria is housekeeper and Dad just stops there once
in a while. They don't care about having a home, I reckon."

The man
was silent with astonishment at her keen observations, and mistaking
his silence for disapproval at her criticisms, she hastily resumed,
"The kind of a home I mean is where all the folks in it like each
other and are always nice like the Carsons."

"So your father isn't
like Mr. Carson?"

"Not a bit--yet."

"Is he mean to you?"

"N-o,
not exactly. He is a Catt, that's all. I reckon it is me--I, who is
mean. I get mad and sass him when he shakes me, and once when he whipped
me I burned up his slippers."

I had been vaguely conscious, for a while, of a person who was walking in the street abreast
of us; I had glanced furtively at him once or twice, and noticed that he was a fine, large,
vigorous young fellow, with an open, independent countenance, faintly shaded with a pale and
even almost imperceptible crop of early down, and that he was clothed from head to heel in
cool and enviable snow-white linen. I thought I had also noticed that his head had a sort of
listening tilt to it. Now about this time the Rev. Mr. ------ said:

"The sidewalk is hardly wide enough for three, so I will walk behind; but keep the talk going,
keep the talk going, there's no time to lose, and you may be sure I will do my share." He ranged
himself behind us, and straightway that stately snow-white young fellow closed up to the sidewalk
alongside him, fetched him a cordial slap on the shoulder with his broad palm, and sung out
with a hearty cheeriness:

"AMERICANS for two-and-a-half and the money up! HEY?"

The Reverend winced, but said mildly:

"Yes--we are Americans."

"Lord love you, you can just bet that's what I am, every time! Put it there!"

He held out his Sahara of his palm, and the Reverend laid his diminutive hand in it, and got
so cordial a shake that we heard his glove burst under it.

"Say, didn't I put you up right?"

"Oh, yes."

"Sho! I spotted you for MY kind the minute I heard your clack. You been over here long?"

"About four months. Have you been over long?"

"LONG? Well, I should say so! Going on two YEARS, by geeminy! Say, are you homesick?"

"No, I can't say that I am. Are you?"

"Oh, HELL, yes!" This with immense enthusiasm.

The Reverend shrunk a little, in his clothes, and we were aware, rather by instinct than otherwise,
that he was throwing out signals of distress to us; but we did not interfere or try to succor
him, for we were quite happy.

The young fellow hooked his arm into the Reverend's, now, with the confiding and grateful air
of a waif who has been longing for a friend, and a sympathetic ear, and a chance to lisp once
more the sweet accents of the mother-tongue--and then he limbered up the muscles of his mouth
and turned himself loose--and with such a relish! Some of his words were not Sunday-school
words, so I am obliged to put blanks where they occur.

"Yes indeedy! If I ain't an American there AIN'T any Americans, that's all. And when I heard
you fellows gassing away in the good old American language, I'm ------ if it wasn't all I could
do to keep from hugging you! My tongue's all warped with trying to curl it around these ------
forsaken wind-galled nine-jointed German words here; now I TELL you it's awful good to lay
it over a Christian word once more and kind of let the old taste soak it. I'm from western
New York. My name is Cholley Adams. I'm a student, you know. Been here going on two years.
I'm learning to be a horse-doctor! I LIKE that part of it, you know, but ------these people,
they won't learn a fellow in his own language, they make him learn in German; so before I could
tackle the horse-doctoring I had to tackle this miserable language.

"First off, I thought it would certainly give me the botts, but I don't mind now. I've got
it where the hair's short, I think; and dontchuknow, they made me learn Latin, too. Now between
you and me, I wouldn't give a ------for all the Latin that was ever jabbered; and the first
thing I calculate to do when I get through, is to just sit down and forget it. 'Twon't take
me long, and I don't mind the time, anyway. And I tell you what! the difference between school-teaching
over yonder and school-teaching over here--sho! WE don't know anything about it! Here you've
got to peg and peg and peg and there just ain't any let-up--and what you learn here, you've
got to KNOW, dontchuknow --or else you'll have one of these ------ spavined, spectacles, ring-boned,
knock-kneed old professors in your hair. I've been here long ENOUGH, and I'm getting blessed
tired of it, mind I TELL you. The old man wrote me that he was coming over in June, and said
he'd take me home in August, whether I was done with my education or not, but durn him, he
didn't come; never said why; just sent me a hamper of Sunday-school books, and told me to be
good, and hold on a while. I don't take to Sunday-school books, dontchuknow--I don't hanker
after them when I can get pie--but I READ them, anyway, because whatever the old man tells
me to do, that's the thing that I'm a-going to DO, or tear something, you know. I buckled in
and read all those books, because he wanted me to; but that kind of thing don't excite ME,
I like something HEARTY. But I'm awful homesick. I'm homesick from ear-socket to crupper, and
from crupper to hock-joint; but it ain't any use, I've got to stay here, till the old man drops
the rag and give the word--yes, SIR, right here in this ------ country I've got to linger till
the old man says COME!--and you bet your bottom dollar, Johnny, it AIN'T just as easy as it
is for a cat to have twins!"

At the end of this profane and cordial explosion he fetched a prodigious "WHOOSH!" to relieve
his lungs and make recognition of the heat, and then he straightway dived into his narrative
again for "Johnny's" benefit, beginning, "Well, ------it ain't any use talking, some of those
old American words DO have a kind of a bully swing to them; a man can EXPRESS himself with
'em--a man can get at what he wants to SAY, dontchuknow."

When we reached our hotel and it seemed that he was about to lose the Reverend, he showed so
much sorrow, and begged so hard and so earnestly that the Reverend's heart was not hard enough
to hold out against the pleadings--so he went away with the parent-honoring student, like a
right Christian, and took supper with him in his lodgings, and sat in the surf-beat of his
slang and profanity till near midnight, and then left him--left him pretty well talked out,
but grateful "clear down to his frogs," as he expressed it. The Reverend said it had transpired
during the interview that "Cholley" Adams's father was an extensive dealer in horses in western
New York; this accounted for Cholley's choice of a profession. The Reverend brought away a
pretty high opinion of Cholley as a manly young fellow, with stuff in him for a useful citizen;
he considered him rather a rough gem, but a gem, nevertheless.

CHAPTER XXI

[Insolent Shopkeepers and Gabbling Americans]

Baden-Baden sits in the lap of the hills, and the natural and artificial beauties of the surroundings
are combined effectively and charmingly. The level strip of ground which stretches through
and beyond the town is laid out in handsome pleasure grounds, shaded by noble trees and adorned
at intervals with lofty and sparkling fountain-jets. Thrice a day a fine band makes music in
the public promenade before the Conversation House, and in the afternoon and evening that locality
is populous with fashionably dressed people of both sexes, who march back and forth past the
great music-stand and look very much bored, though they make a show of feeling otherwise. It
seems like a rather aimless and stupid existence. A good many of these people are there for
a real purpose, however; they are racked with rheumatism, and they are there to stew it out
in the hot baths. These invalids looked melancholy enough, limping about on their canes and
crutches, and apparently brooding over all sorts of cheerless things. People say that Germany,
with her damp stone houses, is the home of rheumatism. If that is so, Providence must have
foreseen that it would be so, and therefore filled the land with the healing baths. Perhaps
no other country is so generously supplied with medicinal springs as Germany. Some of these
baths are good for one ailment, some for another; and again, peculiar ailments are conquered
by combining the individual virtues of several different baths. For instance, for some forms
of disease, the patient drinks the native hot water of Baden-Baden, with a spoonful of salt
from the Carlsbad springs dissolved in it. That is not a dose to be forgotten right away.

They don't SELL this hot water; no, you go into the great Trinkhalle, and stand around, first
on one foot and then on the other, while two or three young girls sit pottering at some sort
of ladylike sewing-work in your neighborhood and can't seem to see you --polite as three-dollar
clerks in government offices.

By and by one of these rises painfully, and "stretches"--stretches fists and body heavenward
till she raises her heels from the floor, at the same time refreshing herself with a yawn of
such comprehensiveness that the bulk of her face disappears behind her upper lip and one is
able to see how she is constructed inside--then she slowly closes her cavern, brings down her
fists and her heels, comes languidly forward, contemplates you contemptuously, draws you a
glass of hot water and sets it down where you can get it by reaching for it. You take it and say:

"How much?"--and she returns you, with elaborate indifference, a beggar's answer:

"NACH BELIEBE" (what you please.)

This thing of using the common beggar's trick and the common beggar's shibboleth to put you
on your liberality when you were expecting a simple straightforward commercial transaction,
adds a little to your prospering sense of irritation. You ignore her reply, and ask again:

"How much?"

--and she calmly, indifferently, repeats:

"NACH BELIEBE."

You are getting angry, but you are trying not to show it; you resolve to keep on asking your
question till she changes her answer, or at least her annoyingly indifferent manner. Therefore,
if your case be like mine, you two fools stand there, and without perceptible emotion of any
kind, or any emphasis on any syllable, you look blandly into each other's eyes, and hold the
following idiotic conversation:

"How much?"

"NACH BELIEBE."

"How much?"

I do not know what another person would have done, but at this point I gave up; that cast-iron
indifference, that tranquil contemptuousness, conquered me, and I struck my colors. Now I knew
she was used to receiving about a penny from manly people who care nothing about the opinions
of scullery-maids, and about tuppence from moral cowards; but I laid a silver twenty-five cent
piece within her reach and tried to shrivel her up with this sarcastic speech:

"If it isn't enough, will you stoop sufficiently from your official dignity to say so?"

She did not shrivel. Without deigning to look at me at all, she languidly lifted the coin and
bit it!--to see if it was good. Then she turned her back and placidly waddled to her former
roost again, tossing the money into an open till as she went along. She was victor to the last,
you see.

I have enlarged upon the ways of this girl because they are typical; her manners are the manners
of a goodly number of the Baden-Baden shopkeepers. The shopkeeper there swindles you if he
can, and insults you whether he succeeds in swindling you or not. The keepers of baths also
take great and patient pains to insult you. The frowsy woman who sat at the desk in the lobby
of the great Friederichsbad and sold bath tickets, not only insulted me twice every day, with
rigid fidelity to her great trust, but she took trouble enough to cheat me out of a shilling,
one day, to have fairly entitled her to ten. Baden-Baden's splendid gamblers are gone, only
her microscopic knaves remain.

An English gentleman who had been living there several years, said:

"If you could disguise your nationality, you would not find any insolence here. These shopkeepers
detest the English and despise the Americans; they are rude to both, more especially to ladies
of your nationality and mine. If these go shopping without a gentleman or a man-servant, they
are tolerably sure to be subjected to petty insolences--insolences of manner and tone, rather
than word, though words that are hard to bear are not always wanting. I know of an instance
where a shopkeeper tossed a coin back to an American lady with the remark, snappishly uttered,
'We don't take French money here.' And I know of a case where an English lady said to one of
these shopkeepers, 'Don't you think you ask too much for this article?' and he replied with
the question, 'Do you think you are obliged to buy it?' However, these people are not impolite
to Russians or Germans. And as to rank, they worship that, for they have long been used to
generals and nobles. If you wish to see what abysses servility can descend, present yourself
before a Baden-Baden shopkeeper in the character of a Russian prince."

It is an inane town, filled with sham, and petty fraud, and snobbery, but the baths are good.
I spoke with many people, and they were all agreed in that. I had the twinges of rheumatism
unceasingly during three years, but the last one departed after a fortnight's bathing there,
and I have never had one since. I fully believe I left my rheumatism in Baden-Baden. Baden-Baden
is welcome to it. It was little, but it was all I had to give. I would have preferred to leave
something that was catching, but it was not in my power.

There are several hot springs there, and during two thousand years they have poured forth a
never-diminishing abundance of the healing water. This water is conducted in pipe to the numerous
bath-houses, and is reduced to an endurable temperature by the addition of cold water. The
new Friederichsbad is a very large and beautiful building, and in it one may have any sort
of bath that has ever been invented, and with all the additions of herbs and drugs that his
ailment may need or that the physician of the establishment may consider a useful thing to
put into the water. He spoke this word with a peculiar rising inflection, but she did not catch
the significance of the question, and replied, "Yes. He is tall and thin and black and slab-sided.
That's me, too, except I am short yet; but I expect I will grow. Besides, I've got the Catt
inside of me. I scratch like fury when I am mad. Now Tom doesn't get mad, though his name is almost,
or just, as bad as mine."

"What do you get mad at?"

"Lots of things,
but 'specially my name.

The room is divided by a great curtain; you draw this curtain aside, and find a large white
marble bathtub, with its rim sunk to the level of the floor, and with three white marble steps
leading down to it. This tub is full of water which is as clear as crystal, and is tempered
to 28 degrees Re'aumur (about 95 degrees Fahrenheit). Sunk into the floor, by the tub, is a
covered copper box which contains some warm towels and a sheet. You look fully as white as
an angel when you are stretched out in that limpid bath. You remain in it ten minutes, the
first time, and afterward increase the duration from day to day, till you reach twenty-five
or thirty minutes. There you stop. The appointments of the place are so luxurious, the benefit
so marked, the price so moderate, and the insults so sure, that you very soon find yourself
adoring the Friederichsbad and infesting it.

