"Yes," replied Bridgenorth, "even as the sluice brings into action the sleeping waters of the
lake, which it finally drains. Necessity invents arts and discovers means; and what necessity
is sterner than that of civil war? Therefore, even war is not in itself unmixed evil, being
the creator of impulses and energies which could not otherwise have existed in society."

"Men should go to war, then," said Peveril, "that they may send their silver plate to the mint,
and eat from pewter dishes and wooden plates?"

"Not so, my son," said Bridgenorth. Then checking himself as he observed the deep crimson in
Julian's cheek and brow, he added, "I crave your pardon for such familiarity; but I meant not
to limit what I said even now to such trifling consequences, although it may be something salutary
to tear men from their pomps and luxuries, and teach those to be Romans who would otherwise
be Sybarites. But I would say, that times of public danger, as they call into circulation the
miser's hoard and the proud man's bullion, and so add to the circulating wealth of the country,
do also call into action many a brave and noble spirit, which would otherwise lie torpid, give
no example to the living, and bequeath no name to future ages. Society knows not, and cannot
know, the mental treasures which slumber in her bosom, till necessity and opportunity call
forth the statesman and the soldier from the shades of lowly life to the parts they are designed
by Providence to perform, and the stations which nature had qualified them to hold. So rose
Oliver--so rose Milton--so rose many another name which cannot be forgotten--even as the tempest
summons forth and displays the address of the mariner."

"You speak," said Peveril, "as if national calamity might be, in some sort, an advantage."

"And if it were not so," replied Bridgenorth, "it had not existed in this state of trial, where
all temporal evil is alleviated by something good in its progress or result, and where all
that is good is close coupled with that which is in itself evil."

"It must be a noble sight," said Julian, "to behold the slumbering energies of a great mind
awakened into energy, and to see it assume the authority which is its due over spirits more
meanly endowed."

"I once witnessed," said Bridgenorth, "something to the same effect; and as the tale is brief,
I will tell it you, if you will:--Amongst my wanderings, the Transatlantic settlements have
not escaped me; more especially the country of New England, into which our native land has
shaken from her lap, as a drunkard flings from him his treasures, so much that is precious
in the eyes of God and of His children. There thousands of our best and most godly men--such
whose righteousness might come of cities--are content to be the inhabitants of the desert,
rather encountering the unenlightened savages, than stooping to extinguish, under the oppression
practised in Britain, the light that is within their own minds. There I remained for a time,
during the wars which the colony maintained with Philip, a great Indian Chief, or Sachem, as
they were called, who seemed a messenger sent from Satan to buffet them. His cruelty was great--his
dissimulation profound; and the skill and promptitude with which he maintained a destructive
and desultory warfare, inflicted many dreadful calamities on the settlement. I was, by chance,
at a small village in the woods, more than thirty miles from Boston, and in its situation exceedingly
lonely, and surrounded with thickets. Nevertheless, there was no idea of any danger from the
Indians at that time, for men trusted to the protection of a considerable body of troops who
had taken the field for protection of the frontiers, and who lay, or were supposed to lie,
betwixt the hamlet and the enemy's country. But they had to do with a foe, whom the devil himself
had inspired at once with cunning and cruelty. It was on a Sabbath morning, when we had assembled
to take sweet counsel together in the Lord's house. Our temple was but constructed of wooden
logs; but when shall the chant of trained hirelings, or the sounding of tin and brass tubes
amid the aisles of a minster, arise so sweetly to Heaven, as did the psalm in which we united
at once our voices and our hearts! An excellent worthy, who now sleeps in the Lord, Nehemia
Solsgrace, long the companion of my pilgrimage, had just begun to wrestle in prayer, when a
woman, with disordered looks and dishevelled hair, entered our chapel in a distracted manner,
screaming incessantly, 'The Indians! The Indians!'--In that land no man dares separate himself
from his means of defence; and whether in the city or in the field, in the ploughed land or
the forest, men keep beside them their weapons, as did the Jews at the rebuilding of the Temple.
So we sallied forth with our guns and pikes, and heard the whoop of these incarnate devils,
already in possession of a part of the town, and exercising their cruelty on the few whom weighty
causes or indisposition had withheld from public worship; and it was remarked as a judgment,
that, upon that bloody Sabbath, Adrian Hanson, a Dutchman, a man well enough disposed towards
man, but whose mind was altogether given to worldly gain, was shot and scalped as he was summing
his weekly gains in his warehouse. In fine, there was much damage done; and although our arrival
and entrance into combat did in some sort put them back, yet being surprised and confused,
and having no appointed leader of our band, the devilish enemy shot hard at us and had some
advantage. It was pitiful to hear the screams of women and children amid the report of guns
and the whistling of bullets, mixed with the ferocious yells of these savages, which they term
their war-whoop. Several houses in the upper part of the village were soon on fire; and the
roaring of the flames, and crackling of the great beams as they blazed, added to the horrible
confusion; while the smoke which the wind drove against us gave farther advantage to the enemy,
who fought as it were, invisible, and under cover, whilst we fell fast by their unerring fire.
In this state of confusion, and while we were about to adopt the desperate project of evacuating
the village, and, placing the women and children in the centre, of attempting a retreat to
the nearest settlement, it pleased Heaven to send us unexpected assistance. A tall man, of
a reverend appearance, whom no one of us had ever seen before, suddenly was in the midst of
us, as we hastily agitated the resolution of retreating. His garments were of the skin of the
elk, and he wore sword and carried gun; I never saw anything more august than his features,
overshadowed by locks of grey hair, which mingled with a long beard of the same colour. 'Men
and brethren,' he said, in a voice like that which turns back the flight, 'why sink your hearts?
and why are you thus disquieted? Fear ye that the God we serve will give you up to yonder heathen
dogs? Follow me, and you shall see this day that there is a captain in Israel!' He uttered
a few brief but distinct orders, in a tone of one who was accustomed to command; and such was
the influence of his appearance, his mien, his language, and his presence of mind, that he
was implicitly obeyed by men who had never seen him until that moment. We were hastily divided,
by his orders, into two bodies; one of which maintained the defence of the village with more
courage than ever, convinced that the Unknown was sent by God to our rescue. At his command
they assumed the best and most sheltered positions for exchanging their deadly fire with the
Indians; while, under cover of the smoke, the stranger sallied from the town, at the head of
the other division of the New England men, and, fetching a circuit, attacked the Red Warriors
in the rear. The surprise, as is usual amongst savages, had complete effect; for they doubted
not that they were assailed in their turn, and placed betwixt two hostile parties by the return
of a detachment from the provincial army. The heathens fled in confusion, abandoning the half-won
village, and leaving behind them such a number of their warriors, that the tribe hath never
recovered its loss. Never shall I forget the figure of our venerable leader, when our men,
and not they only, but the women and children of the village, rescued from the tomahawk and
scalping-knife, stood crowded around him, yet scarce venturing to approach his person, and
more minded, perhaps, to worship him as a descended angel, than to thank him as a fellow-mortal.
'Not unto me be the glory,' he said; 'I am but an implement, frail as yourselves, in the hand
of Him who is strong to deliver. Bring me a cup of water, that I may allay my parched throat,
ere I essay the task of offering thanks where they are most due.' I was nearest to him as he
spoke, and I gave into his hand the water he requested. At that moment we exchanged glances,
and it seemed to me that I recognised a noble friend whom I had long since deemed in glory;
but he gave me no time to speak, had speech been prudent. Sinking on his knees, and signing
us to obey him, he poured forth a strong and energetic thanksgiving for the turning back of
the battle, which, pronounced with a voice loud and clear as a war-trumpet, thrilled through
the joints and marrow of the hearers. I have heard many an act of devotion in my life, had
Heaven vouchsafed me grace to profit by them; but such a prayer as this, uttered amid the dead
and the dying, with a rich tone of mingled triumph and adoration, was beyond them all--it was
like the song of the inspired prophetess who dwelt beneath the palm-tree between Ramah and
Bethel. He was silent; and for a brief space we remained with our faces bent to the earth--no
man daring to lift his head. At length we looked up, but our deliverer was no longer amongst
us; nor was he ever again seen in the land which he had rescued."

Here Bridgenorth, who had told this singular story with an eloquence and vivacity of detail
very contrary to the usual dryness of his conversation, paused for an instant, and then resumed--"Thou
seest, young man, that men of valour and of discretion are called forth to command in circumstances
of national exigence, though their very existence is unknown in the land which they are predestined
to deliver."

"But what thought the people of the mysterious stranger?" said Julian, who had listened with
eagerness, for the story was of a kind interesting to the youthful and the brave.

"Many things," answered Bridgenorth, "and, as usual, little to the purpose. The prevailing
opinion was, notwithstanding his own disclamation, that the stranger was really a supernatural
being; others believed him an inspired champion, transported in the body from some distant
climate, to show us the way to safety; others, again, concluded that he was a recluse, who,
either from motives of piety, or other cogent reasons, had become a dweller in the wilderness,
and shunned the face of man."

"And, if I may presume to ask," said Julian, "to which of these opinions were you disposed
to adhere?"

"The last suited best with the transient though close view with which I had perused the stranger's
features," replied Bridgenorth; "for although I dispute not that it may please Heaven, on high
occasions, even to raise one from the dead in defence of his country, yet I doubted not then,
as I doubt not now, that I looked on the living form of one, who had indeed powerful reasons
to conceal him in the cleft of the rock."

"Are these reasons a secret?" said Julian Peveril.

"Not properly a secret," replied Bridgenorth; "for I fear not thy betraying what I might tell
thee in private discourse; and besides, wert thou so base, the prey lies too distant for any
hunters to whom thou couldst point out its traces. But the name of this worthy will sound harsh
in thy ear, on account of one action of his life--being his accession to a great measure, which
made the extreme isles of the earth to tremble. Have you never heard of Richard Whalley?"

"Of the regicide?" exclaimed Peveril, starting.

"Call his act what thou wilt," said Bridgenorth; "he was not less the rescuer of that devoted
village, that, with other leading spirits of the age, he sat in the judgment-seat when Charles
Stewart was arraigned at the bar, and subscribed the sentence that went forth upon him."

"I have ever heard," said Julian, in an altered voice, and colouring deeply, "that you, Master
Bridgenorth, with other Presbyterians, were totally averse to that detestable crime, and were
ready to have made joint-cause with the Cavaliers in preventing so horrible a parricide."

"If it were so," said Bridgenorth, "we have been richly rewarded by his successor."

"Rewarded!" exclaimed Julian; "does the distinction of good and evil, and our obligation to
do the one and forbear the other, depend on the reward which may attach to our actions?"

"God forbid," answered Bridgenorth; "yet those who view the havoc which this house of Stewart
have made in the Church and State--the tyranny which they exercise over men's persons and consciences--may
well doubt whether it be lawful to use weapons in their defence. Yet you hear me not praise,
or even vindicate the death of the King, though so far deserved, as he was false to his oath
as a Prince and Magistrate. I only tell you what you desired to know, that Richard Whalley,
one of the late King's judges, was he of whom I have just been speaking. I knew his lofty brow,
though time had made it balder and higher; his grey eye retained all its lustre; and though
the grizzled beard covered the lower part of his face, it prevented me not from recognising
him. The scent was hot after him for his blood; but by the assistance of those friends whom
Heaven had raised up for his preservation, he was concealed carefully, and emerged only to
do the will of Providence in the matter of that battle. Perhaps his voice may be heard in the
field once more, should England need one of her noblest hearts."

"Now, God forbid!" said Julian.

"Amen," returned Bridgenorth. "May God avert civil war, and pardon those whose madness would
bring it on us!"

There was a long pause, during which Julian, who had scarce lifted his eyes towards Alice,
stole a glance in that direction, and was struck by the deep cast of melancholy which had stolen
over features, to which a cheerful, if not gay expression, was most natural. So soon as she
caught his eye, she remarked, and, as Julian thought, with significance, that the shadows were
lengthening, and evening coming on.

He heard; and although satisfied that she hinted at his departure, he could not, upon the instant,
find resolution to break the spell which detained him. The language which Bridgenorth held
was not only new and alarming, but so contrary to the maxims in which he was brought up, that,
as a son of Sir Geoffrey Peveril of the Peak, he would, in another case, have thought himself
called upon to dispute its conclusions, even at the sword's point. But Bridgenorth's opinions
were delivered with so much calmness--seemed so much the result of conviction--that they excited
in Julian rather a spirit of wonder, than of angry controversy. There was a character of sober
decision, and sedate melancholy, in all that he said, which, even had he not been the father
of Alice (and perhaps Julian was not himself aware how much he was influenced by that circumstance),
would have rendered it difficult to take personal offence. His language and sentiments were
of that quiet, yet decided kind, upon which it is difficult either to fix controversy, or quarrel,
although it be impossible to acquiesce in the conclusions to which they lead.

While Julian remained, as if spell-bound to his chair, scarce more surprised at the company
in which he found himself, than at the opinions to which he was listening, another circumstance
reminded him that the proper time of his stay at Black Fort had been expended. Little Fairy,
the Manx pony, which, well accustomed to the vicinity of Black Fort, used to feed near the
house while her master made his visits there, began to find his present stay rather too long.
She had been the gift of the Countess to Julian, whilst a youth, and came of a high-spirited
mountain breed, remarkable alike for hardiness, for longevity, and for a degree of sagacity
approaching to that of the dog. Fairy showed the latter quality, by the way in which she chose
to express her impatience to be moving homewards. At least such seemed the purpose of the shrill
neigh with which she startled the female inmates of the parlour, who, the moment afterwards,
could not forbear smiling to see the nose of the pony advanced through the opened casement.

"Fairy reminds me," said Julian, looking to Alice, and rising, "that the term of my stay here
is exhausted."

"Speak with me yet one moment," said Bridgenorth, withdrawing him into a Gothic recess of the
old-fashioned apartment, and speaking so low that he could not be overheard by Alice and her
governante, who, in the meantime, caressed, and fed with fragments of bread the intruder Fairy.

"You have not, after all," said Bridgenorth, "told me the cause of your coming hither." He
stopped, as if to enjoy his embarrassment, and then added, "And indeed it were most unnecessary
that you should do so. I have not so far forgotten the days of my youth, or those affections
which bind poor frail humanity but too much to the things of this world. Will you find no words
to ask of me the great boon which you seek, and which, peradventure, you would not have hesitated
to have made your own, without my knowledge, and against my consent?--Nay, never vindicate
thyself, but mark me farther. The patriarch bought his beloved by fourteen years' hard service
to her father Laban, and they seemed to him but as a few days. But he that would wed my daughter
must serve, in comparison, but a few days; though in matters of such mighty import, that they
shall seem as the service of many years. Reply not to me now, but go, and peace be with you."

He retired so quickly, after speaking, that Peveril had literally not an instant to reply.
He cast his eyes around the apartment, but Deborah and her charge had also disappeared. His
gaze rested for a moment on the portrait of Christian, and his imagination suggested that his
dark features were illuminated by a smile of haughty triumph. He stared, and looked more attentively--it
was but the effect of the evening beam, which touched the picture at the instant. The effect
was gone, and there remained but the fixed, grave, inflexible features of the republican soldier.

Julian left the apartment as one who walks in a dream; he mounted Fairy, and, agitated by a
variety of thoughts, which he was unable to reduce to order, he returned to Castle Rushin before
the night sat down.

Here he found all in movement. The Countess, with her son, had, upon some news received, or
resolution formed, during his absence, removed, with a principal part of their family, to the
yet stronger Castle of Holm-Peel, about eight miles' distance across the island; and which
had been suffered to fall into a much more dilapidated condition than that of Castletown, so
far as it could be considered as a place of residence. But as a fortress, Holm-Peel was stronger
than Castletown; nay, unless assailed regularly, was almost impregnable; and was always held
by a garrison belonging to the Lords of Man. Here Peveril arrived at nightfall. He was told
in the fishing-village, that the night-bell of the Castle had been rung earlier than usual,
and the watch set with circumstances of unusual and jealous repetition.

Resolving, therefore, not to disturb the garrison by entering at that late hour, he obtained
an indifferent lodging in the town for the night, and determined to go to the Castle early
on the succeeding morning. He was not sorry thus to gain a few hours of solitude, to think
over the agitating events of the preceding day.

CHAPTER XV

                ----What seem'd its head,
                The likeness of a kingly crown had on.
                                           --PARADISE LOST.

Sodor, or Holm-Peel, so is named the castle to which our Julian directed his course early on
the following morning, is one of those extraordinary monuments of antiquity with which this
singular and interesting island abounds. It occupies the whole of a high rocky peninsula, or
rather an island, for it is surrounded by the sea at high-water, and scarcely accessible even
when the tide is out, although a stone causeway, of great solidity, erected for the express
purpose, connects the island with the mainland. The whole space is surrounded by double walls
of great strength and thickness; and the access to the interior, at the time which we treat
of, was only by two flights of steep and narrow steps, divided from each other by a strong
tower and guard-house; under the former of which, there is an entrance-arch. The open space
within the walls extends to two acres, and contains many objects worthy of antiquarian curiosity.
There were besides the castle itself, two cathedral churches, dedicated, the earlier to St.
Patrick, the latter to St. Germain; besides two smaller churches; all of which had become,
even in that day, more or less ruinous. Their decayed walls, exhibiting the rude and massive
architecture of the most remote period, were composed of a ragged grey-stone, which formed
a singular contrast with the bright red freestone of which the window-cases, corner-stones,
arches, and other ornamental parts of the building, were composed.

Besides these four ruinous churches, the space of ground enclosed by the massive exterior walls
of Holm-Peel exhibited many other vestiges of the olden time. There was a square mound of earth,
facing, with its angles to the points of the compass, one of those motes, as they were called,
on which, in ancient times, the northern tribes elected or recognised their chiefs, and held
their solemn popular assemblies, or comitia. There was also one of those singular towers, so
common in Ireland as to have proved the favourite theme of her antiquaries; but of which the
real use and meaning seems yet to be hidden in the mist of ages. This of Holm-Peel had been
converted to the purpose of a watch-tower. There were, besides, Runic monuments, of which legends
could not be deciphered; and later inscriptions to the memory of champions, of whom the names
only were preserved from oblivion. But tradition and superstitious eld, still most busy where
real history is silent, had filled up the long blank of accurate information with tales of
Sea-kings and Pirates, Hebridean Chiefs and Norwegian Resolutes, who had formerly warred against,
and in defence of, this famous castle. Superstition, too, had her tales of fairies, ghosts,
and spectres--her legions of saints and demons, of fairies and of familiar spirits, which in
no corner of the British empire are told and received with more absolute credulity than in
the Isle of Man.

Amidst all these ruins of an older time arose the Castle itself,--now ruinous--but in Charles
II.'s reign well garrisoned, and, in a military point of view, kept in complete order. It was
a venerable and very ancient building, containing several apartments of sufficient size and
height to be termed noble. But in the surrender of the island by Christian, the furniture had
been, in a great measure, plundered or destroyed by the republican soldiers; so that, as we
have before hinted, its present state was ill adapted for the residence of the noble proprietor.
Yet it had been often the abode, not only of the Lords of Man, but of those state prisoners
whom the Kings of Britain sometimes committed to their charge.

In this Castle of Holm-Peel the great king-maker, Richard, Earl of Warwick, was confined, during
one period of his eventful life, to ruminate at leisure on his farther schemes of ambition.
And here, too, Eleanor, the haughty wife of the good Duke of Gloucester, pined out in seclusion
the last days of her banishment. The sentinels pretended that her discontented spectre was
often visible at night, traversing the battlements of the external walls, or standing motionless
beside a particular solitary turret of one of the watch-towers with which they are flanked;
but dissolving into air at cock-crow, or when the bell tolled from the yet remaining tower
of St. Germain's church.

Such was Holm-Peel, as records inform us, till towards the end of the seventeenth century.

It was in one of the lofty but almost unfurnished apartments of this ancient Castle that Julian
Peveril found his friend the Earl of Derby, who had that moment sat down to a breakfast composed
of various sorts of fish. "Welcome, most imperial Julian," he said; "welcome to our royal fortress;
in which, as yet, we are not like to be starved with hunger, though well-nigh dead for cold."

Julian answered by inquiring the meaning of this sudden movement.

"Upon my word," replied the Earl, "you know nearly as much of it as I do. My mother has told
me nothing about it; supposing I believe, that I shall at length be tempted to inquire; but
she will find herself much mistaken. I shall give her credit for full wisdom in her proceedings,
rather than put her to the trouble to render a reason, though no woman can render one better."

"Come, come; this is affectation, my good friend," said Julian. "You should inquire into these
matters a little more curiously."

"To what purpose?" said the Earl. "To hear old stories about the Tinwald laws, and the contending
rights of the lords and the clergy, and all the rest of that Celtic barbarism, which, like
Burgesse's thorough-paced doctrine enters at one ear, paces through, and goes out at the other?"

"Come, my lord," said Julian, "you are not so indifferent as you would represent yourself--you
are dying of curiosity to know what this hurry is about; only you think it the courtly humour
to appear careless about your own affairs."

"Why, what should it be about," said the young Earl "unless some factious dispute between our
Majesty's minister, Governor Nowel, and our vassals? or perhaps some dispute betwixt our Majesty
and the ecclesiastical jurisdictions? for all which our Majesty cares as little as any king
in Christendom."

"I rather suppose there is intelligence from England," said Julian. "I heard last night in
Peel-town, that Greenhalgh is come over with unpleasant news."

"He brought me nothing that was pleasant, I wot well," said the Earl. "I expected something
from St. Evremond or Hamilton--some new plays by Dryden or Lee, and some waggery or lampoons
from the Rose Coffee-house; and the fellow has brought me nothing but a parcel of tracts about
Protestants and Papists, and a folio play-book, one of the conceptions, as she calls them,
of that old mad-woman the Duchess of Newcastle."

"Hush, my lord, for Heaven's sake," said Peveril; "here comes the Countess; and you know she
takes fire at the least slight to her ancient friend."

"Let her read her ancient friend's works herself, then," said the Earl, "and think her as wise
as she can; but I would not give one of Waller's songs, or Denham's satires, for a whole cart-load
of her Grace's trash.--But here comes our mother with care on her brow."

The Countess of Derby entered the apartment accordingly, holding in her hand a number of papers.
Her dress was a mourning habit, with a deep train of black velvet, which was borne by a little
favourite attendant, a deaf and dumb girl, whom, in compassion to her misfortune, the Countess
had educated about her person for some years. Upon this unfortunate being, with the touch of
romance which marked many of her proceedings, Lady Derby had conferred the name of Fenella,
after some ancient princess of the island. The Countess herself was not much changed since
we last presented her to our readers. Age had rendered her step more slow, but not less majestic;
and while it traced some wrinkles on her brow, had failed to quench the sedate fire of her
dark eye. The young men rose to receive her with the formal reverence which they knew she loved,
and were greeted by her with equal kindness.

"Cousin Peveril," she said (for so she always called Julian, in respect of his mother being
a kinswoman of her husband), "you were ill abroad last night, when we much needed your counsel."

Julian answered with a blush which he could not prevent, "That he had followed his sport among
the mountains too far--had returned late--and finding her ladyship was removed from Castletown,
had instantly followed the family hither; but as the night-bell was rung, and the watch set,
he had deemed it more respectful to lodge for the night in the town."

"It is well," said the Countess; "and, to do you justice, Julian, you are seldom a truant neglecter
of appointed hours, though, like the rest of the youth of this age, you sometimes suffer your
sports to consume too much of time that should be spent otherwise. But for your friend Philip,
he is an avowed contemner of good order, and seems to find pleasure in wasting time, even when
he does not enjoy it."

"I have been enjoying my time just now at least," said the Earl, rising from table, and picking
his teeth carelessly. "These fresh mullets are delicious, and so is the Lachrymæ Christi. I
pray you to sit down to breakfast, Julian, and partake the goods my royal foresight has provided.
Never was King of Man nearer being left to the mercy of the execrable brandy of his dominions.
Old Griffiths would never, in the midst of our speedy retreat of last night, have had sense
enough to secure a few flasks, had I not given him a hint on that important subject. But presence
of mind amid danger and tumult, is a jewel I have always possessed."

"I wish, then, Philip, you would exert it to better purpose," said the Countess, half smiling,
half displeased; for she doated upon her son with all a mother's fondness, even when she was
most angry with him for being deficient in the peculiar and chivalrous disposition which had
distinguished his father, and which was so analogous to her own romantic and high-minded character.
"Lend me your signet," she added with a sigh; "for it were, I fear, vain to ask you to read
over these despatches from England, and execute the warrants which I have thought necessary
to prepare in consequence."

"My signet you shall command with all my heart, madam," said Earl Philip; "but spare me the
revision of what you are much more capable to decide upon. I am, you know, a most complete
Roi fainéant, and never once interfered with my Maire de palais in her proceedings."

The Countess made signs to her little train-bearer, who immediately went to seek for wax and
a light, with which she presently returned.

In the meanwhile the Countess continued, addressing Peveril. "Philip does himself less than
justice. When you were absent, Julian (for if you had been here I would have given you the
credit of prompting your friend), he had a spirited controversy with the Bishop, for an attempt
to enforce spiritual censures against a poor wretch, by confining her in the vault under the
chapel."[*]

[*] Beneath the only one of the four churches in Castle Rushin, which
    is or was kept a little in repair, is a prison or dungeon, for
    ecclesiastical offenders. "This," says Waldron, "is certainly one
    of the most dreadful places that imagination can form; the sea
    runs under it through the hollows of the rock with such a
    continual roar, that you would think it were every moment breaking
    in upon you, and over it are the vaults for burying the dead. The
    stairs descending to this place of terrors are not above thirty,
    but so steep and narrow, that they are very difficult to go down,
    a child of eight or nine years not being able to pass them but
    sideways."--WALDRON'S Description of the Isle of Man, in his
    Works, p. 105, folio.

"Do not think better of me than I deserve," said the Earl to Peveril; "my mother has omitted
to tell you the culprit was pretty Peggy of Ramsey, and her crime what in Cupid's courts would
have been called a peccadillo."

"Do not make yourself worse than you are," replied Peveril, who observed the Countess's cheek
redden,--"you know you would have done as much for the oldest and poorest cripple in the island.
Why, the vault is under the burial-ground of the chapel, and, for aught I know, under the ocean
itself, such a roaring do the waves make in its vicinity. I think no one could remain there
long, and retain his reason."

"It is an infernal hole," answered the Earl, "and I will have it built up one day--that is
full certain.--But hold--hold--for God's sake, madam--what are you going to do?--Look at the
seal before you put it to the warrant--you will see it is a choice antique cameo Cupid, riding
on a flying fish--I had it for twenty zechins, from Signor Furabosco at Rome--a most curious
matter for an antiquary, but which will add little faith to a Manx warrant.

"My signet--my signet--Oh! you mean that with the three monstrous legs, which I supposed was
devised as the most preposterous device, to represent our most absurd Majesty of Man.--The
signet--I have not seen it since I gave it to Gibbon, my monkey, to play with.--He did whine
for it most piteously--I hope he has not gemmed the green breast of ocean with my symbol of
sovereignty!"

"Now, by Heaven," said the Countess, trembling, and colouring deeply with anger, "it was your
father's signet! the last pledge which he sent, with his love to me, and his blessing to thee,
the night before they murdered him at Bolton!"

"Mother, dearest mother," said the Earl, startled out of his apathy, and taking her hand, which
he kissed tenderly, "I did but jest--the signet is safe--Peveril knows that it is so.--Go fetch
it, Julian, for Heaven's sake--here are my keys--it is in the left-hand drawer of my travelling
cabinet--Nay, mother, forgive me--it was but a mauvaise plaisanterie; only an ill-imagined
jest, ungracious, and in bad taste, I allow--but only one of Philip's follies. Look at me,
dearest mother, and forgive me."

The Countess turned her eyes towards him, from which the tears were fast falling.

"Philip," she said, "you try me too unkindly, and too severely. If times are changed, as I
have heard you allege--if the dignity of rank, and the high feelings of honour and duty, are
now drowned in giddy jests and trifling pursuits, let me at least, who live secluded from all
others, die without perceiving the change which has happened, and, above all, without perceiving
it in mine own son. Let me not learn the general prevalence of this levity, which laughs at
every sense of dignity or duty, through your personal disrespect--Let me not think that when
I die----"

"Speak nothing of it, mother," said the Earl, interrupting her affectionately. "It is true,
I cannot promise to be all my father and his fathers were; for we wear silk vests for their
steel coats, and feathered beavers for their crested helmets. But believe me, though to be
an absolute Palmerin of England is not in my nature, no son ever loved a mother more dearly,
or would do more to oblige her. And that you may own this, I will forthwith not only seal the
warrants, to the great endangerment of my precious fingers, but also read the same from end
to end, as well as the despatches thereunto appertaining."

A mother is easily appeased, even when most offended; and it was with an expanding heart that
the Countess saw her son's very handsome features, while reading these papers, settle into
an expression of deep seriousness, such as they seldom wore. It seemed to her as if the family
likeness to his gallant but unfortunate father increased, when the expression of their countenances
became similar in gravity. The Earl had no sooner perused the despatches, which he did with
great attention, than he rose and said, "Julian, come with me."

The Countess looked surprised. "I was wont to share your father's counsels, my son," she said;
"but do not think that I wish to intrude myself upon yours. I am too well pleased to see you
assume the power and the duty of thinking for yourself, which is what I have so long urged
you to do. Nevertheless, my experience, who have been so long administrator of your authority
in Man, might not, I think, be superfluous to the matter in hand."

"Hold me excused, dearest mother," said the Earl gravely. "The interference was none of my
seeking; had you taken your own course, without consulting me, it had been well; but since
I have entered on the affair--and it appears sufficiently important--I must transact it to
the best of my own ability."

"Go, then, my son," said the Countess, "and may Heaven enlighten thee with its counsel, since
thou wilt have none of mine.--I trust that you, Master Peveril, will remind him of what is
fit for his own honour; and that only a coward abandons his rights, and only a fool trusts
his enemies."

The Earl answered not, but, taking Peveril by the arm, led him up a winding stair to his own
apartment, and from thence into a projecting turret, where, amidst the roar of waves and sea-mews'
clang, he held with him the following conversation:--

"Peveril, it is well I looked into these warrants. My mother queens it at such a rate as may
cost me not only my crown, which I care little for, but perhaps my head, which, though others
may think little of, I would feel it an inconvenience to be deprived of."

"What on earth is the matter?" said Peveril, with considerable anxiety.

"It seems," said the Earl of Derby, "that old England who takes a frolicsome brain-fever once
every two or three years, for the benefit of her doctors, and the purification of the torpid
lethargy brought on by peace and prosperity, is now gone stark staring mad on the subject of
a real or supposed Popish plot. I read one programme on the subject, by a fellow called Oates,
and thought it the most absurd foolery I ever perused. But that cunning fellow Shaftesbury,
and some others amongst the great ones, having taken it up, and are driving on at such a rate
as makes harness crack, and horses smoke for it. The King, who has sworn never to kiss the
pillow his father went to sleep on, temporises, and gives way to the current; the Duke of York,
suspected and hated on account of his religion, is about to be driven to the continent; several
principal Catholic nobles are in the Tower already; and the nation, like a bull at Tutbury-running,
is persecuted with so many inflammatory rumours and pestilent pamphlets, that she has cocked
her tail, flung up her heels, taken the bit betwixt her teeth and is as furiously unmanageable
as in the year 1642."

"All this you must have known already," said Peveril; "I wonder you told me not of news so
important."

"It would have taken long to tell," said the Earl; "moreover, I desired to have you solus;
thirdly, I was about to speak when my mother entered; and, to conclude, it was no business
of mine. But these despatches of my politic mother's private correspondent put a new face on
the whole matter; for it seems some of the informers--a trade which, having become a thriving
one, is now pursued by many--have dared to glance at the Countess herself as an agent in this
same plot--ay, and have found those that are willing enough to believe their report."

"On mine honour," said Peveril, "you both take it with great coolness. I think the Countess
the more composed of the two; for, except her movement hither, she exhibited no mark of alarm,
and, moreover, seemed no way more anxious to communicate the matter to your lordship than decency
rendered necessary."

"My good mother," said the Earl, "loves power, though it has cost her dear. I wish I could
truly say that my neglect of business is entirely assumed in order to leave it in her hands,
but that better motive combines with natural indolence. But she seems to have feared I should
not think exactly like her in this emergency, and she was right in supposing so."

"How comes the emergency upon you?" said Julian; "and what form does the danger assume?"

"Marry, thus it is," said the Earl: "I need not bid you remember the affair of Colonel Christian.
That man, besides his widow, who is possessed of large property--Dame Christian of Kirk Truagh,
whom you have often heard of, and perhaps seen--left a brother called Edward Christian, whom
you never saw at all. Now this brother--but I dare say you know all about it."

"Not I, on my honour," said Peveril; "you know the Countess seldom or never alludes to the
subject."

"Why," replied the Earl, "I believe in her heart she is something ashamed of that gallant act
of royalty and supreme jurisdiction, the consequences of which maimed my estate so cruelly.--Well,
cousin, this same Edward Christian was one of the dempsters at the time, and, naturally enough,
was unwilling to concur in the sentence which adjudged his aîné to be shot like a dog. My mother,
who was then in high force, and not to be controlled by any one, would have served the dempster
with the same sauce with which she dressed his brother, had he not been wise enough to fly
from the island. Since that time, the thing has slept on all hands; and though we knew that
Dempster Christian made occasionally secret visits to his friends in the island, along with
two or three other Puritans of the same stamp, and particularly a prick-eared rogue, called
Bridgenorth, brother-in-law to the deceased, yet my mother, thank Heaven, has hitherto had
the sense to connive at them, though, for some reason or other, she holds this Bridgenorth
in especial disfavour."

"And why," said Peveril, forcing himself to speak, in order to conceal the very unpleasant
surprise which he felt, "why does the Countess now depart from so prudent a line of conduct?"

"You must know the case is now different. The rogues are not satisfied with toleration--they
would have supremacy. They have found friends in the present heat of the popular mind. My mother's
name, and especially that of her confessor, Aldrick the Jesuit, have been mentioned in this
beautiful maze of a plot, which if any such at all exists, she knows as little of as you or
I. However, she is a Catholic, and that is enough; and I have little doubt, that if the fellows
could seize on our scrap of a kingdom here, and cut all our throats, they would have the thanks
of the present House of Commons, as willingly as old Christian had those of the Rump, for a
similar service."

"From whence did you receive all this information?" said Peveril, again speaking, though by
the same effort which a man makes who talks in his sleep.

"Aldrick has seen the Duke of York in secret, and his Royal Highness, who wept while he confessed
his want of power to protect his friends--and it is no trifle will wring tears from him--told
him to send us information that we should look to our safety, for that Dempster Christian and
Bridgenorth were in the island, with secret and severe orders; that they had formed a considerable
party there, and were likely to be owned and protected in anything they might undertake against
us. The people of Ramsey and Castletown are unluckily discontented about some new regulation
of the imposts; and to tell you the truth, though I thought yesterday's sudden remove a whim
of my mother's, I am almost satisfied they would have blockaded us in Rushin Castle, where
we could not have held out for lack of provisions. Here we are better supplied, and, as we
are on our guard, it is likely the intended rising will not take place."

"And what is to be done in this emergency?" said Peveril.

"That is the very question, my gentle coz," answered the Earl. "My mother sees but one way
of going to work, and that is by royal authority. Here are the warrants she had prepared, to
search for, take, and apprehend the bodies of Edward Christian and Robert--no, Ralph Bridgenorth,
and bring them to instant trial. No doubt, she would soon have had them in the Castle court,
with a dozen of the old matchlocks levelled against them--that is her way of solving all sudden
difficulties."

"But in which, I trust, you do not acquiesce, my lord," answered Peveril, whose thoughts instantly
reverted to Alice, if they could ever be said to be absent from her.

"Truly I acquiesce in no such matter," said the Earl. "William Christian's death cost me a
fair half of my inheritance. I have no fancy to fall under the displeasure of my royal brother,
King Charles, for a new escapade of the same kind. But how to pacify my mother, I know not.
I wish the insurrection would take place, and then, as we are better provided than they can
be, we might knock the knaves on the head; and yet, since they began the fray, we should keep
the law on our side."

"Were it not better," said Peveril, "if by any means these men could be induced to quit the
island?"

"Surely," replied the Earl; "but that will be no easy matter--they are stubborn on principle,
and empty threats will not move them. This stormblast in London is wind in their sails, and
they will run their length, you may depend on it. I have sent orders, however, to clap up the
Manxmen upon whose assistance they depended, and if I can find the two worthies themselves,
here are sloops enough in the harbour--I will take the freedom to send them on a pretty distant
voyage, and I hope matters will be settled before they return to give an account of it."

At this moment a soldier belonging to the garrison approached the two young men, with many
bows and tokens of respect. "How now, friend?" said the Earl to him. "Leave off thy courtesies,
and tell thy business."

The man, who was a native islander, answered in Manx, that he had a letter for his honour,
Master Julian Peveril. Julian snatched the billet hastily, and asked whence it came.

"It was delivered to him by a young woman," the soldier replied, "who had given him a piece
of money to deliver it into Master Peveril's own hand."

"Thou art a lucky fellow, Julian," said the Earl. "With that grave brow of thine, and thy character
for sobriety and early wisdom, you set the girls a-wooing, without waiting till they are asked;
whilst I, their drudge and vassal, waste both language and leisure, without getting a kind
word or look, far less a billet-doux."

This the young Earl said with a smile of conscious triumph, as in fact he valued himself not
a little upon the interest which he supposed himself to possess with the fair sex.

Meanwhile the letter impressed on Peveril a different train of thoughts from what his companion
apprehended. It was in Alice's hand, and contained these few words:--

 "I fear what I am going to do is wrong; but I must see you. Meet me
  at noon at Goddard Crovan's Stone, with as much secrecy as you
  may."

The letter was signed only with the initials A. B.; but Julian had no difficulty in recognising
the handwriting, which he had often seen, and which was remarkably beautiful. He stood suspended,
for he saw the difficulty and impropriety of withdrawing himself from the Countess and his
friend at this moment of impending danger; and yet, to neglect this invitation was not to be
thought of. He paused in the utmost perplexity.

"Shall I read your riddle?" said the Earl. "Go where love calls you--I will make an excuse
to my mother--only, most grave anchorite, be hereafter more indulgent to the failings of others
than you have been hitherto, and blaspheme not the power of the little deity."

"Nay, but, Cousin Derby--" said Peveril, and stopped short, for he really knew not what to
say. Secured himself by a virtuous passion from the contagious influence of the time, he had
seen with regret his noble kinsman mingle more in its irregularities than he approved of, and
had sometimes played the part of a monitor. Circumstances seemed at present to give the Earl
a right of retaliation. He kept his eye fixed on his friend, as if he waited till he should
complete his sentence, and at length exclaimed, "What! cousin, quite à-la-mort! Oh, most judicious
Julian! Oh, most precise Peveril! have you bestowed so much wisdom on me that you have none
left for yourself? Come, be frank--tell me name and place--or say but the colour of the eyes
of the most emphatic she--or do but let me have the pleasure to hear thee say, 'I love!'--confess
one touch of human frailty--conjugate the verb amo, and I will be a gentle schoolmaster, and
you shall have, as father Richards used to say, when we were under his ferule, 'licentia exeundi.'"

"Enjoy your pleasant humour at my expense, my lord," said Peveril; "I fairly will confess thus
much, that I would fain, if it consisted with my honour and your safety, have two hours at
my own disposal; the more especially as the manner in which I shall employ them may much concern
the safety of the island."

"Very likely, I dare say," answered the Earl, still laughing. "No doubt you are summoned out
by some Lady Politic Wouldbe of the isle, to talk over some of the breast-laws: but never mind--go,
and go speedily, that you may return as quickly as possible. I expect no immediate explosion
of this grand conspiracy. When the rogues see us on our guard, they will be cautious how they
break out. Only, once more make haste."

Peveril thought this last advice was not to be neglected; and, glad to extricate himself from
the raillery of his cousin, walked down towards the gate of the Castle, meaning to cross over
to the village, and there take horse at the Earl's stables, for the place of rendezvous.

CHAPTER XVI

         Acasto.--Can she not speak?
         Oswald.--If speech be only in accented sounds,
         Framed by the tongue and lips, the maiden's dumb;
         But if by quick and apprehensive look,
         By motion, sign, and glance, to give each meaning,
         Express as clothed in language, be term'd speech,
         She hath that wondrous faculty; for her eyes,
         Like the bright stars of heaven, can hold discourse,
         Though it be mute and soundless.
                                                   --OLD PLAY.

At the head of the first flight of steps which descended towards the difficult and well-defended
entrance of the Castle of Holm-Peel, Peveril was met and stopped by the Countess's train-bearer.
This little creature--for she was of the least and slightest size of womankind--was exquisitely
well formed in all her limbs, which the dress she usually wore (a green silk tunic, of a peculiar
form) set off to the best advantage. Her face was darker than the usual hue of Europeans; and
the profusion of long and silken hair, which, when she undid the braids in which she commonly
wore it, fell down almost to her ankles, was also rather a foreign attribute. Her countenance
resembled a most beautiful miniature; and there was a quickness, decision, and fire, in Fenella's
look, and especially in her eyes, which was probably rendered yet more alert and acute, because,
through the imperfection of her other organs, it was only by sight that she could obtain information
of what passed around her.

The pretty mute was mistress of many little accomplishments, which the Countess had caused
to be taught to her in compassion for her forlorn situation, and which she learned with the
most surprising quickness. Thus, for example, she was exquisite in the use of the needle, and
so ready and ingenious a draughtswoman, that, like the ancient Mexicans, she sometimes made
a hasty sketch with her pencil the means of conveying her ideas, either by direct or emblematical
representation. Above all, in the art of ornamental writing, much studied at that period, Fenella
was so great a proficient, as to rival the fame of Messrs. Snow, Shelley, and other masters
of the pen, whose copybooks, preserved in the libraries of the curious, still show the artists
smiling on the frontispiece in all the honours of flowing gowns and full-bottomed wigs, to
the eternal glory of caligraphy.

The little maiden had, besides these accomplishments, much ready wit and acuteness of intellect.
With Lady Derby, and with the two young gentlemen, she was a great favourite, and used much
freedom in conversing with them, by means of a system of signs which had been gradually established
amongst them, and which served all ordinary purposes of communication.

But, though happy in the indulgence and favour of her mistress, from whom indeed she was seldom
separate, Fenella was by no means a favourite with the rest of the household. In fact, it seemed
that her temper, exasperated perhaps by a sense of her misfortune, was by no means equal to
her abilities. She was very haughty in her demeanour, even towards the upper domestics, who
in that establishment were of a much higher rank and better birth than in the families of the
nobility in general. These often complained, not only of her pride and reserve, but of her
high and irascible temper and vindictive disposition. Her passionate propensity had been indeed
idly encouraged by the young men, and particularly by the Earl, who sometimes amused himself
with teasing her, that he might enjoy the various singular motions and murmurs by which she
expressed her resentment. Towards him, these were of course only petulant and whimsical indications
of pettish anger. But when she was angry with others of inferior degree--before whom she did
not control herself--the expression of her passion, unable to display itself in language, had
something even frightful, so singular were the tones, contortions, and gestures, to which she
had recourse. The lower domestics, to whom she was liberal almost beyond her apparent means,
observed her with much deference and respect, but much more from fear than from any real attachment;
for the caprices of her temper displayed themselves even in her gifts; and those who most frequently
shared her bounty, seemed by no means assured of the benevolence of the motives which dictated
her liberality.

All these peculiarities led to a conclusion consonant with Manx superstition. Devout believers
in all the legends of fairies so dear to the Celtic tribes, the Manx people held it for certainty
that the elves were in the habit of carrying off mortal children before baptism, and leaving
in the cradle of the new born babe one of their own brood, which was almost always imperfect
in some one or other of the organs proper to humanity. Such a being they conceived Fenella
to be; and the smallness of her size, her dark complexion, her long locks of silken hair, the
singularity of her manners and tones, as well as the caprices of her temper, were to their
thinking all attributes of the irritable, fickle, and dangerous race from which they supposed
her to be sprung. And it seemed, that although no jest appeared to offend her more than when
Lord Derby called her in sport the Elfin Queen, or otherwise alluded to her supposed connection
with "the pigmy folk," yet still her perpetually affecting to wear the colour of green, proper
to the fairies, as well as some other peculiarities, seemed voluntarily assumed by her, in
order to countenance the superstition, perhaps because it gave her more authority among the
lower orders.

Many were the tales circulated respecting the Countess's Elf, as Fenella was currently called
in the island; and the malcontents of the stricter persuasion were convinced, that no one but
a Papist and a malignant would have kept near her person a creature of such doubtful origin.
They conceived that Fenella's deafness and dumbness were only towards those of this world,
and that she had been heard talking, and singing, and laughing most elvishly, with the invisibles
of her own race. They alleged, also, that she had a Double, a sort of apparition resembling
her, which slept in the Countess's ante-room, or bore her train, or wrought in her cabinet,
while the real Fenella joined the song of the mermaids on the moonlight sands, or the dance
of the fairies in the haunted valley of Glenmoy, or on the heights of Snawfell and Barool.
The sentinels, too, would have sworn they had seen the little maiden trip past them in their
solitary night walks, without their having it in their power to challenge her, any more than
if they had been as mute as herself. To all this mass of absurdities the better informed paid
no more attention than to the usual idle exaggerations of the vulgar, which so frequently connect
that which is unusual with what is supernatural.

Such, in form and habits, was the little female, who, holding in her hand a small old-fashioned
ebony rod, which might have passed for a divining wand, confronted Julian on the top of the
flight of steps which led down the rock from the Castle court. We ought to observe, that as
Julian's manner to the unfortunate girl had been always gentle, and free from those teasing
jests in which his gay friend indulged, with less regard to the peculiarity of her situation
and feelings; so Fenella, on her part, had usually shown much greater deference to him than
to any of the household, her mistress, the Countess, always excepted.

On the present occasion, planting herself in the very midst of the narrow descent, so as to
make it impossible for Peveril to pass by her, she proceeded to put him to the question by
a series of gestures, which we will endeavour to describe. She commenced by extending her hand
slightly, accompanied with the sharp inquisitive look which served her as a note of interrogation.
This was meant as an inquiry whether he was going to a distance. Julian, in reply, extended
his arm more than half, to intimate that the distance was considerable. Fenella looked grave,
shook her head, and pointed to the Countess's window, which was visible from the spot where
they stood. Peveril smiled, and nodded, to intimate there was no danger in quitting her mistress
for a short space. The little maiden next touched an eagle's feather which she wore in her
hair, a sign which she usually employed to designate the Earl, and then looked inquisitively
at Julian once more, as if to say, "Goes he with you?" Peveril shook his head, and, somewhat
wearied by these interrogatories, smiled, and made an effort to pass. Fenella frowned, struck
the end of her ebony rod perpendicularly on the ground, and again shook her head, as if opposing
his departure. But finding that Julian persevered in his purpose, she suddenly assumed another
and milder mood, held him by the skirt of his cloak with one hand, and raised the other in
an imploring attitude, whilst every feature of her lively countenance was composed into the
like expression of supplication; and the fire of the large dark eyes, which seemed in general
so keen and piercing as almost to over-animate the little sphere to which they belonged, seemed
quenched, for the moment, in the large drops which hung on her long eyelashes, but without falling.

Julian Peveril was far from being void of sympathy towards the poor girl, whose motives in
opposing his departure appeared to be her affectionate apprehension for her mistress's safety.
He endeavoured to reassure by smiles, and, at the same time, by such signs as he could devise,
to intimate that there was no danger, and that he would return presently; and having succeeded
in extricating his cloak from her grasp, and in passing her on the stair, he began to descend
the steps as speedily as he could, in order to avoid farther importunity.

But with activity much greater than his, the dumb maiden hastened to intercept him, and succeeded
by throwing herself, at the imminent risk of life and limb, a second time into the pass which
he was descending, so as to interrupt his purpose. In order to achieve this, she was obliged
to let herself drop a considerable height from the wall of a small flanking battery, where
two patereroes were placed to scour the pass, in case any enemy could have mounted so high.
Julian had scarce time to shudder at her purpose, as he beheld her about to spring from the
parapet, ere, like a thing of gossamer, she stood light and uninjured on the rocky platform
below. He endeavoured, by the gravity of his look and gesture, to make her understand how much
he blamed her rashness; but the reproof, though obviously quite intelligible, was entirely
thrown away. A hasty wave of her hand intimated how she contemned the danger and the remonstrance;
while, at the same time, she instantly resumed, with more eagerness than before, the earnest
and impressive gestures by which she endeavoured to detain him in the fortress.

Julian was somewhat staggered by her pertinacity. "Is it possible," he thought, "that any danger
can approach the Countess, of which this poor maiden has, by the extreme acuteness of her observation,
obtained knowledge which has escaped others?"

He signed to Fenella hastily to give him the tablets and the pencil which she usually carried
with her, and wrote on them the question, "Is there danger near to your mistress, that you
thus stop me?"

"There is danger around the Countess," was the answer instantly written down; "but there is
much more in your own purpose."

"How?--what?--what know you of my purpose?" said Julian, forgetting, in his surprise, that
the party he addressed had neither ear to comprehend, nor voice to reply to uttered language.
She had regained her book in the meantime, and sketched, with a rapid pencil, on one of the
leaves, a scene which she showed to Julian. To his infinite surprise he recognised Goddard
Crovan's Stone, a remarkable monument, of which she had given the outline with sufficient accuracy;
together with a male and female figure, which, though only indicated by a few slight touches
of the pencil, bore yet, he thought, some resemblance to himself and Alice Bridgenorth.

When he had gazed on the sketch for an instant with surprise, Fenella took the book from his
hand, laid her finger upon the drawing, and slowly and sternly shook her head, with a frown
which seemed to prohibit the meeting which was there represented. Julian, however, though disconcerted,
was in no shape disposed to submit to the authority of his monitress. By whatever means she,
who so seldom stirred from the Countess's apartment, had become acquainted with a secret which
he thought entirely his own, he esteemed it the more necessary to keep the appointed rendezvous,
that he might learn from Alice, if possible, how the secret had transpired. He had also formed
the intention of seeking out Bridgenorth; entertaining an idea that a person so reasonable
and calm as he had shown himself in their late conference, might be persuaded, when he understood
that the Countess was aware of his intrigues, to put an end to her danger and his own, by withdrawing
from the island. And could he succeed in this point, he should at once, he thought, render
a material benefit to the father of his beloved Alice--remove the Earl from his state of anxiety--save
the Countess from a second time putting her feudal jurisdiction in opposition to that of the
Crown of England--and secure quiet possession of the island to her and her family.

With this scheme of mediation on his mind, Peveril determined to rid himself of the opposition
of Fenella to his departure, with less ceremony than he had hitherto observed towards her;
and suddenly lifting up the damsel in his arms before she was aware of his purpose, he turned
about, set her down on the steps above him, and began to descend the pass himself as speedily
as possible. It was then that the dumb maiden gave full course to the vehemence of her disposition;
and clapping her hands repeatedly, expressed her displeasure in sound, or rather a shriek,
so extremely dissonant, that it resembled more the cry of a wild creature, than anything which
could have been uttered by female organs. Peveril was so astounded at the scream as it rung
through the living rocks, that he could not help stopping and looking back in alarm, to satisfy
himself that she had not sustained some injury. He saw her, however, perfectly safe, though
her face seemed inflamed and distorted with passion. She stamped at him with her foot, shook
her clenched hand, and turning her back upon him, without further adieu, ran up the rude steps
as lightly as a kid could have tripped up that rugged ascent, and paused for a moment at the
summit of the first flight.

Julian could feel nothing but wonder and compassion for the impotent passion of a being so
unfortunately circumstanced, cut off, as it were, from the rest of mankind, and incapable of
receiving in childhood that moral discipline which teaches us mastery of our wayward passions,
ere yet they have attained their meridian strength and violence. He waved his hand to her,
in token of amicable farewell; but she only replied by once more menacing him with her little
hand clenched; and then ascending the rocky staircase with almost preternatural speed, was
soon out of sight.

Julian, on his part, gave no farther consideration to her conduct or its motives, but hastening
to the village on the mainland, where the stables of the Castle were situated, he again took
his palfrey from the stall, and was soon mounted and on his way to the appointed place of rendezvous,
much marvelling, as he ambled forward with speed far greater than was promised by the diminutive
size of the animal he was mounted on, what could have happened to produce so great a change
in Alice's conduct towards him, that in place of enjoining his absence as usual, or recommending
his departure from the island, she should now voluntarily invite him to a meeting. Under impression
of the various doubts which succeeded each other in his imagination, he sometimes pressed Fairy's
sides with his legs; sometimes laid his holly rod lightly on her neck; sometimes incited her
by his voice, for the mettled animal needed neither whip nor spur, and achieved the distance
betwixt the Castle of Holm-Peel and the stone at Goddard Crovan, at the rate of twelve miles
within the hour.

The monumental stone, designed to commemorate some feat of an ancient King of Man, which had
been long forgotten, was erected on the side of a narrow lonely valley, or rather glen, secluded
from observation by the steepness of its banks, upon a projection of which stood the tall,
shapeless, solitary rock, frowning, like a shrouded giant, over the brawling of the small rivulet
which watered the ravine.

CHAPTER XVII

          This a love-meeting? See the maiden mourns,
          And the sad suitor bends his looks on earth.
          There's more hath pass'd between them than belongs
          To Love's sweet sorrows.
                                                   --OLD PLAY.

As he approached the monument of Goddard Crovan, Julian cast many an anxious glance to see
whether any object visible beside the huge grey stone should apprise him, whether he was anticipated,
at the appointed place of rendezvous, by her who had named it. Nor was it long before the flutter
of a mantle, which the breeze slightly waved, and the motion necessary to replace it upon the
wearer's shoulders, made him aware that Alice had already reached their place of meeting. One
instant set the palfrey at liberty, with slackened girths and loosened reins, to pick its own
way through the dell at will; another placed Julian Peveril by the side of Alice Bridgenorth.

That Alice should extend her hand to her lover, as with the ardour of a young greyhound he
bounded over the obstacles of the rugged path, was as natural as that Julian, seizing on the
hand so kindly stretched out, should devour it with kisses, and, for a moment or two, without
reprehension; while the other hand, which should have aided in the liberation of its fellow,
served to hide the blushes of the fair owner. But Alice, young as she was, and attached to
Julian by such long habits of kindly intimacy, still knew well how to subdue the tendency of
her own treacherous affections.

"This is not right," she said, extricating her hand from Julian's grasp, "this is not right,
Julian. If I have been too rash in admitting such a meeting as the present, it is not you that
should make me sensible of my folly."

Julian Peveril's mind had been early illuminated with that touch of romantic fire which deprives
passion of selfishness, and confers on it the high and refined tone of generous and disinterested
devotion. He let go the hand of Alice with as much respect as he could have paid to that of
a princess; and when she seated herself upon a rocky fragment, over which nature had stretched
a cushion of moss and lichen, interspersed with wild flowers, backed with a bush of copsewood,
he took his place beside her, indeed, but at such distance as to intimate the duty of an attendant,
who was there only to hear and to obey. Alice Bridgenorth became more assured as she observed
the power which she possessed over her lover; and the self-command which Peveril exhibited,
which other damsels in her situation might have judged inconsistent with intensity of passion,
she appreciated more justly, as a proof of his respectful and disinterested sincerity. She
recovered, in addressing him, the tone of confidence which rather belonged to the scenes of
their early acquaintance, than to those which had passed betwixt them since Peveril had disclosed
his affection, and thereby had brought restraint upon their intercourse.

"Julian," she said, "your visit of yesterday--your most ill-timed visit, has distressed me
much. It has misled my father--it has endangered you. At all risks, I resolved that you should
know this, and blame me not if I have taken a bold and imprudent step in desiring this solitary
interview, since you are aware how little poor Deborah is to be trusted."

"Can you fear misconstruction from me, Alice?" replied Peveril warmly; "from me, whom you have
thus highly favoured--thus deeply obliged?"

"Cease your protestations, Julian," answered the maiden; "they do but make me the more sensible
that I have acted over boldly. But I did for the best.--I could not see you whom I have known
so long--you, who say you regard me with partiality----"

"Say that I regard you with partiality!" interrupted Peveril in his turn. "Ah, Alice, with
a cold and doubtful phrase you have used to express the most devoted, the most sincere affection!"

"Well, then," said Alice sadly, "we will not quarrel about words; but do not again interrupt
me.--I could not, I say, see you, who, I believe, regard me with sincere though vain and fruitless
attachment, rush blindfold into a snare, deceived and seduced by those very feelings towards me."

"I understand you not, Alice," said Peveril; "nor can I see any danger to which I am at present
exposed. The sentiments which your father has expressed towards me, are of a nature irreconcilable
with hostile purposes. If he is not offended with the bold wishes I may have formed,--and his
whole behaviour shows the contrary,--I know not a man on earth from whom I have less cause
to apprehend any danger or ill-will."

"My father," said Alice, "means well by his country, and well by you; yet I sometimes fear
he may rather injure than serve his good cause; and still more do I dread, that in attempting
to engage you as an auxiliary, he may forget those ties which ought to bind you, and I am sure
which will bind you, to a different line of conduct from his own."

"You lead me into still deeper darkness, Alice," answered Peveril. "That your father's especial
line of politics differs widely from mine, I know well; but how many instances have occurred,
even during the bloody scenes of civil warfare, of good and worthy men laying the prejudice
of party affections aside, and regarding each other with respect, and even with friendly attachment,
without being false to principle on either side?"

"It may be so," said Alice; "but such is not the league which my father desires to form with
you, and that to which he hopes your misplaced partiality towards his daughter may afford a
motive for your forming with him."

"And what is it," said Peveril, "which I would refuse, with such a prospect before me?"

"Treachery and dishonour!" replied Alice; "whatever would render you unworthy of the poor boon
at which you aim--ay, were it more worthless than I confess it to be."

"Would your father," said Peveril, as he unwillingly received the impression which Alice designed
to convey,--"would he, whose views of duty are so strict and severe--would he wish to involve
me in aught, to which such harsh epithets as treachery and dishonour can be applied with the
lightest shadow of truth?"

"Do not mistake me, Julian," replied the maiden; "my father is incapable of requesting aught
of you that is not to his thinking just and honourable; nay, he conceives that he only claims
from you a debt, which is due as a creature to the Creator, and as a man to your fellow-men."

"So guarded, where can be the danger of our intercourse?" replied Julian. "If he be resolved
to require, and I determined to accede to, nothing save what flows from conviction, what have
I to fear, Alice? And how is my intercourse with your father dangerous? Believe not so; his
speech has already made impression on me in some particulars, and he listened with candour
and patience to the objections which I made occasionally. You do Master Bridgenorth less than
justice in confounding him with the unreasonable bigots in policy and religion, who can listen
to no argument but what favours their own prepossessions."

"Julian," replied Alice; "it is you who misjudge my father's powers, and his purpose with respect
to you, and who overrate your own powers of resistance. I am but a girl, but I have been taught
by circumstances to think for myself, and to consider the character of those around me. My
father's views in ecclesiastical and civil policy are as dear to him as the life which he cherishes
only to advance them. They have been, with little alteration, his companions through life.
They brought him at one period into prosperity, and when they suited not the times, he suffered
for having held them. They have become not only a part, but the very dearest part, of his existence.
If he shows them not to you at first, in the flexible strength which they have acquired over
his mind, do not believe that they are the less powerful. He who desires to make converts,
must begin by degrees. But that he should sacrifice to an inexperienced young man, whose ruling
motive he will term a childish passion, any part of those treasured principles which he has
maintained through good repute and bad repute--Oh, do not dream of such an impossibility! If
you meet at all, you must be the wax, he the seal--you must receive, he must bestow, an absolute
impression."

"That," said Peveril, "were unreasonable. I will frankly avow to you, Alice, that I am not
a sworn bigot to the opinions entertained by my father, much as I respect his person. I could
wish that our Cavaliers, or whatsoever they are pleased to call themselves, would have some
more charity towards those who differ from them in Church and State. But to hope that I would
surrender the principles in which I have lived, were to suppose me capable of deserting my
benefactress, and breaking the hearts of my parents."

"Even so I judged of you," answered Alice; "and therefore I asked this interview, to conjure
that you will break off all intercourse with our family--return to your parents--or, what will
be much safer, visit the continent once more, and abide till God send better days to England,
for these are black with many a storm."

"And can you bid me go, Alice?" said the young man, taking her unresisting hand; "can you bid
me go, and yet own an interest in my fate?--Can you bid me, for fear of dangers, which, as
a man, as a gentleman, and a loyal one, I am bound to show my face to, meanly abandon my parents,
my friends, my country--suffer the existence of evils which I might aid to prevent--forego
the prospect of doing such little good as might be in my power--fall from an active and honourable
station, into the condition of a fugitive and time-server--Can you bid me do all this, Alice?
Can you bid me do all this, and, in the same breath, bid farewell for ever to you and happiness?--It
is impossible--I cannot surrender at once my love and my honour."

"There is no remedy," said Alice, but she could not suppress a sigh while she said so--"there
is no remedy--none whatever. What we might have been to each other, placed in more favourable
circumstances, it avails not to think of now; and, circumstanced as we are, with open war about
to break out betwixt our parents and friends, we can be but well-wishers--cold and distant
well-wishers, who must part on this spot, and at this hour, never meet again."

"No, by Heaven!" said Peveril, animated at the same time by his own feelings, and by the sight
of the emotions which his companion in vain endeavoured to suppress,--"No, by Heaven!" he exclaimed,
"we part not--Alice, we part not. If I am to leave my native land, you shall be my companion
in my exile. What have you to lose?--Whom have you to abandon?--Your father?--The good old
cause, as it is termed, is dearer to him than a thousand daughters; and setting him aside,
what tie is there between you and this barren isle--between my Alice and any spot of the British
dominions, where her Julian does not sit by her?"

"O Julian," answered the maiden, "why make my duty more painful by visionary projects, which
you ought not to name, or I to listen to? Your parents--my father--it cannot be!"

"Fear not for my parents, Alice," replied Julian, and pressing close to his companion's side,
he ventured to throw his arm around her; "they love me, and they will soon learn to love, in
Alice, the only being on earth who could have rendered their son happy. And for your own father,
when State and Church intrigues allow him to bestow a thought upon you, will he not think that
your happiness, your security, is better cared for when you are my wife, than were you to continue
under the mercenary charge of yonder foolish woman? What could his pride desire better for
you, than the establishment which will one day be mine? Come then, Alice, and since you condemn
me to banishment--since you deny me a share in those stirring achievements which are about
to agitate England--come! do you--for you only can--do you reconcile me to exile and inaction,
and give happiness to one, who, for your sake, is willing to resign honour."

"It cannot--it cannot be," said Alice, faltering as she uttered her negative. "And yet," she
said, "how many in my place--left alone and unprotected, as I am--But I must not--I must not--for
your sake, Julian, I must not."

"Say not for my sake you must not, Alice," said Peveril eagerly; "this is adding insult to
cruelty. If you will do aught for my sake, you will say yes; or you will suffer this dear head
to drop on my shoulder--the slightest sign--the moving of an eyelid, shall signify consent.
All shall be prepared within an hour; within another the priest shall unite us; and within
a third, we leave the isle behind us, and seek our fortunes on the continent." But while he
spoke, in joyful anticipation of the consent which he implored, Alice found means to collect
together her resolution, which, staggered by the eagerness of her lover, the impulse of her
own affections, and the singularity of her situation,--seeming, in her case, to justify what
would have been most blamable in another,--had more than half abandoned her.

The result of a moment's deliberation was fatal to Julian's proposal. She extricated herself
from the arm which had pressed her to his side--arose, and repelling his attempts to approach
or detain her, said, with a simplicity not unmingled with dignity, "Julian, I always knew I
risked much in inviting you to this meeting; but I did not guess that I could have been so
cruel to both to you and to myself, as to suffer you to discover what you have to-day seen
too plainly--that I love you better than you love me. But since you do know it, I will show
you that Alice's love is disinterested--She will not bring an ignoble name into your ancient
house. If hereafter, in your line, there should arise some who may think the claims of the
hierarchy too exorbitant, the powers of the crown too extensive, men shall not say these ideas
were derived from Alice Bridgenorth, their whig granddame."

"Can you speak thus, Alice?" said her lover. "Can you use such expressions? and are you not
sensible that they show plainly it is your own pride, not regard for me, that makes you resist
the happiness of both?"

"Not so, Julian; not so," answered Alice, with tears in her eyes; "it is the command of duty
to us both--of duty, which we cannot transgress, without risking our happiness here and hereafter.
Think what I, the cause of all, should feel, when your father frowns, your mother weeps, your
noble friends stand aloof, and you, even you yourself, shall have made the painful discovery,
that you have incurred the contempt and resentment of all to satisfy a boyish passion; and
that the poor beauty, once sufficient to mislead you, is gradually declining under the influence
of grief and vexation. This I will not risk. I see distinctly it is best we should here break
off and part; and I thank God, who gives me light enough to perceive, and strength enough to
withstand, your folly as well as my own. Farewell, then, Julian; but first take the solemn
advice which I called you hither to impart to you:--Shun my father--you cannot walk in his
paths, and be true to gratitude and to honour. What he doth from pure and honourable motives,
you cannot aid him in, except upon the suggestion of a silly and interested passion, at variance
with all the engagements you have formed at coming into life."

"Once more, Alice," answered Julian, "I understand you not. If a course of action is good,
it needs no vindication from the actor's motives--if bad, it can derive none."

"You cannot blind me with your sophistry, Julian," replied Alice Bridgenorth, "any more than
you can overpower me with your passion. Had the patriarch destined his son to death upon any
less ground than faith and humble obedience to a divine commandment, he had meditated a murder
and not a sacrifice. In our late bloody and lamentable wars, how many drew swords on either
side, from the purest and most honourable motives? How many from the culpable suggestions of
ambition, self-seeking, and love of plunder? Yet while they marched in the same ranks, and
spurred their horses at the same trumpet-sound, the memory of the former is dear to us as patriots
or loyalists--that of those who acted on mean or unworthy promptings, is either execrated or
forgotten. Once more, I warn you, avoid my father--leave this island, which will be soon agitated
by strange incidents--while you stay, be on your guard--distrust everything--be jealous of
every one, even of those to whom it may seem almost impossible, from circumstances, to attach
a shadow of suspicion--trust not the very stones of the most secret apartment in Holm-Peel,
for that which hath wings shall carry the matter."

Here Alice broke off suddenly, and with a faint shriek; for, stepping from behind the stunted
copse which had concealed him, her father stood unexpectedly before them.

The reader cannot have forgotten that this was the second time in which the stolen interviews
of the lovers had been interrupted by the unexpected apparition of Major Bridgenorth. On this
second occasion his countenance exhibited anger mixed with solemnity, like that of the spirit
to a ghost-seer, whom he upbraids with having neglected a charge imposed at their first meeting.
Even his anger, however, produced no more violent emotion than a cold sternness of manner in
his speech and action. "I thank you, Alice," he said to his daughter, "for the pains you have
taken to traverse my designs towards this young man, and towards yourself. I thank you for
the hints you have thrown out before my appearance, the suddenness of which alone has prevented
you from carrying your confidence to a pitch which would have placed my life and that of others
at the discretion of a boy, who, when the cause of God and his country is laid before him,
has not leisure to think of them, so much is he occupied with such a baby-face as thine." Alice,
pale as death, continued motionless, with her eyes fixed on the ground, without attempting
the slightest reply to the ironical reproaches of her father.

"And you," continued Major Bridgenorth, turning from his daughter to her lover,--"you sir,
have well repaid the liberal confidence which I placed in you with so little reserve. You I
have to thank also for some lessons, which may teach me to rest satisfied with the churl's
blood which nature has poured into my veins, and with the rude nurture which my father allotted
to me."

"I understand you not, sir," replied Julian Peveril, who, feeling the necessity of saying something,
could not, at the moment, find anything more fitting to say.

"Yes, sir, I thank you," said Major Bridgenorth, in the same cold sarcastic tone, "for having
shown me that breach of hospitality, infringement of good faith, and such like peccadilloes,
are not utterly foreign to the mind and conduct of the heir of a knightly house of twenty descents.
It is a great lesson to me, sir: for hitherto I had thought with the vulgar, that gentle manners
went with gentle blood. But perhaps courtesy is too chivalrous a quality to be wasted in intercourse
with a round-headed fanatic like myself."

"Major Bridgenorth," said Julian, "whatever has happened in this interview which may have displeased
you, has been the result of feelings suddenly and strongly animated by the crisis of the moment--nothing
was premeditated."

"Not even your meeting, I suppose?" replied Bridgenorth, in the same cold tone. "You, sir,
wandered hither from Holm-Peel--my daughter strolled forth from the Black Fort; and chance,
doubtless, assigned you a meeting by the stone of Goddard Crovan?--Young man, disgrace yourself
by no more apologies--they are worse than useless.--And you, maiden, who, in your fear of losing
your lover, could verge on betraying what might have cost a father his life--begone to your
home. I will talk with you at more leisure, and teach you practically those duties which you
seem to have forgotten."

"On my honour, sir," said Julian, "your daughter is guiltless of all that can offend you; she
resisted every offer which the headstrong violence of my passion urged me to press upon her."

"And, in brief," said Bridgenorth, "I am not to believe that you met in this remote place of
rendezvous by Alice's special appointment?"

Peveril knew not what to reply, and Bridgenorth again signed with his hand to his daughter
to withdraw.

"I obey you, father," said Alice, who had by this time recovered from the extremity of her
surprise,--"I obey you; but Heaven is my witness that you do me more than injustice in suspecting
me capable of betraying your secrets, even had it been necessary to save my own life or that
of Julian. That you are walking in a dangerous path I well know; but you do it with your eyes
open, and are actuated by motives of which you can estimate the worth and value. My sole wish
was, that this young man should not enter blindfold on the same perils; and I had a right to
warn him, since the feelings by which he is hoodwinked had a direct reference to me."

"'Tis well, minion," said Bridgenorth, "you have spoken your say. Retire, and let me complete
the conference which you have so considerately commenced."

"I go, sir," said Alice.--"Julian, to you my last words are, and I would speak them with my
last breath--Farewell, and caution!"

She turned from them, disappeared among the underwood, and was seen no more.

"A true specimen of womankind," said her father, looking after her, "who would give the cause
of nations up, rather than endanger a hair of her lover's head.--You, Master Peveril, doubtless,
hold her opinion, that the best love is a safe love!"

"Were danger alone in my way," said Peveril, much surprised at the softened tone in which Bridgenorth
made this observation, "there are few things which I would not face to--to--deserve your good
opinion."

"Or rather to win my daughter's hand," said Bridgenorth. "Well, young man, one thing has pleased
me in your conduct, though of much I have my reasons to complain--one thing has pleased me.
You have surmounted that bounding wall of aristocratical pride, in which your father, and,
I suppose, his fathers, remained imprisoned, as in the precincts of a feudal fortress--you
have leaped over this barrier, and shown yourself not unwilling to ally yourself with a family
whom your father spurns as low-born and ignoble."

However favourable this speech sounded towards success in his suit, it so broadly stated the
consequences of that success so far as his parents were concerned, that Julian felt it in the
last degree difficult to reply. At length, perceiving that Major Bridgenorth seemed resolved
quietly to await his answer, he mustered up courage to say, "The feelings which I entertain
towards your daughter, Master Bridgenorth, are of a nature to supersede many other considerations,
to which in any other case, I should feel it my duty to give the most reverential attention.
I will not disguise from you, that my father's prejudices against such a match would be very
strong; but I devoutly believe they would disappear when he came to know the merit of Alice
Bridgenorth, and to be sensible that she only could make his son happy."

"In the meanwhile, you are desirous to complete the union which you propose without the knowledge
of your parents, and take the chance of their being hereafter reconciled to it? So I understand,
from the proposal which you made but lately to my daughter."

The turns of human nature, and of human passion, are so irregular and uncertain, that although
Julian had but a few minutes before urged to Alice a private marriage, and an elopement to
the continent, as a measure upon which the whole happiness of his life depended, the proposal
seemed not to him half so delightful when stated by the calm, cold, dictatorial accents of
her father. It sounded no longer like the dictates of ardent passion, throwing all other considerations
aside, but as a distinct surrender of the dignity of his house to one who seemed to consider
their relative situation as the triumph of Bridgenorth over Peveril. He was mute for a moment,
in the vain attempt to shape his answer so as at once to intimate acquiescence in what Bridgenorth
stated, and a vindication of his own regard for his parents, and for the honour of his house.

This delay gave rise to suspicion, and Bridgenorth's eye gleamed, and his lip quivered while
he gave vent to it. "Hark ye, young man--deal openly with me in this matter, if you would not
have me think you the execrable villain who would have seduced an unhappy girl, under promises
which he never designed to fulfil. Let me but suspect this, and you shall see, on the spot,
how far your pride and your pedigree will preserve you against the just vengeance of a father."

"You do me wrong," said Peveril--"you do me infinite wrong, Major Bridgenorth, I am incapable
of the infamy which you allude to. The proposal I made to your daughter was as sincere as ever
was offered by man to woman. I only hesitated, because you think it necessary to examine me
so very closely; and to possess yourself of all my purposes and sentiments, in their fullest
extent, without explaining to me the tendency of your own."

"Your proposal, then, shapes itself thus," said Bridgenorth:--"You are willing to lead my only
child into exile from her native country, to give her a claim to kindness and protection from
your family, which you know will be disregarded, on condition I consent to bestow her hand
on you, with a fortune sufficient to have matched your ancestors, when they had most reason
to boast of their wealth. This, young man, seems no equal bargain. And yet," he continued,
after a momentary pause, "so little do I value the goods of this world, that it might not be
utterly beyond thy power to reconcile me to the match which you have proposed to me, however
unequal it may appear."

"Show me but the means which can propitiate your favour, Major Bridgenorth," said Peveril,--"for
I will not doubt that they will be consistent with my honour and duty--and you shall soon see
how eagerly I will obey your directions, or submit to your conditions."

"They are summed in few words," answered Bridgenorth. "Be an honest man, and the friend of
your country."

"No one has ever doubted," replied Peveril, "that I am both."

"Pardon me," replied the Major; "no one has, as yet, seen you show yourself either. Interrupt
me not--I question not your will to be both; but you have hitherto neither had the light nor
the opportunity necessary for the display of your principles, or the service of your country.
You have lived when an apathy of mind, succeeding to the agitations of the Civil War, had made
men indifferent to state affairs, and more willing to cultivate their own ease, than to stand
in the gap when the Lord was pleading with Israel. But we are Englishmen; and with us such
unnatural lethargy cannot continue long. Already, many of those who most desired the return
of Charles Stewart, regard him as a King whom Heaven, importuned by our entreaties, gave to
us in His anger. His unlimited licence--and example so readily followed by the young and the
gay around him--has disgusted the minds of all sober and thinking men. I had not now held conference
with you in this intimate fashion, were I not aware that you, Master Julian, were free from
such stain of the times. Heaven, that rendered the King's course of license fruitful, had denied
issue to his bed of wedlock; and in the gloomy and stern character of his bigoted successor,
we already see what sort of monarch shall succeed to the crown of England. This is a critical
period, at which it necessarily becomes the duty of all men to step forward, each in his degree,
and aid in rescuing the country which gave us birth." Peveril remembered the warning which
he had received from Alice, and bent his eyes on the ground, without returning any reply. "How
is it, young man," continued Bridgenorth, after a pause--"so young as thou art, and bound by
no ties of kindred profligacy with the enemies of your country, you can be already hardened
to the claims she may form on you at this crisis?"

"It were easy to answer you generally, Major Bridgenorth," replied Peveril--"It were easy to
say that my country cannot make a claim on me which I will not promptly answer at the risk
of lands and life. But in dealing thus generally, we should but deceive each other. What is
the nature of this call? By whom is it to be sounded? And what are to be the results? for I
think you have already seen enough of the evils of civil war, to be wary of again awakening
its terrors in a peaceful and happy country."

"They that are drenched with poisonous narcotics," said the Major, "must be awakened by their
physicians, though it were with the sound of the trumpet. Better that men should die bravely,
with their arms in their hands, like free-born Englishmen, than that they should slide into
the bloodless but dishonoured grave which slavery opens for its vassals--But it is not of war
that I was about to speak," he added, assuming a milder tone. "The evils of which England now
complains, are such as can be remedied by the wholesome administration of her own laws, even
in the state in which they are still suffered to exist. Have these laws not a right to the
support of every individual who lives under them? Have they not a right to yours?"

As he seemed to pause for an answer, Peveril replied, "I have to learn, Major Bridgenorth,
how the laws of England have become so far weakened as to require such support as mine. When
that is made plain to me, no man will more willingly discharge the duty of a faithful liegeman
to the law as well as the King. But the laws of England are under the guardianship of upright
and learned judges, and of a gracious monarch."

"And of a House of Commons," interrupted Bridgenorth, "no longer doting upon restored monarchy,
but awakened, as with a peal of thunder, to the perilous state of our religion, and of our
freedom. I appeal to your own conscience, Julian Peveril, whether this awakening hath not been
in time, since you yourself know, and none better than you, the secret but rapid strides which
Rome has made to erect her Dagon of idolatry within our Protestant land."

Here Julian seeing, or thinking he saw, the drift of Bridgenorth's suspicions, hastened to
exculpate himself from the thought of favouring the Roman Catholic religion. "It is true,"
he said, "I have been educated in a family where that faith is professed by one honoured individual,
and that I have since travelled in Popish countries; but even for these very reasons I have
seen Popery too closely to be friendly to its tenets. The bigotry of the laymen--the persevering
arts of the priesthood--the perpetual intrigue for the extension of the forms without the spirit
of religion--the usurpation of that Church over the consciences of men--and her impious pretensions
to infallibility, are as inconsistent to my mind as they can seem to yours, with common-sense,
rational liberty, freedom of conscience, and pure religion."

"Spoken like the son of your excellent mother," said Bridgenorth, grasping his hand; "for whose
sake I have consented to endure so much from your house unrequited, even when the means of
requital were in my own hand."

"It was indeed from the instructions of that excellent parent," said Peveril, "that I was enabled,
in my early youth, to resist and repel the insidious attacks made upon my religious faith by
the Catholic priests into whose company I was necessarily thrown. Like her, I trust to live
and die in the faith of the reformed Church of England."

"The Church of England!" said Bridgenorth, dropping his young friend's hand, but presently
resuming it--"Alas! that Church, as now constituted, usurps scarcely less than Rome herself
upon men's consciences and liberties; yet, out of the weakness of this half-reformed Church,
may God be pleased to work out deliverance to England, and praise to Himself. I must not forget,
that one whose services have been in the cause incalculable, wears the garb of an English priest,
and hath had Episcopal ordination. It is not for us to challenge the instrument, so that our
escape is achieved from the net of the fowler. Enough, that I find thee not as yet enlightened
with the purer doctrine, but prepared to profit by it when the spark shall reach thee. Enough,
in especial, that I find thee willing to uplift thy testimony to cry aloud and spare not, against
the errors and arts of the Church of Rome. But remember, what thou hast now said, thou wilt
soon be called upon to justify, in a manner the most solemn--the most awful."

"What I have said," replied Julian Peveril, "being the unbiassed sentiments of my heart, shall,
upon no proper occasion, want the support of my open avowal; and I think it strange you should
doubt me so far."

"I doubt thee not, my young friend," said Bridgenorth; "and I trust to see that name rank high
amongst those by whom the prey shall be rent from the mighty. At present, thy prejudices occupy
thy mind like the strong keeper of the house mentioned in Scripture. But there shall come a
stronger than he, and make forcible entry, displaying on the battlements that sign of faith
in which alone there is found salvation.--Watch, hope, and pray, that the hour may come."

There was a pause in the conversation, which was first broken by Peveril. "You have spoken
to me in riddles, Major Bridgenorth; and I have asked you for no explanation. Listen to a caution
on my part, given with the most sincere good-will. Take a hint from me, and believe it, though
it is darkly expressed. You are here--at least are believed to be here--on an errand dangerous
to the Lord of the island. That danger will be retorted on yourself, if you make Man long your
place of residence. Be warned, and depart in time."

"And leave my daughter to the guardianship of Julian Peveril! Runs not your counsel so, young
man?" answered Bridgenorth. "Trust my safety, Julian, to my own prudence. I have been accustomed
to guide myself through worse dangers than now environ me. But I thank you for your caution,
which I am willing to believe was at least partly disinterested."

"We do not, then, part in anger?" said Peveril.

"Not in anger, my son," said Bridgenorth, "but in love and strong affection. For my daughter,
thou must forbear every thought of seeing her, save through me. I accept not thy suit, neither
do I reject it; only this I intimate to you, that he who would be my son, must first show himself
the true and loving child of his oppressed and deluded country. Farewell; do not answer me
now, thou art yet in the gall of bitterness, and it may be that strife (which I desire not)
should fall between us. Thou shalt hear of me sooner than thou thinkest for."

He shook Peveril heartily by the hand, and again bid him farewell, leaving him under the confused
and mingled impression of pleasure, doubt, and wonder. Not a little surprised to find himself
so far in the good graces of Alice's father, that his suit was even favoured with a sort of
negative encouragement, he could not help suspecting, as well from the language of the daughter
as of the father, that Bridgenorth was desirous, as the price of his favour, that he should
adopt some line of conduct inconsistent with the principles in which he had been educated.

"You need not fear, Alice," he said in his heart; "not even your hand would I purchase by aught
which resembled unworthy or truckling compliance with tenets which my heart disowns; and well
I know, were I mean enough to do so, even the authority of thy father were insufficient to
compel thee to the ratification of so mean a bargain. But let me hope better things. Bridgenorth,
though strong-minded and sagacious, is haunted by the fears of Popery, which are the bugbears
of his sect. My residence in the family of the Countess of Derby is more than enough to inspire
him with suspicions of my faith, from which, thank Heaven, I can vindicate myself with truth
and a good conscience."

So thinking, he again adjusted the girths of his palfrey, replaced the bit which he had slipped
out of its mouth, that it might feed at liberty, and mounting, pursued his way back to the
Castle of Holm-Peel, where he could not help fearing that something extraordinary might have
happened in his absence.

But the old pile soon rose before him, serene, and sternly still, amid the sleeping ocean.
The banner, which indicated that the Lord of Man held residence within its ruinous precincts,
hung motionless by the ensign-staff. The sentinels walked to and fro on their posts, and hummed
or whistled their Manx airs. Leaving his faithful companion, Fairy, in the village as before,
Julian entered the Castle, and found all within in the same state of quietness and good order
which external appearances had announced.

CHAPTER XVIII

                 Now rede me, rede me, brother dear,
                   Throughout Merry England,
                 Where will I find a messenger,
                   Betwixt us two to send.
                                       --BALLAD OF KING ESTMERE.

Julian's first encounter, after re-entering the Castle, was with its young Lord, who received
him with his usual kindness and lightness of humour.

"Thrice welcome, Sir Knight of Dames," said the Earl; "here you rove gallantly, and at free
will, through our dominions, fulfilling of appointments, and achieving amorous adventures;
while we are condemned to sit in our royal halls, as dull and as immovable as if our Majesty
was carved on the stern of some Manx smuggling dogger, and christened the King Arthur of Ramsey."

"Nay, in that case you would take the sea," said Julian, "and so enjoy travel and adventure
enough."

"Oh, but suppose me wind-bound, or detained in harbour by a revenue pink, or ashore, if you
like it, and lying high and dry upon the sand. Imagine the royal image in the dullest of all
predicaments, and you have not equalled mine."

"I am happy to hear, at least, that you have had no disagreeable employment," said Julian;
"the morning's alarm has blown over, I suppose?"

"In faith it has, Julian; and our close inquiries cannot find any cause for the apprehended
insurrection. That Bridgenorth is in the island seems certain; but private affairs of consequence
are alleged as the cause of his visit; and I am not desirous to have him arrested unless I
could prove some malpractices against him and his companions. In fact, it would seem we had
taken the alarm too soon. My mother speaks of consulting you on the subject, Julian; and I
will not anticipate her solemn communication. It will be partly apologetical, I suppose; for
we begin to think our retreat rather unroyal, and that, like the wicked, we have fled when
no man pursued. This idea afflicts my mother, who, as a Queen-Dowager, a Queen-Regent, a heroine,
and a woman in general, would be extremely mortified to think that her precipitate retreat
hither had exposed her to the ridicule of the islanders; and she is disconcerted and out of
humour accordingly. In the meanwhile, my sole amusement has been the grimaces and fantastic
gestures of that ape Fenella, who is more out of humour, and more absurd, in consequence, than
you ever saw her. Morris says, it is because you pushed her downstairs, Julian--how is that?"

"Nay, Morris has misreported me," answered Julian; "I did but lift her up stairs to be rid
of her importunity; for she chose, in her way, to contest my going abroad in such an obstinate
manner, that I had no other mode of getting rid of her."

"She must have supposed your departure, at a moment so critical, was dangerous to the state
of our garrison," answered the Earl; "it shows how dearly she esteems my mother's safety, how
highly she rates your prowess. But, thank Heaven, there sounds the dinner-bell. I would the
philosophers, who find a sin and waste of time in good cheer, could devise us any pastime half
so agreeable."

The meal which the young Earl had thus longed for, as a means of consuming a portion of the
time which hung heavy on his hands, was soon over; as soon, at least, as the habitual and stately
formality of the Countess's household permitted. She herself, accompanied by her gentlewomen
and attendants, retired early after the tables were drawn; and the young gentlemen were left
to their own company. Wine had, for the moment, no charms for either; for the Earl was out
of spirits from ennui, and impatience of his monotonous and solitary course of life; and the
events of the day had given Peveril too much matter for reflection, to permit his starting
amusing or interesting topics of conversation. After having passed the flask in silence betwixt
them once or twice, they withdrew each to a separate embrasure of the windows of the dining
apartment, which, such was the extreme thickness of the wall, were deep enough to afford a
solitary recess, separated, as it were, from the chamber itself. In one of these sat the Earl
of Derby, busied in looking over some of the new publications which had been forwarded from
London; and at intervals confessing how little power or interest these had for him, by yawning
fearfully as he looked out on the solitary expanse of waters, which, save from the flight of
a flock of sea-gulls, or a solitary cormorant, offered so little of variety to engage his attention.

Peveril, on his part, held a pamphlet also in his hand, without giving, or affecting to give
it, even his occasional attention. His whole soul turned upon the interview which he had had
that day with Alice Bridgenorth, and with her father; while he in vain endeavoured to form
any hypothesis which could explain to him why the daughter, to whom he had no reason to think
himself indifferent, should have been so suddenly desirous of their eternal separation, while
her father, whose opposition he so much dreaded, seemed to be at least tolerant of his addresses.
He could only suppose, in explanation, that Major Bridgenorth had some plan in prospect, which
it was in his own power to farther or to impede; while, from the demeanour, and indeed the
language, of Alice, he had but too much reason to apprehend that her father's favour could
only be conciliated by something, on his own part, approaching to dereliction of principle.
But by no conjecture which he could form, could he make the least guess concerning the nature
of that compliance, of which Bridgenorth seemed desirous. He could not imagine, notwithstanding
Alice had spoken of treachery, that her father would dare to propose to him uniting in any
plan by which the safety of the Countess, or the security of her little kingdom of Man, was
to be endangered. This carried such indelible disgrace in the front, that he could not suppose
the scheme proposed to him by any who was not prepared to defend with his sword, upon the spot,
so flagrant an insult offered to his honour. And such a proceeding was totally inconsistent
with the conduct of Major Bridgenorth in every other respect, besides his being too calm and
cold-blooded to permit of his putting a mortal affront upon the son of his old neighbour, to
whose mother he confessed so much of obligation.

While Peveril in vain endeavoured to extract something like a probable theory out of the hints
thrown out by the father and by the daughter--not without the additional and lover-like labour
of endeavouring to reconcile his passion to his honour and conscience--he felt something gently
pull him by the cloak. He unclasped his arms, which, in meditation, had been folded on his
bosom; and withdrawing his eyes from the vacant prospect of sea-coast and sea which they perused,
without much consciousness upon what they rested, he beheld beside him the little dumb maiden,
the elfin Fenella. She was seated on a low cushion or stool, with which she had nestled close
to Peveril's side, and had remained there for a short space of time, expecting, no doubt, he
would become conscious of her presence; until, tired of remaining unnoticed, she at length
solicited his attention in the manner which we have described. Startled out of his reverie
by this intimation of her presence, he looked down, and could not, without interest, behold
this singular and helpless being.

Her hair was unloosened, and streamed over her shoulders in such length, that much of it lay
upon the ground, and in such quantity, that it formed a dark veil, or shadow, not only around
her face, but over her whole slender and minute form. From the profusion of her tresses looked
forth her small and dark, but well-formed features, together with the large and brilliant black
eyes; and her whole countenance was composed into the imploring look of one who is doubtful
of the reception she is about to meet with from a valued friend, while she confesses a fault,
pleads an apology, or solicits a reconciliation. In short, the whole face was so much alive
with expression, that Julian, though her aspect was so familiar to him, could hardly persuade
himself but that her countenance was entirely new. The wild, fantastic, elvish vivacity of
the features, seemed totally vanished, and had given place to a sorrowful, tender, and pathetic
cast of countenance, aided by the expression of the large dark eyes, which, as they were turned
up towards Julian, glistened with moisture, that, nevertheless, did not overflow the eyelids.

Conceiving that her unwonted manner arose from a recollection of the dispute which had taken
place betwixt them in the morning, Peveril was anxious to restore the little maiden's gaiety,
by making her sensible that there dwelt on his mind no unpleasing recollection of their quarrel.
He smiled kindly, and shook her hand in one of his; while, with the familiarity of one who
had known her from childhood, he stroked down her long dark tresses with the other. She stooped
her head, as if ashamed, and, at the same time, gratified with his caresses--and he was thus
induced to continue them, until, under the veil of her rich and abundant locks, he suddenly
felt his other hand, which she still held in hers, slightly touched with her lips, and, at
the same time, moistened with a tear.

At once, and for the first time in his life, the danger of being misinterpreted in his familiarity
with a creature to whom the usual modes of explanation were a blank, occurred to Julian's mind;
and, hastily withdrawing his hand, and changing his posture, he asked her, by a sign which
custom had rendered familiar, whether she brought any message to him from the Countess. She
started up, and arranged herself in her seat with the rapidity of lightning; and, at the same
moment, with one turn of her hand, braided her length of locks into a natural head-dress of
the most beautiful kind. There was, indeed, when she looked up, a blush still visible on her
dark features; but their melancholy and languid expression had given place to that of wild
and restless vivacity, which was most common to them. Her eyes gleamed with more than their
wonted fire, and her glances were more piercingly wild and unsettled than usual. To Julian's
inquiry, she answered, by laying her hand on her heart--a motion by which she always indicated
the Countess--and rising, and taking the direction of her apartment, she made a sign to Julian
to follow her.

The distance was not great betwixt the dining apartment and that to which Peveril now followed
his mute guide; yet, in going thither, he had time enough to suffer cruelly from the sudden
suspicion, that this unhappy girl had misinterpreted the uniform kindness with which he had
treated her, and hence come to regard him with feelings more tender than those which belong
to friendship. The misery which such a passion was likely to occasion to a creature in her
helpless situation, and actuated by such lively feelings, was great enough to make him refuse
credit to the suspicion which pressed itself upon his mind; while, at the same time, he formed
the internal resolution so to conduct himself towards Fenella, as to check such misplaced sentiments,
if indeed she unhappily entertained them towards him.

When they reached the Countess's apartment, they found her with writing implements, and many
sealed letters before her. She received Julian with her usual kindness; and having caused him
to be seated, beckoned to the mute to resume her needle. In an instant Fenella was seated at
an embroidering-frame; where, but for the movement of her dexterous fingers, she might have
seemed a statue, so little did she move from her work either head or eye. As her infirmity
rendered her presence no bar to the most confidential conversation, the Countess proceeded
to address Peveril as if they had been literally alone together.

"Julian," she said, "I am not now about to complain to you of the sentiments and conduct of
Derby. He is your friend--he is my son. He has kindness of heart and vivacity of talent; and
yet----"

"Dearest lady," said Peveril, "why will you distress yourself with fixing your eye on deficiencies
which arise rather from a change of times and manners, than any degeneracy of my noble friend?
Let him be once engaged in his duty, whether in peace or war, and let me pay the penalty if
he acquits not himself becoming his high station."

"Ay," replied the Countess; "but when will the call of duty prove superior to that of the most
idle or trivial indulgence which can serve to drive over the lazy hour? His father was of another
mould; and how often was it my lot to entreat that he would spare, from the rigid discharge
of those duties which his high station imposed, the relaxation absolutely necessary to recruit
his health and his spirits!"

"Still, my dearest lady," said Peveril, "you must allow, that the duties to which the times
summoned your late honoured lord, were of a more stirring, as well as a more peremptory cast,
than those which await your son."

"I know not that," said the Countess. "The wheel appears to be again revolving; and the present
period is not unlikely to bring back such scenes as my young years witnessed.--Well, be it
so; they will not find Charlotte de la Tremouille broken in spirit, though depressed by years.
It was even on this subject I would speak with you, my young friend. Since our first early
acquaintance--when I saw your gallant behaviour as I issued forth to your childish eye, like
an apparition, from my place of concealment in your father's castle--it has pleased me to think
you a true son of Stanley and Peveril. I trust your nurture in this family has been ever suited
to the esteem in which I hold you.--Nay, I desire no thanks.--I have to require of you, in
return, a piece of service, not perhaps entirely safe to yourself, but which, as times are
circumstanced, no person is so well able to render to my house."

"You have been ever my good and noble lady," answered Peveril, "as well as my kind, and I may
say maternal, protectress. You have a right to command the blood of Stanley in the veins of
every one--You have a thousand rights to command it in mine."[*]

[*] The reader cannot have forgotten that the Earl of Derby was head
    of the great house of Stanley.

"My advices from England," said the Countess, "resemble more the dreams of a sick man, than
the regular information which I might have expected from such correspondents as mine;--their
expressions are like those of men who walk in their sleep, and speak by snatches of what passes
in their dreams. It is said, a plot, real or fictitious, has been detected among the Catholics,
which has spread far wider and more uncontrollable terror than that of the fifth of November.
Its outlines seem utterly incredible, and are only supported by the evidence of wretches, the
meanest and most worthless in the creation; yet it is received by the credulous people of England
with the most undoubting belief."

"This is a singular delusion, to rise without some real ground," answered Julian.

"I am no bigot, cousin, though a Catholic," replied the Countess. "I have long feared that
the well-meant zeal of our priests for increasing converts, would draw on them the suspicion
of the English nation. These efforts have been renewed with double energy since the Duke of
York conformed to the Catholic faith; and the same event has doubled the hate and jealousy
of the Protestants. So far, I fear, there may be just cause of suspicion, that the Duke is
a better Catholic than an Englishman, and that bigotry has involved him, as avarice, or the
needy greed of a prodigal, has engaged his brother, in relations with France, whereof England
may have too much reason to complain. But the gross, thick, and palpable fabrications of conspiracy
and murder, blood and fire--the imaginary armies--the intended massacres--form a collection
of falsehoods, that one would have thought indigestible, even by the coarse appetite of the
vulgar for the marvellous and horrible; but which are, nevertheless, received as truth by both
Houses of Parliament, and questioned by no one who is desirous to escape the odious appellation
of friend to the bloody Papists, and favourer of their infernal schemes of cruelty."

"But what say those who are most likely to be affected by these wild reports?" said Julian.
"What say the English Catholics themselves?--a numerous and wealthy body, comprising so many
noble names?"

"Their hearts are dead within them," said the Countess. "They are like sheep penned up in the
shambles, that the butcher may take his choice among them. In the obscure and brief communications
which I have had by a secure hand, they do but anticipate their own utter ruin, and ours--so
general is the depression, so universal the despair."

"But the King," said Peveril,--"the King and the Protestant Royalists--what say they to this
growing tempest?"

"Charles," replied the Countess, "with his usual selfish prudence, truckles to the storm; and
will let cord and axe do their work on the most innocent men in his dominions, rather than
lose an hour of pleasure in attempting their rescue. And, for the Royalists, either they have
caught the general delirium which has seized on Protestants in general, or they stand aloof
and neutral, afraid to show any interest in the unhappy Catholics, lest they be judged altogether
such as themselves, and abettors of the fearful conspiracy in which they are alleged to be
engaged. In fact, I cannot blame them. It is hard to expect that mere compassion for a persecuted
sect--or, what is yet more rare, an abstract love of justice--should be powerful enough to
engage men to expose themselves to the awakened fury of a whole people; for, in the present
state of general agitation, whoever disbelieves the least tittle of the enormous improbabilities
which have been accumulated by these wretched reformers, is instantly hunted down, as one who
would smother the discovery of the Plot. It is indeed an awful tempest; and, remote as we lie
from its sphere, we must expect soon to feel its effects."

"Lord Derby already told me something of this," said Julian; "and that there were agents in
this island whose object was to excite insurrection."

"Yes," answered the Countess, and her eye flashed fire as she spoke; "and had my advice been
listened to, they had been apprehended in the very fact; and so dealt with, as to be a warning
to all others how they sought this independent principality on such an errand. But my son,
who is generally so culpably negligent of his own affairs, was pleased to assume the management
of them upon this crisis."

"I am happy to learn, madam," answered Peveril, "that the measures of precaution which my kinsman
has adopted, have had the complete effect of disconcerting the conspiracy."

"For the present, Julian; but they should have been such as would have made the boldest tremble
to think of such infringement of our rights in future. But Derby's present plan is fraught
with greater danger; and yet there is something in it of gallantry, which has my sympathy."

"What is it, madam?" inquired Julian anxiously; "and in what can I aid it, or avert its dangers?"

"He purposes," said the Countess, "instantly to set forth for London. He is, he says, not merely
the feudal chief of a small island, but one of the noble Peers of England, who must not remain
in the security of an obscure and distant castle, when his name, or that of his mother, is
slandered before his Prince and people. He will take his place, he says, in the House of Lords,
and publicly demand justice for the insult thrown on his house, by perjured and interested
witnesses."

"It is a generous resolution, and worthy of my friend," said Julian Peveril. "I will go with
him and share his fate, be it what it may."

"Alas, foolish boy!" answered the Countess, "as well may you ask a hungry lion to feel compassion,
as a prejudiced and furious people to do justice. They are like the madman at the height of
frenzy, who murders without compunction his best and dearest friend; and only wonders and wails
over his own cruelty, when he is recovered from his delirium."

"Pardon me, dearest lady," said Julian, "this cannot be. The noble and generous people of England
cannot be thus strangely misled. Whatever prepossessions may be current among the more vulgar,
the House of Legislature cannot be deeply infected by them--they will remember their own dignity."

"Alas! cousin," answered the Countess, "when did Englishmen, even of the highest degree, remember
anything, when hurried away by the violence of party feeling? Even those who have too much
sense to believe in the incredible fictions which gull the multitude, will beware how they
expose them, if their own political party can gain a momentary advantage by their being accredited.
It is amongst such, too, that your kinsman has found friends and associates. Neglecting the
old friends of his house, as too grave and formal companions for the humour of the times, his
intercourse has been with the versatile Shaftesbury--the mercurial Buckingham--men who would
not hesitate to sacrifice to the popular Moloch of the day, whatsoever or whomsoever, whose
ruin could propitiate the deity.--Forgive a mother's tears, kinsman; but I see the scaffold
at Bolton again erected. If Derby goes to London while these bloodhounds are in full cry, obnoxious
as he is, and I have made him by my religious faith, and my conduct in this island, he dies
his father's death. And yet upon what other course to resolve!----"

"Let me go to London, madam," said Peveril, much moved by the distress of his patroness; "your
ladyship was wont to rely something on my judgment. I will act for the best--will communicate
with those whom you point out to me, and only with them; and I trust soon to send you information
that this delusion, however strong it may now be, is in the course of passing away; at the
worst, I can apprise you of the danger, should it menace the Earl or yourself; and may be able
also to point out the means by which it may be eluded."

The Countess listened with a countenance in which the anxiety of maternal affection, which
prompted her to embrace Peveril's generous offer, struggled with her native disinterested and
generous disposition. "Think what you ask of me, Julian," she replied with a sigh. "Would you
have me expose the life of my friend's son to those perils to which I refuse my own?--No, never!"

"Nay, but madam," replied Julian, "I do not run the same risk--my person is not known in London--my
situation, though not obscure in my own country, is too little known to be noticed in that
huge assemblage of all that is noble and wealthy. No whisper, I presume, however indirect,
has connected my name with the alleged conspiracy. I am a Protestant, above all; and can be
accused of no intercourse, direct or indirect, with the Church of Rome. My connections also
lie amongst those, who, if they do not, or cannot, befriend me, cannot, at least, be dangerous
to me. In a word, I run no danger where the Earl might incur great peril."

"Alas!" said the Countess of Derby, "all this generous reasoning may be true; but it could
only be listened to by a widowed mother. Selfish as I am, I cannot but reflect that my kinswoman
has, in all events, the support of an affectionate husband--such is the interested reasoning
to which we are not ashamed to subject our better feelings."

"Do not call it so, madam," answered Peveril; "think of me as the younger brother of my kinsman.
You have ever done by me the duties of a mother; and have a right to my filial service, were
it at a risk ten times greater than a journey to London, to inquire into the temper of the
times. I will instantly go and announce my departure to the Earl."

"Stay, Julian," said the Countess; "if you must make this journey in our behalf,--and, alas!
I have not generosity enough to refuse your noble proffer,--you must go alone, and without
communication with Derby. I know him well; his lightness of mind is free from selfish baseness;
and for the world, would he not suffer you to leave Man without his company. And if he went
with you, your noble and disinterested kindness would be of no avail--you would but share his
ruin, as the swimmer who attempts to save a drowning man is involved in his fate, if he permit
the sufferer to grapple with him."

"It shall be as you please, madam," said Peveril. "I am ready to depart upon half-an-hour's
notice."

"This night, then," said the Countess, after a moment's pause--"this night I will arrange the
most secret means of carrying your generous project into effect; for I would not excite that
prejudice against you, which will instantly arise, were it known you had so lately left this
island, and its Popish lady. You will do well, perhaps, to use a feigned name in London."

"Pardon me, madam," said Julian; "I will do nothing that can draw on me unnecessary attention;
but to bear a feigned name, or affect any disguise beyond living with extreme privacy, would,
I think, be unwise as well as unworthy; and what, if challenged, I might find some difficulty
in assigning a reason for, consistent with perfect fairness of intentions."

"I believe you are right," answered the Countess, after a moment's consideration; and then
added, "You propose, doubtless, to pass through Derbyshire, and visit Martindale Castle?"

"I should wish it, madam, certainly," replied Peveril, "did time permit, and circumstances
render it advisable."

"Of that," said the Countess, "you must yourself judge. Despatch is, doubtless, desirable;
on the other hand, arriving from your own family-seat, you will be less an object of doubt
and suspicion, than if you posted up from hence, without even visiting your parents. You must
be guided in this,--in all,--by your own prudence. Go, my dearest son--for to me you should
be dear as a son--go, and prepare for your journey. I will get ready some despatches, and a
supply of money--Nay, do not object. Am I not your mother; and are you not discharging a son's
duty? Dispute not my right of defraying your expenses. Nor is this all; for, as I must trust
your zeal and prudence to act in our behalf when occasion shall demand, I will furnish you
with effectual recommendations to our friends and kindred, entreating and enjoining them to
render whatever aid you may require, either for your own protection, or the advancement of
what you may propose in our favour."

Peveril made no farther opposition to an arrangement, which in truth the moderate state of
his own finances rendered almost indispensable, unless with his father's assistance; and the
Countess put into his hand bills of exchange to the amount of two hundred pounds, upon a merchant
in the city. She then dismissed Julian for the space of an hour; after which, she said, she
must again require his presence.

The preparations for his journey were not of a nature to divert the thoughts which speedily
pressed on him. He found that half-an-hour's conversation had once more completely changed
his immediate prospects and plans for the future. He had offered to the Countess of Derby a
service, which her uniform kindness had well deserved at his hand; but, by her accepting it,
he was upon the point of being separated from Alice Bridgenorth, at a time when she was become
dearer to him than ever, by her avowal of mutual passion. Her image rose before him, such as
he had that day pressed her to his bosom--her voice was in his ear, and seemed to ask whether
he could desert her in the crisis which everything seemed to announce as impending. But Julian
Peveril, his youth considered, was strict in judging his duty, and severely resolved in executing
it. He trusted not his imagination to pursue the vision which presented itself; but resolutely
seizing his pen, wrote to Alice the following letter, explaining his situation, as far as justice
to the Countess permitted him to do so:--

 "I leave you, dearest Alice," thus ran the letter.--"I leave you;
  and though, in doing so, I but obey the command you have laid on
  me, yet I can claim little merit for my compliance, since, without
  additional and most forcible reasons in aid of your orders, I fear
  I should have been unable to comply with them. But family affairs
  of importance compel me to absent myself from this island, for, I
  fear, more than one week. My thoughts, hopes, and wishes will be
  on the moment that shall restore me to the Black Fort, and its
  lovely valley. Let me hope that yours will sometimes rest on the
  lonely exile, whom nothing could render such, but the command of
  honour and duty. Do not fear that I mean to involve you in a
  private correspondence, and let not your father fear it. I could
  not love you so much, but for the openness and candour of your
  nature; and I would not that you concealed from Major Bridgenorth
  one syllable of what I now avow. Respecting other matters, he
  himself cannot desire the welfare of our common country with more
  zeal than I do. Differences may occur concerning the mode in which
  that is to be obtained; but, in the principle, I am convinced
  there can be only one mind between us; nor can I refuse to listen
  to his experience and wisdom, even where they may ultimately fail
  to convince me. Farewell--Alice, farewell! Much might be added to
  that melancholy word, but nothing that could express the
  bitterness with which it is written. Yet I could transcribe it
  again and again, rather than conclude the last communication which
  I can have with you for some time. My sole comfort is, that my
  stay will scarce be so long as to permit you to forget one who
  never can forget you."

He held the paper in his hand for a minute after he had folded, but before he had sealed it,
while he hurriedly debated in his own mind whether he had not expressed himself towards Major
Bridgenorth in so conciliating a manner as might excite hopes of proselytism, which his conscience
told him he could not realise with honour. Yet, on the other hand, he had no right, from what
Bridgenorth had said, to conclude that their principles were diametrically irreconcilable;
for though the son of a high Cavalier, and educated in the family of the Countess of Derby,
he was himself, upon principle, an enemy of prerogative, and a friend to the liberty of the
subject. And with such considerations, he silenced all internal objections on the point of
honour; although his conscience secretly whispered that these conciliatory expressions towards
the father were chiefly dictated by the fear, that during his absence Major Bridgenorth might
be tempted to change the residence of his daughter, and perhaps to convey her altogether out
of his reach.

Having sealed his letter, Julian called his servant, and directed him to carry it under cover
of one addressed to Mrs. Debbitch, to a house in the town of Rushin, where packets and messages
intended for the family at Black Fort were usually deposited; and for that purpose to take
horse immediately. He thus got rid of an attendant, who might have been in some degree a spy
on his motions. He then exchanged the dress he usually wore for one more suited to travelling;
and, having put a change or two of linen into a small cloak-bag, selected as arms a strong
double-edged sword and an excellent pair of pistols, which last he carefully loaded with double
bullets. Thus appointed, and with twenty pieces in his purse, and the bills we have mentioned
secured in a private pocket-book, he was in readiness to depart as soon as he should receive
the Countess's commands.

The buoyant spirit of youth and hope, which had, for a moment, been chilled by the painful
and dubious circumstances in which he was placed, as well as the deprivation which he was about
to undergo, now revived in full vigour. Fancy, turning from more painful anticipations, suggested
to him that he was now entering upon life, at a crisis when resolution and talents were almost
certain to make the fortune of their possessor. How could he make a more honourable entry on
the bustling scene, than sent by, and acting in behalf of, one of the noblest houses in England;
and should he perform what his charge might render incumbent with the resolution and the prudence
necessary to secure success, how many occurrences might take place to render his mediation
necessary to Bridgenorth; and thus enable him, on the most equal and honourable terms, to establish
a claim to his gratitude and to his daughter's hand.

Whilst he was dwelling on such pleasing, though imaginary prospects, he could not help exclaiming
aloud--"Yes, Alice, I will win thee nobly!" The words had scarce escaped his lips, when he
heard at the door of his apartment, which the servant had left ajar, a sound like a deep sigh,
which was instantly succeeded by a gentle tap--"Come in," replied Julian, somewhat ashamed
of his exclamation, and not a little afraid that it had been caught up by some eavesdropper--"Come
in," he again repeated; but his command was not obeyed; on the contrary, the knock was repeated
somewhat louder. He opened the door, and Fenella stood before him.

With eyes that seemed red with recent tears, and with a look of the deepest dejection, the
little mute, first touching her bosom, and beckoning with her finger, made to him the usual
sign that the Countess desired to see him--then turned, as if to usher him to her apartment.
As he followed her through the long gloomy vaulted passages which afforded communication betwixt
the various apartments of the castle, he could not but observe that her usual light trip was
exchanged for a tardy and mournful step, which she accompanied with low inarticulate moaning
(which she was probably the less able to suppress, because she could not judge how far it was
audible), and also with wringing of the hands, and other marks of extreme affliction.

At this moment a thought came across Peveril's mind, which, in spite of his better reason,
made him shudder involuntarily. As a Peaksman, and a long resident in the Isle of Man, he was
well acquainted with many a superstitious legend, and particularly with a belief, which attached
to the powerful family of the Stanleys, for their peculiar demon, a Banshie, or female spirit,
who was wont to shriek "foreboding evil times;" and who was generally seen weeping and bemoaning
herself before the death of any person of distinction belonging to the family. For an instant,
Julian could scarcely divest himself of the belief that the wailing, jibbering form, which
glided before him, with a lamp in her hand, was a genius of his mother's race, come to announce
to him as an analogous reflection, that if the suspicion which had crossed his mind concerning
Fenella was a just one, her ill-fated attachment to him, like that of the prophetic spirit
to his family, could bode nothing but disaster, and lamentation, and woe.

CHAPTER XIX

           Now, hoist the anchor, mates--and let the sails
           Give their broad bosom to the buxom wind,
           Like lass that woos a lover.
                                               --ANONYMOUS.

The presence of the Countess dispelled the superstitious feeling, which, for an instant, had
encroached on Julian's imagination, and compelled him to give attention to the matters of ordinary
life. "Here are your credentials," she said, giving him a small packet, carefully packed up
in a sealskin cover; "you had better not open them till you come to London. You must not be
surprised to find that there are one or two addressed to men of my own persuasion. These, for
all our sakes, you will observe caution in delivering."

"I go your messenger, madam," said Peveril; "and whatever you desire me to charge myself with,
of that I undertake the care. Yet allow me to doubt whether an intercourse with Catholics will
at this moment forward the purposes of my mission."

"You have caught the general suspicion of this wicked sect already," said the Countess, smiling,
"and are the fitter to go amongst Englishmen in their present mood. But, my cautious friend,
these letters are so addressed, and the persons to whom they are addressed so disguised, that
you will run no danger in conversing with them. Without their aid, indeed, you will not be
able to obtain the accurate information you go in search of. None can tell so exactly how the
wind sets, as the pilot whose vessel is exposed to the storm. Besides, though you Protestants
deny our priesthood the harmlessness of the dove, you are ready enough to allow us a full share
of the wisdom of the serpent; in plain terms, their means of information are extensive, and
they are not deficient in the power of applying it. I therefore wish you to have the benefit
of their intelligence and advice, if possible."

"Whatever you impose upon me as a part of my duty, madam, rely on its being discharged punctually,"
answered Peveril. "And, now, as there is little use in deferring the execution of a purpose
when once fixed, let me know your ladyship's wishes concerning my departure."

"It must be sudden and secret," said the Countess; "the island is full of spies; and I would
not wish that any of them should have notice that an envoy of mine was about to leave Man for
London. Can you be ready to go on board to-morrow?"

"To-night--this instant if you will," said Julian,--"my little preparations are complete."

"Be ready, then, in your chamber, at two hours after midnight. I will send one to summon you,
for our secret must be communicated, for the present, to as few as possible. A foreign sloop
is engaged to carry you over; then make the best of your way to London, by Martindale Castle,
or otherwise, as you find most advisable. When it is necessary to announce your absence, I
will say you are gone to see your parents. But stay--your journey will be on horseback, of
course, from Whitehaven. You have bills of exchange, it is true; but are you provided with
ready money to furnish yourself with a good horse?"

"I am sufficiently rich, madam," answered Julian; "and good nags are plenty in Cumberland.
There are those among them who know how to come by them good and cheap."

"Trust not to that," said the Countess. "Here is what will purchase for you the best horse
on the Borders.--Can you be simple enough to refuse it?" she added, as she pressed on him a
heavy purse, which he saw himself obliged to accept.

"A good horse, Julian," continued the Countess, "and a good sword, next to a good heart and
head, are the accomplishments of a cavalier."

"I kiss your hands, then, madam," said Peveril, "and humbly beg you to believe, that whatever
may fail in my present undertaking, my purpose to serve you, my noble kinswoman and benefactress,
can at least never swerve or falter."

"I know it, my son, I know it; and may God forgive me if my anxiety for your friend has sent
you on dangers which should have been his! Go--go--May saints and angels bless you! Fenella
shall acquaint him that you sup in your own apartment. So indeed will I; for to-night I should
be unable to face my son's looks. Little will he thank me for sending you on his errand; and
there will be many to ask, whether it was like the Lady of Latham to trust her friend's son
on the danger which should have been braved by her own. But oh! Julian, I am now a forlorn
widow, whom sorrow has made selfish!"

"Tush, madam," answered Peveril; "it is more unlike the Lady of Latham to anticipate dangers
which may not exist at all, and to which, if they do indeed occur, I am less obnoxious than
my noble kinsman. Farewell!--All blessings attend you, madam. Commend me to Derby, and make
him my excuses. I shall expect a summons at two hours after midnight."

They took an affectionate leave of each other; the more affectionate, indeed, on the part of
the Countess, that she could not entirely reconcile her generous mind to exposing Peveril to
danger on her son's behalf; and Julian betook himself to his solitary apartment.

His servant soon afterwards brought him wine and refreshments; to which, notwithstanding the
various matters he had to occupy his mind, he contrived to do reasonable justice. But when
this needful occupation was finished, his thoughts began to stream in upon him like a troubled
tide--at once recalling the past, and anticipating the future. It was in vain that he wrapped
himself in his riding cloak, and, lying down on his bed, endeavoured to compose himself to
sleep. The uncertainty of the prospect before him--the doubt how Bridgenorth might dispose
of his daughter during his absence--the fear that the Major himself might fall into the power
of the vindictive Countess, besides a numerous train of vague and half-formed apprehensions,
agitated his blood, and rendered slumber impossible. Alternately to recline in the old oaken
easy-chair, and listen to the dashing of the waves under the windows, mingled, as the sound
was, with the scream of the sea-birds; or traverse the apartment with long and slow steps,
pausing occasionally to look out on the sea, slumbering under the influence of a full moon,
which tipped each wave with silver--such were the only pastimes he could invent, until midnight
had passed for one hour; the next was wasted in anxious expectation of the summons of departure.

At length it arrived--a tap at his door was followed by a low murmur, which made him suspect
that the Countess had again employed her mute attendant as the most secure minister of her
pleasure on this occasion. He felt something like impropriety in this selection; and it was
with a feeling of impatience alien to the natural generosity of his temper, that, when he opened
the door, he beheld the dumb maiden standing before him. The lamp which he held in his hand
showed his features distinctly, and probably made Fenella aware of the expression which animated
them. She cast her large dark eyes mournfully on the ground; and, without again looking him
in the face, made him a signal to follow her. He delayed no longer than was necessary to secure
his pistols in his belt, wrap his cloak closer around him, and take his small portmanteau under
his arm. Thus accoutred, he followed her out of the Keep, or inhabited part of the Castle,
by a series of obscure passages leading to a postern gate, which she unlocked with a key, selected
from a bundle which she carried at her girdle.

They now stood in the castle-yard, in the open moonlight, which glimmered white and ghastly
on the variety of strange and ruinous objects to which we have formerly alluded, and which
gave the scene rather the appearance of some ancient cemetery, than of the interior of a fortification.
The round and elevated tower--the ancient mount, with its quadrangular sides facing the ruinous
edifices which once boasted the name of Cathedral--seemed of yet more antique and anomalous
form, when seen by the pale light which now displayed them. To one of these churches Fenella
took the direct course, and was followed by Julian; although he at once divined, and was superstitious
enough to dislike, the path which she was about to adopt. It was by a secret passage through
this church that in former times the guard-room of the garrison, situated at the lower and
external defences, communicated with the Keep of the Castle; and through this passage were
the keys of the Castle every night carried to the Governor's apartment, so soon as the gates
were locked, and the watch set. The custom was given up in James the First's time, and the
passage abandoned, on account of the well-known legend of the Mauthe Dog--a fiend, or demon,
in the shape of a large, shaggy, black mastiff, by which the church was said to be haunted.
It was devoutly believed, that in former times this spectre became so familiar with mankind,
as to appear nightly in the guard-room, issuing from the passage which we have mentioned at
night, and retiring to it at daybreak. The soldiers became partly familiarised to its presence;
yet not so much so as to use any licence of language while the apparition was visible; until
one fellow, rendered daring by intoxication, swore he would know whether it was dog or devil,
and, with his drawn sword, followed the spectre when it retreated by the usual passage. The
man returned in a few minutes, sobered by terror, his mouth gaping, and his hair standing on
end, under which horror he died; but, unhappily for the lovers of the marvellous, altogether
unable to disclose the horrors which he had seen. Under the evil repute arising from this tale
of wonder, the guard-room was abandoned, and a new one constructed. In like manner, the guards
after that period held another and more circuitous communication with the Governor or Seneschal
of the Castle; and that which lay through the ruinous church was entirely abandoned.

In defiance of the legendary terrors which tradition had attached to the original communication,
Fenella, followed by Peveril, now boldly traversed the ruinous vaults through which it lay--sometimes
only guided over heaps of ruins by the precarious light of the lamp borne by the dumb maiden--sometimes
having the advantage of a gleam of moonlight, darting into the dreary abyss through the shafted
windows, or through breaches made by time. As the path was by no means a straight one, Peveril
could not but admire the intimate acquaintance with the mazes which his singular companion
displayed, as well as the boldness with which she traversed them. He himself was not so utterly
void of the prejudices of the times, but that he contemplated, with some apprehension, the
possibility of their intruding on the lair of the phantom hound, of which he had heard so often;
and in every remote sight of the breeze among the ruins, he thought he heard him baying at
the mortal footsteps which disturbed his gloomy realm. No such terrors, however, interrupted
their journey; and in the course of a few minutes, they attained the deserted and now ruinous
guard-house. The broken walls of the little edifice served to conceal them from the sentinels,
one of whom was keeping a drowsy watch at the lower gate of the Castle; whilst another, seated
on the stone steps which communicated with the parapet of the bounding and exterior wall, was
slumbering, in full security, with his musket peacefully grounded by his side. Fenella made
a sign to Peveril to move with silence and caution, and then showed him, to his surprise, from
the window of the deserted guard-room, a boat, for it was now high water, with four rowers,
lurking under the cliff on which the castle was built; and made him farther sensible that he
was to have access to it by a ladder of considerable height placed at the window of the ruin.

Julian was both displeased and alarmed by the security and carelessness of the sentinels, who
had suffered such preparations to be made without observation or alarm given; and he hesitated
whether he should not call the officer of the guard, upbraid him with negligence, and show
him how easily Holm-Peel, in spite of its natural strength, and although reported impregnable,
might be surprised by a few resolute men. Fenella seemed to guess his thoughts with that extreme
acuteness of observation which her deprivations had occasioned her acquiring. She laid one
hand on his arm, and a finger of the other on her own lips, as if to enjoin forbearance; and
Julian, knowing that she acted by the direct authority of the Countess, obeyed her accordingly;
but with the internal resolution to lose no time in communicating his sentiments to the Earl,
concerning the danger to which the Castle was exposed on this point.

In the meantime, he descended the ladder with some precaution, for the steps were unequal,
broken, wet, and slippery; and having placed himself in the stern of the boat, made a signal
to the men to push off, and turned to take farewell of his guide. To his utter astonishment,
Fenella rather slid down, than descended regularly, the perilous ladder, and, the boat being
already pushed off, made a spring from the last step of it with incredible agility, and seated
herself beside Peveril, ere he could express either remonstrance or surprise. He commanded
the men once more to pull in to the precarious landing-place; and throwing into his countenance
a part of the displeasure which he really felt, endeavoured to make her comprehend the necessity
of returning to her mistress. Fenella folded her arms, and looked at him with a haughty smile,
which completely expressed the determination of her purpose. Peveril was extremely embarrassed;
he was afraid of offending the Countess, and interfering with her plan, by giving alarm, which
otherwise he was much tempted to have done. On Fenella, it was evident, no species of argument
which he could employ was likely to make the least impression; and the question remained, how,
if she went on with him, he was to rid himself of so singular and inconvenient a companion,
and provide, at the same time, sufficiently for her personal security.

The boatmen brought the matter to a decision; for, after lying on their oars for a minute,
and whispering among themselves in Low Dutch or German, they began to pull stoutly, and were
soon at some distance from the Castle. The possibility of the sentinels sending a musket-ball,
or even a cannon-shot, after them, was one of the contingencies which gave Peveril momentary
anxiety; but they left the fortress, as they must have approached it, unnoticed, or at least
unchallenged--a carelessness on the part of the garrison, which, notwithstanding that the oars
were muffled, and that the men spoke little, and in whispers, argued, in Peveril's opinion,
great negligence on the part of the sentinels. When they were a little way from the Castle,
the men began to row briskly towards a small vessel which lay at some distance. Peveril had,
in the meantime, leisure to remark, that the boatmen spoke to each other doubtfully, and bent
anxious looks on Fenella, as if uncertain whether they had acted properly in bringing her off.

After about a quarter of an hour's rowing, they reached the little sloop, where Peveril was
received by the skipper, or captain, on the quarter-deck, with an offer of spirits or refreshments.
A word or two among the seamen withdrew the captain from his hospitable cares, and he flew
to the ship's side, apparently to prevent Fenella from entering the vessel. The men and he
talked eagerly in Dutch, looking anxiously at Fenella as they spoke together; and Peveril hoped
the result would be, that the poor woman should be sent ashore again. But she baffled whatever
opposition could be offered to her; and when the accommodation-ladder, as it is called, was
withdrawn, she snatched the end of a rope, and climbed on board with the dexterity of a sailor,
leaving them no means of preventing her entrance, save by actual violence, to which apparently
they did not choose to have recourse. Once on deck, she took the captain by the sleeve, and
led him to the head of the vessel, where they seemed to hold intercourse in a manner intelligible
to both.

Peveril soon forgot the presence of the mute, as he began to muse upon his own situation, and
the probability that he was separated for some considerable time from the object of his affections.
"Constancy," he repeated to himself,--"Constancy." And, as if in coincidence with the theme
of his reflections, he fixed his eyes on the polar star, which that night twinkled with more
than ordinary brilliancy. Emblem of pure passion and steady purpose--the thoughts which arose
as he viewed its clear and unchanging light, were disinterested and noble. To seek his country's
welfare, and secure the blessings of domestic peace--to discharge a bold and perilous duty
to his friend and patron--to regard his passion for Alice Bridgenorth, as the loadstar which
was to guide him to noble deeds--were the resolutions which thronged upon his mind, and which
exalted his spirits to that state of romantic melancholy, which perhaps is ill exchanged even
for feelings of joyful rapture.

He was recalled from those contemplations by something which nestled itself softly and closely
to his side--a woman's sigh sounded so near him, as to disturb his reverie; and as he turned
his head, he saw Fenella seated beside him, with her eyes fixed on the same star which had
just occupied his own. His first emotion was that of displeasure; but it was impossible to
persevere in it towards a being so helpless in many respects, so interesting in others; whose
large dark eyes were filled with dew, which glistened in the moonlight; and the source of whose
emotions seemed to be in a partiality which might well claim indulgence, at least from him
who was the object of it. At the same time, Julian resolved to seize the present opportunity,
for such expostulations with Fenella on the strangeness of her conduct, as the poor maiden
might be able to comprehend. He took her hand with great kindness, but at the same time with
much gravity, pointed to the boat, and to the Castle, whose towers and extended walls were
now scarce visible in the distance; and thus intimated to her the necessity of her return to
Holm-Peel. She looked down, and shook her head, as if negativing his proposal with obstinate
decision. Julian renewed his expostulation by look and gesture--pointed to his own heart, to
intimate the Countess--and bent his brows, to show the displeasure which she must entertain.
To all which the maiden only answered by her tears.

At length, as if driven to explanation by his continued remonstrances, she suddenly seized
him by the arm, to arrest his attention--cast her eye hastily around, as if to see whether
she was watched by any one--then drew the other hand, edge-wise, across her slender throat--pointed
to the boat, and to the Castle, and nodded.

On this series of signs, Peveril could put no interpretation, excepting that he was menaced
with some personal danger, from which Fenella seemed to conceive that her presence was a protection.
Whatever was her meaning, her purpose seemed unalterably adopted; at least it was plain he
had no power to shake it. He must therefore wait till the end of their short voyage, to disembarrass
himself of his companion; and, in the meanwhile, acting on the idea of her having harboured
a misplaced attachment to him, he thought he should best consult her interest, and his own
character, in keeping at as great a distance from her as circumstances admitted. With this
purpose, he made the sign she used for going to sleep, by leaning his head on his palm; and
having thus recommended to her to go to rest, he himself desired to be conducted to his berth.

The captain readily showed him a hammock, in the after-cabin, into which he threw himself,
to seek that repose which the exercise and agitation of the preceding day, as well as the lateness
of the hour, made him now feel desirable. Sleep, deep and heavy, sunk down on him in a few
minutes, but it did not endure long. In his sleep he was disturbed by female cries; and at
length, as he thought, distinctly heard the voice of Alice Bridgenorth call on his name.

He awoke, and starting up to quit his bed, became sensible, from the motion of the vessel,
and the swinging of the hammock, that his dream had deceived him. He was still startled by
its extreme vivacity and liveliness. "Julian Peveril, help! Julian Peveril!" The sounds still
rung in his ears--the accents were those of Alice--and he could scarce persuade himself that
his imagination had deceived him. Could she be in the same vessel? The thought was not altogether
inconsistent with her father's character, and the intrigues in which he was engaged; but then,
if so, to what peril was she exposed, that she invoked his name so loudly?

Determined to make instant inquiry, he jumped out of his hammock, half-dressed as he was, and
stumbling about the little cabin, which was as dark as pitch, at length, with considerable
difficulty, reached the door. The door, however, he was altogether unable to open; and was
obliged to call loudly to the watch upon deck. The skipper, or captain, as he was called, being
the only person aboard who could speak English, answered to the summons, and replied to Peveril's
demand, what noise that was?--that a boat was going off with the young woman--that she whimpered
a little as she left the vessel--and "dat vaas all."

His dream was thus fully explained. Fancy had caught up the inarticulate and vehement cries
with which Fenella was wont to express resistance or displeasure--had coined them into language,
and given them the accents of Alice Bridgenorth. Our imagination plays wilder tricks with us
almost every night.

The captain now undid the door, and appeared with a lantern; without the aid of which Peveril
could scarce have regained his couch, where he now slumbered secure and sound, until day was
far advanced, and the invitation of the captain called him up to breakfast.

CHAPTER XX

           Now, what is this that haunts me like my shadow,
           Frisking and mumming like an elf in moonlight!
                                               --BEN JONSON.

Peveril found the master of the vessel rather less rude than those in his station of life usually
are, and received from him full satisfaction concerning the fate of Fenella, upon whom the
captain bestowed a hearty curse, for obliging him to lay-to until he had sent his boat ashore,
and had her back again.

"I hope," said Peveril, "no violence was necessary to reconcile her to go ashore? I trust she
offered no foolish resistance?"

"Resist! mein Gott," said the captain, "she did resist like a troop of horse--she did cry,
you might hear her at Whitehaven--she did go up the rigging like a cat up a chimney; but dat
vas ein trick of her old trade."

"What trade do you mean?" said Peveril.

"Oh," said the seaman, "I vas know more about her than you, Meinheer. I vas know that she vas
a little, very little girl, and prentice to one seiltanzer, when my lady yonder had the good
luck to buy her."

"A seiltanzer!" said Peveril; "what do you mean by that?"

"I mean a rope-danzer, a mountebank, a Hans pickel-harring. I vas know Adrian Brackel vell--he
sell de powders dat empty men's stomach, and fill him's own purse. Not know Adrian Brackel,
mein Gott! I have smoked many a pound of tabak with him."

Peveril now remembered that Fenella had been brought into the family when he and the young
Earl were in England, and while the Countess was absent on an expedition to the continent.
Where the Countess found her, she never communicated to the young men; but only intimated,
that she had received her out of compassion, in order to relieve her from a situation of extreme
distress.

He hinted so much to the communicative seaman, who replied, "that for distress he knew nocht's
on't; only, that Adrian Brackel beat her when she would not dance on the rope, and starved
her when she did, to prevent her growth." The bargain between the countess and the mountebank,
he said, he had made himself; because the Countess had hired his brig upon her expedition to
the continent. None else knew where she came from. The Countess had seen her on a public stage
at Ostend--compassionated her helpless situation, and the severe treatment she received--and
had employed him to purchase the poor creature from her master, and charged him with silence
towards all her retinue.--"And so I do keep silence," continued the faithful confidant, "van
I am in the havens of Man; but when I am on the broad seas, den my tongue is mine own, you
know. Die foolish beoples in the island, they say she is a wechsel-balg--what you call a fairy-elf
changeling. My faith, they do not never have seen ein wechsel-balg; for I saw one myself at
Cologne, and it was twice as big as yonder girl, and did break the poor people, with eating
them up, like de great big cuckoo in the sparrow's nest; but this Venella eat no more than
other girls--it was no wechsel-balg in the world."

By a different train of reasoning, Julian had arrived at the same conclusion; in which, therefore,
he heartily acquiesced. During the seaman's prosing, he was reflecting within himself, how
much of the singular flexibility of her limbs and movements the unfortunate girl must have
derived from the discipline and instructions of Adrian Brackel; and also how far the germs
of her wilful and capricious passions might have been sown during her wandering and adventurous
childhood. Aristocratic, also, as his education had been, these anecdotes respecting Fenella's
original situation and education, rather increased his pleasure of having shaken off her company;
and yet he still felt desirous to know any farther particulars which the seaman could communicate
on the same subject. But he had already told all he knew. Of her parents he knew nothing, except
that "her father must have been a damned hundsfoot, and a schelm, for selling his own flesh
and blood to Adrian Brackel;" for by such a transaction had the mountebank become possessed
of his pupil.

This conversation tended to remove any passing doubts which might have crept on Peveril's mind
concerning the fidelity of the master of the vessel, who appeared from thence to have been
a former acquaintance of the Countess, and to have enjoyed some share of her confidence. The
threatening motion used by Fenella, he no longer considered as worthy of any notice, excepting
as a new mark of the irritability of her temper.

He amused himself with walking the deck, and musing on his past and future prospects, until
his attention was forcibly arrested by the wind, which began to rise in gusts from the north-west,
in a manner so unfavourable to the course they intended to hold, that the master, after many
efforts to beat against it, declared his bark, which was by no means an excellent sea-boat,
was unequal to making Whitehaven; and that he was compelled to make a fair wind of it, and
run for Liverpool. To this course Peveril did not object. It saved him some land journey, in
case he visited his father's castle; and the Countess's commission would be discharged as effectually
the one way as the other.

The vessel was put, accordingly, before the wind, and ran with great steadiness and velocity.
The captain, notwithstanding, pleading some nautical hazards, chose to lie off, and did not
attempt the mouth of the Mersey until morning, when Peveril had at length the satisfaction
of being landed upon the quay of Liverpool, which even then showed symptoms of the commercial
prosperity that has since been carried to such a height.

The master, who was well acquainted with the port, pointed out to Julian a decent place of
entertainment, chiefly frequented by seafaring people; for, although he had been in the town
formerly, he did not think it proper to go anywhere at present where he might have been unnecessarily
recognised. Here he took leave of the seaman, after pressing upon him with difficulty a small
present for his crew. As for his passage, the captain declined any recompense whatever; and
they parted upon the most civil terms.

The inn to which he was recommended was full of strangers, seamen, and mercantile people, all
intent upon their own affairs, and discussing them with noise and eagerness, peculiar to the
business of a thriving seaport. But although the general clamour of the public room, in which
the guests mixed with each other, related chiefly to their own commercial dealings, there was
a general theme mingling with them, which was alike common and interesting to all; so that,
amidst disputes about freight, tonnage, demurrage, and such like, were heard the emphatic sounds
of "Deep, damnable, accursed plot,"--"Bloody Papist villains,"--"The King in danger--the gallows
too good for them," and so forth.

The fermentation excited in London had plainly reached even this remote seaport, and was received
by the inhabitants with the peculiar stormy energy which invests men in their situation with
the character of the winds and waves with which they are chiefly conversant. The commercial
and nautical interests of England were indeed particularly anti-Catholic; although it is not,
perhaps, easy to give any distinct reason why they should be so, since theological disputes
in general could scarce be considered as interesting to them. But zeal, amongst the lower orders
at least, is often in an inverse ratio to knowledge; and sailors were not probably the less
earnest and devoted Protestants, that they did not understand the controversy between the Churches.
As for the merchants, they were almost necessarily inimical to the gentry of Lancashire and
Cheshire; many of whom still retained the faith of Rome, which was rendered ten times more
odious to the men of commerce, as the badge of their haughty aristocratic neighbours.

From the little which Peveril heard of the sentiments of the people of Liverpool, he imagined
he should act most prudently in leaving the place as soon as possible, and before any suspicion
should arise of his having any connection with the party which appeared to have become so obnoxious.

In order to accomplish his journey, it was first necessary that he should purchase a horse;
and for this purpose he resolved to have recourse to the stables of a dealer well known at
the time, and who dwelt in the outskirts of the place; and having obtained directions to his
dwelling, he went thither to provide himself.

Joe Bridlesley's stables exhibited a large choice of good horses; for that trade was in former
days more active than at present. It was an ordinary thing for a stranger to buy a horse for
the purpose of a single journey, and to sell him, as well as he could, when he had reached
the point of his destination; and hence there was a constant demand, and a corresponding supply;
upon both of which, Bridlesley, and those of his trade, contrived, doubtless, to make handsome
profits.

Julian, who was no despicable horse-jockey, selected for his purpose a strong well-made horse,
about sixteen hands high, and had him led into the yard, to see whether the paces corresponded
with his appearance. As these also gave perfect satisfaction to the customer, it remained only
to settle the price with Bridlesley; who of course swore his customer had pitched upon the
best horse ever darkened the stable-door, since he had dealt that way; that no such horses
were to be had nowadays, for that the mares were dead that foaled them; and having named a
corresponding price, the usual haggling commenced betwixt the seller and purchaser, for adjustment
of what the French dealers call le prix juste.

The reader, if he be at all acquainted with this sort of traffic, well knows it is generally
a keen encounter of wits, and attracts the notice of all the idlers within hearing, who are
usually very ready to offer their opinions, or their evidence. Amongst these, upon the present
occasion, was a thin man, rather less than the ordinary size, and meanly dressed; but whose
interference was in a confident tone, and such as showed himself master of the subject on which
he spoke. The price of the horse being settled to about fifteen pounds, which was very high
for the period, that of the saddle and bridle had next to be adjusted, and the thin mean-looking
person before-mentioned, found nearly as much to say on this subject as on the other. As his
remarks had a conciliating and obliging tendency towards the stranger, Peveril concluded he
was one of those idle persons, who, unable or unwilling to supply themselves with the means
of indulgence at their own cost, do not scruple to deserve them at the hands of others, by
a little officious complaisance; and considering that he might acquire some useful information
from such a person, was just about to offer him the courtesy of a morning draught, when he
observed he had suddenly left the yard. He had scarce remarked this circumstance, before a
party of customers entered the place, whose haughty assumption of importance claimed the instant
attention of Bridlesley, and all his militia of grooms and stable-boys.

"Three good horses," said the leader of the party, a tall bulky man, whose breath was drawn
full and high, under a consciousness of fat, and of importance--"three good and able-bodied
horses, for the service of the Commons of England."

Bridlesley said he had some horses which might serve the Speaker himself at need; but that,
to speak Christian truth, he had just sold the best in his stable to that gentleman present,
who, doubtless, would give up the bargain if the horse was needed for the service of the State.

"You speak well, friend," said the important personage; and advancing to Julian, demanded,
in a very haughty tone, the surrender of the purchase which he had just made.

Peveril, with some difficulty, subdued the strong desire which he felt to return a round refusal
to so unreasonable a request, but fortunately, recollecting that the situation in which he
at present stood, required, on his part, much circumspection, he replied simply, that upon
showing him any warrant to seize upon horses for the public service, he must of course submit
to resign his purchase.

The man, with an air of extreme dignity, pulled from his pocket, and thrust into Peveril's
hand, a warrant, subscribed by the Speaker of the House of Commons, empowering Charles Topham,
their officer of the Black Rod, to pursue and seize upon the persons of certain individuals
named in the warrant; and of all other persons who are, or should be, accused by competent
witnesses, of being accessory to, or favourers of, the hellish and damnable Popish Plot, at
present carried on within the bowels of the kingdom; and charging all men, as they loved their
allegiance, to render the said Charles Topham their readiest and most effective assistance,
in execution of the duty entrusted to his care.

On perusing a document of such weighty import, Julian had no hesitation to give up his horse
to this formidable functionary; whom somebody compared to a lion, which, as the House of Commons
was pleased to maintain such an animal, they were under the necessity of providing for by frequent
commitments; until "Take him, Topham," became a proverb, and a formidable one, in the mouth
of the public.

The acquiescence of Peveril procured him some grace in the sight of the emissary; who, before
selecting two horses for his attendants, gave permission to the stranger to purchase a grey
horse, much inferior, indeed, to that which he had resigned, both in form and in action, but
very little lower in price, as Mr. Bridlesley, immediately on learning the demand for horses
upon the part of the Commons of England, had passed a private resolution in his own mind, augmenting
the price of his whole stud, by an imposition of at least twenty per cent., ad valorem.

Peveril adjusted and paid the price with much less argument than on the former occasion; for,
to be plain with the reader, he had noticed in the warrant of Mr. Topham, the name of his father,
Sir Geoffrey Peveril of Martindale Castle, engrossed at full length, as one of those subjected
to arrest by that officer.

When aware of this material fact, it became Julian's business to leave Liverpool directly,
and carry the alarm to Derbyshire, if, indeed, Mr. Topham had not already executed his charge
in that county, which he thought unlikely, as it was probable they would commence by securing
those who lived nearest to the seaports. A word or two which he overheard strengthened his hopes.

"And hark ye, friend," said Mr. Topham; "you will have the horses at the door of Mr. Shortell,
the mercer, in two hours, as we shall refresh ourselves there with a cool tankard, and learn
what folks live in the neighbourhood that may be concerned in my way. And you will please to
have that saddle padded, for I am told the Derbyshire roads are rough.--And you, Captain Dangerfield,
and Master Everett, you must put on your Protestant spectacles, and show me where there is
the shadow of a priest, or of a priest's favourer; for I am come down with a broom in my cap
to sweep this north country of such like cattle."

One of the persons he thus addressed, who wore the garb of a broken-down citizen, only answered,
"Ay, truly, Master Topham, it is time to purge the garner."

The other, who had a formidable pair of whiskers, a red nose, and a tarnished laced coat, together
with a hat of Pistol's dimensions, was more loquacious. "I take it on my damnation," said this
zealous Protestant witness, "that I will discover the marks of the beast on every one of them
betwixt sixteen and seventy, as plainly as if they had crossed themselves with ink, instead
of holy water. Since we have a King willing to do justice, and a House of Commons to uphold
prosecutions, why, damn me, the cause must not stand still for lack of evidence."

"Stick to that, noble captain," answered the officer; "but, prithee, reserve thy oaths for
the court of justice; it is but sheer waste to throw them away, as you do in your ordinary
conversation."

"Fear you nothing, Master Topham," answered Dangerfield; "it is right to keep a man's gifts
in use; and were I altogether to renounce oaths in my private discourse, how should I know
how to use one when I needed it? But you hear me use none of your Papist abjurations. I swear
not by the mass, or before George, or by anything that belongs to idolatry; but such downright
oaths as may serve a poor Protestant gentleman, who would fain serve Heaven and the King."

"Bravely spoken, most noble Festus," said his yoke-fellow. "But do not suppose, that although
I am not in the habit of garnishing my words with oaths out of season, I shall be wanting,
when called upon, to declare the height and the depth, the width and the length, of this hellish
plot against the King and the Protestant faith."

Dizzy, and almost sick, with listening to the undisguised brutality of these fellows, Peveril,
having with difficulty prevailed on Bridlesley to settle his purchase, at length led forth
his grey steed; but was scarce out of the yard, when he heard the following alarming conversation
pass, of which he seemed himself the object.

"Who is that youth?" said the slow soft voice of the more precise of the two witnesses. "Methinks
I have seen him somewhere before. Is he from these parts?"

"Not that I know of," said Bridlesley; who, like all the other inhabitants of England at the
time, answered the interrogatories of these fellows with the deference which is paid in Spain
to the questions of an inquisitor. "A stranger--entirely a stranger--never saw him before--a
wild young colt, I warrant him; and knows a horse's mouth as well as I do."

"I begin to bethink me I saw such a face as his at the Jesuits' consult, in the White Horse
Tavern," answered Everett.

"And I think I recollect," said Captain Dangerfield----

"Come, come, master and captain," said the authoritative voice of Topham, "we will have none
of your recollections at present. We all know what these are likely to end in. But I will have
you know, you are not to run till the leash is slipped. The young man is a well-looking lad,
and gave up his horse handsomely for the service of the House of Commons. He knows how to behave
himself to his betters, I warrant you; and I scarce think he has enough in his purse to pay
the fees."

This speech concluded the dialogue, which Peveril, finding himself so much concerned in the
issue, thought it best to hear to an end. Now, when it ceased, to get out of the town unobserved,
and take the nearest way to his father's castle, seemed his wisest plan. He had settled his
reckoning at the inn, and brought with him to Bridlesley's the small portmanteau which contained
his few necessaries, so that he had no occasion to return thither. He resolved, therefore,
to ride some miles before he stopped, even for the purpose of feeding his horse; and being
pretty well acquainted with the country, he hoped to be able to push forward to Martindale
Castle sooner than the worshipful Master Topham; whose saddle was, in the first place, to be
padded, and who, when mounted, would, in all probability, ride with the precaution of those
who require such security against the effects of a hard trot.

Under the influence of these feelings, Julian pushed for Warrington, a place with which he
was well acquainted; but, without halting in the town, he crossed the Mersey, by the bridge
built by an ancestor of his friend the Earl of Derby, and continued his route towards Dishley,
on the borders of Derbyshire. He might have reached this latter village easily, had his horse
been fitter for a forced march; but in the course of the journey, he had occasion, more than
once, to curse the official dignity of the person who had robbed him of his better steed, while
taking the best direction he could through a country with which he was only generally acquainted.

At length, near Altringham, a halt became unavoidable; and Peveril had only to look for some
quiet and sequestered place of refreshment. This presented itself, in the form of a small cluster
of cottages; the best of which united the characters of an alehouse and a mill, where the sign
of the Cat (the landlord's faithful ally in defence of his meal-sacks), booted as high as Grimalkin
in the fairy tale, and playing on the fiddle for the more grace, announced that John Whitecraft
united the two honest occupations of landlord and miller; and, doubtless, took toll from the
public in both capacities.

Such a place promised a traveller, who journeyed incognito, safer, if not better accommodation,
than he was like to meet with in more frequented inns; and at the door of the Cat and Fiddle,
Julian halted accordingly.

CHAPTER XXI

           In these distracted times, when each man dreads
           The bloody stratagems of busy hands.
                                                       --OTWAY.

At the door of the Cat and Fiddle, Julian received the usual attention paid to the customers
of an inferior house of entertainment. His horse was carried by a ragged lad, who acted as
hostler, into a paltry stable; where, however, the nag was tolerably supplied with food and litter.

Having seen the animal on which his comfort, perhaps his safety, depended, properly provided
for, Peveril entered the kitchen, which indeed was also the parlour and hall of the little
hostelry, to try what refreshment he could obtain for himself. Much to his satisfaction, he
found there was only one guest in the house besides himself; but he was less pleased when he
found that he must either go without dinner, or share with that single guest the only provisions
which chanced to be in the house, namely, a dish of trouts and eels, which their host, the
miller, had brought in from his mill-stream.

At the particular request of Julian, the landlady undertook to add a substantial dish of eggs
and bacon, which perhaps she would not have undertaken for, had not the sharp eye of Peveril
discovered the flitch hanging in its smoky retreat, when, as its presence could not be denied,
the hostess was compelled to bring it forward as a part of her supplies.

She was a buxom dame about thirty, whose comely and cheerful countenance did honour to the
choice of the jolly miller, her loving mate; and was now stationed under the shade of an old-fashioned
huge projecting chimney, within which it was her province to "work i' the fire," and provide
for the wearied wayfaring man, the good things which were to send him rejoicing on his course.
Although, at first, the honest woman seemed little disposed to give herself much additional
trouble on Julian's account, yet the good looks, handsome figure, and easy civility of her
new guest, soon bespoke the principal part of her attention; and while busy in his service,
she regarded him, from time to time, with looks, where something like pity mingled with complacency.
The rich smoke of the rasher, and the eggs with which it was flanked, already spread itself
through the apartment; and the hissing of these savoury viands bore chorus to the simmering
of the pan, in which the fish were undergoing a slower decoction. The table was covered with
a clean huck-aback napkin, and all was in preparation for the meal, which Julian began to expect
with a good deal of impatience, when the companion, who was destined to share it with him,
entered the apartment.

At the first glance Julian recognised, to his surprise, the same indifferently dressed, thin-looking
person, who, during the first bargain which he had made with Bridlesley, had officiously interfered
with his advice and opinion. Displeased at having the company of any stranger forced upon him,
Peveril was still less satisfied to find one who might make some claim of acquaintance with
him, however slender, since the circumstances in which he stood compelled him to be as reserved
as possible. He therefore turned his back upon his destined messmate, and pretended to amuse
himself by looking out of the window, determined to avoid all intercourse until it should be
inevitably forced upon him.

In the meanwhile, the other stranger went straight up to the landlady, where she toiled on
household cares intent, and demanded of her, what she meant by preparing bacon and eggs, when
he had positively charged her to get nothing ready but the fish.

The good woman, important as every cook in the discharge of her duty, deigned not for some
time so much as to acknowledge that she heard the reproof of her guest; and when she did so,
it was only to repel it in a magisterial and authoritative tone.--"If he did not like bacon--(bacon
from their own hutch, well fed on pease and bran)--if he did not like bacon and eggs--(new-laid
eggs, which she had brought in from the hen-roost with her own hands)--why so put case--it
was the worse for his honour, and the better for those who did."

"The better for those who like them?" answered the guest; "that is as much as to say I am to
have a companion, good woman."

"Do not good woman me, sir," replied the miller's wife, "till I call you good man; and, I promise
you, many would scruple to do that to one who does not love eggs and bacon of a Friday."

"Nay, my good lady," said her guest, "do not fix any misconstruction upon me--I dare say the
eggs and the bacon are excellent; only they are rather a dish too heavy for my stomach."

"Ay, or your conscience perhaps, sir," answered the hostess. "And now, I bethink me, you must
needs have your fish fried with oil, instead of the good drippings I was going to put to them.
I would I could spell the meaning of all this now; but I warrant John Bigstaff, the constable,
could conjure something out of it."

There was a pause here; but Julian, somewhat alarmed at the tone which the conversation assumed,
became interested in watching the dumb show which succeeded. By bringing his head a little
towards the left, but without turning round, or quitting the projecting latticed window where
he had taken his station, he could observe that the stranger, secured, as he seemed to think
himself, from observation, had sidled close up to the landlady, and, as he conceived, had put
a piece of money into her hand. The altered tone of the miller's moiety corresponded very much
with this supposition.

"Nay, indeed, and forsooth," she said, "her house was Liberty Hall; and so should every publican's
be. What was it to her what gentlefolks ate or drank, providing they paid for it honestly?
There were many honest gentlemen, whose stomachs could not abide bacon, grease, or dripping,
especially on a Friday; and what was that to her, or any one in her line, so gentlefolks paid
honestly for the trouble? Only, she would say, that her bacon and eggs could not be mended
betwixt this and Liverpool, and that she would live and die upon."

"I shall hardly dispute it," said the stranger; and turning towards Julian, he added, "I wish
this gentleman, who I suppose is my trencher-companion, much joy of the dainties which I cannot
assist him in consuming."

"I assure you, sir," answered Peveril, who now felt himself compelled to turn about, and reply
with civility, "that it was with difficulty I could prevail on my landlady to add my cover
to yours, though she seems now such a zealot for the consumption of eggs and bacon."

"I am zealous for nothing," said the landlady, "save that men would eat their victuals, and
pay their score; and if there be enough in one dish to serve two guests, I see little purpose
in dressing them two; however, they are ready now, and done to a nicety.--Here, Alice! Alice!"

The sound of that well-known name made Julian start; but the Alice who replied to the call
ill resembled the vision which his imagination connected with the accents, being a dowdy slipshod
wench, the drudge of the low inn which afforded him shelter. She assisted her mistress in putting
on the table the dishes which the latter had prepared; and a foaming jug of home-brewed ale
being placed betwixt them, was warranted by Dame Whitecraft as excellent; "for," said she,
"we know by practice that too much water drowns the miller, and we spare it on our malt as
we would in our mill-dam."

"I drink to your health in it, dame," said the elder stranger; "and a cup of thanks for these
excellent fish; and to the drowning of all unkindness between us."

"I thank you, sir," said the dame, "and wish you the like; but I dare not pledge you, for our
Gaffer says that ale is brewed too strong for women; so I only drink a glass of canary at a
time with a gossip, or any gentleman guest that is so minded."

"You shall drink one with me, then, dame," said Peveril, "so you will let me have a flagon."

"That you shall, sir, and as good as ever was broached; but I must to the mill, to get the
key from the goodman."

So saying, and tucking her clean gown through the pocket-holes, that her steps might be the
more alert, and her dress escape dust, off she tripped to the mill, which lay close adjoining.

"A dainty dame, and dangerous, is the miller's wife," said the stranger, looking at Peveril.
"Is not that old Chaucer's phrase?"

"I--I believe so," said Peveril, not much read in Chaucer, who was then even more neglected
than at present; and much surprised at a literary quotation from one of the mean appearance
exhibited by the person before him.

"Yes," answered the stranger, "I see that you, like other young gentlemen of the time, are
better acquainted with Cowley and Waller, than with the 'well of English undefiled.' I cannot
help differing. There are touches of nature about the old bard of Woodstock, that, to me, are
worth all the turns of laborious wit in Cowley, and all the ornate and artificial simplicity
of his courtly competitor. The description, for instance, of his country coquette--

 'Wincing she was, as is a wanton colt,
  Sweet as a flower, and upright as a bolt.'

Then, again, for pathos, where will you mend the dying scene of Arcite?

 'Alas, my heart's queen! alas, my wife!
  Giver at once, and ender of my life.
  What is this world?--What axen men to have?
  Now with his love--now in his cold grave
  Alone, withouten other company.'

But I tire you, sir; and do injustice to the poet, whom I remember but by halves."

"On the contrary, sir," replied Peveril, "you make him more intelligible to me in your recitation,
than I have found him when I have tried to peruse him myself."

"You were only frightened by the antiquated spelling, and 'the letters black,'" said his companion.
"It is many a scholar's case, who mistakes a nut, which he could crack with a little exertion,
for a bullet, which he must needs break his teeth on; but yours are better employed.--Shall
I offer you some of this fish?"

"Not so, sir," replied Julian, willing to show himself a man of reading in his turn; "I hold
with old Caius, and profess to fear judgment, to fight where I cannot choose, and to eat no fish."

The stranger cast a startled look around him at this observation, which Julian had thrown out,
on purpose to ascertain, if possible, the quality of his companion, whose present language
was so different from the character he had assumed at Bridlesley's. His countenance, too, although
the features were of an ordinary, not to say mean cast, had that character of intelligence
which education gives to the most homely face; and his manners were so easy and disembarrassed,
as plainly showed a complete acquaintance with society, as well as the habit of mingling with
it in the higher stages. The alarm which he had evidently shown at Peveril's answer, was but
momentary; for he almost instantly replied, with a smile, "I promise you, sir, that you are
in no dangerous company; for notwithstanding my fish dinner, I am much disposed to trifle with
some of your savoury mess, if you will indulge me so far."

Peveril accordingly reinforced the stranger's trencher with what remained of the bacon and
eggs, and saw him swallow a mouthful or two with apparent relish; but presently after began
to dally with his knife and fork, like one whose appetite was satiated; and then took a long
draught of the black jack, and handed his platter to the large mastiff dog, who, attracted
by the smell of the dinner, had sat down before him for some time, licking his chops, and following
with his eye every morsel which the guest raised to his head.

"Here, my poor fellow," said he, "thou hast had no fish, and needest this supernumerary trencher-load
more than I do. I cannot withstand thy mute supplication any longer."

The dog answered these courtesies by a civil shake of the tail, while he gobbled up what was
assigned him by the stranger's benevolence, in the greater haste, that he heard his mistress's
voice at the door.

"Here is the canary, gentlemen," said the landlady; "and the goodman has set off the mill,
to come to wait on you himself. He always does so, when company drink wine."

"That he may come in for the host's, that is, for the lion's share," said the stranger, looking
at Peveril.

"The shot is mine," said Julian; "and if mine host will share it, I will willingly bestow another
quart on him, and on you, sir. I never break old customs."

These sounds caught the ear of Gaffer Whitecraft, who had entered the room, a strapping specimen
of his robust trade, prepared to play the civil, or the surly host, as his company should be
acceptable or otherwise. At Julian's invitation, he doffed his dusty bonnet--brushed from his
sleeve the looser particles of his professional dust--and sitting down on the end of a bench,
about a yard from the table, filled a glass of canary, and drank to his guests, and "especially
to this noble gentleman," indicating Peveril, who had ordered the canary.

Julian returned the courtesy by drinking his health, and asking what news were about in the
country?

"Nought, sir, I hears on nought, except this Plot, as they call it, that they are pursuing
the Papishers about; but it brings water to my mill, as the saying is. Between expresses hurrying
hither and thither, and guards and prisoners riding to and again, and the custom of the neighbours,
that come to speak over the news of an evening, nightly, I may say, instead of once a week,
why, the spigot is in use, gentlemen, and your land thrives; and then I, serving as constable,
and being a known Protestant, I have tapped, I may venture to say, it may be ten stands of
ale extraordinary, besides a reasonable sale of wine for a country corner. Heaven make us thankful,
and keep all good Protestants from Plot and Popery."

"I can easily conceive, my friend," said Julian, "that curiosity is a passion which runs naturally
to the alehouse; and that anger, and jealousy, and fear, are all of them thirsty passions,
and great consumers of home-brewed. But I am a perfect stranger in these parts; and I would
willingly learn, from a sensible man like you, a little of this same Plot, of which men speak
so much, and appear to know so little."

"Learn a little of it?--Why, it is the most horrible--the most damnable, bloodthirsty beast
of a Plot--But hold, hold, my good master; I hope, in the first place, you believe there is
a Plot; for, otherwise, the Justice must have a word with you, as sure as my name is John Whitecraft."

"It shall not need," said Peveril; "for I assure you, mine host, I believe in the Plot as freely
and fully as a man can believe in anything he cannot understand."

"God forbid that anybody should pretend to understand it," said the implicit constable; "for
his worship the Justice says it is a mile beyond him; and he be as deep as most of them. But
men may believe, though they do not understand; and that is what the Romanists say themselves.
But this I am sure of, it makes a rare stirring time for justices, and witnesses, and constables.--So
here's to your health again, gentlemen, in a cup of neat canary."

"Come, come, John Whitecraft," said the wife, "do not you demean yourself by naming witnesses
along with justices and constables. All the world knows how they come by their money."

"Ay, but all the world knows that they do come by it, dame; and that is a great comfort. They
rustle in their canonical silks, and swagger in their buff and scarlet, who but they?--Ay,
ay, the cursed fox thrives--and not so cursed neither. Is there not Doctor Titus Oates, the
saviour of the nation--does he not live at Whitehall, and eat off plate, and have a pension
of thousands a year, for what I know? and is he not to be Bishop of Litchfield, so soon as
Dr. Doddrum dies?"

"Then I hope Dr. Doddrum's reverence will live these twenty years; and I dare say I am the
first that ever wished such a wish," said the hostess. "I do not understand these doings, not
I; and if a hundred Jesuits came to hold a consult at my house, as they did at the White Horse
Tavern, I should think it quite out of the line of business to bear witness against them, provided
they drank well, and paid their score."

"Very true, dame," said her elder guest; "that is what I call keeping a good publican conscience;
and so I will pay my score presently, and be jogging on my way."

Peveril, on his part, also demanded a reckoning, and discharged it so liberally, that the miller
flourished his hat as he bowed, and the hostess courtesied down to the ground.

The horses of both guests were brought forth; and they mounted, in order to depart in company.
The host and hostess stood in the doorway, to see them depart. The landlord proffered a stirrup-cup
to the elder guest, while the landlady offered Peveril a glass from her own peculiar bottle.
For this purpose, she mounted on the horse-block, with flask and glass in hand; so that it
was easy for the departing guest, although on horse-back, to return the courtesy in the most
approved manner, namely, by throwing his arm over his landlady's shoulder, and saluting her
at parting.

Dame Whitecraft did not decline this familiarity; for there is no room for traversing upon
a horse-block, and the hands which might have served her for resistance, were occupied with
glass and bottle--matters too precious to be thrown away in such a struggle. Apparently, however,
she had something else in her head; for as, after a brief affectation of reluctance, she permitted
Peveril's face to approach hers, she whispered in his ear, "Beware of trepans!"--an awful intimation,
which, in those days of distrust, suspicion, and treachery, was as effectual in interdicting
free and social intercourse, as the advertisement of "man-traps and spring-guns," to protect
an orchard. Pressing her hand, in intimation that he comprehended her hint, she shook his warmly
in return, and bade God speed him. There was a cloud on John Whitecraft's brow; nor did his
final farewell sound half so cordial as that which had been spoken within doors. But then Peveril
reflected, that the same guest is not always equally acceptable to landlord and landlady; and
unconscious of having done anything to excite the miller's displeasure, he pursued his journey
without thinking farther of the matter.

Julian was a little surprised, and not altogether pleased, to find that his new acquaintance
held the same road with him. He had many reasons for wishing to travel alone; and the hostess's
caution still rung in his ears. If this man, possessed of so much shrewdness as his countenance
and conversation intimated, versatile, as he had occasion to remark, and disguised beneath
his condition, should prove, as was likely, to be a concealed Jesuit or seminary-priest, travelling
upon their great task of the conversion of England, and rooting out of the Northern heresy,--a
more dangerous companion, for a person in his own circumstances, could hardly be imagined;
since keeping society with him might seem to authorise whatever reports had been spread concerning
the attachment of his family to the Catholic cause. At the same time, it was very difficult,
without actual rudeness, to shake off the company of one who seemed so determined, whether
spoken to or not, to remain alongside of him.

Peveril tried the experiment of riding slow; but his companion, determined not to drop him,
slackened his pace, so as to keep close by him. Julian then spurred his horse to a full trot;
and was soon satisfied, that the stranger, notwithstanding the meanness of his appearance,
was so much better mounted than himself, as to render vain any thought of outriding him. He
pulled up his horse to a more reasonable pace, therefore, in a sort of despair. Upon his doing
so, his companion, who had been hitherto silent, observed, that Peveril was not so well qualified
to try speed upon the road, as he would have been had he abode by his first bargain of horse-flesh
that morning.

Peveril assented dryly, but observed, that the animal would serve his immediate purpose, though
he feared it would render him indifferent company for a person better mounted.

"By no means," answered his civil companion; "I am one of those who have travelled so much,
as to be accustomed to make my journey at any rate of motion which may be most agreeable to
my company."

Peveril made no reply to this polite intimation, being too sincere to tender the thanks which,
in courtesy, were the proper answer.--A second pause ensued, which was broken by Julian asking
the stranger whether their roads were likely to lie long together in the same direction.

"I cannot tell," said the stranger, smiling, "unless I knew which way you were travelling."

"I am uncertain how far I shall go to-night," said Julian, willingly misunderstanding the purport
of the reply.

"And so am I," replied the stranger; "but though my horse goes better than yours, I think it
will be wise to spare him; and in case our road continues to lie the same way, we are likely
to sup, as we have dined together."

Julian made no answer whatever to this round intimation, but continued to ride on, turning,
in his own mind, whether it would not be wisest to come to a distinct understanding with his
pertinacious attendant, and to explain, in so many words, that it was his pleasure to travel
alone. But, besides that the sort of acquaintance which they had formed during dinner, rendered
him unwilling to be directly uncivil towards a person of gentleman-like manners, he had also
to consider that he might very possibly be mistaken in this man's character and purpose; in
which case, the cynically refusing the society of a sound Protestant, would afford as pregnant
matter of suspicion, as travelling in company with a disguised Jesuit.

After brief reflection, therefore, he resolved to endure the encumbrance of the stranger's
society, until a fair opportunity should occur to rid himself of it; and, in the meantime,
to act with as much caution as he possibly could, in any communication that might take place
between them; for Dame Whitecraft's parting caution still rang anxiously in his ears, and the
consequences of his own arrest upon suspicion, must deprive him of every opportunity of serving
his father, or the countess, or Major Bridgenorth, upon whose interest, also, he had promised
himself to keep an eye.

While he revolved these things in his mind, they had journeyed several miles without speaking;
and now entered upon a more waste country, and worse roads, than they had hitherto found, being,
in fact, approaching the more hilly district of Derbyshire. In travelling on a very stony and
uneven lane, Julian's horse repeatedly stumbled; and, had he not been supported by the rider's
judicious use of the bridle, must at length certainly have fallen under him.

"These are times which crave wary riding, sir," said his companion; "and by your seat in the
saddle, and your hand on the rein, you seem to understand it to be so."

"I have been long a horseman, sir," answered Peveril.

"And long a traveller, too, sir, I should suppose; since by the great caution you observe,
you seem to think the human tongue requires a curb, as well as the horse's jaws."

"Wiser men than I have been of opinion," answered Peveril, "that it were a part of prudence
to be silent, when men have little or nothing to say."

"I cannot approve of their opinion," answered the stranger. "All knowledge is gained by communication,
either with the dead, through books, or, more pleasingly, through the conversation of the living.
The deaf and dumb, alone, are excluded from improvement; and surely their situation is not
so enviable that we should imitate them."

At this illustration, which awakened a startling echo in Peveril's bosom, the young man looked
hard at his companion; but in the composed countenance, and calm blue eye, he read no consciousness
of a farther meaning than the words immediately and directly implied. He paused a moment, and
then answered, "You seem to be a person, sir, of shrewd apprehension; and I should have thought
it might have occurred to you, that in the present suspicious times, men may, without censure,
avoid communication with strangers. You know not me; and to me you are totally unknown. There
is not room for much discourse between us, without trespassing on the general topics of the
day, which carry in them seeds of quarrel between friends, much more betwixt strangers. At
any other time, the society of an intelligent companion would have been most acceptable upon
my solitary ride; but at present----"

"At present!" said the other, interrupting him. "You are like the old Romans, who held that
hostis meant both a stranger and an enemy. I will therefore be no longer a stranger. My name
is Ganlesse--by profession I am a Roman Catholic priest--I am travelling here in dread of my
life--and I am very glad to have you for a companion."

"I thank you for the information with all my heart," said Peveril; "and to avail myself of
it to the uttermost, I must beg you to ride forward, or lag behind, or take a side-path, at
your own pleasure; for as I am no Catholic, and travel upon business of high concernment, I
am exposed both to risk and delay, and even to danger, by keeping such suspicious company.
And so, Master Ganlesse, keep your own pace, and I will keep the contrary; for I beg leave
to forbear your company."

As Peveril spoke thus, he pulled up his horse, and made a full stop.

The stranger burst out a-laughing. "What!" he said, "you forbear my company for a trifle of
danger? Saint Anthony! How the warm blood of the Cavaliers is chilled in the young men of the
present day! This young gallant, now, has a father, I warrant, who has endured as many adventures
for hunting priests, as a knight-errant for distressed damsels."

"This raillery avails nothing, sir," said Peveril. "I must request you will keep your own way."

"My way is yours," said the pertinacious Master Ganlesse, as he called himself; "and we will
both travel the safer, that we journey in company. I have the receipt of fern-seed, man, and
walk invisible. Besides, you would not have me quit you in this lane, where there is no turn
to right or left?"

Peveril moved on, desirous to avoid open violence--for which the indifferent tone of the traveller,
indeed, afforded no apt pretext--yet highly disliking his company, and determined to take the
first opportunity to rid himself of it.

The stranger proceeded at the same pace with him, keeping cautiously on his bridle hand, as
if to secure that advantage in case of a struggle. But his language did not intimate the least
apprehension. "You do me wrong," he said to Peveril, "and you equally wrong yourself. You are
uncertain where to lodge to-night--trust to my guidance. Here is an ancient hall, within four
miles, with an old knightly Pantaloon for its lord--an all-be-ruffed Dame Barbara for the lady
gay--a Jesuit, in a butler's habit, to say grace--an old tale of Edgehill and Worster fights
to relish a cold venison pasty, and a flask of claret mantled with cobwebs--a bed for you in
the priest's hiding-hole--and, for aught I know, pretty Mistress Betty, the dairy-maid, to
make it ready."

"This has no charms for me, sir," said Peveril, who, in spite of himself, could not but be
amused with the ready sketch which the stranger gave of many an old mansion in Cheshire and
Derbyshire, where the owners retained the ancient faith of Rome.

"Well, I see I cannot charm you in this way," continued his companion; "I must strike another
key. I am no longer Ganlesse, the seminary priest, but (changing his tone, and snuffling in
the nose) Simon Canter, a poor preacher of the Word, who travels this way to call sinners to
repentance; and to strengthen, and to edify, and to fructify among the scattered remnant who
hold fast the truth.--What say you to this, sir?"

"I admire your versatility, sir, and could be entertained with it at another time. At present
sincerity is more in request."

"Sincerity!" said the stranger;--"a child's whistle, with but two notes in it--yea, yea, and
nay, nay. Why, man, the very Quakers have renounced it, and have got in its stead a gallant
recorder, called Hypocrisy, that is somewhat like Sincerity in form, but of much greater compass,
and combines the whole gamut. Come, be ruled--be a disciple of Simon Canter for the evening,
and we will leave the old tumble-down castle of the knight aforesaid, on the left hand, for
a new brick-built mansion, erected by an eminent salt-boiler from Namptwich, who expects the
said Simon to make a strong spiritual pickle for the preservation of a soul somewhat corrupted
by the evil communications of this wicked world. What say you? He has two daughters--brighter
eyes never beamed under a pinched hood; and for myself, I think there is more fire in those
who live only to love and to devotion, than in your court beauties, whose hearts are running
on twenty follies besides. You know not the pleasure of being conscience-keeper to a pretty
precisian, who in one breath repeats her foibles, and in the next confesses her passion. Perhaps,
though, you may have known such in your day? Come, sir, it grows too dark to see your blushes;
but I am sure they are burning on your cheek."

"You take great freedom, sir," said Peveril, as they now approached the end of the lane, where
it opened on a broad common; "and you seem rather to count more on my forbearance, than you
have room to do with safety. We are now nearly free of the lane which has made us companions
for this late half hour. To avoid your farther company, I will take the turn to the left, upon
that common; and if you follow me, it shall be at your peril. Observe, I am well armed; and
you will fight at odds."

"Not at odds," returned the provoking stranger, "while I have my brown jennet, with which I
can ride round and round you at pleasure; and this text, of a handful in length (showing a
pistol which he drew from his bosom), which discharges very convincing doctrine on the pressure
of a forefinger, and is apt to equalise all odds, as you call them, of youth and strength.
Let there be no strife between us, however--the moor lies before us--choose your path on it--I
take the other."

"I wish you good night, sir," said Peveril to the stranger. "I ask your forgiveness, if I have
misconstrued you in anything; but the times are perilous, and a man's life may depend on the
society in which he travels."

"True," said the stranger; "but in your case, the danger is already undergone, and you should
seek to counteract it. You have travelled in my company long enough to devise a handsome branch
of the Popish Plot. How will you look, when you see come forth, in comely folio form, The Narrative
of Simon Canter, otherwise called Richard Ganlesse, concerning the horrid Popish Conspiracy
for the Murder of the King, and Massacre of all Protestants, as given on oath to the Honourable
House of Commons; setting forth, how far Julian Peveril, younger of Martindale Castle, is concerned
in carrying on the same----"

"How, sir? What mean you?" said Peveril, much startled.

"Nay, sir," replied his companion, "do not interrupt my title-page. Now that Oates and Bedloe
have drawn the great prizes, the subordinate discoverers get little but by the sale of their
Narrative; and Janeway, Newman, Simmons, and every bookseller of them, will tell you that the
title is half the narrative. Mine shall therefore set forth the various schemes you have communicated
to me, of landing ten thousand soldiers from the Isle of Man upon the coast of Lancashire;
and marching into Wales, to join the ten thousand pilgrims who are to be shipped from Spain;
and so completing the destruction of the Protestant religion, and of the devoted city of London.
Truly, I think such a Narrative, well spiced with a few horrors, and published cum privilegio
parliamenti, might, though the market be somewhat overstocked, be still worth some twenty or
thirty pieces."

"You seem to know me, sir," said Peveril; "and if so, I think I may fairly ask you your purpose
in thus bearing me company, and the meaning of all this rhapsody. If it be mere banter, I can
endure it within proper limit; although it is uncivil on the part of a stranger. If you have
any farther purpose, speak it out; I am not to be trifled with."

"Good, now," said the stranger, laughing, "into what an unprofitable chafe you have put yourself!
An Italian fuoruscito, when he desires a parley with you, takes aim from behind a wall, with
his long gun, and prefaces his conference with Posso tirare. So does your man-of-war fire a
gun across the bows of a Hansmogan Indiaman, just to bring her to; and so do I show Master
Julian Peveril, that, if I were one of the honourable society of witnesses and informers, with
whom his imagination has associated me for these two hours past, he is as much within my danger
now, as what he is ever likely to be." Then, suddenly changing his tone to serious, which was
in general ironical, he added, "Young man, when the pestilence is diffused through the air
of a city, it is in vain men would avoid the disease, by seeking solitude, and shunning the
company of their fellow-sufferers."

"In what, then, consists their safety?" said Peveril, willing to ascertain, if possible, the
drift of his companion's purpose.

"In following the counsels of wise physicians;" such was the stranger's answer.

"And as such," said Peveril, "you offer me your advice?"

"Pardon me, young man," said the stranger haughtily, "I see no reason I should do so.--I am
not," he added, in his former tone, "your fee'd physician--I offer no advice--I only say it
would be wise that you sought it."

"And from whom, or where, can I obtain it?" said Peveril. "I wander in this country like one
in a dream; so much a few months have changed it. Men who formerly occupied themselves with
their own affairs, are now swallowed up in matters of state policy; and those tremble under
the apprehension of some strange and sudden convulsion of empire, who were formerly only occupied
by the fear of going to bed supperless. And to sum up the matter, I meet a stranger apparently
well acquainted with my name and concerns, who first attaches himself to me, whether I will
or no; and then refuses me an explanation of his business, while he menaces me with the strangest
accusations."

"Had I meant such infamy," said the stranger, "believe me, I had not given you the thread of
my intrigue. But be wise, and come one with me. There is, hard by, a small inn, where, if you
can take a stranger's warrant for it, we shall sleep in perfect security."

"Yet, you yourself," said Peveril, "but now were anxious to avoid observation; and in that
case, how can you protect me?"

"Pshaw! I did but silence that tattling landlady, in the way in which such people are most
readily hushed; and for Topham, and his brace of night owls, they must hawk at other and lesser
game than I should prove."

Peveril could not help admiring the easy and confident indifference with which the stranger
seemed to assume a superiority to all the circumstances of danger around him; and after hastily
considering the matter with himself, came to the resolution to keep company with him for this
night at least; and to learn, if possible, who he really was, and to what party in the estate
he was attached. The boldness and freedom of his talk seemed almost inconsistent with his following
the perilous, though at that time the gainful trade of an informer. No doubt, such persons
assumed every appearance which could insinuate them into the confidence of their destined victims;
but Julian thought he discovered in this man's manner, a wild and reckless frankness, which
he could not but connect with the idea of sincerity in the present case. He therefore answered,
after a moment's recollection, "I embrace your proposal, sir; although, by doing so, I am reposing
a sudden, and perhaps an unwary, confidence."

"And what am I, then, reposing in you?" said the stranger. "Is not our confidence mutual?"

"No; much the contrary. I know nothing of you whatever--you have named me; and, knowing me
to be Julian Peveril, know you may travel with me in perfect security."

"The devil I do!" answered his companion. "I travel in the same security as with a lighted
petard, which I may expect to explode every moment. Are you not the son of Peveril of the Peak,
with whose name Prelacy and Popery are so closely allied, that no old woman of either sex in
Derbyshire concludes her prayer without a petition to be freed from all three? And do you not
come from the Popish Countess of Derby, bringing, for aught I know, a whole army of Manxmen
in your pocket, with full complement of arms, ammunition, baggage, and a train of field artillery?"

"It is not very likely I should be so poorly mounted," said Julian, laughing, "if I had such
a weight to carry. But lead on, sir. I see I must wait for your confidence, till you think
proper to confer it; for you are already so well acquainted with my affairs, that I have nothing
to offer you in exchange for it."

"Allons, then," said his companion; "give your horse the spur, and raise the curb rein, lest
he measure the ground with his nose instead of his paces. We are not now more than a furlong
or two from the place of entertainment."

They mended their pace accordingly, and soon arrived at the small solitary inn which the traveller
had mentioned. When its light began to twinkle before them, the stranger, as if recollecting
something he had forgotten, "By the way, you must have a name to pass by; for it may be ill
travelling under your own, as the fellow who keeps this house is an old Cromwellian. What will
you call yourself?--My name is--for the present--Ganlesse."

"There is no occasion to assume a name at all," answered Julian. "I do not incline to use a
borrowed one, especially as I may meet with some one who knows my own."

"I will call you Julian, then," said Master Ganlesse; "for Peveril will smell, in the nostrils
of mine host, of idolatry, conspiracy, Smithfield faggots, fish on Fridays, the murder of Sir
Edmondsbury Godfrey, and the fire of purgatory."

As he spoke thus, they alighted under the great broad-branched oak tree, that served to canopy
the ale-bench, which, at an earlier hour, had groaned under the weight of a frequent conclave
of rustic politicians. Ganlesse, as he dismounted, whistled in a particularly shrill note,
and was answered from within the house.

CHAPTER XXII

           He was a fellow in a peasant's garb;
           Yet one could censure you a woodcock's carving.
           Like any courtier at the ordinary.
                                                --THE ORDINARY.

The person who appeared at the door of the little inn to receive Ganlesse, as we mentioned
in our last chapter, sung, as he came forward, this scrap of an old ballad,--

 "Good even to you, Diccon;
    And how have you sped;
  Bring you the bonny bride
    To banquet and bed?"

To which Ganlesse answered, in the same tone and tune,--

 "Content thee, kind Robin;
    He need little care,
  Who brings home a fat buck
    Instead of a hare."

"You have missed your blow, then?" said the other, in reply.

"I tell you I have not," answered Ganlesse; "but you will think of nought but your own thriving
occupation--May the plague that belongs to it stick to it! though it hath been the making of thee."

"A man must live, Diccon Ganlesse," said the other.

"Well, well," said Ganlesse, "bid my friend welcome, for my sake. Hast thou got any supper?"

"Reeking like a sacrifice--Chaubert has done his best. That fellow is a treasure! give him
a farthing candle, and he will cook a good supper out of it.--Come in, sir. My friend's friend
is welcome, as we say in my country."

"We must have our horses looked to first," said Peveril, who began to be considerably uncertain
about the character of his companions--"that done, I am for you."

Ganlesse gave a second whistle; a groom appeared, who took charge of both their horses, and
they themselves entered the inn.

The ordinary room of a poor inn seemed to have undergone some alterations, to render it fit
for company of a higher description. There were a beaufet, a couch, and one or two other pieces
of furniture, of a style inconsistent with the appearance of the place. The tablecloth, which
was already laid, was of the finest damask; and the spoons, forks, &c., were of silver. Peveril
looked at this apparatus with some surprise; and again turning his eyes attentively upon his
travelling companion, Ganlesse, he could not help discovering (by the aid of imagination, perhaps),
that though insignificant in person, plain in features, and dressed like one in indigence,
there lurked still about his person and manners, that indefinable ease of manner which belongs
only to men of birth and quality, or to those who are in the constant habit of frequenting
the best company. His companion, whom he called Will Smith, although tall and rather good-looking,
besides being much better dressed, had not, nevertheless, exactly the same ease of demeanour;
and was obliged to make up for the want, by an additional proportion of assurance. Who these
two persons could be, Peveril could not attempt even to form a guess. There was nothing for
it but to watch their manner and conversation.

After speaking a moment in whispers, Smith said to his companion, "We must go look after our
nags for ten minutes, and allow Chaubert to do his office."

"Will not he appear, and minister before us, then?" said Ganlesse.

"What! he?--he shift a trencher--he hand a cup?--No, you forget whom you speak of. Such an
order were enough to make him fall on his own sword--he is already on the borders of despair,
because no craw-fish are to be had."

"Alack-a day!" replied Ganlesse. "Heaven forbid I should add to such a calamity! To stable,
then, and see we how our steeds eat their provender, while ours is getting ready."

They adjourned to the stable accordingly, which, though a poor one, had been hastily supplied
with whatever was necessary for the accommodation of four excellent horses; one of which, that
from which Ganlesse was just dismounted, the groom we have mentioned was cleaning and dressing
by the light of a huge wax-candle.

"I am still so far Catholic," said Ganlesse, laughing, as he saw that Peveril noticed this
piece of extravagance. "My horse is my saint, and I dedicate a candle to him."

"Without asking so great a favour for mine, which I see standing behind yonder old hen-coop,"
replied Peveril, "I will at least relieve him of his saddle and bridle."

"Leave him to the lad of the inn," said Smith; "he is not worthy of any other person's handling;
and I promise you, if you slip a single buckle, you will so flavour of that stable duty, that
you might as well eat roast-beef as ragouts, for any relish you will have of them."

"I love roast-beef as well as ragouts, at any time," said Peveril, adjusting himself to a task
which every young man should know how to perform when need is; "and my horse, though it be
but a sorry jade, will champ better on hay and corn, than on an iron bit."

While he was unsaddling his horse, and shaking down some litter for the poor wearied animal,
he heard Smith observe to Ganlesse,--"By my faith, Dick, thou hast fallen into poor Slender's
blunder; missed Anne Page, and brought us a great lubberly post-master's boy."

"Hush, he will hear thee," answered Ganlesse; "there are reasons for all things--it is well
as it is. But, prithee, tell thy fellow to help the youngster."

"What!" replied Smith, "d'ye think I am mad?--Ask Tom Beacon--Tom of Newmarket--Tom of ten
thousand, to touch such a four-legged brute as that?--Why, he would turn me away on the spot--discard
me, i'faith. It was all he would do to take in hand your own, my good friend; and if you consider
him not the better, you are like to stand groom to him yourself to-morrow."

"Well, Will," answered Ganlesse, "I will say that for thee, thou hast a set of the most useless,
scoundrelly, insolent vermin about thee, that ever ate up a poor gentleman's revenues."

"Useless? I deny it," replied Smith. "Every one of my fellows does something or other so exquisitely,
that it were sin to make him do anything else--it is your jacks-of-all-trades who are masters
of none.--But hark to Chaubert's signal. The coxcomb is twangling it on the lute, to the tune
of Eveillez-vous, belle endormie.--Come, Master What d'ye call (addressing Peveril),--get ye
some water, and wash this filthy witness from your hand, as Betterton says in the play; for
Chaubert's cookery is like Friar Bacon's Head--time is--time was--time will soon be no more."

So saying, and scarce allowing Julian time to dip his hands in a bucket, and dry them on a
horse-cloth, he hurried him from the stable back to the supper-chamber.

Here all was prepared for their meal, with an epicurean delicacy, which rather belonged to
the saloon of a palace, than the cabin in which it was displayed. Four dishes of silver, with
covers of the same metal, smoked on the table; and three seats were placed for the company.
Beside the lower end of the board, was a small side-table, to answer the purpose of what is
now called a dumb waiter; on which several flasks reared their tall, stately, and swan-like
crests, above glasses and rummers. Clean covers were also placed within reach; and a small
travelling-case of morocco, hooped with silver, displayed a number of bottles, containing the
most approved sauces that culinary ingenuity had then invented.

Smith, who occupied the lower seat, and seemed to act as president of the feast, motioned the
two travellers to take their places and begin. "I would not stay a grace-time," he said, "to
save a whole nation from perdition. We could bring no chauffettes with any convenience; and
even Chaubert is nothing, unless his dishes are tasted in the very moment of projection. Come,
uncover, and let us see what he has done for us.--Hum!--ha!--ay--squab-pigeons--wildfowl--young
chickens--venison cutlets--and a space in the centre, wet, alas! by a gentle tear from Chaubert's
eye, where should have been the soupe aux écrevisses. The zeal of that poor fellow is ill repaid
by his paltry ten louis per month."

"A mere trifle," said Ganlesse; "but, like yourself, Will, he serves a generous master."

The repast now commenced; and Julian, though he had seen his young friend the Earl of Derby,
and other gallants, affect a considerable degree of interest and skill in the science of the
kitchen, and was not himself either an enemy or a stranger to the pleasures of a good table,
found that, on the present occasion, he was a mere novice. Both his companions, but Smith in
especial, seemed to consider that they were now engaged in the only true business of life;
and weighed all its minutiæ with a proportional degree of accuracy. To carve the morsel in
the most delicate manner--and to apportion the proper seasoning with the accuracy of the chemist,--to
be aware, exactly, of the order in which one dish should succeed another, and to do plentiful
justice to all--was a minuteness of science to which Julian had hitherto been a stranger. Smith
accordingly treated him as a mere novice in epicurism, cautioning him to eat his soup before
the bouilli, and to forget the Manx custom of bolting the boiled meat before the broth, as
if Cutlar MacCulloch and all his whingers were at the door. Peveril took the hint in good part,
and the entertainment proceeded with animation.

At length Ganlesse paused, and declared the supper exquisite. "But, my friend Smith," he added,
"are your wines curious? When you brought all that trash of plates and trumpery into Derbyshire,
I hope you did not leave us at the mercy of the strong ale of the shire, as thick and muddy
as the squires who drink it?"

"Did I not know that you were to meet me, Dick Ganlesse?" answered their host. "And can you
suspect me of such an omission? It is true, you must make champagne and claret serve, for my
burgundy would not bear travelling. But if you have a fancy for sherry, or Vin de Cahors, I
have a notion Chaubert and Tom Beacon have brought some for their own drinking."

"Perhaps the gentlemen would not care to impart," said Ganlesse.

"Oh, fie!--anything in the way of civility," replied Smith. "They are, in truth, the best-natured
lads alive, when treated respectfully; so that if you would prefer----"

"By no means," said Ganlesse--"a glass of champagne will serve in a scarcity of better."

 "The cork shall start obsequious to my thumb."

said Smith; and as he spoke, he untwisted the wire, and the cork struck the roof of the cabin.
Each guest took a large rummer glass of the sparkling beverage, which Peveril had judgment
and experience enough to pronounce exquisite.

"Give me your hand, sir," said Smith; "it is the first word of sense you have spoken this evening."

"Wisdom, sir," replied Peveril, "is like the best ware in the pedlar's pack, which he never
produces till he knows his customer."

"Sharp as mustard," returned the bon vivant; "but be wise, most noble pedlar, and take another
rummer of this same flask, which you see I have held in an oblique position for your service--not
permitting it to retrograde to the perpendicular. Nay, take it off before the bubble bursts
on the rim, and the zest is gone."

"You do me honour, sir," said Peveril, taking the second glass. "I wish you a better office
than that of my cup-bearer."

"You cannot wish Will Smith one more congenial to his nature," said Ganlesse. "Others have
a selfish delight in the objects of sense, Will thrives, and is happy by imparting them to
his friends."

"Better help men to pleasures than to pains, Master Ganlesse," answered Smith, somewhat angrily.

"Nay, wrath thee not, Will," said Ganlesse; "and speak no words in haste, lest you may have
cause to repent at leisure. Do I blame thy social concern for the pleasures of others? Why,
man, thou dost therein most philosophically multiply thine own. A man has but one throat, and
can but eat, with his best efforts, some five or six times a day; but thou dinest with every
friend that cuts a capon, and art quaffing wine in other men's gullets, from morning to night--et
sic de cæteris."

"Friend Ganlesse," returned Smith, "I prithee beware--thou knowest I can cut gullets as well
as tickle them."

"Ay, Will," answered Ganlesse carelessly; "I think I have seen thee wave thy whinyard at the
throat of a Hogan-Mogan--a Netherlandish weasand, which expanded only on thy natural and mortal
objects of aversion,--Dutch cheese, rye-bread, pickled herring, onion, and Geneva."

"For pity's sake, forbear the description!" said Smith; "thy words overpower the perfumes,
and flavour the apartment like a dish of salmagundi!"

"But for an epiglottis like mine," continued Ganlesse, "down which the most delicate morsels
are washed by such claret as thou art now pouring out, thou couldst not, in thy bitterest mood,
wish a worse fate than to be necklaced somewhat tight by a pair of white arms."

"E'en as you like the thoughts of dining on bran-bread and milk-porridge--an extremity which
you trust never to be reduced to. But all this shall not prevent me from pledging you in a
cup of sound claret."

As the claret circulated, the glee of the company increased; and Smith placing the dishes which
had been made use of upon the side-table, stamped with his foot on the floor, and the table
sinking down a trap, again rose, loaded with olives, sliced neat's tongue, caviare, and other
provocatives for the circulation of the bottle.

"Why, Will," said Ganlesse, "thou art a more complete mechanist than I suspected; thou hast
brought thy scene-shifting inventions to Derbyshire in marvellously short time."

"A rope and pullies can be easily come by," answered Will; "and with a saw and a plane, I can
manage that business in half a day. I love the knack of clean and secret conveyance--thou knowest
it was the foundation of my fortunes."

"It may be the wreck of them too, Will," replied his friend.

"True, Diccon," answered Will; "but, dum vivimus, vivamus,--that is my motto; and therewith
I present you a brimmer to the health of the fair lady you wot of."

"Let it come, Will," replied his friend; and the flask circulated briskly from hand to hand.

Julian did not think it prudent to seem a check on their festivity, as he hoped in its progress
something might occur to enable him to judge of the character and purposes of his companions.
But he watched them in vain. Their conversation was animated and lively, and often bore reference
to the literature of the period, in which the elder seemed particularly well skilled. They
also talked freely of the Court, and of that numerous class of gallants who were then described
as "men of wit and pleasure about town;" and to which it seemed probable they themselves appertained.

At length the universal topic of the Popish Plot was started; upon which Ganlesse and Smith
seemed to entertain the most opposite opinions. Ganlesse, if he did not maintain the authority
of Oates in its utmost extent, contended, that at least it was confirmed in a great measure
by the murder of Sir Edmondsbury Godfrey, and the letters written by Coleman to the confessor
of the French King.

With much more noise, and less power of reasoning, Will Smith hesitated not to ridicule and
run down the whole discovery, as one of the wildest and most causeless alarms which had ever
been sounded in the ears of a credulous public. "I shall never forget," he said, "Sir Godfrey's
most original funeral. Two bouncing parsons, well armed with sword and pistol, mounted the
pulpit, to secure the third fellow who preached from being murdered in the face of the congregation.
Three parsons in one pulpit--three suns in one hemisphere--no wonder men stood aghast at such
a prodigy."

"What then, Will," answered his companion, "you are one of those who think the good knight
murdered himself, in order to give credit to the Plot?"

"By my faith, not I," said the other; "but some true blue Protestant might do the job for him,
in order to give the thing a better colour.--I will be judged by our silent friend, whether
that be not the most feasible solution of the whole."

"I pray you, pardon me, gentlemen," said Julian; "I am but just landed in England, and am a
stranger to the particular circumstances which have thrown the nation into such a ferment.
It would be the highest degree of assurance in me to give my opinion betwixt gentlemen who
argue the matter so ably; besides, to say truth, I confess weariness--your wine is more potent
than I expected, or I have drunk more of it than I meant to do."

"Nay, if an hour's nap will refresh you," said the elder of the strangers, "make no ceremony
with us. Your bed--all we can offer as such--is that old-fashioned Dutch-built sofa, as the
last new phrase calls it. We shall be early stirrers tomorrow morning."

"And that we may be so," said Smith, "I propose that we do sit up all this night--I hate lying
rough, and detest a pallet-bed. So have at another flask, and the newest lampoon to help it out--

 'Now a plague of their votes
  Upon Papists and Plots,
  And be d--d Doctor Oates.
                  Tol de rol.'"

"Nay, but our Puritanic host," said Ganlesse.

"I have him in my pocket, man--his eyes, ears, nose, and tongue," answered his boon companion,
"are all in my possession."

"In that case, when you give him back his eyes and nose, I pray you keep his ears and tongue,"
answered Ganlesse. "Seeing and smelling are organs sufficient for such a knave--to hear and
tell are things he should have no manner of pretensions to."

"I grant you it were well done," answered Smith; "but it were a robbing of the hangman and
the pillory; and I am an honest fellow, who would give Dun[*] and the devil his due. So,

 'All joy to great Cæsar,
  Long life, love, and pleasure;
  May the King live for ever,
                  'Tis no matter for us, boys.'"

[*] Dun was the hangman of the day at Tyburn. He was successor of
    Gregory Brunden, who was by many believed to be the same who
    dropped the axe upon Charles I., though others were suspected of
    being the actual regicide.

While this Bacchanalian scene proceeded, Julian had wrapt himself closely in his cloak, and
stretched himself on the couch which they had shown him. He looked towards the table he had
left--the tapers seemed to become hazy and dim as he gazed--he heard the sound of voices, but
they ceased to convey any impression to his understanding; and in a few minutes, he was faster
asleep than he had ever been in the whole course of his life.

CHAPTER XXIII

                 The Gordon then his bugle blew,
                   And said, awa, awa;
                 The House of Rhodes is all on flame,
                   I hauld it time to ga'.
                                           --OLD BALLAD.

When Julian awaked the next morning, all was still and vacant in the apartment. The rising
sun, which shone through the half-closed shutters, showed some relics of the last night's banquet,
which his confused and throbbing head assured him had been carried into a debauch.

Without being much of a boon companion, Julian, like other young men of the time, was not in
the habit of shunning wine, which was then used in considerable quantities; and he could not
help being surprised, that the few cups he had drunk over night had produced on his frame the
effects of excess. He rose up, adjusted his dress, and sought in the apartment for water to
perform his morning ablutions, but without success. Wine there was on the table; and beside
it one stool stood, and another lay, as if thrown down in the heedless riot of the evening.
"Surely," he thought to himself, "the wine must have been very powerful, which rendered me
insensible to the noise my companions must have made ere they finished their carouse."

With momentary suspicion he examined his weapons, and the packet which he had received from
the Countess, and kept in a secret pocket of his upper coat, bound close about his person.
All was safe; and the very operation reminded him of the duties which lay before him. He left
the apartment where they had supped, and went into another, wretched enough, where, in a truckle-bed,
were stretched two bodies, covered with a rug, the heads belonging to which were amicably deposited
upon the same truss of hay. The one was the black shock-head of the groom; the other, graced
with a long thrum nightcap, showed a grizzled pate, and a grave caricatured countenance, which
the hook-nose and lantern-jaws proclaimed to belong to the Gallic minister of good cheer, whose
praises he had heard sung forth on the preceding evening. These worthies seemed to have slumbered
in the arms of Bacchus as well as of Morpheus, for there were broken flasks on the floor; and
their deep snoring alone showed that they were alive.

Bent upon resuming his journey, as duty and expedience alike dictated, Julian next descended
the trap-stair, and essayed a door at the bottom of the steps. It was fastened within. He called--no
answer was returned. It must be, he thought, the apartment of the revellers, now probably sleeping
as soundly as their dependants still slumbered, and as he himself had done a few minutes before.
Should he awake them?--To what purpose? They were men with whom accident had involved him against
his own will; and situated as he was, he thought it wise to take the earliest opportunity of
breaking off from society which was suspicious, and might be perilous. Ruminating thus, he
essayed another door, which admitted him to a bedroom, where lay another harmonious slumberer.
The mean utensils, pewter measures, empty cans and casks, with which this room was lumbered,
proclaimed it that of the host, who slept surrounded by his professional implements of hospitality
and stock-in-trade.

This discovery relieved Peveril from some delicate embarrassment which he had formerly entertained.
He put upon the table a piece of money, sufficient, as he judged, to pay his share of the preceding
night's reckoning; not caring to be indebted for his entertainment to the strangers, whom he
was leaving without the formality of an adieu.

His conscience cleared of this gentleman-like scruple, Peveril proceeded with a light heart,
though somewhat a dizzy head, to the stable, which he easily recognised among a few other paltry
outhouses. His horse, refreshed with rest, and perhaps not unmindful of his services the evening
before, neighed as his master entered the stable; and Peveril accepted the sound as an omen
of a prosperous journey. He paid the augury with a sieveful of corn; and, while his palfrey
profited by his attention, walked into the fresh air to cool his heated blood, and consider
what course he should pursue in order to reach the Castle of Martindale before sunset. His
acquaintance with the country in general gave him confidence that he could not have greatly
deviated from the nearest road; and with his horse in good condition, he conceived he might
easily reach Martindale before nightfall.

Having adjusted his route in his mind, he returned into the stable to prepare his steed for
the journey, and soon led him into the ruinous courtyard of the inn, bridled, saddled, and
ready to be mounted. But as Peveril's hand was upon the mane, and his left foot in the stirrup,
a hand touched his cloak, and the voice of Ganlesse said, "What, Master Peveril, is this your
foreign breeding? or have you learned in France to take French leave of your friends?"

Julian started like a guilty thing, although a moment's reflection assured him that he was
neither wrong nor in danger. "I cared not to disturb you," he said, "although I did come as
far as the door of your chamber. I supposed your friend and you might require, after our last
night's revel, rather sleep than ceremony. I left my own bed, though a rough one, with more
reluctance than usual; and as my occasions oblige me to be an early traveller, I thought it
best to depart without leave-taking. I have left a token for mine host on the table of his
apartment."

"It was unnecessary," said Ganlesse; "the rascal is already overpaid.--But are you not rather
premature in your purpose of departing? My mind tells me that Master Julian Peveril had better
proceed with me to London, than turn aside for any purpose whatever. You may see already that
I am no ordinary person, but a master-spirit of the time. For the cuckoo I travel with, and
whom I indulge in his prodigal follies, he also has his uses. But you are a different cast;
and I not only would serve you, but even wish you, to be my own."

Julian gazed on this singular person when he spoke. We have already said his figure was mean
and slight, with very ordinary and unmarked features, unless we were to distinguish the lightnings
of a keen grey eye, which corresponded in its careless and prideful glance, with the haughty
superiority which the stranger assumed in his conversation. It was not till after a momentary
pause that Julian replied, "Can you wonder, sir, that in my circumstances--if they are indeed
known to you so well as they seem--I should decline unnecessary confidence on the affairs of
moment which have called me hither, or refuse the company of a stranger, who assigns no reason
for desiring mine?"

"Be it as you list, young man," answered Ganlesse; "only remember hereafter, you had a fair
offer--it is not every one to whom I would have made it. If we should meet hereafter, on other,
and on worse terms, impute it to yourself and not to me."

"I understand not your threat," answered Peveril, "If a threat be indeed implied. I have done
no evil--I feel no apprehension--and I cannot, in common sense, conceive why I should suffer
for refusing my confidence to a stranger, who seems to require that I should submit me blindfold
to his guidance."

"Farewell, then, Sir Julian of the Peak,--that may soon be," said the stranger, removing the
hand which he had as yet left carelessly on the horse's bridle.

"How mean you by that phrase?" said Julian; "and why apply such a title to me?"

The stranger smiled, and only answered, "Here our conference ends. The way is before you. You
will find it longer and rougher than that by which I would have guided you."

So saying, Ganlesse turned his back and walked toward the house. On the threshold he turned
about once more, and seeing that Peveril had not yet moved from the spot, he again smiled and
beckoned to him; but Julian, recalled by that sign to recollection, spurred his horse and set
forward on his journey.

It was not long ere his local acquaintance with the country enabled him to regain the road
to Martindale, from which he had diverged on the preceding evening for about two miles. But
the roads, or rather the paths, of this wild country, so much satirised by their native poet,
Cotton, were so complicated in some places, so difficult to be traced in others, and so unfit
for hasty travelling in almost all, that in spite of Julian's utmost exertions, and though
he made no longer delay upon the journey than was necessary to bait his horse at a small hamlet
through which he passed at noon, it was nightfall ere he reached an eminence, from which, an
hour sooner, the battlements of Martindale Castle would have been visible; and where, when
they were hid in night, their situation was indicated by a light constantly maintained in a
lofty tower, called the Warder's Turret; and which domestic beacon had acquired, through all
the neighbourhood, the name of Peveril's Polestar.

This was regularly kindled at curfew toll, and supplied with as much wood and charcoal as maintained
the light till sunrise; and at no period was the ceremonial omitted, saving during the space
intervening between the death of a Lord of the Castle and his interment. When this last event
had taken place, the nightly beacon was rekindled with some ceremony, and continued till fate
called the successor to sleep with his fathers. It is not known from which circumstance the
practice of maintaining this light originally sprung. Tradition spoke of it doubtfully. Some
thought it was the signal of general hospitality, which, in ancient times, guided the wandering
knight, or the weary pilgrim, to rest and refreshment. Others spoke of it as a "love-lighted
watchfire," by which the provident anxiety of a former lady of Martindale guided her husband
homeward through the terrors of a midnight storm. The less favourable construction of unfriendly
neighbours of the dissenting persuasion, ascribed the origin and continuance of this practice
to the assuming pride of the family of Peveril, who thereby chose to intimate their ancient
suzerainté over the whole country, in the manner of the admiral who carries the lantern in
the poop, for the guidance of the fleet. And in the former times, our old friend, Master Solsgrace,
dealt from the pulpit many a hard hit against Sir Geoffrey, as he that had raised his horn,
and set up his candlestick on high. Certain it is, that all the Peverils, from father to son,
had been especially attentive to the maintenance of this custom, as something intimately connected
with the dignity of their family; and in the hands of Sir Geoffrey, the observance was not
likely to be omitted.

Accordingly, the polar-star of Peveril had continued to beam more or less brightly during all
the vicissitudes of the Civil War; and glimmered, however faintly, during the subsequent period
of Sir Geoffrey's depression. But he was often heard to say, and sometimes to swear, that while
there was a perch of woodland left to the estate, the old beacon-grate should not lack replenishing.
All this his son Julian well knew; and therefore it was with no ordinary feelings of surprise
and anxiety, that, looking in the direction of the Castle, he perceived that the light was
not visible. He halted--rubbed his eyes--shifted his position--and endeavoured, in vain, to
persuade himself that he had mistaken the point from which the polar-star of his house was
visible, or that some newly intervening obstacle, the growth of a plantation, perhaps, or the
erection of some building, intercepted the light of the beacon. But a moment's reflection assured
him, that from the high and free situation which Martindale Castle bore in reference to the
surrounding country, this could not have taken place; and the inference necessarily forced
itself upon his mind, that Sir Geoffrey, his father, was either deceased, or that the family
must have been disturbed by some strange calamity, under the pressure of which, their wonted
custom and solemn usage had been neglected.

Under the influence of undefinable apprehension, young Peveril now struck the spurs into his
jaded steed, and forcing him down the broken and steep path, at a pace which set safety at
defiance, he arrived at the village of Martindale-Moultrassie, eagerly desirous to ascertain
the cause of this ominous eclipse. The street, through which his tired horse paced slow and
reluctantly, was now deserted and empty; and scarcely a candle twinkled from a casement, except
from the latticed window of the little inn, called the Peveril Arms, from which a broad light
shone, and several voices were heard in rude festivity.

Before the door of this inn, the jaded palfrey, guided by the instinct or experience which
makes a hackney well acquainted with the outside of a house of entertainment, made so sudden
and determined a pause, that, notwithstanding his haste, the rider thought it best to dismount,
expecting to be readily supplied with a fresh horse by Roger Raine, the landlord, the ancient
dependant of his family. He also wished to relive his anxiety, by inquiring concerning the
state of things at the Castle, when he was surprised to hear, bursting from the taproom of
the loyal old host, a well-known song of the Commonwealth time, which some puritanical wag
had written in reprehension of the Cavaliers, and their dissolute courses, and in which his
father came in for a lash of the satirist.

 "Ye thought in the world there was no power to tame ye,
  So you tippled and drabb'd till the saints overcame ye;
  'Forsooth,' and 'Ne'er stir,' sir, have vanquish'd 'G-- d--n me,'
                                      Which nobody can deny.

  There was bluff old Sir Geoffrey loved brandy and mum well,
  And to see a beer-glass turned over the thumb well;
  But he fled like the wind, before Fairfax and Cromwell,
                                      Which nobody can deny."

Some strange revolution, Julian was aware, must have taken place, both in the village and in
the Castle, ere these sounds of unseemly insult could have been poured forth in the very inn
which was decorated with the armorial bearings of his family; and not knowing how far it might
be advisable to intrude on these unfriendly revellers, without the power of repelling or chastising
their insolence, he led his horse to a back-door, which as he recollected, communicated with
the landlord's apartment, having determined to make private inquiry of him concerning the state
of matters at the Castle. He knocked repeatedly, and as often called on Roger Raine with an
earnest but stifled voice. At length a female voice replied by the usual inquiry, "Who is there?"

"It is I, Dame Raine--I, Julian Peveril--tell your husband to come to me presently."

"Alack, and a well-a-day, Master Julian, if it be really you--you are to know my poor goodman
has gone where he can come to no one; but, doubtless, we shall all go to him, as Matthew Chamberlain
says."

"He is dead, then?" said Julian. "I am extremely sorry----"

"Dead six months and more, Master Julian; and let me tell you, it is a long time for a lone
woman, as Matt Chamberlain says."

"Well, do you or your chamberlain undo the door. I want a fresh horse; and I want to know how
things are at the Castle."

"The Castle--lack-a-day!--Chamberlain--Matthew Chamberlain--I say, Matt!"

Matt Chamberlain apparently was at no great distance, for he presently answered her call; and
Peveril, as he stood close to the door, could hear them whispering to each other, and distinguish
in a great measure what they said. And here it may be noticed, that Dame Raine, accustomed
to submit to the authority of old Roger, who vindicated as well the husband's domestic prerogative,
as that of the monarch in the state, had, when left a buxom widow, been so far incommoded by
the exercise of her newly acquired independence, that she had recourse, upon all occasions,
to the advice of Matt Chamberlain; and as Matt began no longer to go slipshod, and in a red
nightcap, but wore Spanish shoes, and a high-crowned beaver (at least of a Sunday), and moreover
was called Master Matthew by his fellow-servants, the neighbours in the village argued a speedy
change of the name of the sign-post; nay, perhaps, of the very sign itself, for Matthew was
a bit of a Puritan, and no friend to Peveril of the Peak.

"Now counsel me, an you be a man, Matt Chamberlain," said Widow Raine; "for never stir, if
here be not Master Julian's own self, and he wants a horse, and what not, and all as if things
were as they wont to be."

"Why, dame, an ye will walk by my counsel," said the Chamberlain, "e'en shake him off--let
him be jogging while his boots are green. This is no world for folks to scald their fingers
in other folks' broth."

"And that is well spoken, truly," answered Dame Raine; "but then look you, Matt, we have eaten
their bread, and, as my poor goodman used to say----"

"Nay, nay, dame, they that walk by the counsel of the dead, shall have none of the living;
and so you may do as you list; but if you will walk by mine, drop latch, and draw bolt, and
bid him seek quarters farther--that is my counsel."

"I desire nothing of you, sirrah," said Peveril, "save but to know how Sir Geoffrey and his
lady do?"

"Lack-a-day!--lack-a-day!" in a tone of sympathy, was the only answer he received from the
landlady; and the conversation betwixt her and her chamberlain was resumed, but in a tone too
low to be overheard.

At length Matt Chamberlain spoke aloud, and with a tone of authority: "We undo no doors at
this time of night, for it is against the Justices' orders, and might cost us our licence;
and for the Castle, the road up to it lies before you, and I think you know it as well as we do."

"And I know you," said Peveril, remounting his wearied horse, "for an ungrateful churl, whom,
on the first opportunity, I will assuredly cudgel to a mummy."

To this menace Matthew made no reply, and Peveril presently heard him leave the apartment,
after a few earnest words betwixt him and his mistress.

Impatient at this delay, and at the evil omen implied in these people's conversation and deportment,
Peveril, after some vain spurring of his horse, which positively refused to move a step farther,
dismounted once more, and was about to pursue his journey on foot, notwithstanding the extreme
disadvantage under which the high riding-boots of the period laid those who attempted to walk
with such encumbrances, when he was stopped by a gentle call from the window.

Her counsellor was no sooner gone, than the good-nature and habitual veneration of the dame
for the house of Peveril, and perhaps some fear for her counsellor's bones, induced her to
open the casement, and cry, but in a low and timid tone, "Hist! hist! Master Julian--be you gone?"

"Not yet, dame," said Julian; "though it seems my stay is unwelcome."

"Nay, but good young master, it is because men counsel so differently; for here was my poor
old Roger Raine would have thought the chimney corner too cold for you; and here is Matt Chamberlain
thinks the cold courtyard is warm enough."

"Never mind that, dame," said Julian; "do but only tell me what has happened at Martindale
Castle? I see the beacon is extinguished."

"Is it in troth?--ay, like enough--then good Sir Geoffrey has gone to heaven with my old Roger
Raine!"

"Sacred Heaven!" exclaimed Peveril; "when was my father taken ill?"

"Never as I knows of," said the dame; "but, about three hours since, arrived a party at the
Castle, with buff-coats and bandoleers, and one of the Parliament's folks, like in Oliver's
time. My old Roger Raine would have shut the gates of the inn against them, but he is in the
churchyard, and Matt says it is against law; and so they came in and refreshed men and horses,
and sent for Master Bridgenorth, that is at Moultrassie Hall even now; and so they went up
to the Castle, and there was a fray, it is like, as the old Knight was no man to take napping,
as poor Roger Raine used to say. Always the officers had the best on't; and reason there is,
since they had the law of their side, as our Matthew says. But since the pole-star of the Castle
is out, as your honour says, why, doubtless, the old gentleman is dead."

"Gracious Heaven!--Dear dame, for love or gold, let me have a horse to make for the Castle!"

"The Castle?" said the dame; "the Roundheads, as my poor Roger called them, will kill you as
they have killed your father! Better creep into the woodhouse, and I will send Bett with a
blanket and some supper--Or stay--my old Dobbin stands in the little stable beside the hencoop--e'en
take him, and make the best of your way out of the country, for there is no safety here for
you. Hear what songs some of them are singing at the tap!--so take Dobbin, and do not forget
to leave your own horse instead."

Peveril waited to hear no farther, only, that just as he turned to go off to the stable, the
compassionate female was heard to exclaim--"O Lord! what will Matthew Chamberlain say!" but
instantly added, "Let him say what he will, I may dispose of what's my own."

With the haste of a double-fee'd hostler did Julian exchange the equipments of his jaded brute
with poor Dobbin, who stood quietly tugging at his rackful of hay, without dreaming of the
business which was that night destined for him. Notwithstanding the darkness of the place,
Julian succeeded marvellous quickly in preparing for his journey; and leaving his own horse
to find its way to Dobbin's rack by instinct, he leaped upon his new acquisition, and spurred
him sharply against the hill, which rises steeply from the village to the Castle. Dobbin, little
accustomed to such exertions, snorted, panted, and trotted as briskly as he could, until at
length he brought his rider before the entrance-gate of his father's ancient seat.

The moon was now rising, but the portal was hidden from its beams, being situated, as we have
mentioned elsewhere, in a deep recess betwixt two large flanking towers. Peveril dismounted,
turned his horse loose, and advanced to the gate, which, contrary to his expectation, he found
open. He entered the large courtyard; and could then perceive that lights yet twinkled in the
lower part of the building, although he had not before observed them, owing to the height of
the outward walls. The main door, or great hall-gate, as it was called, was, since the partially
decayed state of the family, seldom opened, save on occasions of particular ceremony. A smaller
postern door served the purpose of ordinary entrance; and to that Julian now repaired. This
also was open--a circumstance which would of itself have alarmed him, had he not already had
so many causes for apprehension. His heart sunk within him as he turned to the left, through
a small outward hall, towards the great parlour, which the family usually occupied as a sitting
apartment; and his alarm became still greater, when, on a nearer approach, he heard proceeding
from thence the murmur of several voices. He threw the door of the apartment wide; and the
sight which was thus displayed, warranted all the evil bodings which he had entertained.

In front of him stood the old Knight, whose arms were strongly secured, over the elbows, by
a leathern belt drawn tight round them, and made fast behind; two ruffianly-looking men, apparently
his guards, had hold of his doublet. The scabbard-less sword which lay on the floor, and the
empty sheath which hung by Sir Geoffrey's side, showed the stout old Cavalier had not been
reduced to this state of bondage without an attempt at resistance. Two or three persons, having
their backs turned towards Julian, sat round a table, and appeared engaged in writing--the
voices which he had heard were theirs, as they murmured to each other. Lady Peveril--the emblem
of death, so pallid was her countenance--stood at the distance of a yard or two from her husband,
upon whom her eyes were fixed with an intenseness of gaze, like that of one who looks her last
on the object which she loves the best. She was the first to perceive Julian; and she exclaimed,
"Merciful Heaven!--my son!--the misery of our house is complete!"

"My son!" echoed Sir Geoffrey, starting from the sullen state of dejection, and swearing a
deep oath--"thou art come in the right time, Julian. Strike me one good blow--cleave me that
traitorous thief from the crown to the brisket! and that done, I care not what comes next."

The sight of his father's situation made the son forget the inequality of the contest which
he was about to provoke.

"Villains," he said, "unhand him!" and rushing on the guards with his drawn sword, compelled
them to let go Sir Geoffrey, and stand on their own defence.

Sir Geoffrey, thus far liberated, shouted to his lady. "Undo the belt, dame, and we will have
three good blows for it yet--they must fight well that beat both father and son."

But one of those men who had started up from the writing-table when the fray commenced, prevented
Lady Peveril from rendering her husband this assistance; while another easily mastered the
hampered Knight, though not without receiving several severe kicks from his heavy boots--his
condition permitting him no other mode of defence. A third, who saw that Julian, young, active,
and animated with the fury of a son who fights for his parents, was compelling the two guards
to give ground, seized on his collar, and attempted to master his sword. Suddenly dropping
that weapon, and snatching one of his pistols, Julian fired it at the head of the person by
whom he was thus assailed. He did not drop, but, staggering back as if he had received a severe
blow, showed Peveril, as he sunk into a chair, the features of old Bridgenorth, blackened with
the explosion, which had even set fire to a part of his grey hair. A cry of astonishment escaped
from Julian; and in the alarm and horror of the moment, he was easily secured and disarmed
by those with whom he had been at first engaged.

"Heed it not, Julian," said Sir Geoffrey; "heed it not, my brave boy--that shot has balanced
all accounts!--but how--what the devil--he lives!--Was your pistol loaded with chaff? or has
the foul fiend given him proof against lead?"

There was some reason for Sir Geoffrey's surprise, since, as he spoke, Major Bridgenorth collected
himself--sat up in the chair as one who recovers from a stunning blow--then rose, and wiping
with his handkerchief the marks of the explosion from his face, he approached Julian, and said,
in the same cold unaltered tone in which he usually expressed himself, "Young man, you have
reason to bless God, who has this day saved you from the commission of a great crime."

"Bless the devil, ye crop-eared knave!" exclaimed Sir Geoffrey; "for nothing less than the
father of all fanatics saved your brains from being blown about like the rinsings of Beelzebub's
porridge pot!"

"Sir Geoffrey," said Major Bridgenorth, "I have already told you, that with you I will hold
no argument; for to you I am not accountable for any of my actions."

"Master Bridgenorth," said the lady, making a strong effort to speak, and to speak with calmness,
"whatever revenge your Christian state of conscience may permit you to take on my husband--I--I,
who have some right to experience compassion at your hand, for most sincerely did I compassionate
you when the hand of Heaven was heavy on you--I implore you not to involve my son in our common
ruin!--Let the destruction of the father and mother, with the ruin of our ancient house, satisfy
your resentment for any wrong which you have ever received at my husband's hand."

"Hold your peace, housewife," said the Knight, "you speak like a fool, and meddle with what
concerns you not.--Wrong at my hand? The cowardly knave has ever had but even too much right.
Had I cudgelled the cur soundly when he first bayed at me, the cowardly mongrel had been now
crouching at my feet, instead of flying at my throat. But if I get through this action, as
I have got through worse weather, I will pay off old scores, as far as tough crab-tree and
cold iron will bear me out."

"Sir Geoffrey," replied Bridgenorth, "if the birth you boast of has made you blind to better
principles, it might have at least taught you civility. What do you complain of? I am a magistrate;
and I execute a warrant, addressed to me by the first authority in that state. I am a creditor
also of yours; and law arms me with powers to recover my own property from the hands of an
improvident debtor."

"You a magistrate!" said the Knight; "much such a magistrate as Noll was a monarch. Your heart
is up, I warrant, because you have the King's pardon; and are replaced on the bench, forsooth,
to persecute the poor Papist. There was never turmoil in the state, but knaves had their vantage
by it--never pot boiled, but the scum was cast uppermost."

"For God's sake, my dearest husband," said Lady Peveril, "cease this wild talk! It can but
incense Master Bridgenorth, who might otherwise consider, that in common charity----"

"Incense him!" said Sir Geoffrey, impatiently interrupting her; "God's-death, madam, you will
drive me mad! Have you lived so long in this world, and yet expect consideration and charity
from an old starved wolf like that? And if he had it, do you think that I, or you, madam, as
my wife, are subjects for his charity?--Julian, my poor fellow, I am sorry thou hast come so
unluckily, since thy petronel was not better loaded--but thy credit is lost for ever as a marksman."

This angry colloquy passed so rapidly on all sides, that Julian, scarce recovered from the
extremity of astonishment with which he was overwhelmed at finding himself suddenly plunged
into a situation of such extremity, had no time to consider in what way he could most effectually
act for the succour of his parents. To speak to Bridgenorth fair seemed the more prudent course;
but to this his pride could hardly stoop; yet he forced himself to say, with as much calmness
as he could assume,

"Master Bridgenorth, since you act as a magistrate, I desire to be treated according to the
laws of England; and demand to know of what we are accused, and by whose authority we are arrested?"

"Here is another howlet for ye!" exclaimed the impetuous old Knight; "his mother speaks to
a Puritan of charity; and thou must talk of law to a round-headed rebel, with a wannion to
you! What warrant hath he, think ye, beyond the Parliament's or the devil's?"

"Who speaks of the Parliament?" said a person entering, whom Peveril recognised as the official
person whom he had before seen at the horse-dealer's, and who now bustled in with all the conscious
dignity of plenary authority,--"Who talks of the Parliament?" he exclaimed. "I promise you,
enough has been found in this house to convict twenty plotters--Here be arms, and that good
store. Bring them in, Captain."

"The very same," exclaimed the Captain, approaching, "which I mention in my printed Narrative
of Information, lodged before the Honourable House of Commons; they were commissioned from
old Vander Huys of Rotterdam, by orders of Don John of Austria, for the service of the Jesuits."

"Now, by this light," said Sir Geoffrey, "they are the pikes, musketoons, and pistols, that
have been hidden in the garret ever since Naseby fight!"

"And here," said the Captain's yoke-fellow, Everett, "are proper priest's trappings--antiphoners,
and missals, and copes, I warrant you--ay, and proper pictures, too, for Papists to mutter
and bow over."

"Now plague on thy snuffling whine," said Sir Geoffrey; "here is a rascal will swear my grandmother's
old farthingale to be priest's vestments, and the story book of Owlenspiegel a Popish missal!"

"But how's this, Master Bridgenorth?" said Topham, addressing the magistrate; "your honour
has been as busy as we have; and you have caught another knave while we recovered these toys."

"I think, sir," said Julian, "if you look into your warrant, which, if I mistake not, names
the persons whom you are directed to arrest, you will find you have not title to apprehend me."

"Sir," said the officer, puffing with importance, "I do not know who you are; but I would you
were the best man in England, that I might teach you the respect due to the warrant of the
House. Sir, there steps not the man within the British seas, but I will arrest him on authority
of this bit of parchment; and I do arrest you accordingly.--What do you accuse him of, gentlemen?"

Dangerfield swaggered forward, and peeping under Julian's hat, "Stop my vital breath," he exclaimed,
"but I have seen you before, my friend, an I could but think where; but my memory is not worth
a bean, since I have been obliged to use it so much of late, in the behalf of the poor state.
But I do know the fellow; and I have seen him amongst the Papists--, I'll take that on my assured
damnation."

"Why, Captain Dangerfield," said the Captain's smoother, but more dangerous associate,--"verily,
it is the same youth whom we saw at the horse-merchant's yesterday; and we had matter against
him then, only Master Topham did not desire us to bring it out."

