"Well, I wonder, and I can't understand it," cried Ella, bursting into a passion of tears.

"There now, Ella," Mara began soothingly, "you will see all in the true light when you have
had time to think it over. Remember how old Houghton is looked upon in this city. Consider
his intense hostility to us."

"I've nothing to say for him," sobbed Ella.

"Well, it would be said that your father had permitted you to marry the son of this rich old
extortioner for the sake of his money. Your action would throw discredit on all your father's
life and devotion to a cause--"

"Which is dead as Julius Caesar," Ella interrupted.

"But which is as sacred to us," continued Mara very gravely, "as the memory of our loved and
honored dead."

"I don't believe our loved and honored dead would wish useless unhappiness to continue indefinitely.
What earthly good can ever result from this cherished bitterness and enmity? Oh, mamma, mamma!
I wish you had lived, for you would have understood the love which forgives and heals the wounds
of the past."

"Ella, can you have given your love to this alien and almost stranger?"

"I have at least given him my respect and admiration," she replied, rising and wiping her eyes
before resuming her work. Suddenly she paused, and in a serio-comic attitude she pointed with
the roller as she said, "Mara, suppose you insisted that that kitchen table was a cathedral,
would it be a cathedral to me? No more so than that your indiscriminate prejudices against
Northern people are grand, heroic, or based on truth. So there, now. I've got to unburden my
feelings somewhere; although I expect sympathy from no one, I believe in the angels' song of
'Peace on earth and good will toward men.'"

"I fear your good will toward one man," said Mara, very sadly, "is taking you out of sympathy
with those who love you, and who have the best and most natural right to your love."

"See how mistaken you are! I shall never be out of sympathy with you, papa, or Cousin Sophy.
But how can I sympathize with some of your views when God has given me a nature that revolts
at them? If you ever love a good man, God and your own heart will teach you what a sacred thing
it is. What if I am poor, and lacking in graces and accomplishments, I know I have an honest,
loving nature. Think of that old man Houghton condemning and threatening his son, as if he
had committed a vile crime in his most honorable intentions toward me! Well, well, it's all
over. I've given my word to papa that I'll do nothing without his consent, and he'll see me
buried before he'll give it. Don't you worry, I'm not going to pine and live on moonshine.
I'll prove that I'm a Bodine in my own way."

"Yes, Ella, you will, and eventually it will be in the right way."

"Mara, what I have said is in confidence, and since I've had my say I'd rather not talk about
it any more."

Mara was glad enough to drop the subject, for Ella had been saying things to which her own
heart echoed most uncomfortably. She and Mrs. Hunter accepted Mrs. Bodine's invitation to dine
that evening, and, in her sympathy for Bodine, was kinder to him than ever, thus reviving his
hopes and deepening his feelings.

Time passed, bringing changes scarcely perceptible on the surface, yet indicating to observant
eyes concealed and silent forces at work. And these were observant eyes; Mrs. Bodine saw that
Ella was masking feelings and memories to which no reference was made. Ella began to observe
that her father's demeanor toward Mara was not the same as that by which he manifested his
affection for her. While she was glad for his sake, and hoped that Mara would respond favorably,
she had an increased sense of injustice that he should seek happiness in a way forbidden to
her. The thought would arise, "I am not so much to him after all."

One day, near the end of July, Ella, her father, Mrs. Hunter and Mara, were on the Battery,
sitting beneath the shade of a live oak. The raised promenade, overlooking the water, was not
far away, and among the passers-by Mara saw Clancy and Miss Ainsley approaching. Apparently
they were absorbed in each other, but, when opposite, Clancy turned and looked her full in
the face. She gave no sign of recognition nor did he. That mutual and unobserved encounter
of their eyes set its seal on their last interview. They were strangers.

"There goes a pair, billing and cooing," said Ella with a laugh.

"Mara, don't you feel well?" asked the captain anxiously. "You look very pale."

"I felt the heat very much to-day," she replied evasively. "I am longing for August and rest."

"Oh, Mara! let us shut up shop at once," cried Ella. "Papa is at leisure now and we can make
little expeditions down the bay, out to Summerville and elsewhere."

"No," Mara replied, "I would rather do just what we agreed upon. It's only a few days now."

"You are as sot as the everlasting hills."

Mara was silent, and glad indeed that her quiet face gave no hint of the tumult in her heart.

Mrs. Hunter's eyes were angrily following Clancy and Miss Ainsley. "Well," she said, with a
scornful laugh, "that renegade Southerner has found his proper match in that Yankee coquette.
I doubt whether he gets her though, if a man ever does get a born flirt. When she's through
with Charleston she'll be through with him, if all I hear of her is true."

"Oh, you're mistaken, Mrs. Hunter," Ella answered. "She fairly dotes on him, and if he don't
marry her he's a worse flirt than she is. Think of Mr. Clancy's blue blood. She undoubtedly
appreciates that."

"I'm inclined to think that he was a changeling, and that old Colonel Clancy's child was spirited
away."

"I beg your pardon, Mrs. Hunter, but I differ with you. While I cannot share in many of Mr.
Clancy's views and affiliations, he has the reputation of being sincere and straightforward.
Even his enemies must admit that he seeks to make his friendliness to the North conducive to
Southern interests."

Mara's heart smote her that even Captain Bodine had been fairer to Clancy than she had been.

Words rose to Ella's lips, but she repressed them, and soon afterward they returned to their
respective homes.

Mara early retired to the solitude of her own room, for that cold mutual glance on the Battery
had suggested a new thought not yet entertained. In her mental excitement it promised to banish
the dreary stagnation of her life. She must have a motive, and if it involved the very self-sacrifice
that she had been warned against, so much the better.

"It would teach Owen Clancy how futile were his words," she said to herself. "It would bring
happiness to my father's friend; it would become a powerful incentive in my own life, and,
above all, would compel me to banish the thought of one to whom I have said I will never speak
again."

The more she dwelt upon this course, the more clear it became in her warped judgment the one
path of escape from an aimless, hopeless existence fast becoming unendurable. She was not by
any means wholly selfish in reaching her decision, for thoughts of her own need did not predominate.
"If I cannot be happy myself," she reasoned, "I can make Captain Bodine happy, for there could
not be a more devoted wife than I will become, if he puts into words the language of his eyes.
Ella has already ceased to be in true sympathy with him in matters that have made so much of
the warp and woof of his life. We two are one in these respects. I can and will cast out all
else if my motive is strong enough."

CHAPTER XXXIII

A SURE TEST

Clancy had gone to Nature to be calmed and healed, but he had brought a spirit at variance
with her teachings. He soon recognized that he was neither receptive nor docile. He chafed
impatiently and angrily at Mara's obduracy, which, nevertheless, only increased his love for
her. The deepest instincts of his nature made him feel that she belonged to him, and he to
her. The barrier between them was so intangible that he was in a sort of rage that he could
not brush it aside. Reflection always brought him back to the conviction that she did love
him. Her passionate words: "If my heart break a thousand times I will never speak to you again,"
grew more and more significant. Odd fancies, half-waking dreams about her, pursued him into
the solitude of the forest. She seemed like one imprisoned; he could see, but could not reach
and release her. Again she was under a strange, malign spell, which some day might suddenly
be broken--broken all too late.

Then she would dwell in his thoughts as the victim of a species of moral insanity which might
pass away. At times her dual life became so clear to him that he was almost impelled to hasten
back to the city, in the belief that he could speak such strong, earnest words as would enable
her to cast aside her prejudices, and break away from the influences which were darkening and
misshaping her life. Then he would despondently recall all that he had said and done, and how
futile had been his effort.

He neither fished nor hunted, but passed the time either in long tramps, or in sitting idly
tormented by perturbed thoughts. Believing that he had reached a crisis in his life, it was
his nature to come to some decision. He was essentially a man of action, strong-willed and
resolute. He despised what he termed weakness, forgetting that the impulses of strength often
lead to error, for the reason that patience and fortitude are lacking.

In facing the possibilities of the future, he began to yield to the promptings of ambition,
a trait which had no mean place in his character. "If Mara denies her love, and sacrifices
herself to Bodine," he reasoned, "what is there left for me but to make the most of my life
by attaining power and influence? I can only put pleasures and excitements in the place of
happiness. I won't go through life like a winged bird."

When such thoughts were in the ascendant, Miss Ainsley presented herself to his fancy, alluring,
fascinating, beckoning. She seemed the embodiment of that brilliant career which he regarded
as the best solace he could hope for. Often, however, he would wake in the night, and, from
his forest bivouac, look up at the stars. Then a calm, deep voice in his soul would tell him
unmistakably that, even if he attained every success that he craved, his heart would not be
in it, that he would always hide the melancholy of a lifelong disappointment. All these misgivings
and compunctions usually ended in the thought: "Caroline Amsley and all that she represents
is the best I can hope for now. She may be playing with me--I'm not sure, if she will marry
me, I can probably give her as true a regard as she will bestow upon me. She is not a woman
to love devotedly and unselfishly, not counting the cost. I could not marry such a woman, for
I feel it would be base to take what I could not return; but I could marry her. I would do
her no wrong, for I could give to her all the affection to which she is entitled, all that
she would actually care for. If I am mistaken, I am totally at fault in the impression which
she has made upon me, and I do not think that I am. I am not in love with her, and therefore
am not blind. She is not in love with me. It has merely so happened that I have proved agreeable
to her, pleased, amused, and interested her. Possibly I have led her to feel that we are so
companionable that a life journey together would be quite endurable. My reason, all my instincts,
assure me that this beautiful girl has considered this question more than once before--that
she is considering it now, coolly and deliberately. I am being weighed in the balances of her
mind, for I do not think she has heart enough to enable that organ to have much voice in the
matter. Her views and beliefs are intellectual. No strong, earnest feelings sway her. When
have her sympathies been touched in behalf of any one or any cause? Oh, my rare beauty! I am
not blind. Selfishness is the mainspring of your character; but it is a selfishness so refined,
so rational and amenable to the laws of good taste, that it can be calculated upon with almost
mathematical accuracy. You are no saint, but a saint might be beguiled into faults which to
you are impossible. You are a fit bride for ambition, and would be its crown and glory."

Such was often the tenor of his thoughts, and ambition suggested the many doors to advancement
which such an alliance would open. Mr. Ainsley was not only a man of wealth, but also of large,
liberal ideas. It certainly would be a pleasure and a constant exhilaration to aid him in carrying
out his great enterprises.

Thus Clancy, as well as Mara, was led by disappointment in his dearest hope of happiness to
seek what next promised best in his estimation to redeem life from a dreary monotony of negations.
He also resolved to have motives and incentives; nor was his ambition purely selfish, for he
purposed to use whatever power, wealth and influence he might obtain for the benefit of the
people among whom he dwelt. Hers, however, was the nobler motive, and the less selfish, for
it involved self-sacrifice, even though it was mistaken, and could lead only to wrong action.
It would cost him nothing to carry out his large, beneficent purposes. Indeed, they would add
to his pleasures and enhance his reputation. She was but a woman, and saw no other path of
escape from the conditions of her lot except the thorny one of self-abnegation.

Alternately cast down, and fired by conflicting thoughts and purposes, Clancy soon discovered
that the woods was no place for him, and he resolved to return to the city, there to be guided
by the circumstances of the next few weeks. If it became clear that Mara had not been influenced
by his warning, but on the contrary was accepting Bodine's attentions, then he would face the
truth that she was lost to him beyond hope. Without compunction he would turn to Miss Ainsley,
and, with all the wariness and penetration which he could exercise, seek to discover how far
she would go with him in his life campaign to achieve eminence. He was glad, however, that
he did not regard her as essential to his plans and hopes. Indeed, he had the odd feeling that
even if she rejected him as a husband, he could shake hands with her and say: "Very well, Ainsley,
we can be good comrades just the same. We amuse and interest each other, we mutually stimulate
our mental faculties. Let it end here."

In this mood he fulfilled his promise and wrote as follows:

"My DEAR AINSLEY--Permit me to remind you of my existence--if one can be said to exist in these
wilds. An expedition of this kind is a good thing for a fellow occasionally. It enables him
to get acquainted with himself, to indulge in egotism without being a nuisance. I have neither
hunted, fished, nor studied the natives. I have not seen a "mountain maid" whose embrace I
would prefer to that of a bear. I have merely tramped aimlessly about, meanwhile learning that
I am not adapted to communion with nature. At this moment I should prefer smoking a cigar with
you on the balcony to looking at scenery which should inspire artist and poet. I am neither,
merely a man of affairs. Humanity interests me more than oaks, however gigantic. You see I
have no soul, no heart, no soaring imagination. I am as matter-of-fact a fellow as you are.
That's why we get on so well together. We can chaff, spar, and run intellectual tilts as amicably
as any two men in town. This proves you to be quite exceptional--delightfully so. I'm not surprised,
however, for, as I have said to you, you are sated with the other kind of thing. How long will
this fancy last? Now that you are so manly you should not be fickle. You have not half comprehended
the penalties of your new role, for you may find that it involves a distressing frankness.
I think I had better close. Letter-writing pre-supposes literary qualities which I do not possess.
Men, unless sentimentally inclined, or given to hobbies, rarely write long letters to each
other. If unusually congenial they can talk together as long as women. I do not know of a man
in town who can equal you as good company; and with this fact in mind, I shall atone for a
brief letter by putting in an appearance at an early date. If you have had any flirtations
in my absence I shall expect all the details. You know I do not care for such trivial amusements.
In this material age, making the world move in the way of business affords ample scope for
my limited faculties, while a chat with you is better than a game of chess in the way of recreation,
better than moping in the woods.         Your friend,        CLANCY."

He had barely time to post the letter before the mail-stage left the little hamlet in which
it was written. He was soon dissatisfied with himself and the missive, and regretted having
written it. Before an hour had passed he muttered: "I never wrote such a letter to a woman
before, and I won't again. I put myself in the worst light, in fact was unjust to myself. How
differently I would write to Mara! Is it the difference in women which inevitably inspires
different thought and action? At any rate, there is a touch of coarseness in this masculine
persiflage which grates. When I return we must become friends as man and woman. I wonder if
she will feel as I do about it?"

Miss Ainsley was not satisfied with the letter at all, one reason being that it revealed too
much penetration on Clancy's part. While she welcomed him with her old cordiality she took
him to task at once.

"This is a spurious letter," she said, holding it up. "You would never write such an affair
to a male friend. You betrayed a consciousness of my femininity in every line. You preached
to me and warned me with the same penful of ink. You write as if you were a commonplace male
cynic, and I a woman who was trying to unsex herself by a lot of ridiculous affectations. I
wished a genial, jolly letter such as you might write to an old college chum."

"Do you know the reason why I did not, rather could not, write such a letter?"

"No."

"Because you are not an old college chum."

"I was not aware that you were so tremendously sincere."

"I'm not tremendously sincere--not tremendous in any grand sense of the word, but I've learned
that I can be tremendously awkward in a false position. It is absurd of you to fancy that I
can think of you in any other light than that of a beautiful woman, gifted with more than your
share of intellect. I prefer that our friendship should rest on this obvious fact. We are too
old 'to make believe,' as children say. I came to this conclusion within an hour after I wrote
the letter."

"Oh, you dashed it off hastily, without giving it thought?"

"I've given you two thoughts to your one," he replied, laughing lightly.

"And none of them very complimentary, judging from the letter." And she impatiently tore it up.

"That's right. Put it out of existence."

"I almost wish I had kept it as documentary evidence against you," she remarked.

"Oh, come! Friends do not wish evidence against, but for each other. I could remain away scarcely
a week."

"From business, yes."

"Or from my most delightful recreation; yes."

"You find me very amusing then."

"I do indeed, and interesting also. I am quite certain that your society gives me far more
pleasure than mine affords you."

"Since I am relegated to woman's sphere I certainly shall not protest against that belief.
I am now under no bonds to be distressingly frank."

"You never would have been any franker than you wished to be. For the manifestation of that
trait I shall have to depend on something very different."

"And what may that be?"

"Why, simply the quality of your friendship."

"I am satisfied that mine compares very favorably with yours."

"In both instances neither of us can escape one sure test."

"Indeed! What test?"

"That of time," he replied, smiling significantly. "Good-by. I'm quite sure that your regard
will survive till to-morrow afternoon when we are to take a sail in the harbor, so Mrs. Willoughby
has informed me."

Miss Ainsley gave a little complacent nod in his direction as he disappeared, and thought,
"Since you are so content and agreeable as a friend merely, I'm half-inclined to keep you as
such, and marry some one else."

CHAPTER XXXIV

"BITTERNESS MUST BE CHERISHED"

To all appearance the long hot days of August were passing very uneventfully to the characters
of our story. The cold look which Clancy received from Mara on the Battery, together with the
fact that Bodine appeared more lover-like than ever, speedily satisfied him that his best resource
was the ambitious career which in his absence he had accepted in the place of happiness. He
therefore gave himself up quite unreservedly to Miss Ainsley's fascinations, and, with all
the skill and energy he possessed, seconded her father's business enterprises. Mr. Ainsley
was sometimes in town, and again absent, as his business interests required; for he was one
of those indefatigable men who, with soldier-like energy and fearlessness, carry out their
plans, regardless of discomfort or danger. He recognized the fact that Clancy was both capable
and useful, and was already inclined to make him one of his chief lieutenants in the South.
He understood the young man's relations to his daughter perfectly, and was not at all averse
to a union between them. At the same time, he knew how problematical Caroline's action would
be, and that it would be useless for him to appear for or against the match. He was aware of
his daughter's attitude in regard to marriage, and also convinced that she would take her own
course.

It would seem that she was taking no course whatever at present, but indolently and complacently
letting matters drift. She sometimes smilingly thought, "I scarcely know whether Mr. Clancy
is friend or lover. I suppose I could lead him to be more pronounced in either character if
I chose, but since he is so agreeable as he is, I would be a fool not to keep everything in
statu quo till I wish a change. Life is too long to give up a pleasure before you are through
with it."

Clancy quietly studied her mood, and was in no greater hurry than herself. Indeed, both felt
that they had arrived at a comparatively clear mutual understanding, and so were quite at their
ease, she enjoying his society abundantly, and he hers, as far as his bitter memories would permit.

Quick of apprehension, Bodine soon perceived a change in Mara's attitude toward him, but was
considerate in availing himself of such slight encouragement as she gave. He had been taught
by her manner that her first feeling on the discovery of a warmer regard than she had expected
was that of repulsion. He now believed that she had thought the matter over, and was learning
that it might not be impossible to regard him in a new and different light. Long since the
ardor of youth had passed, and he was disposed to allow her time to become accustomed to the
thought of wifehood. In the meantime he put forth every effort to prove himself companionable,
in spite of their disparity in age. It was not his delicate and thoughtful attentions, however,
which reconciled her to the future that she had accepted, but rather the motives already revealed.
Under the influence of these, a certain species of mental excitement had been evoked. She had
not ceased to suffer, but she had ceased merely to exist.

There was something now to look forward to, sacred duties to anticipate, and a future which
was not a blank. She believed that in giving help and happiness to another she would more surely
trample on self, and make it the vantage-ground for a greater devotion than that of most women
whose love is often partly self-love. In regarding her first pure love and all its promptings
as the phase of self to be destroyed, she was committing her fatal error; and of this error,
not only Clancy's words, but also her own heart, often warned her. But she was not one to turn
back, having once resolved upon a course.

She had far too much delicacy and maidenly pride to suggest consciously to Bodine the nature
of her thoughts, but she was willing that he should see that she no longer shrank outwardly
from his occasional manifestations of a tenderer regard than he bestowed upon Ella. That something
in her woman's nature beyond her control did shrink and plead for escape, she knew well; but
to conquer this instinctive aversion was a part of the task which she had set for herself.

Not only quick-witted Ella, but also Mrs. Bodine and Mrs. Hunter, saw the drift of affairs,
and gave their unhesitating approval. Mrs. Hunter was glad, because it would destroy Clancy's
prospects forever, and prove a sort of triumph over him. Then it was, as she assured Mara one
day, "eminently fitting. Your father and mother would both approve."

"That thought comes to me, too," calmly rejoined the girl. "I hope they will--I think they
will. But let us not talk further till all is settled."

Mrs. Bodine believed the marriage would result well on other grounds. "Cousin Hugh," she said
one day when they were alone, "you may shut me up if I am meddling, but you are not thinking
of Mara in the same way that you did in the spring."

"I admit it, Cousin Sophy, and you need not shut up."

"Well, I reckon it will come about. On general principles I don't approve of such marriages,
but I suppose there are exceptions to most rules. As I have said to you before, Mara is as
old in her feelings as you are, and I think you will be happier together than you would be
apart. I never understood Mara altogether; but of one thing I am certain, she must have some
strong motive, something or some person for whom she can sacrifice herself; and, being a woman,
she would have a good deal better time sacrificing herself to a man than to anything else;"
and the old lady chirped her little complacent laugh.

"Rest assured," said the veteran, "I don't want any self-sacrifice in Mara's case."

"Of course not; nor do I. I wouldn't approve of any actual self-sacrifice, but Mara will try
to come as near it as she can. I reckon she'd be more drawn toward a cripple like you than
the handsomest young fellow in town, on general principles; and then she has been interested
in you from the first, because you, in a peculiar sense, represent to her the past, which has
been almost her only inheritance."

"I confess that I have indulged in the same thoughts which you express. God grant that we both
are right! She has become strangely dear to me. Once I could never have imagined it at my time
of life."

"Oh, the heart needn't grow old," was the laughing reply.

The captain's outlook was rendered more favorable by the reception of a note which contained
the offer of a better position than that held in the employ of the detested Mr. Houghton. When
he investigated the matter he learned that the offer came largely through the influence of
Clancy, and this last confirmed the veteran's impression that the young man was using his influence
and prosperity for the benefit of the South.

To Mara it was a bitter ordeal to listen to Bodine's complacent explanation of the affair,
and she was glad that she was told in the dusky twilight, which concealed an expression of
pain even beyond her control. Words of passionate protest rose to her very lips, but she remembered
in time that they would involve revelations which would thwart her purpose to make him happy
at every cost to herself. If he ever learned what Clancy had been to her, what he was at this
agonized moment, her vocation, if not gone, would be impaired beyond remedy. Afterward, in
the solitude of her own room, she accepted this bitter experience, as she had resolved to accept
all others, as a part of her lot.

In her morbidness she became Jesuitical. Her father's old friend should be made as happy as
it was in her power to render him. Whatever interfered with this purpose should be concealed
or trampled upon. Of Clancy she said bitterly, "If he thinks he has been magnanimous, how little
he understands me."

Clancy's motives had been somewhat mixed. He was willing that her pride should be rebuked and
wounded, and he also wished her to know that he was above the petty resentment of jealousy.

Poor Ella felt that she was becoming isolated; an impression, however, which she would not
have had were it not for her recent experiences. Had her heart remained as light and untouched
as it was when we first met her, her pleasure over her father's prospects would have been unalloyed.
Even now her satisfaction was deep and sincere, but it was not in human nature to forget how
summarily she had been denied the happiness so sweet to those of her age. She felt, however,
that all were against her; that even kind old Mrs. Bodine would not listen patiently to her
thoughts. So she kept them to herself, and sought by forced mirthfulness to disguise them.
She talked and laughed with the young men who called upon her, and they came in increasing
numbers as inevitably as a flower attracts the bees. She was the life of the "family excursions,"
as she characterized in her thoughts those in which Mara and Mrs. Hunter had a part; and she
joined others of which her father approved, but there was often trouble and sadness in her
eyes, and her cheeks and form were losing their roundness of outline. Mrs. Bodine was not deceived.
She noted everything silently, and thought, "She is making a brave fight; she must make a brave
fight. There is no other course for her. I reckon she'll win it, as many a girl has before."

The old lady was thoughtful, kind, and very attentive. At the same time, with the nicest tact,
she infused a firmness and spirit into her demeanor which made the girl feel that her cousin
had sympathy only with the effort to conquer or forget. And she honestly made such effort,
but was often aghast at its futility. In her brusque way she said to herself, "What's the use
of trying? It seems like a disease which must run its course till old Father Time brings some
sort of a cure."

One day she went to see Aun' Sheba, and found the old woman feeling poorly.

"Yes, honey," she said, "bein' lazy doan 'gree wid me 'tall. I doan see how Unc. stan's it
all de yeah roun'."

"I hab de rheumatiz," Uncle Sheba remarked in the way of explanation.

"Now, Unc., dat ar rheumatiz is like de scapegoat in de Bible. You loads it up with all you
sins. We all hope dat wen you got so sot on dat you'd turn ober a new leaf. How you stan' it
sittin' roun' all day I doan see, no how. I'se gettin' so heaby an' logy an' oncomf'ble dat
I'se gwine ter take in washin' de rest ob de month."

"I'd be glad to go to work to-morrow, too," said Ella. "I'd be glad of anything to make the
time pass."

"Why, honey, wot you want de time to pass quick fer? You oughter be like de hummin'-bird, gederin
sweets all de day."

"I feel more like a croaking raven."

"You'se quar, Missy Ella. You'se up an' you'se down, an' you doan know why. Ole Hannah dat
lib wid you says dat you'se gittin' a lot ob beaux. Why, you eben make a 'pression on dat big,
'ansome Northern chap, ole Houghton's son, wen you doan know it. More'n once he ax me which
de cakes you make, an' wen I tell him, he wanter buy dem all."

"That's very funny," Ella said, and there was the old mirthful ring in her laugh.

"You know him?" Aun' Sheba asked, quickly.

"I met him at Mrs. Willoughby's."

"Shuah now! Dat counts fer it. Well, he'd gobble all you'se cake if I'd let him, but I had
oder cus'mers on my min'; an' he seem ter hab on'y you on his min'."

"You were very wise, Aun' Sheba. So much cake would have made him ill," and she still laughed
joyously.

"'Pears to me you'se gittin' betteh, Missy Ella."

"Oh, you always make me laugh and hearten me up, Aun' Sheba."

"Well, who'd a tink dat ar civil, nice spoken young man was de son ob dat ole sinner Houghton.
Beckon Missy Mara doan like you'se talkin' wid him at Mis Wil'by's."

"Of course not. He's a Northern Vandal, you know."

"Dunno notin' 'bout Wandals. I jedge folks by wot dey is deysefs. He couldn't help bein' bawn
at de Norf. Long as he 'habe himself, wot dat agin him?"

"Being born at the North is a crime, some people think."

"Yes,--I know, but dat ar suttingly fool talk. Dat ain't de trouble so much in dis case. It's
cause he's dat ole 'tankerous Houghton's son."

"He isn't to blame for that either," Ella answered, hotly.

"Lor', Missy Ella! how you stan' up fer 'im."

"I don't believe in injustice, Aun' Sheba," said Ella quietly, conscious meanwhile that her
cheeks were getting very red.

"De heat am po'ful," Aun' Sheba remarked, sententiously. Then her plump form began to shake
with mirth. "Dar now, Missy Ella," she added, "de blin' ole woman kin see as fur in de grin-stone
as de next one. He'd stan' up fer you agin de hull worl. It shines right out in his 'ansome face."

"How very blind you are, Aun' Sheba! Why, he's not fit to be spoken to, and I'm not to speak
to him again as long as I live. Good-by. Good-by, Uncle Sheba. I've heard that sawing wood
was the best cure for rheumatism known;" and she flitted out of the dusky cabin like a tropical
bird.

Aun' Sheba still laughed to herself, and remarked, "Unc., s'pose you try Missy Ella's cure?"

"Wot she know 'bout it?" growled Uncle Sheba, with an injured aspect. "Wot de use ob sawin'
wood all day wen de town hot 'nuff now to roas' lobsters?"

"Dat min's me, Unc. Why don' you took ter some sittin' wuck like fishin' in de harbor? You
mought catch a lobster, or some oder fish."

"De fish an' me 'ud bof be briled in dis yere sun 'fore we got home."

"Bar, Unc., you wouldn't go to Heben 'less you was toted."

"Ob cose not. Doan de Bible say de angels gwine ter tote us?"

"Well, I s'pose dey is.--Ef a body ony know'd weder it ud be up or down."

"Dar now, Aun' Sheba, wot fei you talk so se'rus in Augst? Nex' winter we'se gwine ter hab
a refreshin' from on high."

"P'raps you won' lib till nex' winter, Unc."

Uncle Sheba began to hitch uneasily, and remarked, "I doan see no use ob sech oncomf'ble talk
in de restin' time ob de yeah."

Aun' Sheba soon forgot him in her unspoken thoughts of Ella and young Houghton.

"I begins ter unerstan' dat leetle gal now, an' all her goins on--puttin' aw-spice in de cake
twice, an' sayin' quar tings. Well, well, I knows dey's all agin her, po' chile. Wot foolishness
it all am! I once jam my ban' in de do'--s'pose I went on jamin' for eber. Der's no use ob
der lookin' glum at me, fer dat young man's gwine ter hab all her cakes he wants. I won'er
if Missy Mara got de same 'plaint as Missy Ella. She bery deep, an' won' let on, eben ter her
ole nuss. Pears ter me de cap'n's gittin' kiner lopsided toward her, but I don' belibe dat'll
wuck."

Ella was both gladdened and saddened by her visit. Houghton's buying her cake was one of those
little homely facts on which love delights to dwell; for the heart instinctively knows that
genuine love permeates the whole being, prompting to thoughtfullness in small matters which
indifference overlooks. She could not but be glad that he had seemed to have "on'y you on his
min'"; and then she grieved that all which was coming about so naturally, like a spring growth,
should have been harshly smitten by the black frost of prejudice and hate.

After an early dinner that evening her father asked her kindly to go with him and Mara to the
Battery; but she declined, saying she would rather keep Mrs. Bodine company. He did not urge
her; and he had been so preoccupied by his thoughts as not to observe that she was pale and
dejected, in spite of her efforts to appear as usual.

When alone Mrs. Bodine said, "You should have gone, Ella. You need the fresh cool air from
the water. Why didn't you go?"

"Oh!" said the girl, in assumed lightness of tone, "three is sometimes a crowd."

"You shouldn't feel that way, Ella. You would never be a crowd."

"You are forgetting your old experiences, Cousin Sophy."

"No, I'm not. So you see whither affairs are tending?"

"Oh, cousin! Am I a bat?"

"I hope you are not averse."

"No, Cousin Sophy, I would do anything, and suffer much, to make papa happy. You know how I
love Mara, though we disagree on many points; and if she and papa would be happier--Oh! why
can't I be happy, too?" and she gave way to a tempest of sobs.

"We all wish you to be happy, Ella," said Mrs. Bodine, soothingly.

"Yes, in your own way," she replied, brokenly. "What happened before I was born must be considered
first. If love is sweet to papa at his age think what it is to me?"

"You must not imagine, Ella dear, that we don't feel with you and for you. I am proud of you
as I watch your brave fight in which you will conquer."

"Why should I conquer when my heart tells me that the one I love is worthy of my love? It hurts
me, it wounds my very soul, that he and I should be spoken to as if we had committed a crime.
How could my love be so sacred and heavenly if it were wrong? Oh, how I hate, hate! There is
nothing so hateful as hate."

"But, Ella, you don't consider all--"

"There is no need of considering all, Cousin Sophy. There are some things which stand out so
clearly that all else is insignificant. Mr. Houghton hates papa and me. Does papa love him
or his son? You know me, faulty, foolish little girl that I am; but think of that man raging
at his son because he dared to love me! If George had committed a crime his father would have
spent a fortune in defending him. To love me was worse than a crime. He would have been turned
into the streets. Oh, it's all so unjust, it's all the spawn of hate!"

Mrs. Bodine was aghast at the intensity of the girl's feelings, but could only say, "Well,
Ella, dear, since things are as they are you must fight it out. Trust the experience of an
old woman. Marriages in the face of such bitter opposition are rarely happy."

"Yes, the bitterness must be sacredly cherished, whatever else is lost. Oh, I know, Cousin
Sophy, I know I must fight it out if it takes my lifetime, and all the while know that God
would bless our love if hate hadn't blighted it."

CHAPTER XXXV

NOBLE REVENGE

George Houghton took to the mountain solitudes a better and purer spirit than Clancy, who was
so ready to be consoled by ambition and the fascinations of a woman incapable of evoking the
best in his nature. The young fellow did fish and hunt with tireless energy, and many a humble
cabin was stocked with provisions by his exertions. Believing that not only Bodine, but also
that Ella herself, would have nothing to do with him, his affectionate nature turned to his
father. With a large charity he tried to forget the stern words which had sorely wounded him,
and only to remember the influences on his father's life which had led to their utterance.
He recalled the abundant proofs of his kindness and liberality; and, now that his young dream
was over, he purposed to carry out the old man's schemes as best he could.

He tired himself out through the long hot days, and slept at night from exhaustion. The time
thus passed until he felt that he had the strength to return to the city, and act as if Ella
did not dwell there. He also thought of his father's need of help, and regretted that he had
remained away so long.

The old man looked at him keenly when he returned, seeing that the young face had grown older
by years, and that steadiness of purpose and resolution were in its every bronzed line.

"It's all right, father," George replied to the questioning glance. "I've come back to carry
out your wishes."

"Ah, my boy! now I know that you are made of the same stuff as your brother. Well, you won't
be sorry."

"I wish to leave this town, and I wish you would too. I don't think it's good for you to be here."

"I'll think of it, George. I have thought of it. I shouldn't be mulish since you are not."

"I'm glad you feel so about leaving, father. Go back with me to your old congenial friends
and surroundings. I, for one, don't wish to stay where I am ostracized."

"Oh, curse the rebels! I've punished them! I've punished them well!"

"I don't wish to punish them; but, since they will have nothing to do with me, a decent self-respect
leads me to go where I can be treated according to my behavior."

"I know you can't feel as I do. All I ask is that you have nothing to do with them."

For the next few days, regardless of the heat, George toiled early and late in his father's
office, incited by the hope of soon taking the old man away on a visit to the more bracing
climate of the North. In the evenings he refreshed himself by a long swim in the harbor, and
by sailing his boat over its waters.

One evening, while enjoying the latter favorite pastime in the early twilight, it so happened
that he caught sight, in a passing boat, of a group which made his heart throb quickly. In
the stern sat Captain Bodine steering the vessel toward the city. Ella was near him, and two
ladies whom he did not know. As a hunter his eyes were keen, and he was satisfied that he had
not been recognized. He could not resist the temptation to get a better view of Ella, and,
drawing his hat over his eyes, he began to manoeuvre his boat so as to accomplish his purpose.

His little craft skimmed here and there so swiftly, as he tacked, that Ella at last began to
watch it with a pleased yet languid interest, remarking, "That boat yonder tacks about and
sails as if it were alive."

"Yah, yah, so 'tis alibe," said the negro owner of the craft which Bodine had hired for their
excursion. "Young Marse Houghton sail dat boat, an' he beats any duck dat eber swum."

Ella's breath came quick, and she turned pale and red in her conflicting feelings, for it was
evident that Houghton was purposely keeping near to them. She saw the frown on her father's
face, and that Mara's expression was grave. Mrs. Hunter indignantly said, "He had better go
on and mind his own business. Why should old Houghton's son be hovering around us like a hawk,
I'd like to know?"

"The harbor is as free to him as to us," Ella answered, hotly.

Mrs. Hunter pursed her lips and looked unutterable things at the girl, but she regarded neither
the matron's sour expression nor her father's stern glance, for her eyes were fascinated and
held by the vessel which sped along the water like a white-winged gull. No one except Ella
and the colored man continued the observance of Houghton. The girl was in a perverse mood,
and watched until her father rebukingly spoke her name; then she turned away.

Meanwhile George gazed wistfully at one whom he believed that he might never see again; for
he and his father were almost ready for their visit North, where the young man was to remain.
Then he saw her steady gaze in his direction. Could she have recognized him? Did she continue
to watch him because of some faint interest? His pulses quickened at the thought. After a few
moments he said bitterly: "Yes, she knows me at last, and turns away. Very well, away go I, then."

At this moment he caught a glimpse of the western sky, and his sailor instincts were alarmed.
There was a single dark cloud rising rapidly, portending not a storm, but sudden, violent gusts.
In the gathering gloom all thought of vanishing was abandoned. No matter how Ella regarded
him, he would not be far away while there was a shadow of danger to her. Examining his sail
carefully he knew he could drop it to the point of safety at a moment's notice.

The wind on which he had been sailing died out. Then came little puffs from the west. To catch
these the colored skipper of the captain's boat took the helm and tacked, presenting a broad
surface of sail to their force. Houghton tacked also in the same direction, but with his eye
on the westward water, and his hand on the rope which would bring down his sail with a run.
He speedily had need of this caution. There was a distant roar, the water shoreward darkened,
and then, as his sail came down and the prow of his boat went round to the gust, he was enveloped
in a cloud of spray. At the same instant shrill screams of women and the hoarse cries of men
came from Bodine's vessel.

The fury of the first gust passed quickly. When the atmosphere cleared a little, Houghton saw
that the mast of the other craft had broken, and, with the sail, lay over on the leeward side.
He instantly knew that the occupants were in imminent danger. Raising his sail as high as he
dared, he tacked toward them with such nice judgment that if he kept on he would pass a little
abaft of the disabled vessel.

"Oh, Marse Houghton! come quick," yelled the negro. "She'm won' float anoder minit!"

"Bail, you lubber!"

"Don got notin to bail wid!"

"As usual," growled Houghton.

All the rest were now silent. In his agonized apprehension for Mara and Ella, Bodine felt his
heart beat as it had never done in the bloodiest battle. His careless boatman had not recognized
the danger since the cloud was so comparatively small, and when he sought to lower the sail
something was out of gear and it stuck. The gust struck it fairly, and would have capsized
the boat had not the mast broken. As it was, the vessel so careened as to ship a dangerous
quantity of water, which was rapidly increased by every wave that broke over the sides.

Mara and Mrs. Hunter were pallid indeed, but calm in woman's patient fortitude, remembering,
too, even in that awful moment, that if they escaped they would owe their lives to one whom
they regarded with scorn and hostility. Ella's hope buoyed her spirit, although she felt herself
sinking deeper every moment in the cold waters. With love's confidence she believed that Houghton
would be equal to the emergency, and his swiftly coming sail was like the white wings of an
angel. Then for an instant she was perplexed and troubled, for he seemed to be steering as
if to pass them, near, yet much too far.

"She'm sinkin', she'm goin' un'er," the negro yelled.

"Be ready, every one, to jump the moment I lay alongside," Houghton shouted. Then he luffed
sharply to the wind, dropped his sail; his light craft lost headway, and glided alongside of
the sinking boat.

"Now jump, all," he cried.

The women and negro did so and were safe, but the crippled veteran failed, fell backward, and
would have dragged Ella, who held his hand, with him, had not Houghton broken her grasp. As
quick as light he sprang into the vessel, now down to the water's edge, and fairly flung the
captain into his own boat. As he did so the water-logged craft went down, and he with it. Ella
shrieked and called his name imploringly. In the wild anguish of the moment she would have
jumped overboard after him had she not been restrained.

"Patience," cried her father, "he will rise in a moment."

Houghton's little boat, now so heavily freighted, had almost gone under in the suction. The
negro, rendered half wild with terror, was bent only on saving his own life. He was scarcely
in the boat before he had the oars in the rowlocks, and began to pull for the shore. In their
eager scanning of the dark water, Bodine and the others did not notice this at first, and when
they did the negro was deaf to their expostulations and threats. The captain tried to reach
him as he heaped maledictions on his head, but at that instant another squall swooped down,
enshrouding them in spray, and nearly swamping their frail vessel. They sat silent and trembling,
expecting Houghton's fate, but the gust passed finally, and the lights of the city gleamed out.

"Now put about, you--coward," thundered Bodine.

"No, sah, neber," replied the negro; "de boat swamp in two mi nit if I put 'bout in dis sea."

The veteran began to crawl toward him to compel obedience. The man shouted: "Stop dat ar. Ef
you comes nigher I hit you wid'n oar. Bettah one drown dan we all drown."

Ella gave a despairing cry, and found oblivion in a deathlike swoon.

"Truly, Captain Bodine," said Mrs. Hunter sternly, "you must keep your senses. If the man is
right, and we have every reason to believe he is, you must not throw away all our lives for
the chance of saving one."

Then she, with Mara, gave all her attention to Ella.

The captain groaned aloud, "Would to God it had been me instead of him!" Between his harrowing
solicitude for Ella, and the awful belief that Houghton had given his life for him, he passed
moments which whitened his hair.

As they neared the landing the water grew stiller, and their progress more rapid. Assured of
safety, the negro began to reason and apologize. "Mus' be reas'n'ble, boss," he said. "I dun
declar ter you dat we'd all be at de bottom, feedin' fishes, if I'd dun wot you ax. Been no
use nohow. Young Marse Houghton mus' got cotched in de riggin' or he'd come up an' holler.
I couldn't dibe a'ter 'im in de dark, and in dat swashin' sea."

"Stop your cursed croaking. If you had known how to manage your boat it wouldn't have happened."

"I dun my bes', boss. S'pose I want ter lose my boat an' my life? I'se jis' busted, an' I kin
neber go out on de harbor agin widout fearin' I see young Marse Houghton's spook. I'se wus
off dan you is, but I'se he'p you wen we gits asho', if you ain't 'tankerous."

"Certainly you must help us," said Mrs. Hunter, decidedly. "You must get men and a carriage.
Captain Bodine has lost his crutches, and his daughter is in a swoon. If you help us I will
testify that you did the best you could under the circumstances."

"All right, missus. I kin swar dat it ud been death to hab dun any oder ting."

The carriage was brought, and men lifted into it the unconscious girl and the almost equally
helpless veteran. Then one mounted the box with the driver and another ran for a physician,
who was directed to go to Mrs. Bodine's residence. The negro carefully moored Houghton's boat,
feeling that there might be something propitiatory to the dreaded ghost in this act. He then
hastened to his humble cabin, and filled the cars of his family and neighbors with lamentations
over the lost boat and lost man, and also with self-gratulations that he was alive to tell
the story.

On the way home, Mara took the stricken veteran's hand and said: "Captain, you must bear up
under this. In no respect have you been to blame."

"Nevertheless," he replied, and there was almost desperation in his tone: "I feel that it will
prove the most terrible misfortune of my life. Ella may never be herself again, and I have
wronged one to whom I can never make reparation--a noble, generous boy who has taken a revenge
like himself, but which is scorching my very soul."

"You are noble yourself, captain, or you wouldn't feel it so keenly," was the gentle reply.

Mrs. Bodine, without waiting for explanations, peremptorily ordered that Ella should be carried
to her room. The veteran, using a second pair of crutches which he kept in reserve, went to
the adjoining apartment, buried his face in his hands, and groaned audibly. He knew not how
to perform one imperative and pressing duty, that of relating to Mr. Houghton what had happened.

Aware of what was on his mind, Mara came to him and said, "I will go and tell his father."

"God bless you, Mara, for the offer. I would rather face death than that old man, but it is
my duty and I alone must do it. Hard as it is, it is not so terrible as the thought that the
poor boy died for me and mine, and that I can never make the acknowledgment which his heroic
self-sacrifice deserves. It would have been heroic in any man, but in him whom I had treated
with such bitter scorn and enmity--How can I meet Ella's eyes again! Oh, I fear, I fear all
this will destroy her!"

"Courage, my friend," said Mara, putting her hand on his shoulder. "Ella will live to comfort you."

"Mara, you will not fail me?"

"No, I will not fail you."

He pressed her hand to his lips, and then she returned to Ella.

Mrs. Hunter and old Hannah removed the poor girl's wet garments and applied restoratives. The
invalid, whose strength and spirit rose with the emergency, directed their efforts, meantime
listening to the fragmentary explanations which were possible at such a time.

"Oh, just God!" she exclaimed, "we are punished, terribly punished for our thoughts and actions
toward that poor boy. Ella, dear child, was right after all, and we all wrong. She might well
love such a hero."

At last Ella gave signs of returning consciousness. Mrs. Bodine hastened to the captain, and
said: "Cousin Hugh, Ella is reviving. You must control yourself. Everything depends on how
we tide her over the next few hours."

The length of the swoon revealed the force of the blow which the loving girl had received.
Perhaps the long oblivion was nature's kindly effort to ward off the crushing weight. Mrs.
Bodine hung over her when she opened her eyes with a dazed expression. "There, Ella dear,"
she said, "don't worry. You'll soon be better. Take this," and she gave the girl a little brandy
and water.

The powerful stimulant acted speedily on an unvitiated system, and with returning strength
memory recalled what had befallen the one she loved. From tears she passed to passionate sobs,
writhing and moaning, as if the agony of her spirit had communicated itself to every fibre
of her body.

"Oh, Ella, darling, don't," cried her father. "I cannot endure this. He has conquered me utterly;
my prejudice is turned into homage. We will all love and revere his memory. Would to God it
had been I instead of him!"

"There, Hugh, thank God," said Mrs. Bodine, "that Ella can weep. Such tears keep the heart
from breaking."

The old lady was right. Expression of her anguish brought alleviation, and there was also consolation
in her father's words. The physician came, and his remedies also had their effect.

There was nothing morbid or unhealthful in Ella's nature. With returning reason came also the
influence of conscience and the sustaining power of a brave, unselfish spirit. Her father had
put himself in accord with her feelings, and her heart began to go out toward him in tenderness
and consideration, and she said brokenly: "Papa, I will rally. I will live for your sake, since
you will let me love his memory."

"You cannot love it or honor it more than I shall," he replied, in a voice choked with emotion.
Then he took the physician into the adjoining room, to consult how best they might break the
dreadful news to Mr. Houghton.

At this moment the front door burst open, and hasty, uncertain steps were heard.

CHAPTER XXXVI

A FATHER'S FRENZY

Mr. Houghton knew that his son had gone out sailing in the harbor, and, when the gusts swept
over the city, became very anxious about him. He was aware, however, of George's good seamanship,
and tried to allay his fears by thoughts of this nature. As time lapsed, anxiety passed into
alarm and dread foreboding. At last he summoned his coachman, and determined to go to the place
where his son moored his boat. As he was about to prepare himself for the street, there were
two hasty rings of the door-bell. He sank into a chair, overcome by the awful fear which, for
a moment, robbed him of strength.

Now it had so happened that one of his younger clerks had been on the Battery when the rescued
party reached it, and he had gathered little more from the colored boatman than that young
Houghton had been drowned in saving Bodine and the ladies with him. His first impulse was to
go to tell his employer, and he started to carry out this purpose. On his way he remembered
that, in horror over the event, he had not stopped to ask fuller particulars, and he turned
back to question the negro more fully. When he reached George's boat he found that the man
had gone, and that the small crowd which had gathered had dispersed. With a heavy heart he
again started for Mr. Houghton's residence, regretting sadly that it was his duty to communicate
the terrible news. His feelings increased to a nervous dread by the time he reached Mr. Houghton's
door. He feared the stern old man, and believed that he would always be associated with the
tragedy, and so become abhorrent in the eyes of his employer. But, as the thing must be done,
the sooner it was over the better.

The colored waiter admitted the trembling form, and exclaimed, "O Lawd! what happen?"

"I wish to see Mr. Houghton."

"Bring him up," shouted the old man hoarsely. "Well," he gasped as the clerk entered.

"Mr. Houghton, I'm very sorry--"

"For God's sake, out with it!"

"Well, sir, I fear Mr. George--"

"Drowned!" shrieked the father.

The young clerk was silent and appalled.

"Oh, curse that harbor! Curse that harbor!" the old man groaned.

"Perhaps, sir," faltered the clerk, "Mr. Bodine can--"

"Bodine! Bodine! what in hell had he to do with it?"

"I could not learn the particulars beyond that Mr. George was--was--in saving Mr. Bodine, his
daughter, and two other ladies--"

"Now may all the infernal powers blast that rebel!" and the old man rushed down the stairway.

The frightened clerk and waiter followed hastily, and restrained him as he was opening the
front door.

"Sir, dear sir, be patient--"

"Now, Marse Houghton, wot you gwine ter do?" cried the negro.

"I'm going straight to that damned Bodine."

"Den, Marse Houghton, you mus ride. Sam's puttin' de bosses to de kerrige dis minit."

Houghton instantly darted through the house and out to the stable. "Haste!" he thundered, "haste,
you snail!"

The waiter helped Sam, and in a moment or two the carriage rumbled away, the waiter on the
box with the coachman, and the clerk inside with the frenzied father.

It was his steps which had startled Bodine and the physician, and they opened the door facing
the landing as the old man came rushing up, crying hoarsely, "Where's my boy?"

"Where I wish I was," replied Bodine gravely.

The doctor was a strong and decided man. A glance showed him that Mr. Houghton was excited
almost to the point of insanity. Seizing his hand the doctor drew the old man into the room,
and with gentle force placed him in a chair. Never for a moment, however, did Mr. Houghton
take his fiery eyes from Bodine, who, now that he was in the stress of the emergency, maintained
his sad composure perfectly. Only a soldier whose nerves had been steeled in battle could have
looked upon the half-demented man so quietly, for he presented a terrible spectacle. His white
hair was dishevelled, and his eyes had the ferocity of a lioness robbed of her young. Foam
gathered at his lips as he began again:

"Curse your ill-omened face! Such men as you are worse than a pestilence. As a rebel was there
not enough blood on your hands? He saved you, why couldn't you do something to save him?"

"Mr. Houghton, I did try. I would have perilled even the lives of women."

"You have virtually murdered him, sir. Did you not say that if he had the trace of a gentleman
in his anatomy he would leave you and yours alone? He would rather drown than go ashore with you."

Ella could not help hearing his loud, harsh words, and her long, wailing cry was their echo.

At this instant Mrs. Bodine burst into the room, and her slender form seemed to dilate until
a consciousness of her presence filled the apartment. Her face was more than stern. It wore
the commanding expression of a high-born woman roused to the full extent of an unusually strong
nature. Her dark eyes had an overmastering fire, and her withered cheeks were red with blood
direct from her heart.

"Listen to me, sir," she said imperiously, "and stop your raving. Do not forget for another
instant that you are a man, and that there are women in this house whom you are wounding by
your brutal words. You, yourself, in very truth will commit murder, if you do not become sane.
Did you not hear that cry? fit response to language that is like a bludgeon. How are you worse
off than I, who have lost husband, sons, all? Have you not said to your boy as cruel things
as Captain Bodine has said? This son of yours was too noble, too generous, too lofty for either
you or us to understand in our damnable prejudices and blind hate. Come with me," and, seizing
his hand, she dragged him to where Ella lay, white as death. "There," she resumed in the same
impetuous yet clear-cut tones, "is as pure and good a girl as ever God created. Was loving
her a crime? Go home, and ask God to forgive you, to take you where your son is in His good
time. That poor child is the real victim. Unless you are mad indeed you will ask her forgiveness,
and go quietly away."

The old man trembled like a leaf, swayed to and fro between his fierce conflicting emotions,
and then left the house as hastily as he had entered. As he did so, Ella called after him feebly,
but her voice was unheard.

The clerk and the colored waiter stood at the open door, and received Mr. Houghton's tottering
form. "Home," he gasped.

In renewed dread they bore him to his carriage, which Sam drove rapidly away. By the time he
reached his residence he was in almost a fainting condition, and was carried to his bed. The
waiter, who also acted in the capacity of valet at times, gave the old man stimulants, as he
said to the clerk, "Go for Dr. Devoe: Sam dribe you. Bring 'im wid you quick."

The old man at last lay still, breathing heavily, and half-consciously making an instinctive
struggle for existence. The shock of his passion and the weight of an immeasurable loss had
been almost beyond endurance to a man of his age and of his volcanic nature. His physician
was soon at his side, and, with some degree of success, put forth all his skill to rally his
exhausted patient. He at last succeeded in producing a certain degree of lethargy, which, in
benumbing the brain, brought respite from mental agony.

The impression of Bodine and all the others with him that young Houghton had been drowned was
natural and almost inevitable. They had seen him disappear beneath the water, and that was
the last that was seen or heard. The boatman's explanation that the young man had become entangled
in the rigging of the sunken vessel seemed the only way of accounting for the fact that he
did not rise again and strike out for his own boat. The words of Mr. Houghton, recalling that
final sentence of Bodine's, which had destroyed George's hope and made him feel that he could
not approach Ella again, had greatly augmented the veteran's distress. The thought, once lodged,
could not be banished that the youth, in his wounded pride, might have silently chosen to brave
every danger in order to prove that he was a "gentleman," and that he would "leave them alone,"
even at the cost of his life. This result of his harsh words was crushing to Bodine, and to
escape from its intolerable weight he tried to entertain the hope that George had found some
way of attaining safety as yet unknown.

The young man had not been drowned, although he had had an exceedingly narrow escape. It was
not the rigging which so endangered his life. As he rose toward the surface his head struck
the pole with which the negro was accustomed to push his boat around in the shallow water,
and the blow was so stunning that he did no more than instinctively cling to the object which
had injured him. It sustained his weight, but, in the wind-lashed waves and darkness, he and
his support were unseen. The tide was running out swiftly, and he and the pole had been swept
well astern, while Bodine looked at the spot where they thought he had sunk-a point from which
the negro's frantic oar-strokes were rapidly taking them.

Gradually George's clouded senses cleared, and at last he recalled all that had occurred; far
too late, however, for his voice to be heard. He shouted two or three time but soon recognized
that his cries were lost in the dashing waves and howling wind. So far from giving way to panic,
he encouraged himself with the hope that his effort to rescue Ella and those with her had not
been in vain. Pointing the pole toward the city lights, he tried to make progress by striking
out with his feet, but was soon convinced that he was exhausting himself to little purpose,
for both wind and tide were against him. He therefore let himself float, hoping to be picked
up by some vessel, or, at the worst, to land at Fort Sumter, which he deemed to be the nearest
point of safety. Before very long he heard the throbbing of a steamer's engine, and soon her
lights pierced the gloom. To get near enough to make his condition known without being run
down was now his aim. She seemed to be coming directly toward him, and he thanked Heaven that
the wind was dying out so that his voice might be heard.

As soon as he thought the steamer was within hailing distance he began to shout, "Ship ahoy!"
No heed was given until the boat seemed to be almost upon him, and he swam, with his pole,
desperately to the left to avoid her. Then inflating his lungs he shouted, "Help, if you are
men and not devils!"

"Hallo there! Man overboard?"

"I should say so," thundered Houghton. "Slow up, and throw me a rope."

The wheels were reversed at once. A man near the bow seized a coil of rope and yelled, "Where
are you?"

"Here!" cried Houghton, splashing the water with his hands.

The rope flew with a boatman's aim; George grasped it, and, with sailor-like dexterity, fastened
the end around his body under his arms. Then laying hold of it also with his hands, he cried
from the water almost under the wheel, "Pull."

In a moment or two he was on deck and besieged with questions. "Boat swamped in the squall,"
he replied briefly. "I kept afloat on a pole till you picked me up. There was another boat
that I am anxious about. I'll go up in the pilot-house and keep a weather-eye open."

"Well, you're a cool one," said the captain.

"I've been in the water long enough to get cool. Would you mind lending me an overcoat or some
wrap?" And he escaped from the gathering crowd to the pilot-house.

The vessel proved to be a little steamer which plied between the islands down the harbor and
the city. "That was young Houghton," said one of the passengers.

"--him!" said another. "It's a pity he and his old money-griper of a dad are not both at the
bottom."

Wrapped in the captain's greatcoat, George was as comfortable as his anxieties would permit.
No sign of life was upon the dark waters. When the boat made her landing, he slipped out of
his coat, leaped ashore, and, walking and running alternately, soon reached his father's house.

Opening the door with his latch-key, he stumbled on Jube, the waiter, who backed away from
him with something like a yell of fear, believing that his young master had come back in ghostly
guise.

"Shut up, you fool!" said George sternly. "Don't you know me?"

"O Lawd, Lawd! you ain't a spook, Marse George?"

"I'll box your ears in a way that will convince you--"

At this moment Dr. Devoe came hastily from the sickroom, and met George on the stairs. "Thank
God!" exclaimed the physician, "you have escaped. Caution, now, caution. You must not show
yourself to your father till I give permission."

"Has he heard? Is he very ill?" George asked, in deep anxiety.

"Yes, but he'll come through all right, now that you are alive, I've had to stupefy him partially.
He was told that you had been drowned. Go change your clothes, and be ready when I want you.
How did you escape?"

"Picked up by the steamer 'Firefly.' Did they escape?--I mean Mr. Bodine and his party."

"Yes; and, as far as I can make out, left you to drown."

When the physician returned Mr. Houghton roused a little, and asked, "What is the matter? Is
George ill?"

"No, he's better."

The old man closed his eyes, and at last said dreamily, "Yes, he's better, better off in heaven."

"Mr. Houghton," said the doctor, kindly, "I've just heard that a man was picked up by the steamer
running between the city and the islands. I don't give up hope yet."

"Hope! hope! Do you mean to say there is hope?"

"I do. If you will be patient we will soon know. I have taken steps to find out speedily."

"O God, be merciful! I don't see how I can long survive if he is dead."

Jube, satisfied that George was in the flesh, followed him to his room, and aided him in exchanging
his wet clothes for dry ones, meanwhile answering the young man's rapid questions.

Touched to the very soul by the account of his father's frantic grief, George's thoughts centred
on him, but he asked, "What happened at Mr. Bodine's?"

"Dunno, Marse George. Marse Houghton run up de stairs, an' dey took 'im in a room. Den I heerd
loud talkin', an' soon he come runnin' out all kin ob gone like, and he gasp, 'Home.' We lif
him in de kerrige, an Sam dribe as if de debil was arter 'im. Den we gits de doctor sudden."

Having dressed, George opened his desk and wrote:

"CAPTAIN BODINE,

"Sir--It may relieve you of some natural anxiety to learn that I escaped, and that I am well
and at home. My father is very ill, and absolute quiet of mind and body is essential.    GEORGE
HOUGHTON."

Then he addressed a line to the editor of the daily paper:

"Rumors of an accident in the harbor and of my being drowned may reach you. This note is evidence
that I am safe and well. I will esteem it a favor if no mention is made of the affair."

Despatching Sam with these two missives, he held himself in readiness for the summons to his
father's bedside.

Dr. Devoe, in his efforts to save his patient from any more nervous shocks, administered another
sedative, and then talked quietly of the probability of George's escape.

The old man's mind was far from clear, and in his half dreamy state was inclined to believe
what was said to him. Then the physician pretended to hear the return of his messenger, and
went out for a few moments. When he came back he saw Mr. Houghton's eyes dilating with fear
and hope.

