At this same interview he informed me that there was an additional motive in sending me to
the new command, a motive not explained by the instructions themselves, and went on to say
that, as a matter of fact, he looked upon the invasion of Mexico by Maximilian as a part of
the rebellion itself, because of the encouragement that invasion had received from the Confederacy,
and that our success in putting down secession would never be complete till the French and
Austrian invaders were compelled to quit the territory of our sister republic. With regard
to this matter, though, he said it would be necessary for me to act with great circumspection,
since the Secretary of State, Mr. Seward, was much opposed to the use of our troops along the
border in any active way that would be likely to involve us in a war with European powers. 

[383:2] It has not been thought necessary in this chapter to notice either Arnobius, an African
rhetorician, who wrote seven Books against the Gentiles; or the Christian Cicero, Lactantius,
who is said to have been his pupil. Both these authors appeared about the end of the period embraced
in this history, and consequently exerted little or no influence during the time of which it
treats.

[384:1] His life was written by Gregory Nyssen about a century
after his death.

I went first to St.  Louis, and there took the steamboat for New Orleans, and when near the
mouth of the Red River received word from General Canby that Kirby Smith had surrendered under
terms similar to those accorded Lee and Johnston. And yet, how could the crisis be averted? How
could heresy be most effectually discountenanced? How could the unity of the Church be best
maintained? In times of peril the Romans had formerly been wont to set up a Dictator, and to
commit the whole power of the commonwealth to one trusty and vigorous ruler. During the latter
days of the Republic, the State had been almost torn to pieces by
contending factions; and now, under the sway of the Emperors, it enjoyed
comparative repose.  In consequence of this, and
also because of the desire of the Government to make a strong showing of force in Texas, I
decided to traverse the State with two columns of cavalry, directing one to San Antonio under
Merritt, the other to Houston under Custer.  Both commands were to start from the Red River
--Shreveport and Alexandria--being the respective initial points--and in organizing the columns,
to the mounted force already on the Red River were added several regiments of cavalry from
the east bank of the, Mississippi, and in a singular way one of these fell upon the trail of
my old antagonist, General Early.  While crossing the river somewhere below Vicksburg some
of the men noticed a suspicious looking party being ferried over in a rowboat, behind which
two horses were swimming in tow.  Chase was given, and the horses, being abandoned by the party,
fell into the hands of our troopers, who, however, failed to capture or identify the people
in the boat.  As subsequently ascertained, the men were companions of Early, who was already
across the Mississippi, hidden in the woods, on his way with two or three of these followers
to join the Confederates in Texas, not having heard of Kirby Smith's surrender.  A week or
two later I received a letter from Early describing the affair, and the capture of the horses,
for which he claimed pay, on the ground that they were private property, because he had taken
them in battle.  The letter also said that any further pursuit of Early would be useless, as
he "expected to be on the deep blue sea" by the time his communication reached me.  The unfortunate
man was fleeing from imaginary dangers, however, for striking his trail was purely accidental,
and no effort whatever was being made to arrest him personally.  Had this been especially desired
it might have been accomplished very readily just after Lee's surrender, for it was an open
secret that Early was then not far away, pretty badly disabled with rheumatism.

By the time the two columns were ready to set out for San Antonio and Houston, General Frank
Herron,--with one division of the Thirteenth Corps, occupied Galveston, and another division
under General Fred Steele had gone to Brazos Santiago, to hold Brownsville and the line of
the Rio Grande, the object being to prevent, as far as possible, the escaping Confederates
from joining Maximilian.  With this purpose in view, and not forgetting Grant's conviction
that the French invasion of Mexico was linked with the rebellion, I asked for an increase of
force to send troops into Texas in fact, to concentrate at available points in the State an
army strong enough to move against the invaders of Mexico if occasion demanded.  The Fourth
and Twenty-fifth army corps being ordered to report to me, accordingly, I sent the Fourth Corps
to Victoria and San Antonio, and the bulk of the Twenty-fifth to Brownsville.  Then came the
feeding and caring for all these troops--a difficult matter--for those at Victoria and San
Antonio had to be provisioned overland from Indianola across the "hog-wallow prairie," while
the supplies for the forces at Brownsville and along the Rio Grande must come by way of Brazos
Santiago, from which point I was obliged to construct, with the labor of the men, a railroad
to Clarksville, a distance of about eighteen miles. 

Here is the proof of it. The bee is following our path. They are coming!"

Clark nodded. Woodsmen as they both were, they knew well enough the Indian tradition that the bee
is the harbinger of the coming of the white man. When he comes, the plow soon follows, and weeds
grow where lately have been the flowers of the forest or the prairie.

They sat for a time looking at the little insect, which bore so fateful a message into the West.
Reverently Lewis placed it in his collector's case--the first bee of the plains.

"They are coming!" said he again to his friend.

CHAPTER XII

WHAT VOICE HAD CALLED?

They lay in camp far down the river whose flood had borne them on so rapidly. They had passed
through the last of the dangerous country of the Sioux, defying the
wild bands whose gantlet they had to run, but which they had run in
safety.

Ahead was only what might be called a pleasure journey, to the end of the river trail.

The men were happy as they lay about their fires, which glowed dully in the dusk. Each was telling
what he presently was going to do, when he got his pay at old St. Louis, not far below.

William Clark, weary with the day's labor, had excused himself and gone to his blankets. Lewis,
the responsible head of the expedition, alone, aloof, silent, sat moodily looking into his fire,
the victim of one of his recurring moods of melancholy.

He stirred
at length and raised himself restlessly. It was not unusual for him
to be sleepless, and always, while awake, he had with him the problems
of his many duties; but at this hour something unwontedly disturbing
had come to Meriwether Lewis.

He turned once more and bent down,
as if figuring out some puzzle of a baffling trail. Picking up a bit
of stick, he traced here and there, in the ashes at his feet, points
and lines, as if it were some problem in geometry. Uneasy, strange
of look, now and again he muttered to himself.

"Hoh!" he exclaimed
at length, almost like an Indian, as if in some definite conclusion.

He
had run his trail to the end, had finished the problem in the ashes.

"Hoh!"
his voice again rumbled in his chest.

And now he threw his tracing-stick
away. He sat, his head on one side, as if looking at some distant
star. Then, escorted by a regiment of horse I proceeded hastily to Fort Duncan, on the Rio
Grande just opposite the Mexican town of Piedras Negras.  Here I opened communication with
President Juarez, through one of his staff, taking care not to do this in the dark, and the
news, spreading like wildfire, the greatest significance was ascribed to my action, it being
reported most positively and with many specific details that I was only awaiting the arrival
of the troops, then under marching orders at San Antonio, to cross the Rio Grande in behalf
of the Liberal cause.

Ample corroboration of the reports then circulated was found in my inquiries regarding the
quantity of forage we could depend upon getting in Mexico, our arrangements for its purchase,
and my sending a pontoon train to Brownsville, together with which was cited the renewed activity
of the troops along the lower Rio Grande.  These reports and demonstrations resulted in alarming
the Imperialists so much that they withdrew the French and Austrian soldiers from Matamoras,
and practically abandoned the whole of northern Mexico as far down as Monterey, with the exception
of Matamoras, where General Mejia continued to hang on with a garrison of renegade Mexicans.

The abandonment of so much territory in northern Mexico encouraged General Escobedo and other
Liberal leaders to such a degree that they collected a considerable army of their followers
at Comargo, Mier, and other points.  At the same time that unknown quantity, Cortinas, suspended
his free-booting for the nonce, and stoutly harassing Matamoras, succeeded in keeping its Imperial
garrison within the fortifications.  Thus countenanced and stimulated, and largely supplied
with arms and ammunition, which we left at convenient places on our side of the river to fall
into their hands, the Liberals, under General Escobedo--a man of much force of character--were
enabled in northern Mexico to place the affairs of the Republic on a substantial basis.

But in the midst of what bade fair to cause a final withdrawal of the foreigners, we were again
checked by our Government, as a result of representations of the French Minister at Washington.
In October, he wrote to Mr. Seward that the United States troops on the Rio Grande were acting
"in exact opposition to the repeated assurances Your Excellency has given me concerning the
desire of the Cabinet at Washington to preserve the most strict neutrality in the events now
taking place in Mexico," and followed this statement with an emphatic protest against our course.
Without any investigation whatever by our State Department, this letter of the French Minister
was transmitted to me, accompanied by directions to preserve a strict neutrality; so, of course,
we were again debarred from anything like active sympathy.

After this, it required the patience of Job to abide the slow and poky methods of our State
Department, and, in truth, it was often very difficult to restrain officers and men from crossing
the Rio Grande with hostile purpose.  Within the knowledge of my troops, there had gone on
formerly the transfer of organized bodies of ex-Confederates to Mexico, in aid of the Imperialists,
and at this period it was known that there was in preparation an immigration scheme having
in view the colonizing, at Cordova and one or two other places, of all the discontented elements
of the defunct Confederacy --Generals Price, Magruder, Maury, and other high personages being
promoters of the enterprise, which Maximilian took to readily.  He saw in it the possibilities
of a staunch support to his throne, and therefore not only sanctioned the project, but encouraged
it with large grants of land, inspirited the promoters with titles of nobility, and, in addition,
instituted a system of peonage, expecting that the silver hook thus baited would be largely
swallowed by the Southern people.

The announcement of the scheme was followed by the appointment of commissioners in each of
the Southern States to send out emigrants; but before any were deluded into starting, I made
to General Grant a report of what was going on, with the recommendation that measures be taken,
through our State Department, looking to the suppression of the colony; but, as usual, nothing
could be effected through that channel; so, as an alternative, I published, in April, 1866,
by authority of General Grant, an order prohibiting the embarkation from ports in Louisiana
and Texas, for ports in Mexico, of any person without a permit from my headquarters.  This
dampened the ardor of everybody in the Gulf States who had planned to go to Mexico; and although
the projectors of the Cordova Colonization Scheme--the name by which it was known--secured
a few innocents from other districts, yet this set-back led ultimately to failure.

Among the Liberal leaders along the Rio Grande during this period there sprang up many factional
differences from various causes, some personal, others political, and some, I regret to say,
from downright moral obliquity--as, for example, those between Cortinas and Canales --who,
though generally hostile to the Imperialists, were freebooters enough to take a shy at each
other frequently, and now and then even to join forces against Escobedo, unless we prevented
them by coaxing or threats.  A general who could unite these several factions was therefore
greatly needed, and on my return to New Orleans I so telegraphed General Grant, and he, thinking
General Caravajal (then in Washington seeking aid for the Republic) would answer the purpose,
persuaded him to report to me in New Orleans.  Caravajal promptly appeared, but he did not
impress me very favorably.  He was old and cranky, yet, as he seemed anxious to do his best,
I sent him over to Brownsville, with credentials, authorizing him to cross into Mexico, and
followed him myself by the next boat.  When I arrived in Brownsville, matters in Matamoras
had already reached a crisis. General Mejia, feeling keenly the moral support we were giving
the Liberals, and hard pressed by the harassing attacks of Cortinas and Canales, had abandoned
the place, and Caravajal, because of his credentials from our side, was in command, much to
the dissatisfaction of both those chiefs whose differences it was intended he should reconcile.

The, day after I got to Brownsville I visited Matamoras, and had a long interview with Caravajal.
The outcome of this meeting was, on my part, a stronger conviction than ever that he was unsuitable,
and I feared that either Canales or Cortinas would get possession of the city.  Caravajal made
too many professions of what he would do--in short, bragged too much--but as there was no help
for the situation, I made the best of it by trying to smooth down the ruffled feathers of Canales
and Cortinas.  In my interview with Caravajal I recommended Major Young as a confidential man,
whom he could rely upon as a "go-between" for communicating with our people at Brownsville,
and whom he could trust to keep him informed of the affairs of his own country as well.

