If they did harmonise--if everybody's did--then, by these individual adjustments the complete
group-consciousness of humanity would be changed, brought back into conformity with the Transcendent;
and the spiritual world would be actualised within the temporal order at last. Then, that world
of false imagination, senseless conflicts, and sham values, into which our children are now
born, would be annihilated. The whole race, not merely a few of its noblest, most clearsighted
spirits, would be "in union with God"; and men, transfused by His light and heat, direct and
willing agents of His Pure Activity, would achieve that completeness of life which the mystics
dare to call "deification." This is the substance of that redemption of the world, which all
religions proclaim or demand: the consummation which is crudely imagined in the Apocalyptic
dreams of the prophets and seers. It is the true incarnation of the Divine Wisdom: and you
must learn to see with Paul the pains and disorders of creation-- your own pains, efforts,
and difficulties too--as incidents in the travail of that royal birth. On the twenty-fourth of September,
we turned due north and found the tracks of wagon wheels, which guided us to the valley of "Mary's
River," or "Ogden's River," and on the thirtieth, put us on the old emigrant road leading from
Fort Hall.

So, what is being offered to you is not merely a choice amongst new states of consciousness,
new emotional experiences--though these are indeed involved in it--but, above all else, a larger
and intenser life, a career, a total consecration to the interests of the Real. This life shall
not be abstract and dreamy, made up, as some imagine, of negations. It shall be violently practical
and affirmative; giving scope for a limitless activity of will, heart, and mind working within
the rhythms of the Divine Idea. It shall cost much, making perpetual demands on your loyalty,
trust, and self-sacrifice: proving now the need and the worth of that training in renunciation
which was forced on you at the beginning of your interior life. It shall be both deep and wide,
embracing in its span all those aspects of Reality which the gradual extension of your contemplative
powers has disclosed to you: making "the inner and outer worlds to be indivisibly One." And
because the emphasis is now for ever shifted from the accidents to the substance of life, it
will matter little where and how this career is actualised--whether in convent or factory,
study or battlefield, multitude or solitude, sickness or strength. These fluctuations of circumstance
will no longer dominate you; since "it is Love that payeth for all."

Yet by all this it is not meant that the opening up of the universe, the vivid consciousness
of a living Reality and your relation with it, which came to you in contemplation, will necessarily
be a constant or a governable feature of your experience. Even under the most favourable circumstances,
you shall and must move easily and frequently between that spiritual fruition and active work
in the world of men. Often enough it will slip from you utterly; often your most diligent effort
will fail to recapture it, and only its fragrance will remain. The more intense those contacts
have been, the more terrible will be your hunger and desolation when they are thus withdrawn:
for increase of susceptibility means more pain as well as more pleasure, as every artist knows.
But you will find in all that happens to you, all that opposes and grieves you--even in those
inevitable hours of darkness when the doors of true perception seem to close, and the cruel
tangles of the world are all that you can discern--an inward sense of security which will never
cease.