"Not strange, seeing that I scratched them there last night," said David, drily. "When? Oh,
it was after you left my house last night."

"And it has been some time in your possession, sir?"

"Oh, confound it, no. It was--well, it was a present from a friend for a little service rendered.
So far as I understand, it was purchased at Lockhart's, in North Street. No, I'll be hanged
if I answer any more of your questions, Marley. I'll be your Aunt Sally so far as you are officially
concerned. But as to yonder case, your queries are distinctly impertinent."

Marley shook his head gravely, as one might over a promising but headstrong boy.

"Do I understand that you decline to account for the case?" he asked.

"Certainly I do. It is connected with some friends of mine to whom I rendered a service a little
time back. The whole thing is and must remain an absolute secret."

"You are placing yourself in a very delicate position, Mr. Steel."

David started at the gravity of the tone. That something was radically wrong came upon him
like a shock. And he could see pretty clearly that, without betraying confidence, he could
not logically account for the possession of the cigar-case. In any case it was too much to
expect that the stolid police officer would listen to so extravagant a tale for a moment.

"What on earth do you mean, man?" he cried.

"Well, it's this way, sir," Marley proceeded to explain. "When I pointed out the case to you
lying on the floor of your conservatory last night you said it wasn't yours. You looked at
it with the eyes of a stranger, and then you said you were mistaken. From information given
me last night I have been making inquiries about the cigar-case. You took it to Mr. Mossa's,
and from it you produced notes to the value of nearly £1,000 to pay off a debt. Within eight-and
forty hours you had no more prospect of paying that debt than I have at this moment. Of course,
you will be able to account for those notes. You can, of course?"

Marley looked eagerly at his visitor. A cold chill was playing up and down Steel's spine. Not
to save his life could he account for those notes.

"We will discuss that when the proper time comes," he said, with fine indifference.

"As you please, sir. From information also received I took the case to Walen's, in West Street,
and asked Mr. Walen if he had seen the case before. Pressed to identify it, he handed me a
glass and asked me to find the figures (say) '1771. x 3,' in tiny characters on the edge. I
did so by the aid of the glass, and Mr. Walen further proceeded to show me an entry in his
purchasing ledger which proved that a cigar-case in gun-metal and diamonds bearing that legend
had been added to the stock quite recently--a few weeks ago, in fact."

"Well, what of that?" David asked, impatiently. "For all I know, the case might have come from
Walen's. I said it came from a friend who must needs be nameless for services equally nameless.
I am not going to deny that Walen was right."

"I have not quite finished," Marley said, quietly. "Pressed as to when the case had been sold,
Mr. Walen, without hesitation, said: 'Yesterday, for £72 15s.' The purchaser was a stranger,
whom Mr. Walen is prepared to identify. Asked if a formal receipt had been given, Walen said
that it had. And now I come to the gist of the whole matter. You saw Dr. Cross hand me a mass
of papers, etc., taken from the person of the gentleman who was nearly killed in your house?"

David nodded. His breath was coming a little faster. His quick mind had run on ahead; he saw
the gulf looming before him.

"Go on," said he, hoarsely, "go on. You mean to say that--"

"That amongst the papers found in the pocket of the unfortunate stranger was a receipted bill
for the very cigar-case that lies here on the table before you!"

CHAPTER VI

A POLICY OF SILENCE

Steel dropped into a chair and gazed at Inspector Marley with mild surprise. At the same time
he was not in the least alarmed. Not that he failed to recognise the gravity of the situation,
only it appealed in the first instance to the professional side of his character.

"Walen is quite sure?" he asked. "No possible doubt about that, eh?"

"Not in the least. You see, he recognised his private mark at once, and Brighton is not so
prosperous a place that a man could sell a £70 cigar-case and forget all about it--that is,
a second case, I mean. It's most extraordinary."

"Rather! Make a magnificent story, Marley."

"Very," Marley responded, drily. "It would take all your well-known ingenuity to get your hero
out of this trouble."

Steel nodded gravely. This personal twist brought him to the earth again. He could clearly
see the trap into which he had placed himself. There before him lay the cigar-case which he
had positively identified as his own; inside, his initials bore testimony to the fact. And
yet the same case had been identified beyond question as one sold by a highly respectable local
tradesman to the mysterious individual now lying in the Sussex County Hospital.

"May I smoke a cigarette?" David asked.

"You may smoke a score if they will be of any assistance to you, sir," Marley replied. "I don't
want to ask you any questions and I don't want you--well, to commit yourself. But really, sir,
you must admit--"

The inspector paused significantly. David nodded again.

"Pray proceed," he said: "speak from the brief you have before you."

"Well, you see it's this way," Marley said, not without hesitation. "You call us up to your
house, saying that a murder has been committed there; we find a stranger almost at his last
gasp in your conservatory with every signs of a struggle having taken place. You tell us that
the injured man is a stranger to you; you go on to say that he must have found his way into
your house during a nocturnal ramble of yours. Well, that sounds like common sense on the face
of it. The criminal has studied your habits and has taken advantage of them. Then I ask if
you are in the habit of taking these midnight strolls, and with some signs of hesitation you
say that you have never done such a thing before. Charles Dickens was very fond of that kind
of thing, and I naturally imagined that you had the same fancy. But you had never done it before.
And, the only time, a man is nearly murdered in your house."

"Perfectly correct," David murmured. "Gaboriau could not have put it better. You might have
been a pupil of my remarkable acquaintance Hatherly Bell."

"I am a pupil of Mr. Bell's," Marley said, quietly. "Seven years ago he induced me to leave
the Huddersfield police to go into his office, where I stayed until Mr. Bell gave up business,
when I applied for and gained my present position. Curious you should mention Mr. Bell's name,
seeing that he was here so recently as this afternoon."

"Staying in Brighton?" Steel asked, eagerly. "What is his address?"

"No. 219, Brunswick Square."

It took all the nerve that David possessed to crush the cry that rose to his lips. It was more
than strange that the man he most desired to see at this juncture should be staying in the
very house where the novelist had his great adventure. And in the mere fact might be the key
to the problem of the cigar-case.

"I'll certainly see Bell," he muttered. "Go on, Marley."

"Yes, sir. We now proceed to the cigar-case that lies before you. It was also lying on the
floor of your conservatory on the night in question. I suggested that here we might have found
a clue, taking the precaution at the same time to ask if the article in question was your property.
You looked at the case as one does who examines an object for the first time, and proceeded
to declare that it was not yours. I am quite prepared to admit that you instantly corrected
yourself. But I ask, is it a usual thing for a man to forget the ownership of a £70 cigar-case?"

"A nice point, and I congratulate you upon it," David said.

"Then we will take the matter a little farther. A day or two ago you were in dire need of something
like £1,000. Temporarily, at any rate, you were practically at the end of your resources. If
this money were not forthcoming in a few hours you were a ruined man. In vulgar parlance, you
would have been sold up. Mossa and Mack had you in their grip, and they were determined to
make all they could out of you. The morning following the outrage at your house you call upon
Mr. Mossa and produce the cigar-case lying on the table before you. From that case you produce
notes sufficient to discharge your debt--Bank of England notes, the numbers of which, I need
hardly say, are in my possession. The money is produced from the case yonder, which case we
know was sold to the injured man by Mr. Walen."

Marley made a long and significant pause. Steel nodded.

"There seems to be no way out of it," he said.

"I can see one," Marley suggested. "Of course, it would simplify matters enormously if you
merely told me in confidence whence came those notes. You see, as I have the numbers, I could
verify your statement beyond question, and--"

Marley paused again and shrugged his shoulders. Despite his cold, official manner, he was obviously
prompted by a desire to serve his companion. And yet, simple as the suggestion seemed, it was
the very last thing with which Steel could comply.

The novelist turned the matter over rapidly in his mind. His quick perceptions flashed along
the whole logical line instantaneously. He was like a man who suddenly sees a midnight landscape
by the glare of a dazzling flash of lightning.

"I am sorry," he said, slowly, "very sorry, to disappoint you. Were our situations reversed,
I should take up your position exactly. But it so happens that I cannot, dare not, tell you
where I got those notes from. So far as I am concerned they came honestly into my hands in
payment for special services rendered. It was part of my contract that I should reveal the
secret to nobody. If I told you the story you would decline to believe it; you would say that
it was a brilliant effort of a novelist's imagination to get out of a dangerous position."

"I don't know that I should," Marley replied. "I have long since ceased to wonder at anything
that happens in or connected with Brighton."

"All the same I can't tell you, Marley," Steel said, as he rose. "My lips are absolutely sealed.
The point is: what are you going to do?"

"For the present, nothing," Marley replied. "So long as the man in the hospital remains unconscious
I can do no more than pursue what Beaconsfield called 'a policy of masterly inactivity.' I
have told you a good deal more than I had any right to do, but I did so in the hope that you
could assist me. Perhaps in a day or two you will think better of it. Meanwhile--"

"Meanwhile I am in a tight place. Yes, I see that perfectly well. It is just possible that
I may scheme some way out of the difficulty, and if so I shall be only too pleased to let you
know. Good-night, Marley, and many thanks to you."

But with all his ingenuity and fertility of imagination David could see no way out of the trouble.
He sat up far into the night scheming; there was no flavour in his tobacco; his pictures and
flowers, his silver and china, jarred upon him. He wished with all his heart now that he had
let everything go. It need only have been a temporary matter, and there were other Cellini
tankards, and intaglios, and line engravings in the world for the man with money in his purse.

He could see no way out of it at all. Was it not possible that the whole thing had been deliberately
planned so as to land him and his brains into the hands of some clever gang of swindlers? Had
he been tricked and fooled so that he might become the tool of others? It seemed hard to think
so when he recalled the sweet voice in the darkness and its passionate plea for help. And yet
the very cigar-case that he had been told was the one he admired at Lockhart's had proved beyond
question to be one purchased from Walen's!

If he decided to violate his promise and tell the whole story nobody would believe him. The
thing was altogether too wild and improbable for that. And yet, he reflected, things almost
as impossible happen in Brighton every day. And what proof had he to offer?

Well, there was one thing certain. At least three-quarters of those bank-notes--the portion
he had collected at the house with the crimson blind--could not possibly be traced to the injured
man. And, again, it was no fault of Steel's that Marley had obtained possession of the numbers
of the notes. If the detective chose to ferret out facts for himself no blame could attach
to Steel. If those people had only chosen to leave out of the question that confounded cigar-case!

David's train of thought was broken as an idea came to him. It was not so long since he had
a facsimile cigar-case in his hand at Lockhart's, in North Street. Somebody connected with
the mystery must have seen him admiring it and reluctantly declining the purchase, because
the voice from the telephone told him that the case was a present and that it had come from
the famous North Street establishment.

"By Jove!" David cried. "I'll go to Lockhart's tomorrow and see if the case is still there.
If so, I may be able to trace it."

Fairly early the next morning David was in North Street. For the time being he had put his
work aside altogether. He could not have written a dozen consecutive lines to save the situation.
The mere effort to preserve a cheerful face before his mother was a torture. And at any time
he might find himself forced to meet a criminal charge.

The gentlemanly assistant at Lockhart's remembered Steel and the cigar-case perfectly well,
but he was afraid that the article had been sold. No doubt it would be possible to obtain a
facsimile in the course of a few days.

"Only I required that particular one," Steel said. "Can you tell me when it was sold and who
purchased it?"

A junior partner did, and could give some kind of information. Several people had admired the
case, and it had been on the point of sale several times. Finally, it had passed into the hands
of an American gentleman staying at the Metropole.

"Can you tell me his name?" David asked, "or describe him?"

"Well, I can't, sir," the junior partner said, frankly. "I haven't the slightest recollection
of the gentleman. He wrote from the Metropole on the hotel paper describing the case and its
price and inclosed the full amount in ten-dollar notes and asked to have the case sent by post
to the hotel. When we ascertained that the notes were all right, we naturally posted the case
as desired, and there, so far as we are concerned, was an end of the matter."

"You don't recollect his name?"

"Oh, yes. The name was John Smith. If there is anything wrong---"

David hastily gave the desired assurance. He wanted to arouse no suspicion. All the same, he
left Lockhart's with a plethora of suspicions of his own. Doubtless the jewellers would be
well and fairly satisfied so long as the case had been paid for, but from the standpoint of
David's superior knowledge the whole transaction fairly bristled with suspicion.

Not for one moment did Steel believe in the American at the Metropole. Somebody stayed there
doubtless under the name of John Smith, and that said somebody had paid for the cigar-case
in dollar notes the tracing of which might prove a task of years. Nor was it the slightest
use to inquire at the Metropole, where practically everybody is identified by a number, and
where scores come and go every day. John Smith would only have to ask for his letters and then
drop quietly into a sea of oblivion.

Well, David had got his information, and a lot of use it was likely to prove to him. As he
walked thoughtfully homewards he was debating in his mind whether or not he might venture to
call at or write to 219, Brunswick Square, and lay his difficulties before the people there.
At any rate, he reflected, with grim bitterness, they would know that he was not romancing.
If nothing turned up in the meantime he would certainly visit Brunswick Square.

He sat in his own room puzzling the matter out till his head ached and the flowers before him
reeled in a dazzling whirl of colour. He looked round for inspiration, now desperately, as
he frequently did when the warp of his delicate fancy tangled. The smallest thing sometimes
fed the machine again--a patch of sunshine, the chip on a plate, the damaged edge of a frame.
Then his eye fell on the telephone and he jumped to his feet.

"What a fool I am!" he exclaimed. "If I had been plotting this business out as a story. I should
have thought of that long ago.... No, I don't want any number, at least, not in that way. Two
nights ago I was called up by somebody from London who held the line for fully half an hour
or so. I've--I've forgotten the address of my correspondent, but if you can ascertain the number
... yes, I shall be here if you will ring me up when you have got it.... Thanks."

Half an hour passed before the bell trilled again. David listened eagerly. At any rate, now
he was going to know the number whence the mysterious message came--0017, Kensington, was the
number. David muttered his thanks and flew to his big telephone directory. Yes, there it was--"0017,
446, Prince's Gate, Gilead Gates."

The big volume dropped with a crash on the floor. David looked down at the crumpled volume
with dim, misty amazement.

"Gilead Gates," he murmured. "Quaker, millionaire, and philanthropist. One of the most highly-esteemed
and popular men in England. And from his house came the message which has been the source of
all the mischief. And yet there are critics who say the plots of my novels are too fantastic!"

CHAPTER VII

NO. 218, BRUNSWICK SQUARE

The emotion of surprise seemed to have left Steel altogether. After the last discovery he was
prepared to believe anything. Had anybody told him that the whole Bench of Bishops was at the
bottom of the mystery he would have responded that the suggestion was highly probable.

"Still, it's what the inimitable Dick Swiveller would call a staggerer," he muttered. "Gates,
the millionaire, the one great capitalist who has the profound respect of the labour world.
No, a man with a record like that couldn't have anything to do with it. Still, it must have
been from his house that the mysterious message came. The post-office people working the telephone
trunk line would know that--a fact which probably escaped the party who called me up.... I'll
go to Brunswick Square and see that woman. Money or no money, I'll not lie under an imputation
like this."

There was one thing to be done beforehand, and that was to see Dr. Cross. From the latter's
manner he evidently knew nothing of the charge hanging over Steel's head. Marley was evidently
keeping that close to himself and speaking to nobody.

"Oh, the man is better." Cross said, cheerfully. "He hasn't been identified yet, though the
Press has given us every assistance. I fancy the poor fellow is going to recover, though I
am afraid it will be a long job."

"He hasn't recovered consciousness, then?"

"No, and neither will he for some time to come. There seems to be a certain pressure on the
brain which we are unable to locate, and we dare not try the Röntgen rays yet. So on the whole
you are likely to escape with a charge of aggravated assault."

David smiled grimly as he went his way. He walked the whole distance to Hove along North Street
and the Western Road, finally turning down Brunswick Square instead of up it, as he had done
on the night of the great adventure. He wondered vaguely why he had been specially instructed
to approach the house that way.

Here it was at last, 219, Brunswick Square--220 above and, of course, 218 below the house.
It looked pretty well the same in the daylight, the same door, the same knocker, and the same
crimson blind in the centre of the big bay window. David knocked at the door with a vague feeling
of uncertainty as to what he was going to do next. A very staid, old-fashioned footman answered
his ring and inquired his business.

"Can--can I see your mistress?" David stammered.

The staid footman became, if possible, a little more reserved. If the gentleman would send
in his card he would see if Miss Ruth was disengaged. David found himself vaguely wondering
what Miss Ruth's surname might be. The old Biblical name was a great favourite of his.

"I'm afraid I haven't a card," he said. "Will you say that Mr. Steel would like to see--er--Miss
Ruth for a few minutes? My business is exceedingly pressing."

The staid footman led the way into the dining-room. Evidently this was no frivolous house,
where giddy butterflies came and went; such gaudy insects would have been chilled by the solemn
decorum of the place. David followed into the dining-room in a dreamy kind of way, and with
the feeling that comes to us all at times, the sensation of having done and seen the same thing
before.

Nothing had been altered. The same plain, handsome, expensive furniture was here, the same
mahogany and engravings, the same dull red walls, with the same light stain over the fire-place--a
dull, prosperous, square-toed-looking place. The electric fittings looked a little different,
but that might have been fancy. It was the identical room. David had run his quarry to earth,
and he began to feel his spirits rising. Doubtless he could scheme some way out of the difficulty
and spare his phantom friends at the same time.

"You wanted to see me, sir? Will you be so good as to state your business?"

David turned with a start. He saw before him a slight, graceful figure, and a lovely, refined
face in a frame of the most beautiful hair that he had ever seen. The grey eyes were demure,
with just a suggestion of mirth in them; the lips were made for laughter. It was as if some
dainty little actress were masquerading in Salvation garb, only the dress was all priceless
lace that touched David's artistic perception. He could imagine the girl as deeply in earnest
as going through fire and water for her convictions. Also he could imagine her as Puck or Ariel--there
was rippling laughter in every note of that voice of hers.

"I--I, eh, yes," Steel stammered. "You see, I--if I only knew whom I had the pleasure of addressing?"

"I am Miss Ruth Gates, at your service. Still, you asked for me by name."

David made no reply for a moment. He was tripping over surprises again. What a fool he had
been not to look out the name of the occupant of 219 in the directory. It was pretty evident
that Gilead Gates had a house in Brighton as well as one in town. Not only had that telephone
message emanated from the millionaire's residence, but it had brought Steel to the philanthropist's
abode in Brighton. If Mr. Gates himself had strolled into the room singing a comic song David
would have expressed no emotion.

"Daughter of the famous Gilead Gates?" David asked, feebly.

"No, niece, and housekeeper. This is not my uncle's own house, he has merely taken this for
a time. But, Mr. Steel--"

"Mr. David, Steel--is my name familiar to you?"

David asked the question somewhat eagerly. As yet he was only feeling his way and keenly on
the lookout for anything in the way of a clue. He saw the face of the girl grow white as the
table-cover, he saw the lurking laughter die in her eyes, and the purple black terror dilating
the pupils.

"I--I know you quite well by reputation," the girl gasped. Her little hands were pressed to
her left side as if to check some deadly pain there. "Indeed, I may say I have read most of
your stories. I--I hope that there is nothing wrong."

Her self-possession and courage were coming back to her now. But the spasm of fear that had
shaken her to the soul was not lost upon Steel.

"I trust not," he said, gravely. "Did you know that I was here two nights ago?"

"Here!" the girl cried. "Impossible! In the house! The night before last! Why, we were all
in bed long before midnight."

"I am not aware that I said anything about midnight," David responded, coldly.

An angry flush came sweeping over the face of the girl, annoyance at her own folly, David thought.
She added quickly that she and her uncle had only been down in Brighton for three days.

"Nevertheless, I was in this room two nights ago," David replied. "If you know all about it,
I pray you to give me certain information of vital importance to me; if not, I shall be compelled
to keep my extraordinary story to myself, for otherwise you would never believe it. Do you
or do you not know of my visit here?"

The girl bent her head till Steel could see nothing but the glorious amber of her hair. He
could see, too, the fine old lace round her throat was tossing like a cork on a stream.

"I can tell you nothing," she said. "Nothing, nothing, nothing."

It was the voice of one who would have spoken had she dared. With anybody else Steel would
have been furiously angry. In the present case he could only admire the deep, almost pathetic,
loyalty to somebody who stood behind.

"Are you sure you were in this house?" the girl asked, at length.

"Certain!" David exclaimed. "The walls, the pictures, the furniture--all the same. I could
swear to the place anywhere. Miss Gates, if I cannot prove that I was here at the time I name,
it is likely to go very hard with me."

"You mean that a certain inconvenience--"

"Inconvenience! Do you call a charge of murder, or manslaughter at best, inconvenient? Have
you not seen the local papers? Don't you know that two nights ago, during my absence from home,
a strange man was practically done to death in my conservatory? And during the time of the
outrage, as sure as Heaven is above us, I was in this room."

"I am sorry, but I am sure that you were not."

"Ah, you are going to disappoint me? And yet you know something. You might have been the guiltiest
of creatures yourself when I disclosed my identity. No prisoner detected in some shameful crime
ever looked more guilty than you."

The girl stood there, saying nothing. Had she rang the bell and ordered the footman to put
him out of the house, Steel would have had no cause for complaint. But she did nothing of the
kind. She stood there torn by conflicting emotions.

"I can give you no information," she said, presently. "But I am as positive one way as you
are another that you have never been in this house before. I may surmise things, but as I hope
to be judged fairly I can give you no information. I am only a poor, unhappy girl, who is doing
what she deems to be the best for all parties concerned. And I can tell you nothing, nothing.
Oh, won't you believe that I would do anything to serve you if I were only free?"

She held out her hand with an imploring gesture, the red lips were quivering, and her eyes
were full of tears. David's warm heart went out to her; he forgot all his own troubles and
dangers in his sympathy for the lovely creature in distress.

"Pray say no more about it," he cried. He caught the outstretched hand in his and carried it
to his lips. "I don't wish to hurry you; in fact, haste is dangerous. And there is ample time.
Nor am I going to press you. Still, before long you may find some way to give me a clue without
sacrificing a jot of your fine loyalty to--well, others. I would not distress you for the world,
Miss Gates. Don't you think that this has been the most extraordinary interview?"

The tears trembled like diamonds on the girl's long lashes and a smile flashed over her face.
The sudden transformation was wonderfully fascinating.

"What you might call an impossible interview," she laughed. "And all the more impossible because
it was quite impossible that you could ever have been here before."

"When I was in this room two nights ago," David protested, "I saw---"

"Did you see me, for instance? If not, you couldn't have been here."

A small, misshapen figure, with the face of a Byron--Apollo on the bust of a Satyr--came in
from behind the folding doors at the back of the dining-room carrying some letters in his hand.
The stranger's dark, piercing eyes were fixed inquiringly upon Steel.

"Bell," the latter cried; "Hatherly Bell! you have been listening!"

The little man with the godlike head admitted the fact, coolly. He had been writing letters
in the back room and escape had been impossible for him.

"Funny enough, I was going to look you up to-day," he said. "You did me a great service once,
and I am longing to repay you. I came down here to give my friend Gates the benefit of my advice
and assistance over a large philanthropic scheme he has just evolved. And, writing letters
yonder on that subject, I heard your extraordinary conversation. Can I help you, Steel?"

"My dear fellow," David cried, "if you offered me every intellect in Europe I should not choose
one of them so gladly as yours."

"Then let us shake hands on the bargain. And now I am going to stagger you; I heard you state
positively that two nights ago you were in this very room."

"I am prepared to testify the fact on oath anywhere, my dear Bell."

"Very well; will you be good enough to state the hour?"

"Certainly. I was here from one o'clock--say between one and two."

"And I was here also. From eleven o'clock till two I was in this very room working out some
calculations at this very table by the aid of my reading-lamp, no other light being in the
room, or even in the house, as far as I know. It is one of my fads--as fools call them--to
work in a large, dark room with one brilliant light only. Therefore you could not possibly
have been in the house, to say nothing of this room, on the night in question."

David nodded feebly. There was no combating Bell's statement.

"I presume that this is No. 219?" he asked.

"Certainly it is," Miss Gates replied. "We are all agreed about that."

"Because I read the number over the fanlight," Steel went on. "And I came here by arrangement.
And there was everything as I see it now. Bell, you must either cure me of this delusion, or
you must prove logically to me that I have made a mistake. So far as I am concerned, I am like
a child struggling with the alphabet."

"We'll start now," said Bell. "Come along."

Steel rose none too willingly. He would fain have lingered with Ruth. She held out her hand;
there was a warm, glad smile on her face.

"May you be successful," she whispered. "Come and see me again, because I shall be very, very
anxious to know. And I am not without guilt.... If you only knew!"

"And I may come again?" David said, eagerly.

A further smile and a warm pressure of the hand were the only reply. Presently Steel was standing
outside in the road with Bell. The latter was glancing at the house on either side of 219.
The higher house was let; the one nearest the sea--218--was empty. A bill in the window gave
the information that the property was in the hands of Messrs. Wallace and Brown, Station Quadrant,
where keys could be obtained.

"We'll make a start straightaway," said Bell. "Come along."

"Where are you going to at that pace?" Steel asked.

"Going to interview Messrs. Wallace and Brown. At the present moment I am a gentleman who is
in search of a house of residence, and I have a weakness for Brunswick Square in particular,
especially for No. 218. Unless I am greatly mistaken I am going to show you something that
will startle even the most callous novelist."

CHAPTER VIII

HATHERLY BELL

The queer, misshapen figure striding along by Steel's side would have attracted attention anywhere;
indeed, Hatherly Bell had been an attractive personality from his schooldays. A strange mixture
of vanity and brilliant mental qualities, Bell had almost as many enemies as friends. He was
morbidly miserable over the score of his personal appearance despite the extraordinary beauty
of his face--to be pitied or even sympathised with almost maddened him. Yet there were many
women who would gladly have shared the lot of Hatherly Bell.

For there was strength in the perfectly moulded face, as well as beauty. It was the face of
a man possessed of marvellous intellectual powers, and none the less attractive because, while
the skin was as fair as a woman's and the eyes as clear as a child's, the wavy hair was absolutely
white. The face of a man who had suffered fiercely and long. A face hiding a great sorrow.

Time was when Bell had promised to stand in the front rank of operative physicians. In brain
troubles and mental disorders he had distinguished himself. He had a marvellous faculty for
psychological research; indeed, he had gone so far as to declare that insanity was merely a
disease and capable of cure the same as any ordinary malady. "If Bell goes on as he has started,"
a great German specialist once declared, "he will inevitably prove to be the greatest benefactor
to mankind since the beginning of the world." Bell was to be the man of his time.

And then suddenly he had faded out as a star drops from the zenith. There had been dark rumours
of a terrible scandal, a prosecution burked by strong personal influence, mysterious paragraphs
in the papers, and the disappearance of the name of Hatherly Bell from the rank of great medical
jurists. Nobody seemed to know anything about it, but Bell was ignored by all except a few
old friends, and henceforth he devoted his attention to criminology and the evolution of crime.
It was Bell's boast that he could take a dozen men at haphazard and give you their vices and
virtures point-blank. He had a marvellous gift that way.

A few people stuck to him, Gilead Gates amongst the number. The millionaire philanthropist
had need of someone to pick the sheep from the goats, and Bell made no mistakes. David Steel
had been able to do the specialist some slight service a year or two before, and Bell had been
pleased to magnify this into a great favour.

"You are a fast walker," David said, presently.

"That's because I am thinking fast," Bell replied. "Steel, you are in great trouble?"

"It needs no brilliant effort on your part to see that," David said, bitterly. "Besides, you
heard a great deal just now when you--you--"

"Listened," Bell said, coolly. "Of course I had no intention of playing eavesdropper; and I
had no idea who the Mr. Steel was who wanted to see Miss Gates. They come day by day, my dear
fellow, garbed in the garb of Pall Mall or Petticoat Lane as the case may be, but they all
come for money. Sometimes it is a shilling, sometimes £100. But I did not gather from your
chat with Miss Gates what your trouble was."

"Perhaps not, but Miss Gates knew perfectly well."

Bell patted his companion, approvingly.

"It is a pleasure to help a lucid-minded man like yourself," he said. "You go straight to the
root of the sore and cut all the superfluous matter away. I was deeply interested in the conversation
which I overheard just now. You are in great trouble, and that trouble is connected with 219,
Brunswick Square--a house where you have never been before."

"My dear chap, I was in that dining-room two nights ago. Nothing will convince me to the--"

"There you are wrong, because I am going to convince you to the contrary. You may smile and
shake your head, but before an hour has passed I am going to convince you beyond all question
that you were never inside No. 219."

"Brave words," David muttered. "Still, an hour is not a long time to wait."

"No. But you must enlighten me if I am to assist you. I am profoundly interested. You come
to the house of my friend on a desperate errand. Miss Gates is a perfect stranger to you, and
yet the mere discovery of your identity fills her with the most painful agitation. Therefore,
though you have never been in 219 before, you are pretty certain, and I am pretty certain,
that Ruth Gates knows a deal about the thing that is touching you. On the contrary, I know
nothing on that head. Won't you let me into the secret?"

"I'll tell you part," Steel replied. "And I'll put it pithily. For mere argument we assume
that I am selected to assist a damsel in distress who lives at No. 219, Brunswick Square. We
will assume that the conversation leading up to the flattering selection took place over the
telephone. As a matter of fact, it did take place over the telephone. The thing was involved
with so much secrecy that I naturally hesitated. I was offered £1,000 for my services; also
I was reminded by my unseen messenger that I was in dire need of that money."

"And were you?"

"My dear fellow, I don't fancy that I should have hesitated at burglary to get it. And all
I had to do was to meet a lady secretly in the dead of night at No. 219, and tell her how to
get out of a certain difficulty. It all resolved itself round the synopsis of a proposed new
story of mine. But I had better go into details."

David proceeded to do so. Bell, with his arm crooked through that of his companion, followed
the story with an intelligent and flattering interest.

"Very strange and very fascinating," he said, presently. "I'll think it out presently. Nobody
could possibly think of anything but their toes in Western Road. Go on."

"Now I am coming to the point. I had the money, I had that lovely cigar-case, and subsequently
I had that battered and bleeding specimen of humanity dumped down in the most amazing manner
in my conservatory. The cigar-case lay on the conservatory floor, remember--swept off the table
when I clutched for the telephone bell to call for the police. When Marley came he asked if
the cigar-case was mine. At first I said no, because, you see--"

"I see quite plainly. Pray go on."

"Well, I lose that cigar-case; I leave it in the offices of Mossa, to whom I pay nearly £1,000.
Mossa, to spite me, takes or sends the case to the police, who advertise it not knowing that
it is mine. You will see why they advertise it presently--"

"Because it belonged to the injured man, eh?"

David pulled up and regarded his companion with amazement.

"How on earth--" he gasped. "Do you mean to say that you know--"

"Nothing at present, I assure you," Bell said, coolly. "Call it intuition, if you like. I prefer
to call it the result of logical mental process. I'm right, of course?"

"Of course you are. I'd claimed that case for my own. I had cut my initials inside, as I showed
Marley when I went to the police-station. And then Marley tells me how I paid Mossa nearly
£1,000; how the money must have come into my hands in the nick of time. That was pretty bad
when I couldn't for the life of me give a lucid reason for the possession of those notes; but
there was worse to come. In the pocket of the injured man was a receipt for a diamond-studded
gun-metal cigar-case, purchased the day of the outrage. And Walen, the jeweller, proved beyond
a doubt that the case I claimed was purchased at his shop."

Bell nodded gravely.

"Which places you in an exceedingly awkward position," he said.

"A mild way of putting it," David replied. "If that fellow dies the police have enough evidence
to hang me. And what is my defence? The story of my visit to No. 219. And who would believe
that cock-and-bull story? Fancy a drama like that being played out in the house of such a pillar
of respectability as Gilead Gates."

"It isn't his house," said Bell. "He only takes it furnished."

"In anybody else your remark would be puerile," David said, irritably.

"It's a deeper remark than you are aware of at present," Bell replied. "I quite see your position.
Nobody would believe you, of course. But why not go to the post-office and ask the number of
the telephone that called you up from London?"

The question seemed to amuse David slightly. Then his lips were drawn humorously.

"When my logical formula came back I thought of that," he said. "On inquiring as to who it
was rang me up on that fateful occasion I learnt that the number was 0017 Kensington and that--"

"Gates's own number at Prince's Gate," Bell exclaimed. "The plot thickens."

"It does, indeed," David said, grimly. "It is Wilkie Collins gone mad, Gaboriau in extremis,
Du Boisgobey suffering from delirium tremens. I go to Gates's house here, and am solemnly told
in the midst of surroundings that I can swear to that I have never been there before; the whole
mad expedition is launched by the turning of the handle of a telephone in the house of a distinguished,
trusted, if prosaic, citizen. Somebody gets hold of the synopsis of a story of mine, Heaven
knows how--"

"That is fairly easy. The synopsis was short, I suppose?"

"Only a few lines, say 1,000 words, a sheet of paper. My writing is very small. It was tucked
into a half-penny open envelope--a magazine office envelope, marked 'Proof, urgent.' There
were the proofs of a short story in the buff envelope."

"Which reached its destination in due course?"

"So I hear this morning. But how on earth--"

"Easily enough. The whole thing gets slipped into a larger open envelope, the kind of big-mouthed
affair that enterprising firms send out circulars and patterns with. This falls into the hands
of the woman who is at the bottom of this and every other case, and she reads the synopsis
from sheer curiosity. The case fits her case, and there you are. Mind you, I don't say that
this is how the thing actually happened, but how it might have done so. When did you post the
letter?"

"I can't give you the date. Say ten days ago."

"And there would be no hurry for a reply," Bell said, thoughtfully. "And you had no cause for
worry on that head. Nor need the woman who found it have kept the envelope beyond the delay
of a single post, which is only a matter of an hour or so in London. If you go a little farther
we find that money is no object, hence the £1,000 offer and the careful, and doubtless expensive,
inquiry into your position. Steel, I am going to enjoy this case."

"You're welcome to all the fun you can get out of it," David said, grimly. "So far as I am
concerned, I fail to see the humour. Isn't this the office you are after?"

Bell nodded and disappeared, presently to return with two exceedingly rusty keys tied together
with a drab piece of tape. He jingled them on his long, slender forefinger with an air of positive
enjoyment.

"Now come along," he said. "I feel like a boy who has marked down something rare in the way
of a bird's nest. We will go back to Brunswick Square exactly the same way as you approached
it on the night of the great adventure."

CHAPTER IX

THE BROKEN FIGURE

"Any particular object in that course?" David asked.

"There ought to be an object in everything that even an irrational man says or does," Bell
replied. "I have achieved some marvellous results by following up a single sentence uttered
by a patient. Besides, on the evening in question you were particularly told to approach the
house from the sea front."

"Somebody might have been on the look-out near the Western Road entrance," Steel suggested.

"Possibly. I have another theory.... Here we are. The figures over the fanlights run from 187
upwards, gradually getting to 219 as you breast the slope. At one o'clock in the morning every
house would be in darkness. Did you find that to be so?"

"I didn't notice a light anywhere till I reached 219."

"Good again. And you could only find 219 by the light over the door. Naturally you were not
interested in and would not have noticed any other number. Well, here is 218, where I propose
to enter, and for which purpose I have the keys. Come along."

David followed wonderingly. The houses in Brunswick Square are somewhat irregular in point
of architecture, and Nos. 218 and 219 were the only matched pair thereabouts. Signs were not
wanting, as Bell pointed out, that at one time the houses had been occupied as one residence.
The two entrance-halls were back to back, so to speak, and what had obviously been a doorway
leading from one to the other had been plastered up within comparatively recent memory.

The grim and dusty desolation of an empty house seemed to be supplemented here by a deeper
desolation. Not that there was any dust on the ground floor, which seemed a singular thing
seeing that elsewhere the boards were powdered with it, and festoons of brown cobwebs hung
everywhere. Bell smiled approvingly as David Steel pointed the fact out to him.

"Do you note another singular point?" the former asked.

"No," David said, thoughtfully; "I--stop! The two side-shutters in the bay-windows are closed,
and there is the same vivid crimson blind in the centre window. And the self colour of the
walls is exactly the same. The faint discoloration by the fireplace is a perfect facsimile."

"In fact, this is the room you were in the other night," Bell said, quietly.

"Impossible!" Steel cried. "The blind may be an accident, so might the fading of the distemper.
But the furniture, the engravings, the fittings generally--"

"Are all capable of an explanation, which we shall arrive at with patience."

"Can we arrive at the number over the door with patience?"

"Exactly what I was coming to. I noticed an old pair of steps in the back sitting-room. Would
you mind placing them against the fanlight for me?"

David complied readily enough. He was growing credulous and interested in spite of himself.
At Bell's instigation he placed the steps before the fanlight and mounted them. Over his head
were the figures 218 in elongated shape and formed in white porcelain.

"Now then," Bell said, slowly. "Take this pocket-knife, apply the blade to the right-hand lower
half of the bottom of the 8--to half the small O, in fact--and I shall be extremely surprised
if the quarter section doesn't come away from the glass of the fanlight, leaving the rest of
the figure intact. Very gently, please. I want you to convince yourself that the piece comes
away because it is broken, and not because the pressure has cracked it. Now then."

The point of the knife was hardly under the edge of the porcelain before the segment of the
lower circle dropped into Steel's hand. He could feel the edges of the cement sticking to his
fingers. As yet the full force of the discovery was not apparent to him.

"Go out into the road and look at the fanlight," Bell directed.

David complied eagerly. A sharp cry of surprise escaped him as he looked up. The change was
apparent. Instead of the figures 218 he could read now the change to 219--a fairly indifferent
9, but one that would have passed muster without criticism by ninety-nine people out of a hundred.
With a strong light behind the figures the clumsy 9 would never have been noticed at all. The
very simplicity and ingeniousness of the scheme was its safeguard.

"I should like to have the address of the man who thought that out," David said, drily.

"Yes, I fancy that you are dealing with quite clever people," Bell replied. "And now I have
shown you how utterly you have been deceived over the number we will go a little farther. For
the present, the way in which the furniture trick was worked must remain a mystery. But there
has been furniture here, or this room and the hall would not have been so carefully swept and
garnished whilst the rest of the house remains in so dirty a condition. If my eyes don't deceive
me I can see two fresh nails driven into the archway leading to the back hall. On those nails
hung the curtain that prevented you seeing more than was necessary. Are you still incredulous
as to the house where you had your remarkable adventure?"

"I confess that my faith has been seriously shaken," David admitted. "But about the furniture?
And about my telephone call from Mr. Gates's town house? And about my adventure taking place
in the very next house to the one taken by him at Brighton? And about Miss Gates's agitation
when she learnt my identity? Do you call them coincidences?"

"No, I don't," Bell said, promptly. "They are merely evidences of clever folks taking advantage
of an excellent strategic position. I said just now that it was an important point that Mr.
Gates had merely taken the next door furnished. But we shall come to that side of the theory
in due course. Have you any other objection to urge?"

"One more, and I have finished for the present. When I came here the other night--provided
of course that I did come here--immediately upon my entering the dining-room the place was
brilliantly illuminated. Now, directly the place was void the supply of electric current would
be cut off at the meter. So far as I can judge, some two or three units must have been consumed
during my visit. There could not be many less than ten lights burning for an hour. Now, those
units must show on the meter. Can you read an electric meter?"

"My dear fellow, there is nothing easier."

"Then let us go down into the basement and settle the matter. There is pretty sure to be a
card on the meter made up to the day when the last tenant went out. See, the supply is cut
off now."

As Steel spoke he snapped down the hall switch and no result came. Down in the basement by
the area door stood the meter. Both switches were turned off, but on Bell pressing them down
Steel was enabled to light the passage.

"There's the card," Bell exclaimed. "Made up to 25th June, 1895, since when the house has been
void. Just a minute whilst I read the meter. Yes, that's right. According to this the card
in your hand, provided that the light has not been used since the index was taken, should read
at 1521. What do you make of the card?"

"1532," David cried. "Which means eleven units since the meter was last taken. Or, if you like
to put it from your point of view, eleven units used the night that I came here. You are quite
right, Bell. You have practically convinced me that I have been inside the real 219 for the
first time to-day. And yet the more one probes the mystery the more astounding does it become....
What do you propose to do next?"

"Find out the name of the last tenant or owner." Bell suggested. "Discover what the two houses
were used for when they were occupied by one person. Also ascertain why on earth the owners
are willing to let a house this size and in this situation for a sum like £80 per annum. Let
us go and take the keys back to the agents."

Steel was nothing loth to find himself in the fresh air again. Some progress had been made
like the opening of a chess-match between masters, and yet the more Steel thought of it the
more muddled and bewildered did he become. No complicated tangle in the way of a plot had ever
been anything like the skein this was.

"I'm like a child in your hands," he said. "I'm a blind man on the end of a string; a man dazed
with wine in a labyrinth. And if ever I help a woman again--"

He paused as he caught sight of Ruth Gates's lovely face through the window of No. 219. Her
features were tinged with melancholy; there was a look of deepest sympathy and feeling and
compassion in her glorious eyes. She slipped back as Steel bowed, and the rest of his speech
was lost in a sigh.

CHAPTER X

THE HOUSE OF THE SILENT SORROW

A bell tolled mournfully with a slow, swinging cadence like a passing bell. On winter nights
folks, passing the House of the Silent Sorrow, compared the doleful clanging to the boom that
carries the criminal from the cell to the scaffold. Every night all the year round the little
valley of Longdean echoed to that mournful clang. Perhaps it was for this reason that a wandering
poet christened the place as the House of the Silent Sorrow.

For seven years this had been going on now, until nobody but strangers noticed it. From half-past
seven till eight o'clock that hideous bell rang its swinging, melancholy note. Why it was nobody
could possibly tell. Nobody in the village had ever been beyond the great rusty gates leading
to a dark drive of Scotch firs, though one small boy bolder than the rest had once climbed
the lichen-strewn stone wall and penetrated the thick undergrowth beyond. Hence he had returned,
with white face and staring eyes, with the information that great wild dogs dwelt in the thickets.
Subsequently the village poacher confirmed this information. He was not exactly loquacious
on the subject, but merely hinted that the grounds of Longdean Grange were not salubrious for
naturalists with a predatory disposition.

Indeed, on moonlight nights those apocryphal hounds were heard to bay and whimper. A shepherd
up late one spring night averred that he had seen two of them fighting. But nobody could say
anything about them for certain; also it was equally certain that nobody knew anything about
the people at Longdean Grange. The place had been shut up for thirty years, being understood
to be in Chancery, when the announcement went forth that a distant relative of the family had
arranged to live there in future.

What the lady of the Grange was like nobody could say. She had arrived late one night accompanied
by a niece, and from that moment she had never been beyond the house. None of the large staff
of servants ever left the grounds unless it was to quit altogether, and then they were understood
to leave at night with a large bonus in money as a recompense for their promise to evacuate
Sussex without delay. Everything was ordered by telephone from Brighton, and left at the porter's
lodge. The porter was a stranger, also he was deaf and exceedingly ill-tempered, so that long
since the village had abandoned the hope of getting anything out of him. One rational human
being they saw from the Grange occasionally, a big man with an exceedingly benevolent face
and mild, large, blue eyes--a man full of Christian kindness and given to largesse to the village
boys. The big gentleman went by the name of "Mr. Charles," and was understood to have a lot
of pigeons of which he was exceedingly fond. But who "Mr. Charles" was, or how he got that
name, it would have puzzled the wisest head of the village to tell.

And yet, but for the mighty clamour of that hideous bell and that belt of wildness that surrounded
it, Longdean Grange was a cheerful-looking house enough. Any visitor emerging from the drive
would have been delighted with it. For the lawns were trim and truly kept, the beds were blazing
masses of flowers, the creepers over the Grange were not allowed to riot too extravagantly.
And yet the strange haunting sense of fear was there. Now and again a huge black head would
uplift from the coppice growth, and a long, rumbling growl come from between a double row of
white teeth. For the dogs were no fiction, they lived and bred in the fifteen or twenty acres
of coppice round the house, where they were fed regularly and regularly thrashed without mercy
if they showed in the garden. Perhaps they looked more fierce and truculent than they really
were, being Cuban bloodhounds, but they gave a weird colour to the place and lent it new terror
to the simple folk around.

The bell was swinging dolefully over the stable-turret; it rang out its passing note till the
clock struck eight and then mercifully ceased. At the same moment precisely as she had done
any time the last seven years the lady of the house descended the broad, black oak staircase
to the hall. A butler of the old-fashioned type bowed to her and announced that dinner was
ready. He might have been the butler of an archbishop from his mien and deportment, yet his
evening dress was seedy and shiny to the last degree, his patent leather boots had long lost
their lustre, his linen was terribly frayed and yellow. Two footmen in livery stood in the
hall. They might have been supers playing on the boards of a travelling theatre, their once
smartly cut and trimmed coats hung raggedly upon them.

As to the lady, who was tall and handsome, with dark eyes and features contrasting strangely
with hair as white as the frost on a winter's landscape, there was a far-away, strained look
in the dark eyes, as if they were ever night and day looking for something, something that
would never be found. In herself the lady was clean and wholesome enough, but her evening dress
of black silk and lace was dropping into fragments, the lace was in rags upon her bosom, though
there were diamonds of great value in her white hair.

And here, strangely allied, were wealth and direst poverty; the whole place was filled with
rare and costly things, pictures, statuary, china; the floors were covered with thick carpets,
and yet everything was absolutely smothered in dust. A thick, white, blankety cloud of it lay
everywhere. It obscured the china, it dimmed the glasses of the pictures, it piled in little
drifts on the heads and arms of the dingy statues there. Many years must have passed since
a housemaid's brush or duster had touched anything in Longdean Grange. It was like a palace
of the Sleeping Beauty, wherein people walked as in a waking dream.

The lady of the house made her way slowly to the dining-room. Here dinner was laid out daintily
and artistically enough--a gourmet would have drawn up to the table with a feeling of satisfaction.
Flowers were there, and silver and cut-glass, china with a history of its own, and the whole
set out on a tablecloth that was literally dropping to pieces.

It was a beautiful room in itself, lofty, oak panelled from floor to roof, with a few pictures
of price on the walls. There was plenty of gleaming silver glowing like an argent moon against
a purple sky, and yet the same sense of dust and desolation was everywhere. Only the dinner
looked bright and modern.

There were two other people standing by the table, one a girl with a handsome, intellectual
face full of passion but ill repressed; the other the big fair man known to the village as
"Mr. Charles." As a matter of fact, his name was Reginald Henson, and he was distantly related
to Mrs. Henson, the strange chatelaine of the House of the Silent Sorrow. He was smiling blandly
now at Enid Henson, the wonderfully beautiful girl with the defiant, shining eyes.

"We may be seated now that madam is arrived," Henson said, gravely.

He spoke with a certain mocking humility and a queer wry smile on his broad, loose mouth that
filled Enid with a speechless fury. The girl was hot-blooded--a good hater and a good friend.
And the master passion of her life was hatred of Reginald Henson.

"Madam has had a refreshing rest?" Henson suggested. "Pardon our anxious curiosity."

Again Enid raged, but Margaret Henson might have been of stone for all the notice she took.
The far-away look was still in her eyes as she felt her way to the table like one in a dream.
Then she dropped suddenly into a chair and began grace in a high, clear voice.

".... And the Lord make us truly thankful. And may He, when it seemeth good to Him, remove
the curse from this house and in due season free the innocent and punish the guilty. For the
burden is sore upon us, and there are times when it seems hard to bear."

The big man played with his knife and fork, smilingly. An acute observer might have imagined
that the passionate plaint was directed at him. If so it passed harmlessly over his broad shoulders.
In his immaculate evening dress he looked strangely out of place there. Enid had escaped the
prevailing dilapidation, but her gown of grey homespun was severe as the garb of a charity girl.

"Madam is so poetical," Henson murmured. "And charmingly sanguine."

"Williams," Mrs. Henson said, quite stoically, "my visitor will have some champagne."

She seemed to have dropped once again into the commonplace, painfully exact as a hostess of
breeding must be to an unwelcome guest. And yet she never seemed to see him; those dark eyes
were looking, ever looking, into the dark future. The meal proceeded in silence save for an
oily sarcasm from Henson. In the dense stillness the occasional howl of a dog could be heard.
A slight flush of annoyance crossed Henson's broad face.

"Some day I shall poison all those hounds," he said.

Enid looked up at him swiftly.

"If all the hounds round Longdean were poisoned or shot it would be a good place to live in,"
she said.

Henson smiled caressingly, like Petruchio might have done in his milder moments.

"My dear Enid, you misjudge me," he said. "But I shall get justice some day."

Enid replied that she fervently hoped so, and thus the strange meal proceeded with smiles and
gentle words from Henson, and a wild outburst of bitterness from the girl. So far as she was
concerned the servants might have been mere automatons. The dust rose in clouds as the latter
moved silently. It was hot in there, and gradually the brown powder grimed like a film over
Henson's oily skin. At the head of the table Margaret Henson sat like a woman in a dream. Ever,
ever her dark eyes seemed to be looking eagerly around. Thirsty men seeking precious water
in a desert might have looked like her. Ever and anon her lips moved, but no sound came from
them. Occasionally she spoke to one or the other of her guests, but she never followed her
words with her eyes. Such a sad, pathetic, pitiable figure, such a grey sorrow in her rags
and snowy hair.

The meal came to an end at length, and Mrs. Henson rose suddenly. There was a grotesque suggestion
of the marionette in the movement. She bowed as if to some imaginary personage and moved with
dignity towards the door. Reginald Henson stood aside and opened it for her. She passed into
the dim hall as if absolutely unconscious of his presence. Enid flashed a look of defiance
at him as she disappeared into the gloom and floating dust.

Henson's face changed instantly, as if a mask had fallen from his smug features. He became
alert and vigorous. He was no longer patron of the arts, a wide-minded philanthropist, the
man who devotes himself to the good of humanity. The blue eyes were cold and cruel, there was
a hungry look about the loose mouth.

"Take a bottle of claret and the cigars into the small library, Williams," he said. "And open
the window, the dust stifles me."

The dignified butler bowed respectfully. He resembled the typical bad butler of fiction in
no respect, but his thoughts were by no means pleasant as he hastened to obey. Enid was loitering
in the hall as Williams passed with the tray.

"Small study and the window open, miss," he whispered. "There's some game on--oh, yes, there
is some blessed game on again to-night. And him so anxious to know how Miss Christiana is.
Says she ought to call him in professionally. Personally I'd rather call in an undertaker who
was desperately hard up for a job."

"All right, Williams," Enid replied. "My sister is worse to-night. And unless she gets better
I shall insist upon her seeing a doctor. And I am obliged for the hint about Mr. Henson. The
little study commands the staircase leading to my sister's bedroom."

"And the open window commands the garden," Williams said, drily.

"Yes, yes. Now go. You are a real friend, Williams, and I will never forget your goodness.
Run along--I can actually feel that man coming."

As a matter of fact, Henson was approaching noiselessly. Despite his great bulk he had the
clean, dainty step of a cat; his big, rolling ears were those of a hare. Henson was always
listening. He would have listened behind a kitchen door to a pair of chattering scullery-maids.
He liked to find other people out, though as yet he had not been found out himself. He stood
before the world as a social missioner; he made speeches at religious gatherings and affected
the women to tears. He was known to devote a considerable fortune to doing good; he had been
asked to stand for Parliament, where his real ambition lay. Gilead Gates had alluded to Reginald
Henson as his right-hand man.

He crept along to the study, where the lamps were lighted and the silver claret-jug set out.
He carefully dusted a big arm-chair and began to smoke, having first carefully extinguished
the lamps and seen that the window leading to the garden was wide open. Henson was watching
for something. In his feline nature he had the full gift of feline patience. To serve his own
ends he would have sat there watching all night if necessary. He heard an occasional whimper,
a howl from one of the dogs; he heard Enid's voice singing in the drawing-room. The rest of
the house was quite funereal enough for him.

In the midst of the drawing-room Margaret Henson sat still as a statue. The distant, weary
expression never left her eyes for a moment. As the stable clock, the only one going on the
premises, struck ten, Enid crossed over from the piano to her aunt's side. There was an eager
look on her face, her eyes were gleaming like frosty stars.

"Aunt," she whispered; "dear, I have had a message!"

"Message of woe and desolation," Margaret Henson cried. "Tribulation and sorrow on this wretched
house. For seven long years the hand of the Lord has lain heavily upon us."

She spoke like one who was far away from her surroundings. And yet no one could look in her
eyes and say that she was mad. It was a proud, passionate spirit, crushed down by some bitter
humiliation. Enid's eyes flashed.

"That scoundrel has been robbing you again," she said.

"Two thousand pounds," came the mechanical reply, "to endow a bed in some hospital. And there
is no escape, no hope unless we drag the shameful secret from him. Bit by bit and drop by drop,
and then I shall die and you and Christiana will be penniless."

"I daresay Chris and myself will survive that," Enid said, cheerfully. "But we have a plan,
dear aunt; we have thought it out carefully. Reginald Henson has hidden the secret somewhere
and we are going to find it. The secret is hidden not far off, because our cousin has occasion
to require it frequently. It is like the purloined letter in Edgar Poe's wonderful story."

Margaret Henson nodded and mumbled. It seemed almost impossible to make her understand. She
babbled of strange things, with her dark eyes ever fixed on the future. Enid turned away almost
despairingly. At the same time the stable clock struck the half-hour after ten. Williams slipped
in with a tray of glasses, noiselessly. On the tray lay a small pile of tradesmen's books.
The top one was of dull red with no lettering upon it at all.

"The housekeeper's respectful compliments, miss, and would you go through them to-morrow?"
Williams said. He tapped the top book significantly. "To-morrow is the last day of the month."

Enid picked up the top book with strange eagerness. There were pages of figures and cabalistic
entries that no ordinary person could make anything of. Pages here and there were signed and
decorated with pink receipt stamps. Enid glanced down the last column, and her face grew a
little paler.

"Aunt," she whispered, "I've got to go out. At once; do you understand? There is a message
here; and I am afraid that something dreadful has happened. Can you sing?"

"Ah, yes; a song of lamentation--a dirge for the dead."

"No, no; seven years ago you had a lovely voice. I recollect what a pleasure it was to me as
a child; and they used to say that my voice was very like yours, only not so sweet or so powerful.
Aunt, I must go out; and that man must know nothing about it. He is by the window in the small
library now, watching--watching. Help me, for the love of Heaven, help me."

The girl spoke with a fervency and passion that seemed to waken a responsive chord in Margaret
Henson's breast. A brighter gleam crept into her eyes.

"You are a dear girl," she said, dreamily; "yes, a dear girl. And I loved singing; it was a
great grief to me that they would not let me go upon the stage. But I haven't sung since--since
that--"

She pointed to the huddled heap of china and glass and dried, dusty flowers in one corner.
Ethel [Updater's note: Enid?] shuddered slightly as she followed the direction of the extended
forefinger.

"But you must try," she whispered. "It is for the good of the family, for the recovery of the
secret. Reginald Henson is sly and cruel and clever. But we have one on our side now who is
far more clever. And, unless I can get away to-night without that man knowing, the chance may
be lost for ever. Come!"

Margaret commenced to sing in a soft minor. At first the chords were thin and dry, but gradually
they increased in sweetness and power. The hopeless, distant look died from the singer's eyes;
there was a flush on her cheeks that rendered her years younger.

"Another one," she said, when the song was finished, "and yet another. How wicked I have been
to neglect this balm that God sent me all these years. If you only knew what the sound of my
own voice means to me! Another one, Enid."

"Yes, yes," Enid whispered. "You are to sing till I return. You are to leave Henson to imagine
that I am singing. He will never guess. Now then."

Enid crept away into the hall, closing the door softly behind her. She made her way noiselessly
from the house and across the lawn. As Henson slipped through the open window into the garden
Enid darted behind a bush. Evidently Henson suspected nothing so far as she was concerned,
for she could see the red glow of the cigar between his lips. The faint sweetness of distant
music filled the air. So long as the song continued Henson would relax his vigilance.

He was pacing down the garden in the direction of the drive. Did the man know anything? Enid
wondered. He had so diabolically cunning a brain. He seemed to find out everything, and to
read others before they had made up their minds for themselves.

The cigar seemed to dance like a mocking sprite into the bushes. Usually the man avoided those
bushes. If Reginald Henson was afraid of one thing it was of the dogs. And in return they hated
him as he hated them.

Enid's mind was made up. If the sound of that distant voice should only cease for a moment
she was quite sure Henson would turn back. But he could hear it, and she knew that she was
safe. Enid slipped past him into the bushes and gave a faint click of her lips. Something moved
and whined, and two dark objects bounded towards her. She caught them together by their collars
and cuffed them soundly. Then she led the way back so as to get on Henson's tracks.

He was walking on ahead of her now, beating time softly to the music of the faintly distant
song with his cigar. Enid could distinctly see the sweep of the red circle.

"Hold him, Dan," she whispered. "Watch, Prance; watch, boy."

There was a low growl as the hounds found the scent and dashed forward. Henson came up all
standing and sweating in every pore. It was not the first time he had been held up by the dogs,
and he knew by hard experience what to expect if he made a bolt for it.

Two grim muzzles were pressed against his trembling knees; he saw four rows of ivory flashing
in the dim light. Then the dogs crouched at his feet, watching him with eyes as red and lurid
as the point of his own cigar. Had he attempted to move, had he tried coercion, they would
have fallen upon him and torn him in pieces.

"Confusion to the creatures!" he cried, passionately. "I'll get a revolver; I'll buy some prussic
acid and poison the lot. And here I'll have to stay till Williams locks up the stables. Wouldn't
that little Jezebel laugh at me if she could see me now? She would enjoy it better than singing
songs in the drawing-room to our sainted Margaret. Steady, you brutes! I didn't move."

He stood there rigidly, almost afraid to take the cigar from his lips, whilst Enid sped without
further need for caution down the drive. The lodge-gates were closed and the deaf porter's
house in darkness, so that Enid could unlock the wicket without fear of detection. She rattled
the key on the bars and a figure slipped out of the darkness.

"Good heavens, Ruth, is it really you?" Enid cried.

"Really me, Enid. I came over on my bicycle. I am supposed to be round at some friend's house
in Brunswick Square, and one of the servants is sitting up for me. Is Reginald safe? He hasn't
yet discovered the secret of the tradesman's book?"

"That's all right, dear. But why are you here? Has something dreadful happened?"

"Well, I will try to tell you so in as few words as possible. I never felt so ashamed of anything
in my life."

"Don't tell me that our scheme has failed!" "Perhaps I need not go so far as that. The first
part of it came off all right, and then a very dreadful thing happened. We have got Mr. David
Steel into frightful trouble. He is going to be charged with attempted murder and robbery."

"Ruth! But tell me. I am quite in the dark."

"It was the night when--well, you know the night. It was after Mr. Steel returned home from
his visit to 219, Brunswick Square--"

"You mean 218, Ruth."

"It doesn't matter, because he knows pretty well all about it by this time. It would have been
far better for us if we hadn't been quite so clever. It would have been far wiser to have taken
Mr. Steel entirely into our confidence. Oh, oh, Enid, if we had only left out that little sentiment
over the cigar-case! Then we should have been all right."

"Dearest girl, my time is limited. I've got Reginald held up for the time, but at any moment
he may escape from his bondage. What about the cigar-case?"

"Well, Mr. Steel took it home with him. And when he got home he found a man nearly murdered
lying in his conservatory. That man was conveyed to the Sussex County Hospital, where he still
lies in an unconscious state. On the body was found a receipt for a gun-metal cigar-case set
with diamonds."

"Good gracious, Ruth, you don't mean to say--"

"Oh, I do. I can't quite make out how it happened, but that same case that we--that Mr. Steel
has--has been positively identified as one purchased from Walen by the injured man. There is
no question about it. And they have found out about Mr. Steel being short of money, and the
£1,000, and everything."

"But we know that that cigar-case from Lockhart's in North Street was positively--"

"Yes, yes. But what has become of that? And in what strange way was the change made? I tell
you that the whole thing frightens me. We thought that we had hit upon a scheme to solve the
problem, and keep our friends out of danger. There was the American at Genoa who volunteered
to assist us. A week later he was found dead in his bed. Then there was Christiana's friend,
who disappeared entirely. And now we try further assistance in the case of Mr. Steel, and he
stands face to face with a terrible charge. And he has found us out."

"He has found us out? What do you mean?"

"Well, he called to see me. He called at 219, of course. And directly I heard his name I was
so startled that I am afraid I betrayed myself. Such a nice, kind, handsome man, Enid; so manly
and good over it all. Of course he declared that he had been at 219 before, and I could only
declare that he had done nothing of the kind. Never, never have I felt so ashamed of myself
in my life before."

"It seems a pity," Enid said, thoughtfully. "You said nothing about 218?"

"My dear, he found it out. At least, Hatherly Bell did for him. Hatherly Bell happened to be
staying down with us, and Hatherly Bell, who knows Mr. Steel, promptly solved, or half solved,
that side of the problem. And Hatherly Bell is coming here to-night to see Aunt Margaret. He--"

"Here!" Enid cried. "To see Aunt Margaret? Then he found out about you. At all hazards Mr.
Bell must not come here--he must not. I would rather let everything go than that. I would rather
see auntie dead and Reginald Henson master here. You must--"

In the distance came the rattle of harness bells and the trot of a horse.

"I'm afraid it's too late," Ruth Gates said, sadly. "I am afraid that they are here already.
Oh, if we had only left out that wretched cigar-case!"

CHAPTER XI

AFTER REMBRANDT

"Before we go any farther," Bell said, after a long pause, "I should like to search the house
from top to bottom. I've got a pretty sound theory in my head, but I don't like to leave anything
to chance. We shall be pretty certain to find something."

"I am entirely in your hands," David said, wearily. "So far as I am capable of thinking out
anything, it seems to me that we have to find the woman."

"Cherchez la femme is a fairly sound premise in a case like this, but when we have found the
woman we shall have to find the man who is at the bottom of the plot. I mean the man who is
not only thwarting the woman, but giving you a pretty severe lesson as to the advisability
of minding your own business for the future."

"Then you don't think I am being made the victim of a vile conspiracy?"

"Not by the woman, certainly. You are the victim of some fiendish counterplot by the man, who
has not quite mastered what the woman is driving at. By placing you in dire peril he compels
the woman to speak to save you, and thus to expose her hand."

"Then in that case I propose to sit tight," David said, grimly. "I am bound to be prosecuted
for robbery and attempted murder in due course. If my man dies I am in a tight place."

"And if he recovers your antagonist may be in a tighter," Bell chuckled. "And if the man gets
well and that brain injury proves permanent--I mean if the man is rendered imbecile--why, we
are only at the very threshold of the mystery. It seems a callous thing to say, but this is
the prettiest problem I have had under my hands."

"Make the most of it," David said, sardonically. "I daresay I should see the matter in a more
rational light if I were not so directly concerned. But, if we are going to make a search of
the premises, the sooner we start the better."

Upstairs there was nothing beyond certain lumber. There were dust and dirt everywhere, save
in the hall and front dining-room, which, as Bell sapiently pointed out, had obviously been
cleared to make ready for Steel's strange reception. Down in the housekeeper's room was a large
collection of dusty furniture, and a number of pictures and engravings piled with their faces
to the wall. Bell began idly to turn the latter over.

"I am a maniac on the subject of old prints," he explained. "I never see a pile without a wild
longing to examine them. And, by Jove, there are some good things here. Unless I am greatly
mistaken--here, Steel, pull up the blinds! Good heavens, is it possible?"

"Found a Sistine Madonna or a stray Angelo?" David asked. "Or a ghost? What is the matter?
Is it another phase of the mystery?"

"The Rembrandt," Bell gasped. "Look at it, man!"

Steel bent eagerly over the engraving. An old print, an old piece of china, an antique jewel,
always exercised a charm over the novelist. He had an unerring eye for that kind of thing.

"Exquisite," he cried. "A Rembrandt, of course, but I don't recollect the picture."

"The picture was destroyed by accident after Rembrandt had engraved it with his own hand,"
Bell proceeded to explain. He was quite coherent now, but he breathed fast and loud, "I shall
proceed to give you the history of the picture presently, and more especially a history of
the engraving."

"Has it any particular name?" David asked.

"Yes, we found that out. It was called 'The Crimson Blind!'"

"No getting away from the crimson blind," David murmured. "Still, I can quite imagine that
to have been the name of the picture. That shutter or blind might have had a setting sun behind
it, which would account for the tender warmth of the kitchen foreground and the deep gloom
where the lovers are seated. By Jove, Bell, it is a magnificent piece of work. I've a special
fancy for Rembrandt engravings, but I never saw one equal to that."

"And you never will," Bell replied, "save in one instance. The picture itself was painted in
Rembrandt's modest lodging in the Keizerskroon Tavern after the forced sale of his paintings
at that hostel in the year 1658. At that time Rembrandt was painfully poor, as his recorded
tavern bills show. The same bills also disclose the fact that 'The Crimson Blind' was painted
for a private customer with a condition that the subject should be engraved as well. After
one impression had been taken off the plate the picture was destroyed by a careless servant.
In a sudden fit of rage Rembrandt destroyed the plate, having, they say, only taken one impression
from it."

"Then there is only one of these engravings in the world? What a find!"

"There is one other, as I know to my cost," Bell said, significantly. "Until a few days ago
I never entertained the idea that there were two. Steel, you are the victim of a vile conspiracy,
but it is nothing to the conspiracy which has darkened my life."

"Sooner or later I always felt that I should get to the bottom of the mystery, and now I am
certain of it. And, strange as it may seem, I verily believe that you and I are hunting the
same man down--that the one man is at the bottom of the two evils. But you shall hear my story
presently. What we have to find out now is who was the last tenant and who is the present owner
of the house, and incidentally learn who this lumber belongs to. Ah, this has been a great
day for me!"

Bell spoke exultingly, a great light shining in his eyes. And David sapiently asked no further
questions for the present. All that he wanted to know would come in time. The next move, of
course, was to visit the agent of the property.

A smart, dapper little man, looking absurdly out of place in an exceedingly spacious office,
was quite ready to give every information. It was certainly true that 218, Brunswick Square,
was to be let at an exceedingly low rent on a repairing lease, and that the owner had a lot
more property in Brighton to be let on the same terms. The lady was exceedingly rich and eccentric;
indeed, by asking such low rents she was doing her best to seriously diminish her income.

"Do you know the lady at all?" Bell asked.

"Not personally," the agent admitted. "So far as I can tell, the property came into the present
owner's hands some years ago by inheritance. The property also included a very old house, called
Longdean Grange, not far from Rottingdean, where the lady, Mrs. Henson, lives at present. Nobody
ever goes there, nobody ever visits there, and to keep the place free from prying visitors
a large number of savage dogs are allowed to prowl about the grounds."

Bell listened eagerly. Watching him, David could see that his eyes glinted like points of steel.
There was something subtle behind all this common-place that touched the imagination of the
novelist.

"Has 218 been let during the occupation of the present owner?" Bell asked.

"No," the agent replied. "But the present owner--as heir to the property--I am told, was interested
in both 218 and 219, which used to be a kind of high-class convalescent home for poor clergy
and the widows and daughters of poor clergy in want of a holiday. The one house was for the
men and the other for the women, and both were furnished exactly alike; in fact, Mr. Gates's
landlord, the tenant of 219, bought the furniture exactly as it stands when the scheme fell
through."

Steel looked up swiftly. A sudden inspiration came to him.

"In that case what became of the precisely similar furniture in 218?" he asked.

"That I cannot tell you," the agent said. "That house was let as it stood to some sham philanthropist
whose name I forget. The whole thing was a fraud, and the swindler only avoided arrest by leaving
the country. Probably the goods were stored somewhere or perhaps seized by some creditor. But
I really can't say definitely without looking the matter up. There are some books and prints
now left in the house out of the wreck. We shall probably put them in a sale, only they have
been overlooked. The whole lot will not fetch £5."

"Would you take £5 for them?" Bell asked.

"Gladly. Even if only to get them carted away."

Bell gravely produced a £5 note, for which he asked and received a receipt. Then he and Steel
repaired to 218 once more, whence they recovered the Rembrandt, and subsequently returned the
keys of the house to the agent. There was an air of repressed excitement about Bell which was
not without its effect upon his companion. The cold, hard lines seemed to have faded from Bell's
face; there was a brightness about him that added to his already fine physical beauty.

"And now, perhaps, you will be good enough to explain," David suggested.

"My dear fellow, it would take too long," Bell cried. "Presently I am going to tell you the
story of the tragedy of my life. You have doubtless wondered, as others have wondered, why
I dropped out of the road when the goal was in sight. Well, your curiosity is about to be gratified.
I am going to help you, and in return you are going to help me to come back into the race again.
By way of a start, you are going to ask me to come and dine with you to-night."

"At half-past seven, then. Nothing will give me greater pleasure."

"Spoken like a man and a brother. We will dine, and I will tell you my story after the house
is quiet. And if I ask you to accompany me on a midnight adventure you will not say me nay?"

"Not in my present mood, at any rate. Adventure, with a dash of danger in it, suits my present
mood exactly. And if there is to be physical violence, so much the better. My diplomacy may
be weak, but physically I am not to be despised in a row."

"Well, we'll try and avoid the latter, if possible," Bell laughed. "Still, for your satisfaction,
I may say there is just the chance of a scrimmage. And now I really must go, because I have
any amount of work to do for Gates. Till half-past seven, au revoir."

Steel lighted a cigarette and strolled thoughtfully homewards along the front. The more he
thought over the mystery the more tangled it became. And yet he felt perfectly sure that he
was on the right track. The discovery that both those houses had been furnished exactly alike
at one time was a most important one. And David no longer believed that he had been to No.
219 on the night of the great adventure. Then he found himself thinking about Ruth Gates's
gentle face and lovely eyes, until he looked up and saw the girl before him.

"You--you wanted to speak to me?" he stammered.

"I followed you on purpose," the girl said, quietly, "I can't tell you everything, because
it is not my secret to tell. But believe me everything will come out right in the end. Don't
think badly of me, don't be hard and bitter because--"

"Because I am nothing of the kind," David smiled. "It is impossible to look into a face like
yours and doubt you. And I am certain that you are acting loyally and faithfully for the sake
of others who--"

"Yes, yes, and for your sake, too. Pray try and remember that. For your sake, too. Oh, if you
only knew how I admire and esteem you! If only--"

She paused with the deep blush crimsoning her face. David caught her hand, and it seemed to
him for a moment that she returned the pressure.

"Let me help you," he whispered. "Only be my friend and I will forgive everything."

She gave him a long look of her deep, velvety eyes, she flashed him a little smile, and was gone.

CHAPTER XII

"THE CRIMSON BLIND"

Hatherly Bell turned up at Downend Terrace gay and debonair as if he had not a single trouble
in the world. His evening dress was of the smartest and he had a rose in his buttonhole. From
his cab he took a square brown paper parcel, which he deposited in David's study with particular
care.

He made no allusion whatever to the sterner business of the evening; he was gay and light-hearted
as a child, so that Mrs. Steel sat up quite an hour later than her usual time, absolutely unconscious
of the fact that she had broken a rigid rule of ten years' standing.

"Now let us go into the study and smoke a cigar," David suggested.

Bell dragged a long deck-chair into the conservatory and lighted a Massa. Steel's offer of
whisky and soda was declined.

"An ideal place for a novelist who has a keen eye for the beautiful," he said. "There you have
your books and pictures, your stained glass and china, and when you turn your eyes this way
they are gladdened by green foliage and lovely flowers. It's hard to connect such a room with
a tragedy."

"And yet the tragedy was worked out close by where you are sitting. But never mind that. Come
to your story, and let me see if we can fit it into mine."

Bell took a fresh pull at his cigar and plunged into his subject.

"About seven years ago professional business took me to Amsterdam; a
brilliant young medical genius who was drinking himself prematurely into
his grave had made some wonderful discoveries relating to the brain and
psychology generally, so I decided to learn what I could before it
  was too late. I found the young doctor to be an exceedingly good
  fellow, only too ready to speak of his discoveries, and there I
  stayed for a year. My word! what do I not owe to that misguided
  mind! And what a revolution he would have made in medicine and
  surgery had he only lived!

"Well, in Amsterdam I got to know everybody who was worth knowing--medical, artistic, social.
And amongst the rest was an Englishman called Lord Littimer, his son, and an exceedingly clever
nephew of his, Henson by name, who was the son's tutor. Littimer was a savant, a scholar, and
a fine connoisseur as regarded pictures. He was popularly supposed to have the finest collection
of old prints in England. He would travel anywhere in search of something fresh, and the rumour
of some apocryphal treasure in Amsterdam had brought him thither. He and I were friends from
the first, as, indeed, were the son and myself. Henson, the nephew, was more quiet and reserved,
but fond, as I discovered, of a little secret dissipation.

"In those days I was not averse to a little life myself. I was passionately fond of all games
of cards, and I am afraid that I was in the habit of gambling to a greater extent than I could
afford. I don't gamble now and I don't play cards: in fact, I shall never touch a card again
as long as I live. Why, you shall hear all in good time.

"We were all getting on very well together at that time when Lord Littimer's sister paid us
a visit. She came accompanied by a daughter called Enid. I will not describe her, because no
words of mine could do her justice. In a word, I fell over head and ears in love with Enid,
and in that state I have remained ever since. Of all the crosses that I have to bear the knowledge
that I love Enid and that she loves--and despises--me, is by far the heaviest. But I don't
want to dwell upon ythat."

"We were a very happy party there until Van Sneck and Von Gulden turned up. Enid and I had
come to an understanding, and, though we kept our secret, we were not going to do so for long.
From the very first Von Gulden admired her. He was a handsome, swaggering soldier, a good-looking,
wealthy man, who had a great reputation for gallantry, and something worse. Perhaps the fellow
guessed how things lay, for he never troubled to conceal his dislike and contempt for me. It
is no fault of mine that I am extremely sensitive as to my personal appearance, but Von Gulden
played upon it until he drove me nearly mad. He challenged me sneeringly to certain sports
wherein he knew I could not shine; he challenged me to écarté, where I fancied I was his master.

"Was I? Well, we had been dining that night, and perhaps too freely, for I entirely lost my
head before I began the game in earnest. Those covert sneers had nearly driven me mad. To make
a long story short, when I got up from the table that night, I owed my opponent nearly £800,
without the faintest prospect of paying a tenth part of it. I was only a poor, ambitious young
man then, with my way to make in the world. And if that money were not forthcoming in the next
few days I was utterly ruined."

"The following morning the great discovery was made. The Van Sneck I have alluded to was an
artist, a dealer, a man of the shadiest reputation, whom my patron, Lord Littimer, had picked
up. It was Van Sneck who produced the copy of 'The Crimson Blind.' Not only did he produce
the copy, but he produced the history from some recently discovered papers relating to the
Keizerskroon Tavern of the year 1656, which would have satisfied a more exacting man than Littimer.
In the end the Viscount purchased the engraving for £800 English.

"You can imagine how delighted he was with his prize--he had secured an engraving by Rembrandt
that was absolutely unique. Under more favourable circumstances I should have shared that pleasure.
But I was face to face with ruin, and therefore I had but small heart for rejoicing.

"I came down the next morning after a sleepless night, and with a wild endeavour to scheme
some way of getting the money to pay my creditor. To my absolute amazement I found a polite
note from the lieutenant coldly thanking me for the notes I had sent him by messenger, and
handing me a formal receipt for £800. At first I regarded it as a hoax. But, with all his queer
ways, Von Gulden was a gentleman. Somebody had paid the debt for me. And somebody had, though
I have never found out to this day."

"All the same, you have your suspicions?" Steel suggested.

"I have a very strong suspicion, but I have never been able to verify it. All the same, you
can imagine what an enormous weight it was off my mind, and how comparatively cheerful I was
as I crossed over to the hotel of Lord Littimer after breakfast. I found him literally beside
himself with passion. Some thief had got into his room in the night and stolen his Rembrandt.
The frame was intact, but the engraving had been rolled up and taken away."

"Very like the story of the stolen Gainsborough."

"No doubt the one theft inspired the other. I was sent off on foot to look for Van Sneck, only
to find that he had suddenly left the city. He had got into trouble with the police, and had
fled to avoid being sent to gaol. And from that day to this nothing has been seen of that picture."

"But I read to-day that it is still in Littimer Castle," said David.

"Another one," Bell observed. "Oblige me by opening yonder parcel. There you see is the print
that I purchased to-day for £5. This, this, my friend, is the print that was stolen from Littimer's
lodgings in Amsterdam. If you look closely at it you will see four dull red spots in the left-hand
corner. They are supposed to be blood-spots from a cut finger of the artist. I am prepared
to swear that this is the very print, frame and all, that was purchased in Amsterdam from that
shady scoundrel Van Sneck."

"But Littimer is credited with having one in his collection," David urged.

"He has one in his collection," Bell said, coolly, "And, moreover, he is firmly under the impression
that he is at present happy in the possession of his own lost treasure. And up to this very
day I was under exactly the same delusion. Now I know that there must have been two copies
of the plate, and that this knowledge was used to ruin me."

"But," Steel murmured, "I don't exactly see--"

"I am just coming to that. We hunted high and low for the picture, but nowhere could it be
found. The affair created a profound impression in Amsterdam. A day or two later Von Gulden
went back to his duty on the Belgian frontier and business called me home. I packed my solitary
portmanteau and departed. When I arrived at the frontier I opened my luggage for the Custom
officer and the whole contents were turned out without ceremony. On the bottom was a roll of
paper on a stick that I quite failed to recognise. An inquisitive Customs House officer opened
it and immediately called the lieutenant in charge. Strange to say, he proved to be Von Gulden.
He came up to me, very gravely, with the paper in his hand.

"'May I inquire how this came amongst your luggage?' he asked.

"I could say nothing; I was dumb. For there lay the Rembrandt. The red spots had been smudged
out of the corner, but there, the picture was.

"Well, I lost my head then. I accused Von Gulden of all kinds of disgraceful things. And he
behaved like a gentleman--he made me ashamed of myself. But he kept the picture and returned
it to Littimer, and I was ruined. Lord Littimer declined to prosecute, but he would not see
me and he would hear of no explanation. Indeed, I had none to offer. Enid refused to see me
also or reply to my letters. The story of my big gambling debt, and its liquidation, got about.
Steel, I was ruined. Some enemy had done this thing, and from that day to this I have been
a marked man."

"But how on earth was it done?" Steel cried.

"For the present I can only make surmises," Bell replied. "Van Sneck was a slippery dog. Of
course, he had found two of those plates. He kept the one back so as to sell the other at a
fancy price. My enemy discovered this, and Van Sneck's sudden flight was his opportunity. He
could afford to get rid of me at an apparently dear rate. He stole Littimer's engraving--in
fact, he must have done so, or I should not have it at this moment. Then he smudged out some
imaginary spots on the other and hid it in my luggage, knowing that it would be found. Also
he knew that it would be returned to Littimer, and that the stolen plate could be laid aside
and produced at some remote date as an original find. The find has been mine, and it will go
hard if I can't get to the bottom of the mystery now. It is strange that your mysterious trouble
and mine should be bound up so closely together, but in the end it will simplify matters, for
the very reason that we are both on the hunt for the same man."

"Which man we have got to find, Bell."

"Granted. We will bait for him as one does for a wily old trout. The fly shall be the Rembrandt,
and you see he will rise to it in time. But beyond this I have made one or two important discoveries
to-day. We are going to the house of the strange lady who owns 218 and 219, Brunswick Square,
and I shall be greatly mistaken if she does not prove to be an old acquaintance of mine. There
will be danger."

"You propose to go to-night?"

"I propose to go at once," Bell said. "Dark hours are always best for dark business. Now, which
is the nearest way to Longdean Grange?"

"So the House of the Silent Sorrow, as they call it, is to be our destination! I must confess
that the place has ever held a strange fascination for me. We will go over the golf links and
behind Ovingdean village. It is a rare spot for a tragedy."

Bell rose and lighted a fresh cigar.

"Come along," he said. "Poke that Rembrandt behind your books with its face to the wall. I
would not lose that for anything now. No, on second thoughts I find I shall have to take it
with me."

David closed the door carefully behind him, and the two stepped out into the night.

CHAPTER XIII

"GOOD DOG!"

Two dancing eyes of flame were streaming up the lane towards the girls, a long shadow slanted
across the white pathway, the steady flick of hoofs drew nearer. Then the hoofs ceased their
smiting of the dust and a man's voice spoke.

"Better turn and wait for us by the farm, driver," the voice said. "Bell, can you manage, man?"

"Who was that?" Enid whispered. "A stranger?"

"Not precisely," Ruth replied. "That is Mr. David Steel. Oh, I am sure we can trust him. Don't
annoy him. Think of the trouble he is in for our sakes."

"I do," Enid said, drily. "I am also thinking of Reginald. If our dear Reginald escapes from
the fostering care of the dogs we shall be ruined. That man's hearing is wonderful. He will
come creeping down here on those large flat feet of his, and that cunning brain will take in
everything like a flash. Good dog!"

A hound in the distance growled, and then another howled mournfully. It was the plaint of the
beast who has found his quarry, impatient for the gaoler to arrive. So long as that continued
Henson was safe. Any attempt to escape, and he would be torn to pieces. Just at the present
moment Enid almost hoped that the attempt would be made. It certainly was all right for the
present, but then Williams might happen along on his way to the stables at any moment.

The two men were coming nearer. They both paused as the dogs gave tongue. Through the thick
belt of trees lights gleamed from one or two windows of the house. Steel pulled up and shuddered
slightly in spite of himself.

"Crimson blinds," he said. "Crimson blinds all through this business. They are beginning to
get on my nerves. What about those dogs, Bell?"

"Dogs or no dogs, I am not going back now," Bell muttered. "It's perfectly useless to come
here in the daytime; therefore we must fall back upon a little amateur burglary. There's a
girl yonder who might have assisted me at one time, but--"

Enid slipped into the road. The night was passably light and her beautiful features were fairly
clear to the startled men in the road.

"The girl is here," she said. "What do you want?"

Bell and his companion cried out simultaneously: Bell because he was so suddenly face to face
with one who was very dear to him, David because it seemed to him that he recognised the voice
from the darkness, the voice of his great adventure. And there was another surprise as he saw
Ruth Gates side by side with the owner of that wonderful voice.

"Enid!" Bell cried, hoarsely. "I did not expect--"

"To confront me like this," the girl said, coldly. "That I quite understand. What I don't understand
is why you intrude your hated presence here."

Bell shook his handsome head mournfully. He looked strangely downcast and dejected, and none
the less, perhaps, because a fall in crossing the down had severely wrenched his ankle. But
for a belated cab on the Rottingdean road he would not have been here now.

"As hard and cruel as ever," he said. "Not one word to me, not one word in my defence. And
all the time I am the victim of a vile conspiracy--"

"Conspiracy! Do you call vulgar theft a conspiracy?"

"It was nothing else," David put in, eagerly. "A most extraordinary conspiracy. The kind of
thing that you would not have deemed possible out of a book."

"And who might this gentleman be?" Enid asked, haughtily.

"A thousand pardons for my want of ceremony," David said. "If I had not been under the impression
that we had met before I should never have presumed--"

"Oh, a truce to this," Bell cried. "We are wasting time. The hour is not far distant, Enid,
when you will ask my pardon. Meanwhile I am going up to the house, and you are going to take
me there. Come what way, I don't sleep to-night until I have speech with your aunt."

David had drawn a little aside. By a kind of instinct Ruth Gates followed him. A shaft of grey
light glinted upon her cycle in the grass by the roadside. Enid and Bell were talking in vehement
whispers--they seemed to be absolutely unconscious of anybody else but themselves. David could
see the anger and scorn on the pale, high-bred face; he could see Bell gradually expanding
as he brought all his strength and firm power of will to bear.

"What will be the upshot of it?" Ruth asked, timidly.

"Bell will conquer," David replied. "He always does, you know."

"I am afraid you don't take my meaning, Mr. Steel."

David looked down into the sweet, troubled face of his companion, and thence away to the vivid
crimson patches beyond the dark belt of foliage. Ever and anon the intense stillness of the
night was broken by the long-drawn howl of one of the hounds. David remembered it for years
afterwards; it formed the most realistic chapter of one of his most popular novels.

"Heaven only knows," he said. "I have been dragged into this business, but what it means I
know no more than a child. I am mixed up in it, and Bell is mixed up in it, and so are you.
Why we shall perhaps know some day."

"You are not angry with me?"

"Why, no. Only you might have had a little more confidence in me."

"Mr. Steel, we dared not. We wanted your advice, and nothing more. Even now I am afraid I am
saying too much. There is a withering blight over yonder house that is beyond mere words. And
twice gallant gentlemen have come forward to our assistance. Both of them are dead. And if
we had dragged you, a total stranger, into the arena, we should morally have murdered you."

"Am I not within the charmed circle now?" David smiled.

"Not of our free will," Ruth said, eagerly. "You came into the tangle with Hatherly Bell. Thank
Heaven you have an ally like that. And yet I am filled with shame--"

"My dear young lady, what have you to be ashamed of?"

Ruth covered her face with her hands for a moment and David saw a tear or two trickle through
the slim fingers. He took the hands in his, gently, tenderly, and glanced into the fine, grey
eyes. Never had he been moved to a woman like this before.

"But what will you think of me?" Ruth whispered. "You have been so good and kind and I am so
foolish. What can you think of a girl who is all this way from home at midnight? It is so--so
unmaidenly."

"It might be in some girls, but not in you," David said, boldly. "One has only to look in your
face and see that only the good and the pure dwell there. But you were not afraid?"

"Horribly afraid. The very shadows startled me. But when I discovered your errand to-night
I was bound to come. My loyalty to Enid demanded it, and I had not one single person in the
world whom I could trust."

"If you had only come to me, Miss Ruth--"

"I know, I know now. Oh, it is a blessed thing for a lonely girl to have one good man that
she can rely upon. And you have been so very good, and we have treated you very, very badly."

But David would not hear anything of the kind. The whole adventure was strange to a degree,
but it seemed to matter nothing so long as he had Ruth for company. Still, the girl must be
got home. She could not be allowed to remain here, nor must she be permitted to return to Brighton
alone. Bell strode up at the same moment.

"Miss Henson has been so good as to listen to my arguments," he said. "I am going into the
house. Don't worry about me, but send Miss Gates home in the cab. I shall manage somehow."

David turned eagerly to Ruth.

"That will be best," he said. "We can put your machine on the cab, and I'll accompany you part
of the way home. Our cabman will think that you came from the house. I shan't be long, Bell."

Ruth assented gratefully. As David put her in the cab Bell whispered to him to return as soon
as possible, but the girl heard nothing of this.

"How kind--how kind you are," she murmured.

"Perhaps some day you will be kind to me," David said, and Ruth blushed in the darkness.

CHAPTER XIV

BEHIND THE BLIND

There was a long pause till the sound of the horse's hoofs died away. Bell was waiting for
his companion to speak. Her head was partly turned from him, so that he could only watch the
dainty beauty of her profile. She stood there cold and still, but he could see that she was
profoundly agitated.

"I never thought to see the day when I should trust you again," she said; "I never expected
to trust any man again."

"You will trust me, darling," Bell said, passionately. "If you still care for me as I care
for you. Do you?"

The question came keen as steel. Enid shivered and hesitated. Bell laid a light hand on her arm.

"Speak," he said. "I am going to clear myself, I am going to take back my good name. But if
you no longer care for me the rest matters nothing. Speak."

"I am not one of those who change, God pity me," Enid murmured.

Bell drew a long, deep breath. He wanted no assurance beyond that.

"Then lead the way," he said. "I have come at the right time; I have been looking for you everywhere,
and I find you in the hour of your deepest sorrow. When I knew your aunt last she was a cheerful,
happy woman. From what I hear now she is suffering, you are all suffering, under some blighting
grief."

"Oh, if you only knew what that sorrow was, Hatherly."

"Hatherly! How good the old name sounds from your lips. Nobody has ever called me that since--since
we parted. And to think that I should have been searching for you all these years, when Miss
Ruth Gates could have given me the clue at any time. And why have you been playing such strange
tricks upon my friend David Steel? Why have you---What is that?"

Somebody was moving somewhere in the grounds, and a voice shouted for help. Enid started forward.

"It is Williams coming from the stables," she said. "I have so arranged it that the dogs are
holding up my dear cousin, Reginald Henson, who is calling upon Williams to release him. If
Reginald gets back to the house now we are ruined. Follow me as well as you can."

Enid disappeared down a narrow, tangled path, leaving Bell to limp along painfully in her track.
A little way off Henson was yelling lustily for assistance. Williams, who had evidently taken
in the situation, was coming up leisurely, chuckling at the discomfiture of the enemy. The
hounds were whining and baying. From the house came the notes of a love song passionately declaimed.
A couple of the great dogs came snarling up to Bell and laid their grimy muzzles on his thighs.
A cold sensation crept up and down his spine as he came to a standstill.

"The brutes!" he muttered. "Margaret Henson must be mad indeed to have these creatures about
the place. Ah! would you? Very well, I'll play the game fairly, and not move. If I call out
I shall spoil the game. If I remain quiet I shall have a pleasant night of it. Let us hope
for the best and that Enid will understand the situation."

Meanwhile Enid had come up with Williams. She laid her hand imperiously upon his lips.

"Not a word," she whispered. "Mr. Henson is held up by the dogs. He must remain where he is
till I give you the signal to release him. I know you answered his call, but you are to go
no farther."

Williams assented willingly enough. Everything that tended to the discomfort of Reginald Henson
filled him with a peculiar and deep-seated pleasure.

"Very well, miss," he said, demurely. "And don't you hurry, miss. This is a kind of job that
calls for plenty of patience. And I'm really shocking deaf tonight."

Williams retreated leisurely in the direction of the stables, but his malady was not so distressing
that he failed to hear a groan and a snarling curse from Henson. Enid fled back along the track,
where she found Bell standing patiently with a dog's muzzle close to either knee. His face
was white and shining, otherwise he showed no signs of fear. Enid laid a hand on the head of
either dog, and they rolled like great cats at her feet in the bushes.

"Now come swiftly," she whispered. "There is no time to be lost."

They were in the house at last, crossing the dusty floor, with the motes dancing in the lamp-light,
deadening their footsteps and muffling the intense silence. Above the stillness rose the song
from the drawing-room; from without came the restless murmur of the dogs. Enid entered the
drawing-room, and Bell limped in behind her. The music immediately ceased. As Enid glanced
at her aunt she saw that the far-away look had died from her eyes, that the sparkle and brightness
of reason were there. She had come out of the mist and the shadows for a time at any rate.

"Dr. Hatherly Bell to see you, aunt," Enid said, in a low tone.

Margaret Henson shot up from the piano like a statue. There was no welcome on her face, no
surprise there, nothing but deep, unutterable contempt and loathing.

"I have been asleep," she said. She passed her hand dreamily over her face. "I have been in
a dream for seven long years. Enid brought me back to the music again to-night, and it touched
my heart, and now I am awake again. Do you recollect the 'Slumber Song,' Hatherly Bell? The
last time I sang it you were present. It was a happy night; the very last happy night in the
world to me."

"I recollect it perfectly well, Lady Littimer," Bell said.

"Lady Littimer! How strange it is to hear that name again. Seven years since then. Here I am
called Margaret Henson, and nobody knows. And now you have found out. Do you come here to blackmail
and rob me like the rest?"

"I come here entirely on your behalf and my own, my lady."

"That is what they all say--and then they rob me. You stole the Rembrandt."

The last words came like a shot from a catapult. Enid's face grew colder. Bell drew a long
tube of discoloured paper carefully tied round a stick from his pocket.

"I am going to disprove that once and for all," he said. "The Rembrandt is at present in Lord
Littimer's collection. There is an account of it in to-day's Telegraph. It is perfectly familiar
to both of you. And, that being the case, what do you think of this?"

He unrolled the paper before Enid's astonished eyes. Margaret Henson glanced at it listlessly;
she was fast sinking into the old, strange oblivion again. But Enid was all rapt attention.

"I would have sworn to that as Lord Littimer's own," she gasped.

"It is his own," Bell replied. "Stolen from him and a copy placed by some arch-enemy in my
portmanteau, it was certain to be found on the frontier. Don't you see that there were two
Rembrandts? When the one from my portmanteau was restored to Littimer his own was kept by the
thief. Subsequently it would be exposed as a new find, with some story as to its discovery,
only, unfortunately for the scoundrel, it came into my possession."

"And where did you find it?" Enid asked. "I found it," Bell said, slowly, "in a house called
218, Brunswick Square, Brighton."

A strange cry came from Enid's lips. She stood swaying before her lover, white as the paper
upon which her eyes were eagerly fixed. Margaret Henson was pacing up and down the room, her
lips muttering, and raising a cloud of pallid dust behind her.

"I--I am sorry," Enid said, falteringly. "And all these years I have deemed you guilty. But
then the proof was so plain; I could not deny the evidence of my own senses. And Von Gulden
came to me saying how deeply distressed he was, and that he would have prevented the catastrophe
if he could. Well?"

A servant stood waiting in the doorway with wondering eyes at the sight of a stranger.

"I'm sorry, miss," she said, "but Miss Christiana is worse; indeed, she quite frightens me.
I've taken the liberty of telephoning to Dr. Walker."

The words seemed to bring consciousness to Margaret Henson.

"Christiana worse," she said. "Another of them going; it will be a happy release from a house
of sorrow like this. I will come up, Martin."

She swept out of the room after the servant. Enid appeared hardly to have heard. Bell looked
at her inquiringly and with some little displeasure.

"I fancy I have heard you speak of your sister Christiana," he said. "Is she ill?"

"She is at the point of death, I understand; you think that I am callous. Oh, if you only knew!
But the light will come to us all in time, God willing. Look at this place, look at the blight
of it, and wonder how we endure it. Hatherly, I have made a discovery."

"We seem to be living in an atmosphere of discoveries. What is it?"

"I will answer your question by asking another. You have been made the victim of a vile conspiracy.
For seven years your career has been blighted. And I have lost seven years of my life, too.
Have you any idea who your enemy is?"

"Not the faintest, but, believe me, I shall find out in time. And then---"

A purple blackness like the lurid light of a storm flashed into his eyes, the lines of his
mouth grew rigid. Enid laid a hand tenderly on his arm.

"Your enemy is the common enemy of us all," she said. "We have wasted the years, but we are
young yet. Your enemy is Reginald Henson."

"Enid, you speak with conviction. Are you sure of this?"

"Certain. When I have time I will tell you everything. But not now. And that man must never
know that you have been near the house to-night, not so much for your sake as for the sake
of your friend David Steel. Now I can see the Providence behind it all. Hatherly, tell me that
you forgive me before the others come back."

"My darling, I cannot see how you could have acted otherwise."

Enid turned towards him with a great glad light in her eyes. She said nothing, for the simple
reason that there was nothing to say. Hatherly Bell caught her in his strong arms, and she
swayed to reach his lips. In that delicious moment the world was all forgot.

But not for long. There was a sudden rush and a tumble of feet on the stairs, there was a strange
voice speaking hurriedly, then the drawing-room door opened and Margaret Henson came in. She
was looking wild and excited and talked incoherently. An obviously professional man followed her.

"My dear madam," he was saying, "I have done all I can. In the last few days I have not been
able to disguise from myself that there was small hope for the patient. The exhaustion, the
shock to the system, the congestion, all point to an early collapse."

"Is my sister so much worse, Dr. Walker?" Enid asked, quietly.

"She could not be any worse and be alive," the doctor said. "Unless I am greatly mistaken the
gentleman behind you is Mr. Hatherly Bell. I presume he has been called in to meet me? If so,
I am sincerely glad, because I shall be pleased to have a second opinion. A bad case of"--here
followed a long technical name--"one of the worst cases I have ever seen."

"You can command me, Enid," Bell said. "If I can."

"No, no," Enid cried. "What am I saying? Please to go upstairs with Martin."

Bell departed, wonderingly. Enid flew to the door and out into the night. She could hear Henson
cursing and shouting, could hear the snarling clamour of the dogs. At the foot of the drive
she paused and called Steel softly by name. To her intense relief he came from the shadow.

"I am here," he cried. "Do you want me?"

"Yes, yes," Enid panted. "Never more were your services needed. My sister is dying; my sister
must--die. And Hatherly Bell is with her, and--you understand?"

"Yes," said David. A vivid flash of understanding had come to him. "Bell shall do as I tell
him. Come along."

"Hold him up, dear doggies," Enid murmured. "Hold him up and I'll love both of you for ever."

CHAPTER XV

A MEDICAL OPINION

David Steel followed his guide with the feelings of the man who has given himself over to circumstances.
There was a savour of nightmare about the whole thing that appealed distinctly to his imagination.
The darkness, the strange situation, the vivid streaks of the crimson blinds--the crimson blind
that seemed an integral part of the mystery--all served to stimulate him. The tragic note was
deepened by the whine and howling of the dogs.

"There is a man over there," David whispered.

"A man who is going to stay there," Enid said, with grim satisfaction. "It is virtually necessary
that Mr. Reginald Henson should not be disturbed. The dogs have a foolish weakness for his
society. So long as he shows no signs of boredom he is safe."

David smiled with a vague grasp of the situation. Apparently the cue was to be surprised at
nothing that he saw about the House of the Silent Sorrow. The name of Reginald Henson was more
or less familiar to him as that of a man who stood high in public estimation. But the bitter
contempt in his companion's voice suggested that there was another side to the man's character.

"I hope you are not asking me to do anything wrong," David murmured.

"I am absolutely certain of it," the girl said. "It is a case of the end justifying the means;
and if ever the end justified the means, it does in this case. Besides--"

Enid Henson hesitated. David's quick perception prompted him.

"Besides, it is my suggestion," he said. "When I had the pleasure of seeing you before--"

"Pardon me, you have never had the pleasure of seeing me before."

"Ah, you would make an excellent Parliamentary fencer. I bow to your correction and admit that
I have never seen you before. But your voice reminds me of a voice I heard very recently under
remarkable circumstances. It was my good fortune to help a lady in distress a little time back.
If she had told me more I might have aided her still further. As it is, her reticence has landed
me into serious trouble."

Enid grasped the speaker's arm convulsively.

"I am deeply sorry to hear it," she whispered. "Perhaps the lady in question was reticent for
your sake. Perhaps she had confided more thoroughly in good men before. And suppose those good
men had disappeared?"

"In other words, that they had been murdered. Who by?"

There was a snarl from one of the hounds hard by, and a deep, angry curse from Henson. Enid
pointed solemnly in his direction. No words of hers would have been so thrilling and eloquent.
David strode along without further questions on that head.

"But there is one thing that you must tell me," he said, as they stood together in the porch.
"Is the first part of my advice going to be carried out?"

"Yes. That is why you are here now. Stay here one moment whilst I get you pencil and paper...
There! Now will you please write what I suggest? Dr. Bell is with my sister. At least, I suppose
he is with her, as Dr. Walker desired to have his opinion. My sister is dying--dying, you understand?"

Enid's voice had sunk to a passionate whisper. The hand that she laid on David's shoulder was
trembling strangely. At that moment he would've done anything for her. A shaft of light filtered
from the hall into the porch, and lit up the paper that the girl thrust upon Steel.

"Now write," she commanded. "Ask no questions, but write what I ask, and trust me implicitly."

David nodded. After all, he reflected, he could not possibly get himself into a worse mess
than he was in already. And he felt that he could trust the girl by his side. Her beauty, her
earnestness, and her obvious sincerity touched him.

"Write," Enid whispered. "Say, 'See nothing and notice nothing, I implore you. Only agree with
everything that Dr. Walker says, and leave the room as quickly as possible!' Now sign your
name. We can go into the drawing-room and wait till Dr. Bell comes down. You are merely a friend
of his. I will see that he has this paper at once."

Enid led the way into the drawing-room. She gave no reasons for the weird strangeness of the
place, it was no time for explanations. As for Steel, he gazed around him in fascinated astonishment.
A novelist ever on the look-out for new scenes and backgrounds, the aspect of the room fascinated
him. He saw the dust rising in clouds, he saw the wilted flowers, he noted the overturned table,
obviously untouched and neglected for years, and he wondered. Then he heard the babel of discordant
voices overhead. What a sad house it was, and how dominant was the note of tragedy.

Meanwhile, with no suspicion of the path he was treading, Bell had gone upstairs. He came at
length to the door of the room where the sick girl lay. There was a subdued light inside and
the faint suggestion of illness that clings to the chamber of the sufferer. Bell caught a glimpse
of a white figure lying motionless in bed. It was years now since he had acted thus in a professional
capacity, but the old quietness and caution came back by instinct. As he would have entered
Margaret Henson came out and closed the door.

"You are not going in there," she said. "No, no. Everything of mine you touch you blight and
wither. If the girl is to die, let her die in peace."

She would have raised her voice high, but a lightning glance from Bell quieted her. It was
not exactly madness that he had to deal with, and he knew it. The woman required firm, quiet
treatment. Dr. Walker stood alongside, anxious and nervous. The man with the quiet practice
of the well-to-do doctor was not used to scenes of this kind.

"You have something to conceal," Bell said, sternly. "Open the door."

"Really, my dear sir," Walker said, fussily. "Really, I fancy that under the circumstances--"

"You don't understand this kind of case," Bell interrupted. "I do."

Walker dropped aside with a muttered apology. Bell approached the figure in the doorway and
whispered a few words rapidly in her ear. The effect was electrical. The figure seemed to wilt
and shrivel up, all the power and resistance had gone. She stepped aside, moaning and wringing
her hands. She babbled of strange things; the old, far-away look came into her eyes again.

Without a word of comment or sign of triumph Bell entered the sick room. Then he raised his
head and sniffed the heavy atmosphere as an eager hound might have done. A quick, sharp question
rose to his lips, only to be instantly suppressed as he noted the vacant glance of his colleague.

The white figure on the bed lay perfectly motionless. It was the figure of a young and exceedingly
beautiful girl, a beauty heightened and accentuated by the dead-white pallor of her features.
Still the face looked resolute and the exquisitely chiselled lips were firm.

"Albumen," Bell muttered. "What fiend's game is this? I wonder if that scoundrel--but, no.
In that case there would be no object in concealing my presence here. I wonder--"

He paused and touched the pure white brow with his fingers. At the same moment Enid came into
the room. She panted like one who has run fast and far.

"Well," she whispered, "is she better, better or--Hatherly, read this."

The last words were so low that Bell hardly heard them. He shot a swift glance at his colleague
before he opened the paper. One look and he had mastered the contents. Then the swift glance
was directed from Walker to the girl standing there looking at Bell with a world of passionate
entreaty and longing in her eyes.

"It is your sister who lies there," Bell whispered, meaningly, "and yet you--"

He paused, and Enid nodded. There was evidently a great struggle going on in Bell's mind. He
was grappling with something that he only partially understood, but he did know perfectly well
that he was being asked to do something absolutely wrong and that he was going to yield for
the sake of the girl he loved.

He rose abruptly from the bedside and crossed over to Walker.

"You are perfectly correct," he said. "At this rate--at this rate the patient cannot possibly
last till the morning. It is quite hopeless."

Walker smiled feebly.

"It is a melancholy satisfaction to have my opinion confirmed," he said. "Miss Henson, if you
will get Williams to see me as far as the lodge-gates ... it is so late that--er--"

Williams came at length, and the little doctor departed. Enid fairly cowered before the blazing,
searching look that Bell turned upon her. She fell to plucking the bedclothes nervously.

"What does it mean?" he asked, hoarsely. "What fiend's plaything are you meddling with? Don't
you know that if that girl dies it will be murder? It was only for your sake that I didn't
speak my mind before the fool who has just gone. He has seen murder done under his eyes for
days, and he is ready to give a certificate of the cause of death. And the strange thing is
that in the ordinary way he would be quite justified in doing so."

"Chris is not going to die; at least, not in that way," Enid whispered, hoarsely.

"Then leave her alone. No more drugs; no medicine even. Give Nature a chance. Thank Heaven,
the girl has a perfect constitution."

"Chris is not going to die," Enid repeated, doggedly, "but the certificate will be given, all
the same. Oh, Hatherly, you must trust me--trust me as you have never done before. Look at
me, study me. Did you ever know me to do a mean or dishonourable thing?"

They were down in the drawing-room again; David waiting, with a strange sense of embarrassment
under Margaret Henson's distant eyes; indeed, it was probable that she had never noticed him
at all. All the same she turned eagerly to Bell.

"Tell me the worst," she cried. "Tell me all there is to know."

"Your niece's sufferings are over," Bell said, gravely; "I have no more to tell you."

A profound silence followed, broken presently by angry voices outside. Then Williams looked
in at the door and beckoned Enid to him. His face was wreathed in an uneasy grin.

"Mr. Henson has got away," he said. "Blest if I can say how. And they dogs have rolled him
about, and tore his clothes, and made such a picture of him as you never saw. And a sweet temper
he's in!"

"Where is he now?" Enid asked. "There are people here he must not see."

"Well, he came back in through the study window, swearing dreadful for so respectable a gentleman.
And he went right up to his room, after ordering whisky and soda-water."

Enid flew back to the drawing-room. Not a moment was to be lost. At any hazard Reginald Henson
must be kept in ignorance of the presence of strangers. A minute later, and the darkness of
the night had swallowed them up. Williams fastened the lodge-gates behind them, and they turned
their faces in the direction of Rottingdean Road.

"A strange night's work," David said, presently.

"Aye, but pregnant with result," Bell answered. There was a stern, exulting ring in his voice.
"There is much to do and much danger to be faced, but we are on the right track at last. But
why did you send me that note just now?"

David smiled as he lighted a cigarette.

"It is part of the scheme," he said. "Part of my scheme, you understand. But, principally,
I sent you the note because Miss Enid asked me to."

CHAPTER XVI

MARGARET SEES A GHOST

With a sigh of unutterable relief Enid heard Williams returning. Reginald Henson had not come
down yet, and the rest of the servants had retired some time. Williams came up with a request
as to whether he could do anything more before he went to bed.

"Just one thing," said Enid. "The good dogs have done their work well to-night, but they have
not quite finished. Find Rollo for me, and bring him here quick. Then you can shut up the house,
and I will see that Mr. Henson is made comfortable after his fright."

The big dog came presently and followed Enid timidly upstairs. Apparently the great black-muzzled
brute had been there before, as evidently he knew he was doing wrong. He crawled along the
corridor till he came to the room where the sick girl lay, and here he followed Enid. The lamp
was turned down low as Enid glanced at the bed. Then she smiled faintly, yet hopefully.

There was nobody in the room. The patient's bed was empty!

"It works well," Enid murmured. "May it go on as it has been started. Lie down, Rollo; lie
there, good dog. And if anybody comes in tear him to pieces."

The great brute crouched down obediently, thumping his tail on the floor as an indication that
he understood. As if a load had been taken from her mind Enid crept down the stairs. She had
hardly reached the hall before Henson followed her. His big face was white with passion; he
was trembling from head to foot from fright and pain. There was a red rash on his forehead
that by no means tended to improve his appearance.

"What is the meaning of this?" he demanded, hoarsely.

Enid looked at him coolly. She could afford to do so now. All the danger was past, and she
felt certain that the events of the evening were unknown to him.

"I might ask you the same question," she said. "You look white and shaken; you might have been
thrown violently into a heap of stones. But please don't make a noise. It is not fitting now.
Chris--"

Enid hesitated; the prevarication did not come so easily as she had expected.

"Chris has gone," she said. "She passed away an hour ago."

Henson muttered something that sounded like consolation. He could be polite and suave enough
on occasions, but not to-night. Even philanthropists are selfish at times. Moreover, his nerves
were badly shaken and he wanted a stimulant badly.

"I am going to bed," Enid said, wearily. "Goodnight."

She went noiselessly upstairs, and Henson passed into the library. He was puzzled over this
sudden end of Christiana Henson. He was half inclined to believe that she was not dead at all;
he belonged to the class of men who believe nothing without proof. Well, he could easily ascertain
that for himself. There would be quite time enough in the morning.

For a long time Henson sat there thinking and smoking, as was his usual custom. Like other
great men, he had his worries and troubles, and that they were mainly of his own making did
not render them any lighter. So long as Margaret Henson was under the pressure of his thumb,
money was no great object. But there were other situations where money was utterly powerless.

Henson was about to give it up as a bad job, for tonight at any rate. He wondered bitterly
what his admirers would say if they knew everything. He wondered--what was that?

Somebody creeping about the house, somebody talking in soft, though distinct, whispers. His
quick ears detected that sound instantly. He slipped into the hall; Margaret Henson was there,
with the remains of what had once been a magnificent opera-cloak over her shoulders.

"How you startled me!" Henson said, irritably. "Why don't you go to bed?"

Enid, looking over the balustrade from the landing, wondered so also, but she kept herself
prudently hidden. The first words that she heard drove all the blood from her heart.

"I cannot," the feeble, moaning voice said. "The house is full of ghosts; they haunt and follow
me everywhere. And Chris is dead, and I have seen her spirit."

"So I'm told," Henson said, with brutal callousness. "What was the ghost like?"

"Like Chris. All pale and white, with a frightened look on her face. And she was all dressed
in white, too, with a cloak about her shoulders. And just when I was going to speak to her
she turned and disappeared into Enid's bedroom. And there are other ghosts--"

"One at a time, please," Henson said, grimly. "So Christiana's ghost passed into her sister's
bedroom. You come and sit quietly in the library whilst I investigate matters."

Margaret Henson complied in her dull, mechanical way, and Enid flew like a flash of light to
her room. Another girl was there--a girl exceedingly like her, but looking wonderfully pale
and drawn.

"That fiend suspects," Enid said. "How unfortunate it was that you should meet aunt like that.
Chris, you must go back again. Fly to your own room and compose yourself. Only let him see
you lying white and still there, and he must be satisfied."

Chris rose with a shudder.

"And if the wretch offers to touch me," she moaned, "If he does--"

"He will not. He dare not. Heaven help him if he tries any experiment of that kind. If he does,
Rollo will kill him to a certainty."

"Ah, I had forgotten the faithful dog. Those dogs are more useful to us than a score of men.
I will step by the back way and through my dressing-room. Oh, Enid, how glad I shall be to
find myself outside the walls of this dreadful house!"

She flew along the corridor and gained her room in safety. It was an instant's work to throw
off her cloak and compose herself rigidly under the single white sheet. But though she lay
still her heart was beating to suffocation as she heard the creak and thud of a heavy step
coming up the stairs. Then the door was opened in a stealthy way and Henson came in. He could
see the outline of the white figure, and a sigh of satisfaction escaped him. A less suspicious
man would have retired at once; a man less engaged upon his task would have seen two great
amber eyes close to the floor.

"An old woman's fancy," he muttered. "Still, as I am here, I'll make sure that--"

He stretched out his hand to touch the marble forehead, there was a snarl and a gurgle, and
Henson came to the ground with a hideous crash that carried him staggering beyond the door
into the corridor. Rollo had the intruder by the throat; a thousand crimson and blue stars
danced before the wretched man's eyes; he grappled with his foe with one last despairing effort,
and then there came over him a vague, warm unconsciousness. When he came to himself he was
lying on his bed, with Williams and Enid bending over him.

"How did it happen?" Enid asked, with simulated anxiety.

"I--I was walking along the corridor," Henson gasped, "going--going to bed, you see; and one
of those diabolical dogs must have got into the house. Before I knew what I was doing the creature
flew at my throat and dragged me to the floor. Telephone for Walker at once. I am dying, Williams."

He fell back once more utterly lost to his surroundings. There was a great, gaping, raw wound
at the side of the throat that caused Enid to shudder.

"Do you think he is--dead, Williams?" she asked.

"No such luck as that," Williams said, with the air of a confirmed pessimist. "I hope you locked
that there bedroom door and put the key in your pocket, miss. I suppose we'd better send for
the doctor, unless you and me puts him out of his misery. There's one comfort, however, Mr.
Henson will be in bed for the next fortnight, at any rate, so he'll be powerless to do any
prying about the house. The funeral will be over long before he's about again."

       *       *       *       *       *

The first grey streaks of dawn were in the air as Enid stood outside the lodge-gates. She was
not alone, for a neat figure in grey, marvellously like her, was by her side. The figure in
grey was dressed for travelling and she carried a bag in her hand.

"Good-bye, dear, and good luck to you," she said. "It is dangerous to delay."

"You have absolutely everything that you require?" Enid asked.

"Everything. By the time you are at breakfast I shall be in London. And once I am there the
search for the secret will begin in earnest."

"You are sure that Reginald Henson suspected nothing?"

"I am perfectly certain that he was satisfied; indeed, I heard him say so. Still, if it had
not been for the dogs! We are going to succeed, Enid, something at my heart tells me so. See
how the sun shines on your face and in your dear eyes. Au revoir, an omen--an omen of a glorious
future."

CHAPTER XVII

THE PACE SLACKENS

Steel lay sleepily back in the cab, not quite sure whether his cigarette was alight or not.
They were well into the main road again before Bell spoke.

"It is pretty evident that you and I are on the same track," he said.

"I am certain that I am on the right one," David replied; "but, when I come to consider the
thing calmly, it seems more by good luck than anything else. I came out with you to-night seeking
adventure, and I am bound to admit that I found it. Also, I found the lady who interviewed
me in the darkness, which is more to the point."

"As a matter of fact, you did nothing of the kind," said Bell, with the suggestion of a laugh.

"Oh! Case of the wrong room over again. I was ready to swear it. Whom did I speak to? Whose
voice was it that was so very much like hers?"

"The lady's sister. Enid Henson was not at 218, Brunswick Square, on the night in question.
Of that you may be certain. But it's a queer business altogether. Rascality I can understand.
I am beginning to comprehend the plot of which I am the victim. But I don't mind admitting
that up to the present I fail to comprehend why those girls evolved the grotesque scheme for
getting assistance at your hands. The whole thing savours of madness."

"I don't think so," David said, thoughtfully. "The girls are romantic as well as clever. They
are bound together by the common ties of a common enmity towards a cunning and utterly unscrupulous
scoundrel. By the merest accident in the world they discovered that I am in a position to afford
them valuable advice and assistance. At the same time they don't want me to be brought into
the business, for two reasons--the first, because the family secret is a sacred one; the second,
because any disclosures would land me in great physical danger. Therefore they put their heads
together and evolve this scheme. Call it a mad venture if you like, but if you consider the
history of your own country you can find wilder schemes evolved and carried out by men who
have had brains enough to be trusted with the fortunes of the nation. If these girls had been
less considerate for my safety--"

"But," Bell broke in eagerly, "they failed in that respect at the very outset. You must have
been spotted instantly by the foe, who has cunningly placed you in a dangerous position, perhaps
as a warning to mind your own business in future. And if those girls come forward to save you--and
to do so they must appear in public, mind you--they are bound to give away the whole thing.
Mark the beautiful cunning of it. My word, we have a foe worthy of our steel to meet."

"We? Do you mean to say that your enemy and mine is a common one?"

"Certainly. When I found my foe I found yours."

"And who may he be, by the same token?"

"Reginald Henson. Mind you, I had no more idea of it than the dead when I went to Longdean
Grange to-night. I went there because I had begun to suspect who occupied the place and to
try and ascertain how the Rembrandt engraving got into 218, Brunswick Square. Miss Gates must
have heard us talking over the matter, and that was why she went to Longdean Grange to-night."

"I hope she got home safe," said David. "The cab man says he put her down opposite the Lawns."

"I hope so. Well, I found out who the foe was. And I have a pretty good idea why he played
that trick upon me. He knew that Enid Henson and myself were engaged; he could see what a danger
to his schemes it would be to have a man like myself in the family. Then the second Rembrandt
turned up, and there was his chance for wiping me off the slate. After that came the terrible
family scandal between Lord Littimer and his wife. I cannot tell you anything of that, because
I cannot speak with definite authority. But you could judge of the effect of it on Lady Littimer
to-night."

"I haven't the faintest recollection of seeing Lady Littimer to-night."

"My dear fellow, the poor lady whom you met as Mrs. Henson is really Lady Littimer. Henson
is her maiden name, and those girls are her nieces. Trouble has turned the poor woman's brain.
And at the bottom of the whole mystery is Reginald Henson, who is not only nephew on his mother's
side, but is also next heir but one to the Littimer title. At the present moment he is blackmailing
that unhappy creature, and is manoeuvring to get the whole of her large fortune in his hands.
Reginald Henson is the man those girls want to circumvent, and for that reason they came to
you. And Henson has found it out to a certain extent and placed you in an awkward position."

"Witness my involuntary guest and the notes and the cigar-case," David said. "But does he know
what I advised one of the girls--my princess of the dark room--to do?"

"I don't fancy he does. You see, that advice was conveyed by word of mouth. The girls dared
not trust themselves to correspondence, otherwise they might have approached you in a more
prosaic manner. But I confess you startled me to-night."

"What do you mean by that?"

"When you sent me that note. What you virtually asked me to do was to countenance murder. When
I went into the sick room I saw that Christiana Henson was dying. The first idea that flashed
across my mind was that Reginald Henson was getting the girl out of the way for his own purposes.
My dear fellow, the whole atmosphere literally spoke of albumen. Walker must have been blind
not to see how he was being deceived. I was about to give him my opinion pretty plainly when
your note came up to me. And there was Enid, with her whole soul in her large eyes, pleading
for my silence. If the girl died I was accessory after and before the fact. You will admit
that that was a pretty tight place to put a doctor in."

"That's because you didn't know the facts of the case, my dear Bell."

"Then perhaps you'll be so good as to enlighten me," Bell said, drily.

"Certainly. That was part of my scheme. In that synopsis of the story obtained by the girls
by some more or less mechanical means, the reputed death of a patient forms the crux of the
tale. The idea occurred to me after reading a charge against a medical student some time ago
in the Standard. The man wanted to get himself out of the way; he wanted to be considered as
dead, in fact. By the artful use of albumen in certain doses he produced symptoms of disease
which will be quite familiar to you. He made himself so ill that his doctor naturally concluded
that he was dying. As a matter of fact, he was dying. Had he gone on in the same way another
day he would have been dead. Instead of this he drops the dosing and, going to his doctor in
disguise, says that he is dead. He gets a certificate of his own demise, and there you are.
I am not telling you fiction, but hard fact recorded in a high-class paper. The doctor gave
the certificate without viewing the body. Well, it struck me that we had here the making of
a good story, and I vaguely outlined it for a certain editor. In my synopsis I suggested that
it was a woman who proposed to pretend to die thus so as to lull the suspicions of a villain
to sleep, and thus possess herself of certain vital documents. My synopsis falls into certain
hands. The owner of those hands asks me how the thing was done. I tell her. In other words,
the so-called murder that you imagined you had discovered to-night was the result of design.
Walker will give his certificate, Reginald Henson will regard Miss Christiana as dead and buried,
and she will be free to act for the honour of the family."

"But they might have employed somebody else."

"Who would have had to be told the history of the family dishonour. So far I fancy I have made
the ground quite clear. But the mystery of the cigar-case and the notes and the poor fellow
in the hospital is still as much a mystery as ever. We are like two allied forces working together,
but at the same time under the disadvantage of working in the dark. You can see, of course,
that the awful danger I stand in is as terrible for those poor girls."

"Of course I do. Still, we have a key to your trouble. It is a dreadfully rusty one and will
want a deal of oiling before it's used, but there it is."

"Where, my dear fellow, where?" David asked.

"Why, in the Sussex County Hospital, of course. The man may die, in which case everything must
be sacrificed in order to save your good name. On the other hand, he may get better, and then
he will tell us all about it."

"He might. On the other hand, he might plead ignorance. It is possible for him to suggest that
the whole affair was merely a coincidence, so far as he was concerned."

"Yes, but he would have to explain how he burgled your house, and what business he had to get
himself half murdered in your conservatory. Let us get out here and walk the rest of the way
to your house. Our cabby knows quite enough about us without having definite views as to your
address."

The cabman was dismissed with a handsome douceur, and the twain turned off the front at the
corner of Eastern Terrace. Late as it was, there were a few people lounging under the hospital
wall, where there was a suggestion of activity about the building unusual at that time of the
night. A rough-looking fellow, who seemed to have followed Bell and Steel from the front, dropped
into a seat by the hospital gates and laid his head back as if utterly worn out. Just inside
the gates a man was smoking a cigarette.

"Halloa, Cross," David cried, "you are out late tonight!"

"Heavy night," Cross responded, sleepily, "with half a score of accidents to finish with. Some
of Palmer of Lingfield's private patients thrown off a coach and brought here in the ambulance.
Unless I am greatly mistaken, that is Hatherly Bell with you."

"The same," Bell said, cheerfully. "I recollect you in Edinburgh. So some of Palmer's patients
have come to grief. Most of his special cases used to pass through my hands."

"I've got one here to-night who recollects you perfectly well," said Cross. "He's got a dislocated
shoulder, but otherwise he is doing well. Got a mania that he's a doctor who murdered a patient."

"Electric light anything to do with the story?" Bell asked, eagerly.

"That's the man. Seems to have a wonderfully brilliant intellect if you can only keep him off
that topic. He spotted you in North Street yesterday, and seemed wonderfully disappointed to
find you had nothing whatever to do with this institution."

"If he is not asleep," Bell suggested, "and you have no objection--"

Cross nodded and opened the gate. Before passing inside Bell took the rolled-up Rembrandt from
his deep breast-pocket and handed it to David.

"Take care of this for me," he whispered. "I'm going inside. I've dropped upon an old case
that interested me very much years ago, and I'd like to see my patient again. See you in the
morning, I expect. Good-night."

David nodded in reply and went his way. It was intensely quiet and still now; the weary loafer
at the outside hospital seat had disappeared. There was nobody to be seen anywhere as David
placed his key in the latch and opened the door. Inside the hall-light was burning, and so
was the shaded electric lamp in the conservatory. The study leading to the conservatory was
in darkness. The effect of the light behind was artistic and pleasing.

It was with a sense of comfort and relief that David fastened the door behind him. Without
putting up the light in the study David laid the Rembrandt on his table, which was immediately
below the window in his work-room. The night was hot; he pushed the top sash down liberally.

"I must get that transparency removed," he murmured, "and have the window filled with stained
glass. The stuff is artistic, but it is so frankly what it assumes to be."

CHAPTER XVIII

A COMMON ENEMY

David idly mixed himself some whisky and soda water in the dining-room, where he finished his
cigarette. He was tired and ready for bed now, so tired that he could hardly find energy enough
to remove his boots and get into the big carpet slippers that were so old and worn. He put
down the dining-room lights and strolled into the study. Just for a moment he sat there contemplating
with pleased, tired eyes the wilderness of bloom before him.

Then he fell into a reverie, as he frequently did. An idea for a fascinating story crept unbidden
into his mind. He gazed vaguely around him. Some little noise outside attracted his attention,
the kind of noise made by a sweep's brushes up a chimney. David turned idly towards the open
window. The top of it was but faintly illuminated by the light of the conservatory gleaming
dully on the transparency over the glass. But David's eyes were keen, and he could see distinctly
a man's thumb crooked downwards over the frame of the ash. Somebody had swarmed up the telephone
holdfasts and was getting in through the window. Steel slipped well into the shadow, but not
before an idea had come to him. He removed the rolled-up Rembrandt from the table and slipped
it behind a row of books in the book-case. Then he looked up again at the crooked thumb.

He would recognise that thumb again anywhere. It was flat like the head of a snake, and the
nail was no larger than a pea--a thumb that had evidently been cruelly smashed at one time.
The owner of the thumb might have been a common burglar, but in the light of recent events
David was not inclined to think so. At any rate he felt disposed to give his theory every chance.
He saw a long, fustian-clad arm follow the scarred thumb, and a hand grope all over the table.

"Curse me," a foggy voice whispered, hoarsely. "It ain't here. And the bloke told me--"

The voice said no more, for David grabbed at the arm and caught the wrist in a vice-like grip.
Instantly another arm shot over the window and an ugly piece of iron piping was swung perilously
near Steel's head. Unfortunately, he could see no face. As he jumped back to avoid a blow his
grasp relaxed, there was a dull thud outside, followed by the tearing scratch of boots against
a wall and the hollow clatter of flying feet. All David could do was to close the window and
regret that his impetuosity had not been more judiciously restrained.

"Now, what particular thing was he after?" he asked himself. "But I had better defer any further
speculations on the matter till the morning. After the fright he had my friend won't come back
again. And I'm just as tired as a dog."

But there were other things the next day to occupy David's attention besides the visit of his
nocturnal friend. He had found out enough the previous evening to encourage him to go farther.
And surely Miss Ruth Gates could not refuse to give him further information.

He started out to call at 219, Brunswick Square, as soon as he deemed it excusable to do so.
Miss Gates was out, the solemn butler said, but she might be found in the square gardens. David
came upon her presently with a book in her lap and herself under a shady tree. She was not
reading, her eyes were far away. As she gave David a warm greeting there was a tender bloom
on her lovely face.

"Oh, yes, I got home quite right," she said. "No suspicion was aroused at all. And you?"

"I had a night thrilling enough for yellow covers, as Artemus Ward says. I came here this morning
to throw myself on your mercy, Miss Gates. Were I disposed to do so, I have information enough
to force your hand. But I prefer to hear everything from your lips."

"Did Enid tell you anything?" Ruth faltered.

"Well, she allowed me to know a great deal. In the first place, I know that you had a great
hand in bringing me to 218 the other night. I know that it was you who suggested that idea,
and it was you who facilitated the use of Mr. Gates's telephone. How the thing was stage-managed
matters very little at present. It turns out now that your friend and Dr. Bell and myself have
a common enemy."

Ruth looked up swiftly. There was something like fear in her eyes.

"Have--have you discovered the name of that enemy?" she asked.

"Yes, I know now that our foe is Mr. Reginald Henson."

"A man who is highly respected. A man who stands wonderfully high in public estimation. There
are thousands and thousands of people who look upon him as a great and estimable creature.
He gives largely in charities, he devotes a good deal of his time to the poor. My uncle, who
is a good man, if you like, declares that Reginald Henson is absolutely indispensable to him.
At the next election that man is certain to be returned to Parliament to represent an important
northern constituency. If you told my uncle anything about him, he would laugh at you."

"I have not the slightest intention of approaching your uncle on this matter at present."

"Because you could prove nothing. Nobody can prove anything."

"But Christiana Henson may in time."

Once more Ruth flashed a startled look at her companion.

"So you have discovered something about that?" she whispered.

"I have discovered everything about it. Legally speaking, the young lady is dead. She died
last night, as Dr. Walker will testify. She passed away in the formula presented by me the
night that I met her in the darkness at 218, Brunswick Square. Now, will you be so good as
to tell me how those girls got hold of my synopsis?"

"That came about quite naturally. Your synopsis and proof in an open envelope were accidentally
slipped into a large circular envelope used by a firm of seed merchants and addressed to Longdean
Grange, sent out no doubt amongst thousands of others. Chris saw it, and, prompted by curiosity,
read it. Out of that our little plot was gradually evolved. You see, I was at school with those
two girls, and they have few secrets from me. Naturally, I suggested the scheme because I see
a great deal of Reginald Henson. He comes here; he also comes very frequently to our house
in Prince's Gate. And yet I am sorry, from the bottom of my heart, that I ever touched the
thing, for your sake."

The last words were spoken with a glance that set David's pulses beating. He took Ruth's half-extended
hand in his, and it was not withdrawn.

"Don't worry about me," he said. "I shall come out all right in the end. Still, I shall look
eagerly forward to any assistance that you can afford me. For instance, what hold has Henson
got on his relatives?"

"That I cannot tell you," Ruth cried. "You must not ask me. But we were acting for the best;
our great object was to keep you out of danger."

"There is no danger to me if I can only clear myself," Steel replied. "If you could only tell
me where those bank-notes came from! When I think of that part of the business I am filled
with shame. And yet if you only knew how fond I am of my home.... At the same time, when I
found that I was called upon to help ladies in distress I should have refused all offers of
reward. If I had done so I should have had no need of your pity. And yet--and yet it is very
sweet to me."

He pressed the hand in his, and the pressure was returned. David forget all about his troubles
for the time; and it was very cool and pleasant and quiet there.

"I am afraid that those notes were forced upon us," she said. "Though I frankly believe that
the enemy does not know what we have learnt to do from you. And as to the cigar-case: would
it not be easy to settle that matter by asking a few questions?"

"My dear young lady, I have done so. And the more questions I ask the worse it is for me. The
cigar-case I claimed came from Walen's, beyond all question, and was purchased by the mysterious
individual now in the hospital. I understood that the cigar-case was the very one I admired
at Lockhart's some time ago, and--"

"If you inquire at Lockhart's you will find such to be the case."

David looked up with a puzzled expression. Ruth spoke so seriously, and with such an air of
firm conviction, that he was absolutely staggered.

"So I did," he said. "And was informed in the most positive way by the junior partner that
the case I admired had been purchased by an American called Smith and sent to the Metropole
after he had forwarded dollar-notes for it. Surely you don't suppose that a firm like Lockhart's
would be guilty of anything--"

Ruth rose to her feet, her face pale and resolute.

"This must be looked to," she said. "The cigar-case sent to you on that particular night was
purchased at Lockhart's by myself and paid for with my own money!"

CHAPTER XIX

ROLLO SHOWS HIS TEETH

The blinds were all down at Longdean Grange, a new desolation seemed to be added to the gloom
of the place. Out in the village it had by some means become known that there was somebody
dead in the house, either madam herself or one of those beautiful young ladies whom nobody
had ever seen. Children loitering about the great lodge-gates regarded Williams with respectful
awe and Dr. Walker with curiosity. The doctor was the link connecting the Grange with the outside
world.

To add to the gloom of it all the bell over the stables clanged mournfully. The noise made
Walker quite nervous as he walked up the drive by Williams's side. Not for a pension would
he have dared approach the house alone. Williams, in the seediest and most dilapidated rusty
black, had a face of deepest melancholy.

"But why that confound--Why do they ring that bell?" Walker asked, irritably.

"Madam ordered it, sir," Williams replied. "She's queerer than ever, is mistress. She don't
say much, but Miss Christiana's death is a great shock to her. She ordered the bell to be tolled,
and she carried on awful when Miss Enid tried to stop it."

Walker murmured vaguely something doubtless representing sympathy.

"And my other patient, Williams?" he asked. "How is he getting along? Really, you ought to
keep those dogs under better control. It's a dreadful business altogether. Fancy a man of Mr.
Henson's high character and gentle disposition being attacked by a savage dog in the very house!
I hope the hound is securely kennelled."

"Well, he isn't, sir," Williams said, with just the glint of a grin on his dry features. "And
it wasn't altogether Rollo's fault. That dog was so devoted to Miss Christiana as you never
see. And he got to know as the poor young lady was dying. So he creeps into the house and lies
before her bedroom door, and when Mr. Henson comes along the dog takes it in his 'ead as he
wants to go in there. And now Rollo's got inside, and nobody except Miss Enid dare go near.
I pity that there undertaker when he comes."

Walker shuddered slightly. Longdean Grange was a fearful place for the nerves. Nothing of the
routine or the decorous ever happened there. The fees were high and the remuneration prompt,
or Walker would have handed over his patient cheerfully to somebody else. Not for a moment
did he imagine that Williams was laughing at him. Well, he need not see the body, which was
a comfort. With a perfectly easy conscience he could give a certificate of death. And if only
somebody would stop that hideous bell! Someone was singing quietly in the drawing-room, and
the music seemed to be strangely bizarre and out of place.

Inside it seemed like a veritable house of the dead--the shadow of tragedy loomed everywhere.
The dust rose in clouds from the floor as the servants passed to and fro. They were all clad
in black, and shuffled uneasily, as if conscious that their clothes did not belong to them.
Enid came out into the hall to meet the doctor. Her face seemed terribly white and drawn; there
was something in her eyes that suggested anxiety more than grief.

"I suppose you have come principally to see Mr. Henson?" she said. "But my sister--"

"No occasion to intrude upon your grief for a moment, Miss Henson," Walker said, quietly. "As
I have told you before, there was very little hope for your sister from the first. It was a
melancholy satisfaction to me to find my diagnosis confirmed in every detail by so eminent
an authority as Dr. Hatherly Bell. I will give you a certificate with pleasure--at once."

"You would like to see my sister?" Enid suggested.

The quivering anxiety was in her eyes again, the strained look on her face. Walker was discreetly
silent as to what he had heard about that bloodhound, but he had by no means forgotten it.

"Not the least occasion, I assure you," he said, fervently. "Your sister had practically passed
away when I last saw her. There are times when--er--you see--but really there is no necessity."

"Mr. Henson is terribly fastidious about these things."

"Then he shall be satisfied. I shall tell him that I have--er--seen the body. And I have, you
know. In these matters a medical man cannot be too careful. If you will provide me with pen
and ink--"

"Thank you very much. Will you come this way, please?"

Walker followed into the drawing-room. Mrs. Henson, wearing something faded and dishevelled
in the way of a mourning dress, was crooning some dirge at the piano. Her white hair was streaming
loosely over her shoulders, there was a vacant stare in her eyes. The intruders might have
been statues for all the heed she took of them. Presently the discordant music ceased, and
she began to pace noiselessly up and down the room.

"Another one gone," she murmured; "the best-beloved. It is always the best-beloved that dies,
and the one we hate that is left. Take all those coaches away, send the guests back home. Why
do they come chattering and feasting here? She shall be drawn by four black horses to Churchfield
in the dead of the night, and there laid in the family vault."

"Mrs. Henson's residence," Enid explained, in a whisper. "It is some fifteen miles away. She
has made up her mind that my sister shall be taken away as she says--to-morrow night. Is this
paper all that is necessary for the--you understand? I have telephoned to the undertaker in
Brighton."

Walker hastened to assure the girl that what little further formality was required he would
see to himself. All he desired now was to visit Henson and get out of the house as soon as
possible. As he hurried from the drawing-room he heard Mrs. Henson crooning and muttering,
he saw the vacant glare in her eyes, and vaguely wondered how soon he should have another patient
here.

Reginald Henson sat propped up in his bed, white and exhausted. Beyond doubt he had had a terrible
shock and fright, and the droop of his eyelids told of shattered nerves. There was a thick
white bandage round his throat, his left shoulder was strapped tightly. He spoke with difficulty.

"Do we feel any better this morning?" Walker asked, cheerfully.

"No, we don't," said Henson, with a total absence of his usual graciousness of manner. "We
feel confoundedly weak, and sick, and dizzy. Every time I drop off to sleep I wake with a start
and a feeling that that infernal dog is smothering me. Has the brute been shot yet?"

"I don't fancy so; in fact, he is still at his post upstairs, and therefore--"

"Therefore you have not seen the body of my poor dear cousin?"

"Otherwise I could have given no certificate," Walker said, with dignity. "If I have satisfied
myself, sir, and the requirements of the law, why, then, everybody is satisfied. I have seen
the body."

Technically the little doctor spoke the truth. Henson muttered something that sounded like
an apology. Walker smiled graciously and suggested that rest and a plain diet were all that
his patient needed. Rest was the great thing. The bandages need not be removed for a day or
two, at the expiration of which time he would look in again. Once the road was reached in safety
Walker took off his hat and wiped the beads from his forehead.

"What a house," he muttered. "What a life to lead. Thank goodness I need not go there again
before Saturday. If anybody were to offer me a small glass of brandy with a little soda now,
I should feel tempted to break through my rule and drink it."

Meanwhile the long terror of the day dragged on inside the house. The servants crept about
the place on tiptoe, the hideous bell clanged out, Mrs. Henson paced wearily up and down the
drawing-room, singing and muttering to herself, until Enid was fain to fly or break down and
yell hysterically. It was one of Margaret Henson's worst days.

The death of Christiana seemed to affect her terribly. Enid watched her in terror. More than
once she was fearful that the frail thread would snap--the last faint glimmer of reason go
out for ever. And yet it would be madness to tell Margaret Henson the truth. In the first place
she would not have understood, and on the other hand she might have comprehended enough to
betray to Reginald Henson. As it was, her grief was obvious and sincere enough. The whole thing
was refinedly cruel, but really there was no help for it. And things had gone on splendidly.

Henson was powerless to interfere, and the doctor was satisfied. Once she had put her hand
to the plough Enid's quick brain saw her through. But she would have been hard put to it to
deceive Henson under his very nose without the help of the bloodhound. Now she could see her
way still farther. She waited nervously for a ring from the lodge-gates to the house, and about
four o'clock it came. The undertaker was at the gates waiting for an escort to the Grange.

Enid passed her tongue out over a pair of dry lips. The critical moment was at hand. If she
could get through the next hour she was safe. If not--but there must be no "if not," she told
herself. The undertaker came, suave, quiet, respectful, but he dropped back from the bedroom
door as he saw two gleaming, amber eyes regarding him menacingly.

"The dog loved my sister," Enid explained, quietly. "But he has found his way to her room,
and he refuses to move. He fancies that we have done something her.... Oh, no, I couldn't poison
him! And it would be a dreadful thing if there were to be anything like a struggle here. Come,
Rollo."

Evidently the dog had learned his lesson well. He wagged his great tail, but refused to move.
The undertaker took a couple of steps forward and Rollo's crest rose. There was a flash of
white teeth and a growl. At the end of half an hour no progress had been made.

"There's only one thing for it," suggested Williams, in his rusty voice. "We can get the dog
away for ten minutes at midnight. He likes a run then, and I'll bring the other dogs to fetch
him, like."

"My time is very valuable just now," the undertaker suggested, humbly.

"Then you had better measure me," said Enid, turning a face absolutely flaming red and deadly
white to the speaker. "It is a dreadful, ghastly business altogether, but I cannot possibly
think of any other way. The idea of anything like a struggle here is abhorrent.... And the
dog's fidelity is so touching. My sister and I were exactly alike, except that she was fairer
than me."

The undertaker was understood to demur slightly on professional grounds. It was very irregular
and not in the least likely to give satisfaction.

"What does it matter?" Enid cried, passionately. She was acting none the less magnificently
because her nerves were quivering like harpstrings. "When I am dead you can fling me in a ditch,
for all I care. We are a strange family and do strange things. The question of satisfaction
need not bother you. Take my measure and send the coffin home to-morrow, and we will manage
to do the rest. Then to-morrow night you will have a four-horse hearse here at eleven o'clock,
and drive the coffin to Churchfield Church, where you will be expected. After that your work
will be finished."

The bewildered young man responded that things should be exactly as the young lady required.
He had seen many strange and wild things in his time, but none so strange and weird as this.
It was all utterly irregular, of course, but people after all had a right to demand what they
paid for. Enid watched the demure young man in black down the corridor, and then everything
seemed to be enveloped in a dense purple mist, the world was spinning under her feet, there
was a great noise like the rush of mighty waters in her brain. With a great effort she threw
off the weakness and came to herself, trembling from head to foot.

"Courage," she murmured, "courage. This life has told on me more than I thought. With Chris's
example before me I must not break down now."

CHAPTER XX

FRANK LITTIMER

The lamps gleamed upon the dusty statuary and pictures and faded flowers in the hall, they
glinted upon a long polished oak casket there reposing upon trestles. Ever and anon a servant
would peep in and vanish again as if ashamed of something. The house was deadly quiet now,
for Mrs. Henson had fallen asleep worn out with exhaustion, and Enid had instantly stopped
the dreadful clamour of the bell. The silence that followed was almost as painful as the noise
had been.

On the coffin were wreaths of flowers. Enid sat in the drawing-room with the door open, where
she could see everything, but was herself unseen. She was getting terribly anxious and nervous
again; the hour was near eleven, and the hearse might arrive at any time. She would know no
kind of peace until she could get that hideous mockery out of the house.

She sat listening thus, straining her ears to catch the slightest sound. Suddenly there came
a loud clamour at the front door, an imperative knocking that caused Enid's heart to come into
her mouth. Who could it be? What stranger had passed the dogs in that way?

She heard crabbed, sour, but courageous old Williams go to the door. She heard the clang of
bolts and the rattle of chains, and then a weird cry from Williams. A voice responded that
brought Enid, trembling and livid, into the hall. A young man with a dark, exceedingly handsome
face and somewhat effeminate mouth stood there, with eyes for nothing but the shining flower-decked
casket on the trestles. He seemed beside himself with rage and grief; he might have been a
falsely imprisoned convict face to face with the real culprit.

"Why didn't you let me know?" he cried. "Why didn't you let me know?"

His voice rang in the roof. Enid flew to his side and placed her hand upon his lips.

"Your mother is asleep, Frank," she said. "She has had no sleep for three nights. A long rest
may be the means of preserving her sanity. Why did you come here?"

The young man laughed silently. It was ghastly mirth to see, and it brought the tears into
Enid's eyes. She had forgotten the danger of the young man's presence.

"I heard that Chris was ill," he said. "They told me that she was dying. And I could not keep
away. And now I have come too late. Oh, Chris, Chris!"

He fell on his knees by the side of the coffin, his frame shaken by tearless sobs. Enid bit
her lips to keep back the words that rose to them. She would have given much to have spoken
the truth. But at any hazard she must remain silent. She waited till the paroxysm of grief
had passed away, then she touched the intruder gently on the shoulder.

"There is great danger for you in this house," she said.

"What do I care for danger when Chris lies yonder?"

"But, dear Frank, there are others to consider besides yourself. There is your mother, for
instance. Oh, you ought not to have come here to-night. If your father knew!"

"My father? He would be the last person in the world to know. And what cares he about anything,
so long as he has his prints and his paintings? He has no feelings, no heart, no soul, I may say."

"Frank, you must go at once. Do you know that Reginald Henson is here? He has ears like a hare;
it will be nothing less than a miracle unless he hears your voice. And then--"

The young man was touched at last. The look of grief died out of his eyes and a certain terror
filled them.

"I think that I should have come in any case," he whispered. "I don't want to bring any further
trouble upon you, Enid, but I wanted to see the last of her. I came here, and some of the dogs
remembered me. If not, I might have had no occasion to trouble you. And I won't stay, seeing
that Henson is here. Let me have something to remember her by; let me look into her room for
a moment. If you only knew how I loved her! And you look as if you had no grief at all."

Enid started guiltily. She had quite forgotten her rôle for the time. Indeed, there was something
unmistakably like relief on her face as she heard the porter's bell ring from the lodge to
the house. Williams shuffled away, muttering that he would be more useful in the house than
out of it just now, but a glance from Enid subdued him. Presently there came the sound of wheels
on the gravel outside.

"They have come for the--the coffin," Enid murmured. "Frank, it would be best for you to go.
Go upstairs, if you like; you know the way. Only, don't stay here."

The young man went off dreamily. A heavy grief dulled and blinded his senses; he walked along
like one who wanders in his sleep. Christiana's room door was open and a lamp was there. There
were dainty knick-knacks on the dressing-table, a vase or two of faded flowers--everything
that denotes the presence of refined and gracious womanhood.

Frank Littimer stood there looking round him for some little time. On a table by the bedside
stood a photograph of a girl in a silver frame. Littimer pounced upon it hungrily. It was a
good picture--the best of Christiana's that he had ever seen. He slipped out into the corridor
and gently closed the door behind him. Then he passed along with his whole gaze fixed on the
portrait. The girl seemed to be smiling out of the frame at him. He had loved Christiana since
she was a child; he felt that he had never loved her so much as at this moment. Well, he had
something to remember her by--he had not come here in vain.

It seemed impossible yet to realise that Christiana was dead, that he would never look into
her sunny, tender face again. No, he would wake up presently and find it had all been a dream.
And how different to the last time he was here. He had been smuggled into the house, and he
had occupied the room with the oak door. He--

The room with the oak door opened and a big man with a white bandage round his throat stood
there with tottering limbs and an ugly smile on his loose mouth. Littimer started back.

"Reginald," he exclaimed, "I didn't expect to see you here, or--"

"Or you would never have dared to come?" Henson said, hoarsely. "I heard your voice and I was
bound to give you a welcome, even at considerable personal inconvenience. Help me back to bed
again. And now, you insolent young dog, how dare you show your face here?"

"I came to see Chris," Littimer said, doggedly. "And I came too late. Even if I had known that
I was going to meet you, I should have been here all the same. Oh, I know what you are going
to say; I know what you think. And some day I shall break out and defy you to do your worst."

Henson smiled as one might do at the outbreak of an angry child. His eyes flashed and his tongue
spoke words that Littimer fairly cowed before. And yet he did not show it. He was like a boy
who has found a stone for the man who stands over him with the whip. With quick intuition Henson
saw this, and in a measure his manner changed.

"You will say next that you are not afraid of me," he suggested.

"Well," Littimer replied, slowly; "I am not so much afraid of you as I was."

"Ah! so you imagine that you have discovered something?"

Littimer apparently struggled between a prudent desire for silence and a disposition to speak.
The sneer on the face of his enemy fairly maddened him.

"Yes," he said, with a note of elation in his voice, "I have made a discovery, but I am not
going to tell you how or where my discovery is. But I've found Van Sneck."

A shade of whiter pallor came over Henson's face. Then his eyes took on a murderous, purple-black
gleam. All the same, his voice was quite steady as he replied.

"I'm afraid that is not likely to benefit you much," he said. "Would you mind handing me that
oblong black book from the dressing-table? I want you to do something for me. What's that?"

There was just the faintest suggestion of a sound outside. It was Enid listening with all her
ears. She had not been long in discovering what had happened. Once the ghastly farcical incubus
was off her shoulders she had followed Littimer upstairs. As she passed Henson's room the drone
of voices struck on her ears. She stood there and listened. She would have given much for this
not to have happened, but everything happened for the worst in that accursed house.

But Henson's last words were enough for her. She gathered her skirts together and flew down
the stairs. In the hall Williams stood, with a grin on his face, pensively scraping his chin
with a dry forefinger.

"Now what's the matter, miss?" he cried.

"Don't ask questions," Enid cried. "Go and get me the champagne nippers. The champagne nippers
at once. If you can't find them, then bring me a pair of pliers. Then come to me on the leads
outside the bathroom. It's a matter of life and death."

CHAPTER XXI

A FIND

David did not appear in the least surprised; indeed, he was long since past that emotion. Before
the bottom of the mystery was reached a great many more strange things were pretty sure to happen.

"So you bought that cigar-case yourself?" he said.

"Indeed, I did," Ruth answered, eagerly. "Of course I have long known you by name and I have
read pretty well all your tales. I--I liked your work so much."

David was flattered. The shy, sweet admiration in Ruth's eyes touched him.

"And I was very glad to meet you," Ruth went on. "You see, we all liked your stories. And we
knew one or two people who had met you, and gradually you became quite like a friend of ours--Enid
and Chris and myself, you understand. Then a week or two ago I came down to Brighton with my
uncle to settle all about taking the house here. And I happened to be in Lockhart's buying
something when you came in and asked to see the cigar-case. I recognised you from your photographs,
and I was interested. Of course, I thought no more of it at the time, until Enid came up to
London and told me all about the synopsis, and how strangely the heroine's case in your proposed
story was like hers. Enid wondered how you were going to get the girl out of her difficulty,
and I jokingly suggested that she had better ask you. She accepted the idea quite seriously,
saying that if you had a real, plausible way out of the trouble you might help her. And gradually
our scheme was evolved. You were not to know, because of the possible danger to yourself."

"At the hands of Reginald Henson, of course?"

"Yes. Our scheme took a long time, but we got it worked out at last. We decided on the telephone
because we thought that we could not be traced that way, never imagining for a moment that
you could get the number of your caller over the trunk line. Enid came up to town, and worked
the telephone, Chris was in No. 218, and I brought the money."

"You placed that cigar-case on my doorstep?"

"Yes, I was wound up for anything. It was I whom you saw riding the bicycle through Old Steine;
it was I who dropped the card of instructions. It seems a shameful thing to say and to do now,
but I--well, I enjoyed it at the time. And I did it for the sake of my friends. Do I look like
that sort of a girl, Mr. Steel?"

David glanced into the beautiful shy eyes with just the suggestion of laughter in them.

"You look all that is loyal and good and true," he exclaimed. "And I don't think I ever admired
you quite so much as I do at this moment."

Ruth laughed and looked down. There was something in David's glance that thrilled her and gave
her a sense of happiness she would have found it hard to describe.

"I am so glad you do not despise me," she whispered.

"Despise you!" David cried. "Why? If you only knew how I, well, how I loved you! Don't be angry.
I mean every word that I say; my feelings for you are as pure as your own heart. If you could
care for me as you do for those others I should have a friend indeed."

"You have made me care for you very much indeed, Mr. Steel," Ruth whispered.

"Call me David..... How nice my plain name sounds from your lips. Ruth and David. But I must
hold myself in hand for the present. Still, I am glad you like me."

"Well, you have been so good and kind. We have done you a great deal of injury and you never
blamed us. And you are just the man I have always pictured as the man I could love ... David!"

"Well, it was only one little kiss, and I'm sure nobody saw us, dear. And later on, when you
are my wife--"

"Don't you think we had better keep to business for the present?" Ruth said, demurely.

"Perhaps. There is one little point that you must clear up before we go any farther. How did
you manage to furnish those two big dining-rooms exactly alike?"

"Why, the furniture is there. At the top of the house, in a large attic, all the furniture
is stored."

"But the agent told me it had been removed."

"He was wrong. You can't expect the agent to recollect everything about a house. The place
belonged to the lady whom we may call Mrs. Margaret Henson at one time. When her home scheme
fell through she sold one house as it was. In the other she stored the furniture. Enid knew
of all this, of course. We managed to get a latch--key to fit 218, and Enid and a man did the
rest. Her idea was to keep you in the dark as much as possible. After the interview the furniture
was put back again, and there you are."

"Diplomatic and clever, and decidedly original, not to say feminine. In the light of recently
acquired knowledge I can quite see why your friends desired to preserve their secret. But they
need not have taken all those precautions. Had they written--"

"They dared not. They were fearful as to what might become of the reply."

"But they might have come to me openly."

"Again, they dared not for your sake. You know a great deal, David, but there is darkness and
trouble and wickedness yet that I dare not speak of. And you are in danger. Already Reginald
Henson has shown you what he can do."

"And yet he doesn't know everything," David smiled. "He may have stabbed me in the back, but
he is quite ignorant as to what advice I gave to Enid Henson, which brings me back to the cigar-case.
You saw me looking at it in Lockhart's. Go on."

"Yes, I watched you with a great deal of curiosity. Finally you went off out of the shop saying
that you could not afford to buy the cigar-case, and I thought no more of the matter for a
time. Then we found out all about your private affairs. Oh, I am ashamed almost to go on."

The dainty little face grew crimson; the hand in David's trembled.

"But we were desperate. And, after all, we were doing no harm. It was just then that the idea
of the cigar-case came into my mind. We knew that if we could get you to take that money it
would only be as a loan. I suggested the gift of the case as a memento of the occasion. I purchased
that case with my own money and I placed it with its contents on the doorstep of your house."

"Did you watch it all the time?"

"No, I didn't. But I was satisfied that nobody passed, and I was sufficiently near to hear
your door open at the hour appointed. Of course, we had carefully rehearsed the telephone conversation,
and I knew exactly what to do."

David sat very thoughtfully for some little time.

"The case must have been changed," he said. "It is very difficult to say how, but there is
no other logical solution of the matter. At about half-past twelve on that eventful night you
placed on my doorstep a gun-metal cigar-case, mounted in diamonds, that you had purchased from
Lockhart's?"

"Yes, and the very one that you admired. Of that I am certain."

"Very well. I take that case with me to 218, Brunswick Square, and I bring it back again. Did
I take it with me or not? Anyhow, it was found on the floor beside the body. It never passed
out of my possession to my knowledge. Next day I leave it at the office of Messrs. Mossa and
Mack, and it gets into the hands of the police."

"Was it not possibly changed there, David?"

"No, because of the initials I had scratched inside it. And beyond all question that case--the
same case, mind you, that I picked up on my doorstep--was purchased by the man now lying in
the hospital here from Walen's, in West Street. Now, how was the change made?"

"If I could only see my way to help you!"

"The change was made the day you bought the case. By the way, what time was it?"

"I can't tell you the exact time," Ruth replied. "It was on the morning of the night of your
adventure."

"And you kept it by you all the time."

"Yes. It was in a little box sealed with yellow wax and tied with yellow string. I went to
219 after I had made the purchase. My uncle was there and he was using the back sitting-room
as an office. He had brought a lot of papers with him to go through."

"Ah! Did you put your package down?"

"Just for a moment on the table. But surely my uncle would not--"

"One moment, please. Was anybody with your uncle at the time?"

Ruth gave a sudden little cry.

"How senseless of me to forget," she cried. "My uncle was down merely for the day, and, as
he was very busy, he sent for Mr. Reginald Henson to help him. I did not imagine that Mr. Henson
would know anything. But even now I cannot see what--"

"Again let me interrupt you. Did you leave the room at all?"

"Yes. It is all coming back to me now. My uncle's medicine was locked up in my bag. He asked
me to go for it and I went, leaving my purchase on the table. It is all coming back to me now....
When I returned Mr. Henson was quite alone, as somebody had called to see my uncle. Mr. Henson
seemed surprised to see me back so soon, and as I entered he crushed something up in his hand
and dropped it into the waste-paper basket. But my parcel was quite intact."

"Yellow wax and yellow string and all?"

"Yes, so far as I remember. It was Mr. Henson who reminded my uncle about his medicine."

"And when you were away the change was made. Strange that your uncle should be so friendly
with both Henson and Bell. Have they ever met under your roof?"

"No," Ruth replied. "Henson has always alluded to Dr. Bell as a lost man. He professes to be
deeply sorry for him but he has declined to meet him. Where are you going?"

"I am going with you to see if we can find anything in the waste-paper basket at No. 219. Bell
tells me that your servants have instructions to touch no papers, and I know that the back
sitting-room of your house is used as a kind of office. I want, if possible, to find the paper
that Henson tried to hide on the day you bought the cigar-case."

The basket proved to be a large one, and was partially filled with letters that had never been
opened--begging-letters, Ruth said. For half an hour David was engaged in smoothing out crumpled
sheets of paper, until at length his search was rewarded. He held a packet of note-paper, the
usual six sheets, one inside the other, that generally go to correspondence sheets of good
quality. It was crushed up, but Steel flattened it out and held it up for Ruth's inspection.

"Now, here is a find!" he cried. "Look at the address in green at the top: '15, Downend Terrace.'
Five sheets of my own best notepaper, printed especially for myself, in this basket! Originally
this was a block of six sheets, but the one has been written upon and the others crushed up
like this. Beyond doubt the paper was stolen from my study. And--what's this?"

He held up the thick paper to the light. At the foot of the top sheet was plainly indented
in outline the initials "D. S."

"My own cipher," David went on. "Scrawled in so boldly as to mark on the under sheet of paper.
Almost invariably I use initials instead of my full name unless it is quite formal business."

"And what is to be done now?" Ruth asked.

"Find the letter forged over what looks like a genuine cipher," David said, grimly.

CHAPTER XXII

"THE LIGHT THAT FAILED"

Bell followed Dr. Cross into the hospital with a sense of familiar pleasure. The cool, sweet
smell of the place, the decorous silence, the order of it all appealed to him strongly. It
was as the old war-horse who sniffs the battle from afar. And the battle with death was ever
a joy to Bell.

"This is all contrary to regulations, of course," he suggested.

"Well, it is," Cross admitted. "But I am an enthusiast, and one doesn't often get a chance
of chatting with a brilliant, erratic star like yourself. Besides, our man is not in the hospital
proper. He is in a kind of annexe by my own quarters, and he scoffs the suggestion of being
nursed."

Bell nodded, understanding perfectly. He came at length to a brilliantly-lighted room, where
a dark man with an exceedingly high forehead and wonderfully piercing eyes was sitting up in
bed. The dark eyes lighted with pleasure as they fell upon Bell's queer, shambling figure and
white hair.

"The labour we delight in physics pain," he greeted with a laugh and a groan. "It's worth a
badly twisted shoulder to have the pleasure of seeing Hatherly Bell again. My dear fellow,
how are you?"

The voice was low and pleasant, there was no trace of insanity about the speaker. Bell shook
the proffered hand. For some little time the conversation proceeded smoothly enough. The stranger
was a good talker; his remarks were keen and to the point.

"I hope you will be comfortable here," Bell suggested.

A faint subtle change came over the other's face.

"All but one thing," he whispered. "Don't make a fuss about it, because Cross is very kind.
But I can't stand the electric light. It reminds me of the great tragedy of my life. But for
the electric light I should be a free man with a good practice to-day."

"So you are harping on that string again," Bell said, coldly. "I fancied that I had argued
you out of that. You know perfectly well that it is all imagination, Heritage."

Heritage passed his left hand across his eyes in a confused kind of way.

"When you look at one like that I fancy so," he said. "When I was under your hands I was forgetting
all about it. And now it has all come back again. Did I tell you all about it, Cross?"

Bell gave Cross a significant glance, and the latter shook his head.

"Well, it was this way," Heritage began, eagerly. His eyes were gleaming now, his whole aspect
was changed. "I was poor and struggling, but I had a grand future before me. There was a patient
of mine, a rich man, who had a deadly throat trouble. And he was going to leave me all his
money if I cured him. He told me he had made a will to that effect, and he had done so. And
I was in direst straits for some ready cash. When I came to operate I used an electric light,
a powerful light--you know what I mean. The operation failed and my patient died. The operation
failed because the electric light went out at a critical time.

"People said it was a great misfortune for me, because I was on the threshold of a new discovery
which would have made my name. Nothing of the kind. I deliberately cut the positive wire of
the electric light so that I should fail, and so that my patient might die and I might get
all his money at once. And he did die, and nobody suspected me--nobody could possibly have
found me out. Then I went mad and they put me under Bell's care. I should have got well, only
he gave up his practice and drifted into the world again. My good, kind friend Reginald Henson
heard of my case; he interested some people in me and placed me where I am at present."

"So Reginald Henson knows all about it?" Bell asked, drily.

"My dear fellow, he is the best friend I have in the world. He was most interested in my case.
I have gone over it with him a hundred times. I showed him exactly how it was done. And now
you know why I loathe the electric light. When it shines in my eyes it maddens me; it brings
back to me the recollection of that dreadful time, it causes me to--"

"Heritage," Bell said, sternly, "close your eyes at once, and be silent."

The patient obeyed instantly. He had not forgotten the old habit of obedience. When he opened
his eyes again at length he looked round him in a foolish, shamefaced manner.

"I--I am afraid I have been rambling," he muttered. "Pray don't notice me, Bell; if you are
as good a fellow as you used to be, come and see me again. I'm tired now."

Bell gave the desired assurance, and he and Cross left the room together.

"Any sort of truth in what he has been saying?" asked the latter.

"Very little," Bell replied. "Heritage is an exceedingly clever fellow who has not yet recovered
from a bad breakdown some years ago. I had nearly cured him at one time, but he seems to have
lapsed into bad ways again. Some day, when I have time, I shall take up his case once more."

"Did he operate, or try some new throat cure?"

"Exactly. He was on the verge of discovering some way of operating for throat cases with complete
success. You can imagine how excited he was over his discovery. Unfortunately the patient he
experimented on died under the operation, not because the light went out or any nonsense of
that kind, but from failure of the heart's action owing to excitement. Heritage had no sleep
for a fortnight, and he broke down altogether. For months he was really mad, and when his senses
came back to him he had that hallucination. Some day it will go, and some day Heritage will
take up the dropped threads of his discovery and the world will be all the better for it. And
now, will you do me a favour?"

"I will do anything that lies in my power."

"Then be good enough to let me have a peep at the man who was found half-murdered in my friend
David Steel's conservatory. I'm interested in that case."

Cross hesitated for a moment.

"All right," he said. "There can't be any harm in that. Come this way."

Bell strolled along with the air of a man who is moved by no more than ordinary curiosity.
But from the first he had made up his mind not to lose this opportunity. He had not the remotest
idea what he expected to find, but he had a pretty good idea that he was on the verge of an
important discovery. He came at length to the bedside of the mysterious stranger. The man was
lying on his back in a state of coma, his breath came heavily between his parted lips.

Bell bent low partly to examine the patient, partly to hide his face from Cross. If Bell had
made any discovery he kept the fact rigidly to himself.

"Looks very young," he muttered. "But then he is one of those men who never grow any hair on
their faces. Young as he looks, I should judge him to be at least forty-five, and, if I am
not mistaken, he is a man who has heard the chimes at midnight or later. I'm quite satisfied."

"It's more than I am," Cross said, when at length he and his visitor were standing outside
together. "Look here, Bell, you're a great friend of Steel's, whom I believe to be a very good
fellow. I don't want to get him into any harm, but a day or two ago I found this letter in
a pocket-book in a belt worn by our queer patient. Steel says the fellow is a perfect stranger
to him, and I believe that statement. But what about this letter? I ought to have sent it to
the police, but I didn't. Read it."

And Cross proceeded to take a letter from his pocket. It was on thick paper; the stamped address
given was "15, Downend Terrace." There was no heading, merely the words "Certainly, with pleasure,
I shall be home; in fact, I am home every night till 12.30, and you may call any time up till
then. If you knock quietly on the door I shall hear you.--D.S."

"What do you make of it?" Cross asked.

"It looks as if your patient had called at Steel's house by appointment," Bell admitted. "Here
is the invitation undoubtedly in Steel's handwriting. Subsequently the poor fellow is found
in Steel's house nearly murdered, and yet Steel declares solemnly that the man is a perfect
stranger to him. It is a bad business, but I assure you that Steel is the soul of honour. Cross,
would you be so good as to let me have that letter for two or three days?"

"Very well," Cross said, after a little hesitation. "Good-night."

Bell went on his way homeward with plenty of food for thought.

He stopped just for a moment to light a cigar.

"Getting towards the light," he muttered; "getting along. The light is not going to fail after
all. I wonder what Reginald Henson would say if he only knew that I had been to the hospital
and recognised our mutual friend Van Sneck there!"

CHAPTER XXIII

INDISCRETION

The expression on Henson's usually benign countenance would have startled such of his friends
and admirers as regarded him as a shining light and great example. The smug satisfaction, the
unctuous sweetness of the expansive blue eyes were gone; a murderous gleam shone there instead.
His lips were set and rigid, the strong hand seemed to be strangling the bedclothes. It wanted
no effort of imagination to picture Henson as the murderer stooping over his prey. The man
had discarded his mask altogether.

"Oh," he said, between his teeth, "you are a clever fellow. You would have made an excellent
detective. And so you have found out where Van Sneck is?"

"I have already told you so," Littimer said, doggedly.

"How many days have you been hanging about Brighton?"

"Two or three. I came when I heard that Chris was ill. I didn't dare to come near the house,
at least not too near, for fear of being seen. But I pumped the doctor. Then he told me that
Chris was dead, and I risked it all to see the last of her."

"Yes, yes," Henson said, testily; "but what has this to do with Van Sneck?"

"I was looking for Van Sneck. I found that he had been here. I discovered that he had left
his rooms and had not returned to them. Then it occurred to me to try the hospital. I pretended
that I was in search of some missing relative, and they showed me three cases of bad accidents,
the victims of which had not been identified. And the third was Van Sneck."

Littimer told his story with just the suggestion of triumph in his voice. Henson was watching
him with the keenest possible interest.

"Do you know how Van Sneck got there?" he asked.

Littimer nodded. Evidently he had heard most of the story. Henson was silent for some little
time. He was working out something in his mind. His smile was not a pleasant one; it was nothing
like his bland platform smile, for instance.

"Give me that black book," he said. "Do you know how to work the telephone?"

"I daresay I could learn. It doesn't look hard."

"Well, that is an extension telephone on the table yonder worked in connection with the main
instrument in the library. I like to have my own telephone, as it is of the greatest assistance
to me. Turn that handle two or three times and put that receiver to your ear. When the Exchange
answers tell them to put you on to O,017 Gerrard."

Littimer obeyed mechanically, but though he rang and rang again no answer came. With a snarling
curse Henson dragged himself out of bed and crossed the room, with limbs that shook under him.

He twirled the handle round passionately.

"You always were a fool," he growled, "and you always will be."

Still no reply came. Henson whirled angrily, but he could elicit no response. He kicked the
instrument over and danced round it impotently. Littimer had never seen him in such a raging
fury before. The language of the man was an outrage, filthy, revolting, profane. No yelling,
drunken Hooligan could have been more fluent, more luridly diffuse.

"Go on," Littimer said, bitterly. "I like to hear you. I like to hear the smug, plausible Pharisee,
the friend of the good and pious, going on like this. I'd give fifty years of my life to have
just a handful of your future constituents here for a moment."

Henson paused suddenly and requested that Littimer should help him into bed.

"I can afford to speak freely before you," he said. "Say a word against me and I'll crush you.
Put out a hand to injure me and I'll wipe you off the face of the earth. It's absolutely imperative
that I should send an important telephone message to London at once, and here the machine has
broken down and no chance of its being repaired for a day or two. Curse the telephone."

He lay back on his bed utterly exhausted by his fit of passion. One of the white bandages about
his throat had started, and a little thin stream of blood trickled down his chest. Littimer
waited for the next move. He watched the crimson fluid trickle over Henson's sleeping-jacket.
He could have watched the big scoundrel bleeding to death with the greatest possible pleasure.

"What was Van Sneck doing here?"

The voice came clear and sharp from the bed. Littimer responded to it as a cowed hound does
to a sudden yet not quite unexpected lash from a huntsman's whip. His manliness was of small
account where Henson was concerned. For years he had come to heel like this. Yet the question
startled him and took him entirely by surprise.

"He was looking for the lost Rembrandt."

But Littimer's surprise was as nothing to Henson's amazement. He lay flat on his back so that
his face could not be seen. From the expression of it he had obtained a totally unexpected
reply to his question. He was so amazed that he had no words for the moment. But his quick
intelligence and amazing cunning grasped the possibilities of the situation. Littimer was in
possession of information to which he was a stranger. Except in a vague way he had not the
remotest idea what Littimer was talking about. But the younger man must not know that.

"So Van Sneck told you so?" he asked. "What a fool he must have been! And why should he come
seeking for the Rembrandt in Brighton?"

"Because he knows it was there, I suppose."

"It isn't here, because it doesn't exist. The thing was destroyed by accident by the police
when they raided Van Sneck's lodgings years ago."

"Van Sneck told me that he had actually seen the picture in Brighton."

Henson chuckled. The noise was intended to convey amused contempt, and it had that effect,
so far as Littimer was concerned. It was well for Henson that the latter could not see the
strained anxiety of his face. The man was alert and quivering with excitement in every limb.
Still he chuckled again as if the whole thing merely amused him.

"'The Crimson Blind' is Van Sneck's weak spot," he said. "It is King Charles's head to him.
By good or bad luck--it is in your hands to say which--you know all about the way in which
it became necessary to get Hatherly Bell on our side. All the same, the Rembrandt--the other
one--is destroyed."

"Van Sneck has seen the picture," Littimer said, doggedly.

"Oh, play the farce out to the end," Henson laughed, good-humouredly. "Where did he see it?"

"He says he saw it at 218, Brunswick Square."

Henson's knees suddenly came up to his nose, then he lay quite flat again for a long time.
His face had grown white once more, his lips utterly bloodless. Fear was written all over him.
A more astute man than Littimer would have seen the beads standing out on his forehead. It
was some little time before he dared trust himself to speak again.

"I know the house you mean," he said. "It is next door to the temporary residence of my esteemed
friend, Gilead Gates. At the present moment the place is void--"

"And has been ever since your bogus 'Home' broke up. Years ago, before you used your power
to rob and oppress us as you do now, you had a Home there. You collected subscriptions right
and left in the name of the Reverend Felix Crosbie, and you put the money into your pocket.
A certain weekly journal exposed you, and you had to leave suddenly or you would have found
yourself in the hands of the police. You skipped so suddenly that you had no time even to think
of your personal effects, which you understood were sold to defray expenses. But they were
not sold, as nobody cared to throw good money after bad. Van Sneck got in with the agent under
pretence of viewing the house, and he saw the picture there."

"Why didn't he take it with him?" Henson asked, with amused scorn. He was master of himself
again and had his nerves well under control.

"Well, that was hardly like Van Sneck. Our friend is nothing if not diplomatic. But when he
did manage to get into the house again the picture was gone."

"Excellent!" Henson cried. "How dramatic! There is only one thing required to make the story
complete. The picture was taken away by Hatherly Bell. If you don't bring that in as the dénouement
I shall be utterly disappointed."

"You needn't be," Littimer said, coolly. "That is exactly what did happen."

Henson chuckled again, quite a parody of a chuckle this time. He could detect the quiet suggestion
of triumph in Littimer's voice.

"Did Van Sneck tell you all this?" he asked.

"Not the latter part of it," Littimer replied, "seeing that he was in the hospital when it
happened. But I know it is true because I saw Bell and David Steel, the novelist, come away
from the house, and Bell had the picture under his arm. And that's why Van Sneck's agent couldn't
find it the second time he went. Check to you, my friend, at any rate. Bell will go to my father
with Rembrandt number two, and compare it with number one. And then the fat will be in the fire."

Henson yawned affectedly. All the same he was terribly disturbed and shaken. All he wanted
now was to be alone and to think. So far as he could tell nobody besides Littimer knew anything
of the matter. And no starved, cowed, broken-hearted puppy was ever closer under the heel of
his master than Littimer. He still held all the cards; he still controlled the fortunes of
two ill-starred houses.

"You can leave me now," he said. "I'm tired. I have had a trying day, and I need sleep; and
the sooner you are out of the house the better. For your own sake and for the sake of those
about you, you need not say one word of this to Enid Henson."

Littimer promised meekly enough. With those eyes blazing upon him he would have promised anything.
We shall see presently what a stupendous terror Henson had over the younger man, and in what
way all the sweetness and savour of life was being crushed out of him.

He closed the door behind him, and immediately Henson sat up in bed. He reached for his handkerchief
and wiped the big beads from his forehead.

"So the danger has come at last," he muttered. "I am face to face with it, and I knew I should
be. Hatherly Bell is not the man to quietly lie down under a cloud like that. The man has brains,
and patience, and indomitable courage. Now, does he suspect that I have any hand in the business?
I must see him when my nerves are stronger and try and get at the truth. If he goes to Lord
Littimer with that picture he shakes my power and my position perilously. What a fool I was
not to get it away. But, then, I only escaped from the Brighton police in those days by the
skin of my teeth. And they had followed me from Huddersfield like those cursed bloodhounds
here. I wonder--"

He paused, as the brilliant outline of some cunning scheme occurred to him. A thin, cruel smile
crept over his lips. Never had he been in a tight place yet without discovering a loophole
of escape almost before he had seen the trap.

A fit of noiseless laughter shook him.

"Splendid," he whispered. "Worthy of Machiavelli himself! Provided always that I can get there
first. If I could only see Bell's face afterwards, hear Littimer ordering him off the premises.
The only question is, am I up to seeing the thing through?"

CHAPTER XXIV

ENID LEARNS SOMETHING

Reginald Hensen struggled out of bed and into his clothing as best he could. He was terribly
weak and shaky, far more weak than he had imagined himself to be, but he was in danger now,
and his indomitable will-power pulled him through. What a fool Littimer had been to tell him
so much merely so that he might triumph over his powerful foe for a few minutes. But Henson
was planning a little scheme by which he intended to repay the young man tenfold. He had no
doubt as to the willingness of his tool.

He took a bottle of brandy from a drawer and helped himself to a liberal dose. Walker had expressly
forbidden anything of the kind, but it was no time for nice medical obedience. The grateful
stimulant had its immediate effect. Then Henson rang the bell, and after a time Williams appeared
tardily.

"You are to go down to Barnes and ask him to send a cab here as soon as possible," Henson said.
"I have to go to London by the first train in the morning."

Williams nodded, with his mouth wide open. He was astonished and not a little alarmed at the
strength and vitality of this man. And only a few hours before Williams had learnt with deep
satisfaction that Henson would be confined to his bed for some days.

Henson dressed at length and packed a small portmanteau. But he had to sit on his bed for some
little time and sip a further dose of brandy before he could move farther. After all there
was no hurry. A full hour was sure to elapse before the leisurely Barnes brought the cab to
the lodge-gates.

Henson crept downstairs at length and trod his catlike way to the library. Once there he proceeded
to make a minute inspection of the telephone. He turned the handle just the fragment of an
inch and a queer smile came over his face. Then he crept as silently upstairs, opened the window
of the bathroom quietly, and slipped on to the leads. There were a couple of insulators here,
against the wire of one of which Henson tapped his knuckles gently. The wire gave back an answering
twang. The other jangled limp and loose.

"One of the wires cut," Henson muttered. "I expected as much. Madame Enid is getting a deal
too clever. I suppose this is some suggestion of her very astute friend David Steel. Well,
I have given Mr. Steel one lesson in minding his own business, and if he interferes further
I shall have to give him another. He will be in gaol before long charged with attempted murder
and robbery with violence, and so exit Steel. After that the girl will be perhaps chary of
seeking outside assistance. And this will be the third I have had to get rid of. Heavens! How
feeble I feel, how weak I am. And yet I must go through this thing now."

He staggered into the house again and dropped into a chair. There was a loud buzzing in his
ears, so that he could hardly hear the murmur of voices in the drawing-room below. This was
annoying, because Henson liked to hear everything that other folks said. Then he dropped off
into a kind of dreamy state, coming back presently to the consciousness that he had fainted.

Meanwhile Frank Littimer had joined Enid in the drawing-room. The house was perfectly quiet
and still by this time; the dust-cloud hung on the air and caused the lamps to burn with a
spitting blue flame. Enid's face looked deadly pale against her black dress.

"So you have been seeing Reginald," she said. "Why--why did you do it?"

"I didn't mean to," Frank muttered. "I never intended him to know that I had been in the house
at all. But I was passing his room and he heard me. He seemed to know my footsteps. I believe
if two mice ran by him twice in the darkness he could tell the difference between them."

"You had an interesting conversation. What did he want to use the telephone for?"

"I don't know. I tried to manipulate it for him, but the instrument was out of order."

"I know. I had a pretty shrewd idea what our cousin was going to do. You see, I was listening
at the door. Not a very ladylike thing to do, but one must fight Henson with his own tools.
When I heard him ask for the telephone directory I ran out and nipped one of the wires by the
bathroom. Frank, it would have been far wiser if you hadn't come."

Littimer nodded gloomily. There was something like tears in his eyes.

"I know it," he said. "I hate the place and its dreadful associations. But I wanted to see
Chris first. Did she say anything about me before--before--"

"My dear boy, she loved you always. She knew and understood, and was sorry. And she never,
never forgot the last time that you were in the house."

Frank Littimer glanced across the room with a shudder. His eyes dwelt with fascination on the
overturned table with its broken china and glass and wilted flowers in the corner.

"It is not the kind of thing to forget," he said, hoaresly. "I can see my father now--"

"Don't," Enid shuddered, "don't recall it. And your mother has never been the same since. I
doubt if she will ever be the same again. From that day to this nothing has ever been touched
in the house. And Henson comes here when he can and makes our lives hideous to us."

"I fancy I shook him up to-night," Littimer said, with subdued triumph. "He seemed to shudder
when I told him that I had found Van Sneck."

Enid started from her chair. Her eyes were shining with the sudden brilliancy of unveiled stars.

"You have found Van Sneck!" she whispered. "Where?"

"Why, in the Brighton Hospital. Do you mean to say that you don't know about it, that you don't
know that the man found so mysteriously in Mr. David Steel's house and Van Sneck are one and
the same person?"

Enid resumed her seat again. She was calm enough now.

"It had not occurred to me," she said. "Indeed, I don't know why it should have done. Sooner
or later, of course, I should have suggested to Mr. Steel to try and identify the man, but--"

"My dear Enid, what on earth are you talking about?"

"Nonsense," Enid said, in some confusion. "Things you don't understand at present, and things
you are not going to understand just yet. I read in the papers that the man was quite a stranger
to Mr. Steel. But are you certain that it is Van Sneck?"

"Absolutely certain. I went to the hospital and identified him."

"Then there is no more to be said on that point. But you were foolish to tell Reginald."

"Not a bit of it. Why, Henson has known it all along. You needn't get excited. He is a deep
fellow, and nobody knows better than he how to disguise his feelings. All the same, he was
just mad to know what I had discovered, you could see it in his face. Reginald Henson--"

Littimer paused, open-mouthed, for Henson, dressed and wrapped ready for the journey, had come
quietly into the drawing-room. The deadly pallor of his face, the white bandages about his
throat, only served to render his appearance more emphatic and imposing. He stood there with
the halo of dust about him, looking like the evil genius of the place.

"I fear I startled you," he said, with a sardonic smile. "And I fear that in the stillness
of the place I have overheard a great part of your conversation. Frank, I must congratulate
you on your discretion, so far. But seeing that you are young and impressionable, I am going
to move temptation out of your way. Enid, I am going on a journey."

"I trust that it is a long one, and that it will detain you for a considerable period," Enid
said, coldly.

"It is neither far, nor is it likely to keep me," Henson smiled. "Williams has just come in
with the information that the cab awaits me at the gate. Now, then!"

The last words were flung at Littimer with contemptuous command. The hot blood flared into
the young man's face. Enid's eyes flashed.

"If my cousin likes to stay here," she said, "why--"

"He is coming with me," Henson said, hoarsely. "Do you understand? With me! And if I like to
drag him--or you, my pretty lady--to the end of the world or the gates of perdition, you will
have to come. Now, get along before I compel you."

Enid stood with fury in her eyes and clenched hands as Littimer slunk away out of the house,
Henson following between his victim and Williams. He said no words till the lodge-gates were
past and the growl of the dogs had died into the distance.

"We are going to Littimer Castle," said Henson.

"Not there," Littimer groaned--"not there, Henson! I couldn't--I couldn't go to that place!"

Henson pointed towards the cab.

"Littimer or perdition!" he said. "You don't want to go to the latter just yet? Jump in, then!"

CHAPTER XXV

LITTIMER CASTLE

If you had asked the first five people on the Littimer Estate what they thought of the lord
of the soil you would have had a different answer from every one. One woman would have said
that a kinder and better man never lived; her neighbour would have declared Lord Littimer to
be as hard as the nether millstone. Farmer George would rate him a jolly good fellow, and tell
how he would sit in the kitchen over a mug of ale; whilst Farmer John swore at his landlord
as a hard-fisted, grasping miser devoid of the bowels of compassion.

At the end of an hour you would be utterly bewildered, not knowing what to believe, and prepared
to set the whole village down as a lot of gossips who seemed to mind everything but its own
business. And, perhaps, Lord Littimer might come riding through on his big black horse, small,
lithe, brown as mahogany, and with an eye piercing as a diamond-drill. One day he looked almost
boyishly young, there would be a smile on his tanned face. And then another day he would be
bent in the saddle, huddled up, wizened, an old, old man, crushed with the weight of years
and sorrow.

In sooth he was a man of moods and contradictions, changeable as an April sky, and none the
less quick-tempered and hard because he knew that everybody was terribly afraid of him. And
he had a tongue, too, a lashing, cutting tongue that burnt and blistered. Sometimes he would
be quite meek and angry under the reproaches of the vicar, and yet the same day history records
it that he got off his horse and administered a sound thrashing to the village poacher. Sometimes
he got the best of the vicar, and sometimes that worthy man scored. They were good friends,
these two, though the vicar never swerved in his fealty to Lady Littimer, whose cause he always
championed. But nobody seemed to know anything about that dark scandal. They knew that there
had been a dreadful scene at the castle seven years before, and that Lady Littimer and her
son had left never to return. Lady Littimer was in a madhouse somewhere, they said, and the
son was a wanderer on the face of the earth. And when Lord Littimer died every penny of the
property, the castle included, would go to her ladyship's nephew, Mr. Reginald Henson.

In spite of the great cloud that hung over the family Lord Littimer did not seem to have changed.
He was just a little more caustic than ever, his tongue a little sharper. The servants could
have told a different story, a story of dark moods and days when the bitterness of the shadow
of death lay on the face of their master. Few men could carry their grief better, and because
Littimer carried his grief so well he suffered the more. We shall see what the sorrow was in time.

There are few more beautiful places in England than Littimer Castle. The house stood on a kind
of natural plateau with many woods behind, a trout stream ran clean past the big flight of
steps leading to the hall, below were terrace after terrace of hanging gardens, and to the
left a sloping, ragged drop of 200ft into the sea. To the right lay a magnificently-timbered
park, with a herd of real wild deer--perhaps the only herd of this kind in the country. When
the sun shone on the grey walls they looked as if they had been painted by some cunning hand,
so softly were the greys and reds and blues blended.

Inside the place was a veritable art gallery. There were hundreds of pictures and engravings
there. All round the grand staircase ran a long, deep corridor, filled with pictures. There
were alcoves here fitted up as sitting-rooms, and in most of them some gem or another was hung.
When the full flood of electric light was turned on at night the effect was almost dazzling.
There were few pictures in the gallery without a history.

Lord Littimer had many hobbies, but not one that interested him like this. There were hundreds
of rare birds shot by him in different parts of the world; the corridors and floors were covered
by skins, the spoil of his rifle; here and there a stuffed bear pranced startlingly; but the
pictures and prints were the great amusement of his lordship's lonely life.

He passed along the corridor now towards the great oriel window at the end. A brilliant sunlight
filled the place with shafts of golden and blue and purple as it came filtered through the
stained glass. At a table in the window a girl sat working a typewriter. She might have passed
for beautiful, only her hair was banded down in hideously Puritan fashion on each side of her
delicate, oval face, her eyes were shielded by spectacles. But they were lovely, steady, courageous
blue eyes, as Littimer did not fail to observe. Also he had not failed to note that his new
secretary could do very well without the glasses.

The typewriter and secretary business was a new whim of Littimer's. He wanted an assistant
to catalogue and classify his pictures and prints, and he had told the vicar so. He wanted
a girl who wasn't a fool, a girl who could amuse him and wouldn't be afraid of him, and he
thought he would have an American. To which the vicar responded that the whole thing was nonsense,
but he had heard of a Boston girl in England who had a passion for that kind of thing and who
was looking for a situation of the kind in a genuine old house for a year or so. The vicar
added that he had not seen the young lady, but he could obtain her address. A reply came in
due course, a reply that so pleased the impetuous Earl that he engaged the applicant on the
spot. And now she had been just two hours in the house.

"Well," Littimer cried, "and how have you been getting on?"

Miss Christabel Lee looked up, smilingly.

"I am getting on very well indeed," she said. "You see, I have made a study of this kind of
thing all my lifetime, and most of your pictures are like old friends to me. Do you know, I
fancy that you and I are going to manage very well together?"

"Oh, do you? They say I am pretty formidable at times."

"I shan't mind that a bit. You see, my father was a man with a villainous temper. But a woman
can always get the better of a bad-tempered man unless he happens to be one of the lower classes
who uses his boots. If he is a gentleman you have him utterly at your mercy. Have you a sharp
tongue?"

"I flatter myself I can be pretty blistering on occasions," Littimer said, grimly.

"How delightful! So can I. You and I will have some famous battles later on. Only I warn you
that I never lose my temper, which gives me a tremendous advantage. I haven't been very well
lately, so you must be nice to me for a week or two."

Littimer smiled and nodded. The grim lord of the castle was not accustomed to this kind of
thing, and he was telling himself that he rather liked it.

"And now show me the Rembrandt," Miss Lee said, impatiently.

Littimer led the way to a distant alcove lighted from the side by a latticed window. There
was only one picture in the excellent light there, and that was the famous Rembrandt engraving.
Littimer's eyes lighted up quite lovingly as they rested upon it. The Florentine frame was
hung so low that Miss Lee could bring her face on a level with it.

"This is the picture that was stolen from you?" she asked.

"Yes, that's the thing that there was all the fuss about. It made a great stir at the time.
But I don't expect that it will happen again."

"Why not?" Miss Lee asked. "When an attempt of that sort is made it is usually followed by
another, sometimes after the lapse of years. Anybody getting through that window could easily
get the frame from its two nails and take out the paper."

"Do you think so?" Littimer asked, uneasily.

"I am certain of it. Take my advice and make it secure. The panels behind are hard wood--thick
black oak. Lord Littimer, I am going to get four brass-headed stays and drive them through
some of the open ornamental work into the panel so as to make the picture quite secure. It
is an iron frame, I suppose."

"Wrought-iron, gilt," said Littimer. "Yes, one could easily drive four brass-headed stays through
the open work and make the thing safe. I'll have it seen to."

But Miss Lee insisted that there was no time like the present. She had discovered that Littimer
had an excellent carpenter's shop on the premises; indeed, she admitted to being no mean performer
with the lathe herself. She flitted down the stairs light as thistledown.

"A charming girl!" Littimer said, cynically. "I wonder why she came to this dull hole? A quarrel
with her young man, perhaps. If I were a young man myself I might--But women are all the same.
I should be a happier man if I had never trusted one. If--"

The face darkened; a heavy scowl lined his brows as he paced up and down. Christabel came back
presently with hammer and some brass-headed stays in her hand.

"Don't utterly destroy the frame," Littimer said, resignedly. "It is reputed to be Quentin
Matsy's work, and I had it cut to its present fashion. I'll go to the end of the gallery till
the execution's over."

"On the contrary," Miss Lee said, firmly, "you will stay where you are told."

A little to his own surprise Littimer remained. He saw the nails driven firmly in and finished
off with a punch so that there might be no danger of hammering the exquisitely wrought frame.
Miss Lee stood regarding her work with a suggestion of pride.

"There," she said, "I flatter myself a carpenter could have done no better."

"You don't know our typical carpenter," Littimer said. "Here is Tredwell with a telegram. For
Miss Lee? I hope it isn't an intimation that some relative has died and left you a fortune.
At least, if it is, you mustn't go until we've had one of those quarrels you promised me."

Christabel glanced at the telegram and slipped it into her pocket. There were just a few words
in the telegram that would have been unintelligible to the ordinary understanding. The girl
did not even comprehend, but Littimer's eyes were upon her, and the cipher had to keep for
a time. Littimer walked away at an intimation that his steward desired to see him.

Instantly the girl's manner changed. She glanced at the Rembrandt with a shrewd smile that
meant something beyond a mere act of prudence well done. Then she went down to the library
and began an eager search for a certain book. She found it at length, the "David Copperfield"
in the "Charles Dickens" edition of the great novelist's works. For the next hour or so she
was flitting over the pages with the cipher telegram spread out before her. A little later
and the few jumbled, meaningless words were coded out into a lengthy message. Christabel read
them over a few times, then with the aid of a vesta she reduced the whole thing, telegram and
all, to tinder, which she carefully crushed and flung out of the window.

She looked away down the terrace, she glanced at the dappled deer knee-deep in the bracken,
she caught a glimpse of the smiling sea, and her face saddened for a moment.

"How lovely it all is," she murmured. "How exquisitely beautiful and how utterly sad! And to
think that if I possessed the magician's wand for a moment I could make everything smile again.
He is a good man--a better man than anybody takes him to be. Under his placid, cynical surface
he conceals a deal of suffering. Well, we shall see."

She replaced the "Copperfield" on the shelf and turned to go again. In the hall she met Lord
Littimer dressed for riding. He smiled as she passed.

"Au revoir till dinner-time," he said. "I've got to go and see a tenant. Oh, yes, I shall certainly
expect the pleasure of your company to dinner. And now that the Rembrandt--"

"It is safe for the afternoon," Christabel laughed. "It is generally when the family are dining
that the burglar has his busy time. A pleasant ride to you."

CHAPTER XXVI

AN UNEXPECTED GUEST

Lord Littimer returned, as he declared, with the spirits and appetite of a schoolboy. All the
same, he did not for one moment abandon his usual critical analysis. He rattled on gaily, but
he was studying his guest all the same. She might have been the typical American lady student;
but he was not blind to the fact that the plain muslin and lace frock she wore was made in
Paris or that her manners and style must have been picked up in the best society. She sat there
under the shaded lights and behind the bank of flowers like as to the manner born, and her
accent was only sufficiently American to render her conversation piquant.

"You have always been used to this class of life?" Littimer asked.

"There you are quite mistaken," Christabel said, coolly. "For the last few years my existence
has been anything but a bed of roses. And your remark, my lord, savours slightly of impertinent
curiosity. I might as well ask you why your family is not here."

"We agree to differ," Littimer responded. "I recollect it caused me a great deal of annoyance
at the time. And my son chose to take his mother's part. You knew I had a son?"

"Yes," said Christabel, without looking up from the peach she was peeling. "I have met him."

"Indeed. And what opinion did you form of my son, may I ask?"

"Well, I rather liked him. He seemed to me to be suffering from some great trouble, and trouble
I am sure that was not of his own creating."

"Which means to say you feel rather sorry for Frank. But when you say the trouble was not of
his own creating you are entirely mistaken. It is not a nice thing to say, Miss Lee, but my
son was an utter and most unmitigated young scoundrel. If he came here he would be ordered
out of the house. So far as I am concerned, I have no son at all. He sides with his mother,
and his mother has a considerable private fortune of her own. Where she is at the present moment
I have no idea. Nor do I care. Seems odd, does it not, that I should have been very fond of
that woman at one time, just as it seems odd to think that I should have once been fond of
treacle tart?"

Littimer spoke evenly and quietly, with his eyes full upon the girl. He was deceiving himself,
but he was not deceiving her for a moment. His callousness seemed to be all the more marked
because the servants were in the room. But Christabel could see clearly what an effort it was.

"You love your wife still," she said, so low that only Littimer heard. His eyes flashed, his
face flamed with a sudden spasm of passion.

"Are we to quarrel so early as this?" he whispered.

"I never quarrel," Christabel said, coolly; "I leave my antagonist to do that. But I have met
your son, and I like him. He may be weak, but he is a gentleman. You have made a mistake, and
some day you will be sorry for it. Do you grow those orchids yourself?"

Littimer laughed, with no sign of anger remaining. All the same, Christabel could see that
his thin brown hand was shaking. She noticed the lines that pain had given under those shrewd
black eyes.

"You must see my orchids," he said. "Most of the specimens I obtained myself. They tell me
I have at least three unique kinds. And now, if you will permit me, I am going to smoke. The
drawing-room is at your disposal, though I rarely enter it myself. I always retire at eleven,
but that need not bind you in any way. It has been altogether a most delightful evening."

But Christabel did not dally long in the drawing-room. As she went upstairs and along the corridor
she heard the snapping of the electric lights all over the house as the servants were preparing
to retire. She paused just a moment in the alcove where the precious Rembrandt was and located
carefully the position of the switch there. Then she retired to her own room, where she changed
her dress for a simple black gown. A big clock somewhere was striking twelve as she finished.
She looked out of her door. The whole house was in darkness, the silence seemed to cling like
a curtain.

She paused for a moment as if afraid to take the next step. If it was fear, she shook it aside
resolutely and crept into the corridor. She carried something shining in her hands--something
that gleamed in the dim, uncertain light from the big window. She stood just for an instant
with a feeling that somebody was climbing up the ivy outside the house. She felt her way along
until she came to the alcove containing the Rembrandt and then she stopped. Her hand slid along
the wall till her fingers touched the switch of the electric light.

She stood for a long time there perfectly motionless. It was a still night outside, and there
was nothing to account for the rustling of the ivy leaves. The rattling came in jerks, spasmodically,
stopping every now and then and resuming again. It was no longer a matter of imagination, it
was a certainty. Somebody was climbing up the ivy to the window.

Leaning eagerly forward, Christabel could hear the sound of laboured breathing. She seemed
to see the outline of an arm outside, she could catch the quick rattle of the sash, she could
almost see a bent wire crooked through the beaded edges of the casement. Yes, she was right.
The window swung noiselessly back and a figure stood poised on the ledge outside.

With a quick breath and a fluttering of her heart Christabel felt for the switch.

"It will be all right," she murmured; "the other one will fancy that the light is necessary.
Courage, my dear courage, and the game is yours. Ah!"

The intruder dropped inside and pulled the window behind him. Evidently he was on familiar
ground, though he seemed to be seeking an unfamiliar object. Christabel's hand stole along
to the switch; there was a click, and the alcove was bathed in brilliant light. The intruder
shrank back with a startled cry. He rubbed his dazed eyes.

"Why not come in through the front door, Mr. Littimer?" Christabel drawled, coolly.

Frank Littimer had no words for a moment. He was wondering who this woman was and what she
was doing here. American, evidently, by her accent, and also by the revolver that she handled
so assuredly.

"That is the way you used to enter," Christabel proceeded, "when you had been out contrary
to parental instructions and the keepers expected to have a fracas with the poachers. Your
bedroom being exactly opposite, detection was no easy matter. Your bedroom has never been touched
since you left. The key is still outside the door. Will you kindly enter it?"

"But--" Frank stammered. "But I assure you that I cannot--"

"Take the Rembrandt away. You cannot. The frame is of iron, and it is fastened to the wall.
It would take an experienced carpenter quite a long time to remove it. Therefore your mission
has failed. It is very annoying, because it puts the other man in a very awkward position.
The position is going to be still more awkward presently. Please go to your room."

"My dear lady, if my father knows that I am in the house--"

"He is not going to know that you are in the house, at least not for some little time. And
when you see him it will be better not to say more than is necessary. Later on you will recognise
what a friend I am to you."

"You are not showing it at present," Littimer said, desperately.

"The patient rarely sees any virtue in his medicine. Now, please, go to your room. I can hear
the other man muttering and getting anxious down below. Now, if you approach that window again
I am pretty certain that my revolver will go off. You see, I am an American, and we are so
careless with such weapons. Please go to your room at once."

"And if I refuse your ridiculous request?"

"You will not find my request in the least ridiculous. If you refuse I shall hold you up with
my weapon and alarm the whole house. But I don't want to do that, for the sake of the other
man. He is so very respectable, you know, and anything unconventional may be so awkward for
him. Yes, it is just as I expected. He is coming up the ivy to investigate himself. Go!"

The revolver covered Littimer quite steadily. He could see into the blue rim, and he was conscious
of strange cold sensations down his spine. A revolver is not a pretty thing at the best of
times; it is doubly hazardous in the hands of a woman.

"What do you want with me?" he asked.

"My dear man, I want to do nothing with you. Only do as you are told and--there! The other
man is coming up the ivy. He can't understand the light and you not returning. He imagines
that you are looking in the wrong place. Please go."

Littimer backed before the weapon, backed until he was in the doorway. Suddenly the girl gave
him a push, shut the door to, and turned the key in the lock. Almost at the same instant another
figure loomed large in the window-frame.

CHAPTER XXVII

SLIGHTLY FARCICAL

Something bulky was struggling to get through the window. Half hidden in the shadow, Christabel
watched with the deepest interest. If she had been afraid at first that sensation had entirely
departed by this time. From the expression of her face she might have been enjoying the novel
situation. It was certainly not without a suggestion of the farcical.

The burly figure contrived to squeeze through the narrow casement at length and stood breathing
loudly in the corridor. It was not a pleasant sight that met Christabel's gaze--a big man with
a white, set face and rolling eyes and a stiff bandage about his throat. Evidently the intruder
was utterly exhausted, for he dropped into a chair and nursed his head between his hands.

"Now what has become of that fool?" he muttered. "Ah!"

He looked round him uneasily, but his expression changed as his eyes fell on the Rembrandt.
He had the furtive look of a starving man who picks up a purse whilst the owner is still in
sight. He staggered towards the picture and endeavoured to take it gently from the support.
He tried again and again, and then in a paroxysm of rage he tore at the frame-work.

"I guess that it can't be done," Christabel said, drawlingly. "See, stranger?"

Reginald Henson fairly gasped. As he turned round the ludicrous mixture of cunning and confusion,
anger and vexatious alarm on his face caused the girl to smile.

"I--I beg your pardon," he stammered.

"I said it can't be done," the girl drawled, coolly. "Sandow couldn't do it. The frame is made
of iron and it is fixed to the wall by four long stays. It's a neat job, though I say it myself;
I persuaded Lord Littimer to have it done. And when I heard you two prowling about down there
I was glad. I've got the other one safe."

"Oh, you've got the other one safe?" Henson said, blankly.

He would have liked to have burst out into a torrent of passion, only he recognised his position.
The thing was shamefully funny. It was anything but nice for a man of his distinguished position
to be detected in an act suspiciously like vulgar burglary. Still, there must be some plausible
way out of the difficulty if he could only think of it. Only this girl with the quaint, pretty
face and spectacles did not look in the least like a fool. He would have to try what blandishments
would do.

"Are you aware who I am?" he asked, blandly.

"What does it matter? I've got the other one, and no doubt he will be identified by the police.
If he doesn't say too much he may get off with a light sentence. It is quite easy to see that
you are the greater scoundrel of the two."

"My dear young lady, do you actually take me for a burglar?"

There was a note of deep pain in Henson's voice. He had dropped into a chair again, with a
feeling of utter weakness upon him. The girl's resolute mien and the familiar way in which
she handled her revolver filled him with the deepest apprehension.

"I am a very old friend and relative of Lord Littimer's," he said.

"Oh, indeed. And is the other man a relative of Lord Littimer's also?"

"Oh, why, confound it, yes. The other man, as you call him, is Lord Littimer's only son."

Christabel glanced at Henson, not without admiration.

"Well, you are certainly a cool hand," she said. "You are two clever thieves who have come
here for the express purpose of robbing Lord Littimer of one of his art treasures. I happen
to catch one, and he immediately becomes the son of the owner of the place. I am so fortunate
as to bag the other bird, and he resolves himself into a relative of my host's. And you really
expect me to believe a Hans Andersen fairy story like that!"

"I admit that appearances are against me," Henson said, humbly. "But I am speaking the truth."

"Oh, indeed. Then why didn't you come in through the front door? The violent exercise you were
taking just now must be dangerous to a man of your build!"

"I am afraid I shall have to make a clean breast of it," Henson said, with what he fondly imagined
to be an engaging smile. "You may, perhaps, be aware that yonder Rembrandt has a history. It
was stolen from its present owner once, and I have always said that it will be stolen again.
Many a time have I urged Lord Littimer to make it secure."

"How grateful you should be to me for having done so!"

"Ah, you are cynical still, which is a bad thing for one so young and--er--charming. I came
down here to see my very noble relative, and his son accompanied me. I came to try and make
peace between father and son. But that is a family matter which, forgive me, I cannot discuss
with a stranger. Our train was late, or we should have been here long ago. On reaching the
castle it struck me as a good idea to give Lord Littimer a lesson as to his carelessness. My
idea was to climb through the window, abstract the Rembrandt, and slip quietly into my usual
bedroom here. Then in the morning, after the picture has been missed, I was going to tell the
whole story. That is why Mr. Littimer entered this way and why I followed when I found that
he had failed to return. It was a foolish thing to do, and the dénouement has been most humiliating.
I assure you that is all."

"Not quite," Christabel drawled. "There is something else."

"And what may that be, my dear young lady?"

"To tell your story to Lord Littimer before you sleep. That kind of romance may do for Great
Britain, but it wouldn't make good family reading in the States."

"But, my dear young lady, I beg of you, implore you--"

"Come off the grass! I'm to let you go quietly to bed and retire myself, so that when morning
arrives you will be missing together with as much plunder as you can carry away. No, sir."

Henson advanced angrily. His prudence had gone for the time. As he came down upon Christabel
she raised her revolver and fired two shots in quick succession over Henson's shoulder. The
noise went echoing and reverberating along the corridor like a crackling of thunder. A door
came open with a click, then a voice demanded to know what was wrong.

"Now I guess the fat is in the fire," Christabel said.

Henson dropped into a chair and groaned. Lord Littimer, elegantly attired in a suit of silk
pyjamas and carrying a revolver in his hand, came coolly down the corridor. A curious servant
or two would have followed, but he waved them back crisply.

"Miss Lee," he said, with a faint, sarcastic emphasis, "and my dear friend and relative, Reginald
Henson--Reginald, the future owner of Littimer Castle!"

"So he told me, but I wouldn't believe him," said Christabel.

"It is a cynical age," Littimer remarked. "Reginald, what does this mean?"

Henson shook his head uneasily.

"The young lady persisted in taking me for a burglar," he groaned.

"And why not?" Christabel demanded. "I was just going to bed when I heard voices in the forecourt
below and footsteps creeping along. I came into the corridor with my revolver. Presently one
of the men climbed up the ivy and got into the corridor. I covered him with my revolver and
fairly drove him into a bedroom and locked him in."

"So you killed with both barrels?" Littimer cried, with infinite enjoyment.

"Then the other one came. He came to steal the Rembrandt."

"Nothing of the kind," the wretched Henson cried. "I came to give you a lesson, Lord Littimer.
My idea was to get in through the window, steal the Rembrandt, and, when you had missed it,
confess the whole story. My character is safe."

"Giddy," Littimer said, reproachfully. "You are so young, so boyish, so buoyant, Reginald.
What would your future constituents have said had they seen you creeping up the ivy? They are
a grave people who take themselves seriously. Egad, this would be a lovely story for one of
those prying society papers. 'The Philanthropist and the Picture.' I've a good mind to send
it to the Press myself."

Littimer sat down and laughed with pure enjoyment.

"And where is the other partridge?" he asked, presently.

Christabel seemed to hesitate for a moment, her sense of humour of the situation had departed.
Her hand shook as she turned the key in the door.

"I am afraid you are going to have an unpleasant surprise," Henson said.

Littimer glanced keenly at the speaker. All the laughter died out of his eyes; his face grew
set and stern as Frank Littimer emerged into the light.

"And what are you doing here?" he asked, hoarsely. "What do you expect to gain by taking part
in a fool's trick like this? Did I not tell you never to show your face here again?"

The young man said nothing. He stood there looking down, dogged, quiet, like one tongue-tied.
Littimer thundered out his question again. He crossed over, laying his hands on his son's shoulders
and shaking him as a terrier might shake a rat.

"Did you come for anything?" he demanded. "Did you expect any mercy from--"

Frank Littimer shook off his grasp gently. He looked up for the first time.

"I expected nothing," he said. "I--I did not come of my own free will. I am silent now for
the sake of myself and others. But the time may come--God knows it has been long delayed. For
the present, I am bound in honour to hold my tongue."

He flashed one little glance at Henson, a long, angry glance. Littimer looked from one to the
other in hesitation for a moment. The hard lines between his brows softened.

"Perhaps I am wrong," he muttered. "Perhaps there has been a mistake somewhere. And if ever
I find out I have--pshaw, I am talking like a sentimental schoolgirl. Have I not had evidence
strong as proof of Holy Writ that ... Get out of my sight, your presence angers me. Go, and
never let me see you again. Reginald, you were a fool to bring that boy here to-night. See
him off the premises and fasten the door again."

"Surely," Christabel interfered, "surely at this time of the night--"

"You should be in bed," Littimer said, tartly. "My dear young lady, if you and I are to remain
friends I must ask you to mind your own business. It is a dreadfully difficult thing for a
woman to do, but you must try. You understand?"

Christabel was evidently putting a strong constraint on her tongue, for she merely bowed and
said nothing. She had her own good reasons for the diplomacy of silence. Henson and Frank Littimer
were disappearing in the direction of the staircase.

"I say nothing," Christabel said. "But at the same time I don't fancy I shall care very much
for your distinguished friend Reginald Henson."

Littimer smiled. All his good humour seemed to have returned to him. Only the dark lines under
his eyes were more accentuated.

"A slimy, fawning hound," he whispered. "A mean fellow. And the best of it is that he imagines
that I hold the highest regard for him. Good-night."

CHAPTER XXVIII

A SQUIRE OF DAMES

A little later, and Christabel sat before her looking-glass with her lovely hair about her
shoulders. The glasses were gone and her magnificent eyes gleamed and sparkled.

"Good night's work," she said to her smiling reflection. "Now the danger is passed and now
that I am away from that dreadful house I feel a different being. Strange what a difference
a few hours has made! And I hardly need my disguise--even at this moment I believe that Enid
would not recognise me. She will be pleased to know that her telegram came in so usefully.
Well, here I am, and I don't fancy that anybody will recognise Christabel Lee and Chris Henson
for one and the same person."

She sat there brushing her hair and letting her thoughts drift along idly over the events of
the evening. Reginald Henson would have felt less easy in his mind had he known what these
thoughts were. Up to now that oily scoundrel hugged himself with the delusion that nobody besides
Frank Littimer and himself knew that the second copy of "The Crimson Blind" had passed into
Bell's possession.

But Chris was quite aware of the fact. And Chris as Chris was supposed by Henson to be dead
and buried, and was, therefore, in a position to play her cards as she pleased. Up to now it
seemed to her that she had played them very well indeed. A cipher telegram from Longdean had
warned her that Henson was coming there, had given her more than a passing hint what Henson
required, and her native wit had told her why Henson was after the Rembrandt.

Precisely why he wanted the picture she had not discovered yet. But she knew that she would
before long. And she knew also that Henson would try and obtain the print without making his
presence at Littimer Castle obvious. He was bringing Frank Littimer with him, and was therefore
going to use the younger man in some cunning way.

That Henson would try and get into the castle surreptitiously Chris had felt from the first.
Once he did so the rest would be easy, as he knew exactly where to lay his hand on the picture.
Therefore he could have no better time than the dead of night. If his presence were betrayed
he could turn the matter aside as a joke and trust to his native wit later on. If he had obtained
the picture by stealth he would have discreetly disappeared, covering his tracks as he retreated.

Still, it had all fallen out very fortunately. Henson had been made to look ridiculous; he
had been forced to admit that he was giving Littimer a lesson over the Rembrandt, and though
the thing appeared innocent enough on the surface, Chris was sanguine that later on she could
bring this up in evidence against him.

"So far so good," she told herself. "Watch, watch, watch, and act when the time comes. But
it was hard to meet Frank to-night and be able to say nothing. And how abjectly miserable he
looked! Well, let us hope that the good time is coming."

Chris was up betimes in the morning and out on the terrace. She felt no further uneasiness
on the score of the disguise now. Henson was certain to be inquisitive, it was part of his
nature, but he was not going to learn anything. Chris smiled as she saw Henson lumbering towards
her. He seemed all the better for his night's rest.

"The rose blooms early here," he said, gallantly. "Let me express the hope that you have quite
forgiven me for the fright I gave you last night."

"I guess I don't recollect the fright," Chris drawled. "And if there was any fright I calculate
it was on the other side. And how are you this morning? You look as if you had been in the
wars. Got some trouble with your throat, or what?"

"A slight operation," Henson said, airily. "I have been speaking too much in public lately
and a little something had to be removed. I am much better."

The ready lie tripped off his tongue. Chris smiled slightly.

"Do you know, you remind me very much of somebody," he went on. "And yet I don't know why,
because you are quite different. Lord Littimer tells me you are an American."

"The Stars and Stripes," Chris laughed. "I guess our nation is the first on earth. Now, if
you happen to know anything about Boston--"

"I never was in Boston in my life," Henson replied, hastily. The name seemed to render him
uneasy. "Have you been in England very long?"

Chris replied that she was enjoying England for the first time. But she was not there to answer
questions, her rôle was to ask them. But she was dealing with a past-master in the art of gleaning
information, and Henson was getting on her nerves. She gave a little cry of pleasure as a magnificent
specimen of a bloodhound came trotting down the terrace and paused in friendly fashion before her.

"What a lovely dog," she exclaimed. "Do you like dogs, Mr. Henson?"

She looked up beamingly into his face as she spoke; she saw the heavy features darken and the
eyes grow small with anger.

"I loathe them, and they loathe me," Henson growled. "Look at him!"

He pointed to the dog, who showed his teeth with an angry growl. And yet the great sleek head
lay against the girl's knee in perfect confidence. Henson looked on uneasily and backed a little
way. The dog marked his every movement.

"See how the brute shows his teeth at me," he said.

"Please send him away, Miss Lee. I am certain he is getting ready for a spring."

Henson's face was white and hot and wet, his lips trembled. He was horribly afraid. Chris patted
the silky head and dismissed the dog with a curt command. He went off instantly with a wistful,
backward look in his eye.

"We are going to be great friends, that doggie and I," Chris said, gaily. "And I don't like
you any the better, Mr. Henson, because you don't like dogs and they don't like you. Dogs are
far better judges of character than you imagine. Dr. Bell says--"

"What Dr. Bell?" Henson demanded, swiftly.

Chris had paused just in time: perhaps her successful disguise had made her a trifle reckless.

"Dr. Hatherly Bell," she said. "He used to be a famous man before he fell into disgrace over
something or another. I heard him lecture on the animal instinct in Boston once, and he said--but
as you don't care for dogs it doesn't matter what he said."

"Do you happen to know anything about him?" Henson asked.

"Very little. I never met him, if that is what you mean. But I heard that he had done something
particularly disgraceful. Why do you ask?"

"Nothing more than a mere coincidence," Henson replied. "It is just a little strange that you
should mention his name here, especially after what had happened last night. I suppose that,
being an American, you fell in love with the Rembrandt. It was you who suggested securing it
in its place, and then preventing my little jest from being successfully carried out. Of course
you have heard that the print was stolen once?"

"The knowledge is as general as the spiriting away of the Gainsborough Duchess."

"Quite so. Well, the man who stole the Rembrandt was Dr. Hatherly Bell. He stole it that he
might pay a gambling debt, and it was subsequently found in his luggage before he could pass
it on to the purchaser. I am glad you mentioned it, because the name of Bell is not exactly
a favourite at the castle."

"I am much obliged to you," said Chris, gravely. "Was Dr. Bell a favourite once?"

"Oh, immense. He had great influence over Lord Littimer. He--but here comes Littimer in one
of his moods. He appears to be angry about something."

Littimer strode up, with a frown on his face and a telegram in his hand. Henson assumed to
be mildly sympathetic.

"I hope it is nothing serious?" he murmured.

"Serious," Littimer cried. "The acme of audacity--yes. The telegram has just come. 'Must see
you tonight on important business affecting the past. Shall hope to be with you some time after
dinner!'"

"And who is the audacious aspirant to an interview?" Chris asked, demurely.

"A man I expect you never heard of," said Littimer, "but who is quite familiar to Henson here.
I am alluding to that scoundrel Hatherly Bell."

"Good heavens!" Henson burst out. "I--I mean, what colossal impudence!"

CHAPTER XXIX

THE MAN WITH THE THUMB AGAIN

Chris gave Henson one swift searching glance before her eyes dropped demurely to the ground.
Lord Littimer appeared to be taking no heed of anything but his own annoyance. But quick as
Chris had been, Henson was quicker. He was smiling the slow, sad smile of the man who turns
the other cheek because it is his duty to do so.

"And when does Dr. Bell arrive?" he asked.

"He won't arrive at all," Littimer said, irritably. "Do you suppose I am going to allow that
scoundrel under my roof again? The amazing impudence of the fellow is beyond everything. He
will probably reach Moreton Station by the ten o'clock train. The drive will take him an hour,
if I choose to permit the drive, which I don't. I'll send a groom to meet the train with a
letter. When Bell has read that letter he will not come here."

"I don't think I should do that," Henson said, respectfully.

"Indeed! You are really a clever fellow. And what would you do?"

"I should suffer Bell to come. As a Christian I should deem it my duty to do so. It pains me
to say so, but I am afraid that I cannot contravert your suggestion that Bell is a scoundrel.
It grieves me to prove any man that. And in the present instance the proofs were overpowering.
But there is always a chance--a chance that we have misjudged a man on false evidence."

"False evidence! Why, the Rembrandt was actually found in Bell's portmanteau."

"Dear friend, I know it," Henson said, with the same slow, forgiving smile. "But there have
been cases of black treachery, dark conspiracies that one abhors. And Bell might have made
some stupendous discovery regarding his character. I should see him, my lord; oh, yes, I should
most undoubtedly see him."

"And so should I," Chris put in, swiftly.

Littimer smiled, with all traces of his ill-temper gone. He seemed to be contemplating Henson
with his head on one side, as if to fathom that gentleman's intentions. There was just the
suspicion of contempt in his glance.

"In the presence of so much goodness and beauty I feel quite lost," he said. "Very well, Henson,
I'll see Bell. I may find the interview diverting."

Henson strolled away with a sigh of gentle pleasure. Once out of sight he flew to the library,
where he scribbled a couple of telegrams. They were carefully worded and related to some apocryphal
parcel required without delay, and calculated to convey nothing to the lay mind. A servant
was despatched to the village with them. Henson would have been pleased had he known that the
fascinating little American had waylaid his messenger and read his telegrams under the plea
of verifying one of the addresses. A moment or two later and those addresses were carefully
noted down in a pocket-book. It was past five before Chris found herself with a little time
on her hands again. Littimer had kept her pretty busy all the afternoon, partly because there
was so much to do, but partly from the pleasure that he derived from his secretary's society.
He was more free with her than he had been with any of her sex for years. It was satisfactory,
too, to learn that Littimer regarded Henson as a smug and oily hypocrite, and that the latter
was only going to be left Littimer Castle to spite the owner's other relations.

"Now you run into the garden and get a blow." Littimer said at length. "I am telling you a
lot too much. I am afraid you are a most insinuating young person."

Chris ran out into the garden gaily. Despite the crushing burden on her shoulders she felt
an elation and a flow of spirits she had not been conscious of for years. The invigorating
air of the place seemed to have got into her veins, the cruel depression of the House of the
Silent Sorrow was passing away. Again, she had hope and youth on her side, and everything was
falling out beautifully. It was a pleasanter world than Chris had anticipated.

She went along more quietly after a time. There was a tiny arbour on a terrace overlooking
the sea to which Chris had taken a particular fancy. She picked her way daintily along the
grass paths between the roses until she suddenly emerged upon the terrace. She had popped out
of the roses swiftly as a squirrel peeps from a tree.

Somebody was in the arbour, two people talking earnestly. One man stood up with his back to
Chris, one hand gripping the outside ragged bark of the arbour frame with a peculiarly nervous,
restless force. Chris could see the hand turned back distinctly. A piece of bark was being
crumbled under a strong thumb. Such a thumb! Chris had seen nothing like it before.

It was as if at some time it had been smashed flat with a hammer, a broad, strong, cruel-looking
thumb, flat and sinister-looking as the head of a snake. In the centre, like a pink pearl dropped
in a filthy gutter, was one tiny, perfectly-formed nail.

The owner of the thumb stepped back the better to give way to a fit of hoarse laughter. He
turned slightly aside and his eyes met those of Chris. They were small eyes set in a coarse,
brutal face, the face of a criminal, Chris thought, if she were a judge of such matters. It
came quite as a shock to see that the stranger was in clerical garb.

"I--I beg your pardon," Chris stammered. "But I--"

Henson emerged from the arbour. For once in a way he appeared confused, there was a flush on
his face that told of annoyance ill suppressed.

"Please don't go away," he said. "Mr. Merritt will think that he has alarmed you. Miss Lee,
this is my very good friend and co-worker in the field, the Reverend James Merritt."

"Is Mr. Merritt a friend of Lord Littimer's?" Chris asked, demurely.

"Littimer hates the cloth," Henson replied "Indeed, he has no sympathy whatever with my work.
I met my good friend quite by accident in the village just now, and I brought him here for
a chat. Mr. Merritt is taking a well-earned holiday."

Chris replied graciously that she didn't doubt it. She did not deem it necessary to add that
she knew that one of Mr. Henson's mystic telegrams had been addressed to one James Merritt
at an address in Moreton Wells, a town some fifteen miles away. That the scoundrel was up to
no good she knew perfectly well.

"Your work must be very interesting," she said. "Have you been in the Church long, Mr. Merritt?"

Merritt said hoarsely that he had not been in the Church very long. His dreadful grin and fog
voice suggested that he was a brand plucked from the burning, and that he had only recently
come over to the side of the angels. The whole time he spoke he never met Chris's glance once.
The chaplain of a convict prison would have turned from him in disgust. Henson was obviously
ill at ease. In his suave, diplomatic way he contrived to manoeuvre Merritt off the ground
at length.

"An excellent fellow," he said, with exaggerated enthusiasm. "It was a great day for us when
we won over James Merritt. He can reach a class which hitherto we have not touched."

"He looks as if he had been in gaol," Chris said.

"Oh, he has," Henson admitted, candidly. "Many a time."

Chris deemed it just possible that the unpleasant experience might be endured again, but she
only smiled and expressed herself to be deeply interested. The uneasiness in Henson's manner
gradually disappeared.

Evidently the girl suspected nothing. She would have liked to have asked a question or two
about Mr. Merritt's thumb, but she deemed it prudent not to do so.

Dinner came at length, dinner served in the great hall in honour of the recently arrived guest,
and set up in all the panoply and splendour that Littimer affected at times. The best plate
was laid out on the long table. There were banks and coppices of flowers at either corner,
a huge palm nodded over silver and glass and priceless china. The softly shaded electric lights
made pools of amber flame on fruit and flowers and gleaming crystal. Half-a-dozen big footmen
went about their work with noiseless tread.

Henson shook his head playfully at all this show and splendour. His good humour was of the
elephantine order, and belied the drawn anxiety of his eyes. Luxurious and peaceful as the
scene was, there seemed to Chris to be a touch of electricity in the air, the suggestion of
something about to happen. Littimer glanced at her admiringly. She was dressed in white satin,
and she had in her hair a single diamond star of price.

"Of course Henson pretends to condemn all this kind of thing," Littimer said. "He would have
you believe that when he comes into his own the plate and wine will be sold for the benefit
of the poor, and the seats of the mighty filled with decayed governesses and antiquated shop-walkers."

"I hope that time may long be deferred," Henson murmured.

"And so do I," Littimer said, drily, "which is one of the disadvantages of being conservative.
By the way, who was that truculent-looking scoundrel I saw with you this afternoon?"

Henson hastened to explain. Littimer was emphatically of opinion that such visitors were better
kept at a distance for the present. When all the rare plate and treasures of Littimer Castle
had been disposed of for philanthropic purposes it would not matter.

"There was a time when the enterprising burglar got his knowledge of the domestic and physical
geography of a house from the servants. Now he reforms, with the great advantage that he can
lay his plan of campaign from personal observation. It is a much more admirable method, and
tends to avert suspicion from the actual criminal."

"You would not speak thus if you knew Merritt," said Henson.

"All the same, I don't want the privilege," Littimer smiled. "A man with a face like that couldn't
reform; nature would resent such an enormity. And yet you can never tell. Physically speaking,
my quondam friend Hatherly Bell has a perfect face."

"I confess I am anxious to see him," Chris said. "I--I heard him lecture in America. He had
the most interesting theory about dogs. Mr. Henson hates dogs."

"Yes," Henson said, shortly, "I do, and they hate me, but that does not prevent my being interested
in the coming of Dr. Bell. And nobody hopes more sincerely than myself that he will succeed
in clearly vindicating his character."

Littimer smiled sarcastically as he trifled with his claret glass. In his cynical way he was
looking forward to the interview with a certain sense of amusement. And there was a time when
he had enjoyed Bell's society immensely.

"Well, you will not have long to wait now," he said. "It is long past ten, and Bell is due
at any moment after eleven. Coffee in the balcony, please."

It was a gloriously warm night, with just a faint suspicion of a breeze on the air. Down below
the sea beat with a gentle sway against the cliffs; on the grassy slopes a belated lamb was
bleating for its dam. Chris strolled quietly down the garden with her mind at peace for a time.
She had almost forgotten her mission for the moment. A figure slipped gently past her on the
grass, but she utterly failed to notice it.

"An exceedingly nice girl, that," Littimer was saying, "and distinctly amusing. Excuse me if
I leave you here--a tendency to ague and English night air don't blend together."

CHAPTER XXX

GONE!

It was the very moment that Henson had been waiting for. All his listlessness had vanished.
He sprang to his feet and made his way hurriedly across the lawn. Dark as it was, he slipped
along with the ease of one who is familiar with every inch of the ground. A man half his weight
and half his age could have been no more active.

He advanced to what seemed to be the very edge of the cliff and disappeared. There were rocks
and grassy knolls which served as landmarks to him. A slip of the foot might have resulted
in a serious accident. Above the gloom a head appeared.

"That you, Merritt?" Henson asked, hoarsely.

"Oh, it's me right enough," came the muttered reply. "Good job as I'm used to a seafaring life,
or I should never have got up those cliffs. Where's the girl?"

"Oh, the girl's right enough. She's standing exactly where she can hear the cry of the suffering
in distress. You can leave that part of the drama to me. She's a smart girl with plenty of
pluck, but all the same I am going to make use of her. Have you got the things?"

"Got everything, pardner. Got a proper wipe over the skull, too."

"How on earth did you manage to do that?"

"Meddling with Bell, of course. Why didn't you let him come and produce his picture in peace?
We should have been all ready to flabbergaster him when he did come."

"My good Merritt, I have not the slightest doubt about it. My plans are too carefully laid
for them to go astray. But, at the same time, I firmly believe in having more than one plan
of attack and more than two ways of escape. If we could have despoiled Bell of his picture
it would have been utterly useless for him to have come here. He would have gone back preferring
to accept defeat to arriving with a cock-and-bull story to the effect that he had been robbed
of his treasure on the way. And so he got the best of you, eh?"

"Rather! I fancied that I was pretty strong, but--well, it doesn't matter. Here I am with the
tools, and I ain't going to fail this time. Before Bell comes the little trap will be ready
and you will be able to prove an alibi."

Henson chuckled hoarsely. He loved dramatic effect, and here was one to hand. He almost fancied
that he could see the white outline of Chris's figure from where he stood.

"Get along," he said. "There is no time to lose."

Merritt nodded and began to make his way upward. Some way above him Chris was looking down.
Her quick ear had detected some suspicious sound. She watched eagerly. Just below her the big
electric light on the castle tower cast a band of flame athwart the cliff. Chris looked down
steadily at this. Presently she saw a hand uplifted into the belt of flame, a hand grasping
for a ledge of rock, and a quickly stifled cry rose to her lips. The thumb on the hand was
smashed flat, there was a tiny pink nail in the centre.

Chris's heart gave one quick leap, then her senses came back to her. She needed nobody to tell
her that the owner of the hand was James Merritt. Nor did she require any fine discrimination
to perceive that he was up to no good. That it had something to do with the plot against Bell
she felt certain. But the man was coming now, he could only reach the top of the cliffs just
under the wall where she was standing. Chris peered eagerly down into the path of light until
the intruder looked up. Then she jerked back, forgetting that she was in the darkness and absolutely
invisible. The action was disastrous, however, for it shook Chris's diamond star from her head,
and it fell gently almost at the feet of the climber. An instant later and his eyes had fallen
upon it.

"What bloomin' luck," he said, hoarsely. "I suppose that girl yonder must have dropped it over.
Well, it is as good as a couple of hundred pound to me, anyway. Little missie, you'd better
take a tearful farewell of your lumps of sugar, as you'll never see them again."

To Chris's quivering indignation he slipped the star into his breast-pocket. Just for the moment
the girl was on the point of crying out. She was glad she had refrained a second after, for
a really brilliant thought occurred to her. She had never evolved anything more clever in her
life, but she did not quite realise that as yet.

Nearer and nearer the man with the maimed thumb came. Chris stepped back into the shadow. She
waited till the intruder had slipped past her in the direction of the castle, and prepared
to follow at a discreet distance. Whatever he was after, she felt sure he was being ordered
and abetted by Reginald Henson. Two minutes, five minutes, elapsed before she moved.

What was that? Surely a voice somewhere near her moaning for help. Chris stood perfectly still,
listening for the next cry. Her sense of humanity had been touched, she had forgotten Merritt
entirely. Again the stifled cry for help came.

"Who are you?" Chris shouted. "And where are you?"

"Henson," came the totally unexpected reply. "I'm down below on a ledge of rock. No, I'm not
particularly badly hurt, but I dare not move."

Chris paused for a moment, utterly bewildered. Henson must have been on the look-out for his
accomplice, she thought, and had missed his footing and fallen. Pity he had not fallen a little
farther, she murmured bitterly, and broken his neck. But this was only for a moment, and her
sense of justice and humanity speedily returned.

"I cannot see anything of you," she said.

"All the same, I can see your outline," Henson said, dismally. "I don't feel quite so frightened
now. I can hang on a bit longer, especially now I know assistance is at hand. At first I began
to be afraid that I was a prisoner for the night. No; don't go. If I had a rope I should have
the proper confidence to swarm up again. And there is a coil of rope in the arbour close by
you. Hang it straight down over that middle boulder and fasten your end round one of those
iron pilasters."

The rope was there as Henson stated; indeed, he had placed it there himself. With the utmost
coolness and courage Chris did as she was desired. But it took some little time to coax the
rope to go over in the proper direction. There was a little mutter of triumph from below, and
presently Henson, with every appearance of utter exhaustion, climbed over the ledge to the
terrace. At the same moment an owl hooted twice from the long belt of trees at the bottom of
the garden.

"I hope you are none the worse for your adventure?" Chris asked, politely.

Henson said sententiously that he fancied not. His familiarity with the cliffs had led him
too far. If he had not fallen on a ledge of rock goodness only knows what might have happened.
Would Chris be so good as to lend him the benefit of her arm back to the castle? Chris was
graciously willing, but she was full of curiosity at the same time. Had Henson really been
in danger, or was the whole thing some part of an elaborate and cunning plot? Henson knew perfectly
well that she had taken a great fancy to the upper terrace, and he might--

Really it was difficult to know what to think. They passed slowly along till the lights here
and there from the castle shone on their faces. At the same time a carriage had driven up to
the hall door and a visitor was getting out. With a strange sense of eagerness and pleasure
Chris recognised the handsome features and misshapen shape of Hatherly Bell.

"The expected guest has arrived," Henson said.

There was such a queer mixture of snarling anger and exulting triumph in his voice that Chris
looked up. Just for an instant Henson had dropped the mask. A ray of light from the open door
streamed fully across his face. The malignant pleasure of it startled Chris. Like a flash she
began to see how she had been used by those miscreants.

"He is very handsome," she contrived to say, steadily.

"Handsome is that handsome does," Henson quoted. "Let us hope that Dr. Bell will succeed in
his mission. He has my best wishes."

Chris turned away and walked slowly as possible up the stairs. Another minute with that slimy
hypocrite and she felt she must betray herself. Once out of sight she flew along the corridor
and snapped up the electric light. She fell back with a stifled cry of dismay, but she was
more sorrowful than surprised.

"I expected it," she said. "I knew that this was the thing they were after."

The precious copy of Rembrandt was no longer there!

CHAPTER XXXI

BELL ARRIVES

There were more sides to the mystery than David Steel imagined. It had seemed to him that he
had pretty well all the threads in his hands, but he would have been astonished to know how
much more Hatherly Bell and Enid Henson could have told him.

But it seemed to Bell that there was one very important thing to be done before he proceeded
any farther. He was interested in the mystery as he was interested in anything where crime
and cunning played a part. But he was still more intent upon clearing his good name; besides,
this would give him a wider field of action.

In the light of recent discoveries it had become imperative that he should once more be on
good terms with Lord Littimer. Once this was accomplished, Bell saw his way to the clearing
up of the whole complication. It was a great advantage to know who his enemy was; it was a
still greater advantage to discover the hero of the cigar-case and the victim of the outrage
in Steel's conservatory was the graceless scamp Van Sneck, the picture dealer, who had originally
sold "The Crimson Blind" to Lord Littimer.

It was all falling out beautifully. Not only had Van Sneck turned up in the nick of time, but
he was not in a position to do any further mischief. It suited Bell exactly that Van Sneck
should be hors de combat for the moment.

The first thing to be done was to see Lord Littimer without delay. Bell had no idea of humbly
soliciting an interview. He proceeded to a telegraph office the first thing the following morning
and wired Littimer to the effect that he must see him on important business. He had an hour
or two at his disposal, so he took a cab as far as Downend Terrace. He found Steel slug-hunting
in the conservatory, the atmosphere of which was blue with cigarette smoke.

"So you are not working this morning?" he asked.

"How the dickens can I work?" David exclaimed, irritably. "Not that I haven't been trying.
I might just as well take a long holiday till this mystery is cleared up for all the good I
am. What is the next move?"

"My next move is to go to Littimer and convince him that he has done me a great wrong. I am
bound to have Littimer's ear once more."

"You are going to show him the spare Rembrandt, eh?"

"That's it. I flatter myself I shall astonish him. I've sent a telegram to say I'm coming to-day,
after which I shall proceed to storm the citadel. I feel all the safer because nobody knows
I have the engraving."

"My dear chap, somebody knows you have the picture."

"Impossible!" Bell exclaimed. "Only yourself and Enid Henson can possibly be aware that--"

"All the same, I am speaking the truth," David said. "Last night when you went into the hospital
you gave me the print to take care of. At the same time I noticed a rough-looking man presumedly
asleep on the seat in the road facing the hospital. Afterwards when I looked round he had disappeared.
At the time I thought nothing of it. When I came in here I placed the precious roll of paper
on my writing-table under the window yonder. The window is a small one, as you can see, and
was opened about a foot at the top. I sat here with the light down and the room faintly illuminated
by the light in the conservatory. After a little time I saw a hand and arm groping for something
on the table, and I'm quite sure the hand and arm were groping for your Rembrandt. The fellow
muttered something that I failed to understand, and I made a grab for him and got him. Then
the other hand made a dash for my head with an ugly piece of gas-piping, and I had to let go."

"And you saw no more of the fellow?"

"No; I didn't expect to. I couldn't see his face, but there was one peculiarity he had that
I might tell you for your future guidance. He had a thumb smashed as flat as the head of a
snake, with one tiny pink nail in the middle of it. So, if you meet a man like that on your
journey to-day, look to yourself. On the whole, you see that our enemies are a little more
awake than you give them credit for."

Bell nodded thoughtfully. The information was of the greatest possible value to him. It told
him quite plainly that Reginald Henson knew exactly what had happened. Under ordinary circumstances
by this time Henson would be on his way to Littimer Castle, there to checkmate the man he had
so deeply injured. But fortunately Henson was laid by the heels, or so Bell imagined.

"I am really obliged to you," Bell said. "Your information is likely to be of the greatest
possible service to me. I'm sorry you can't work."

"Don't worry about me," David said, grimly. "I'm gaining a vast quantity of experience that
will be of the greatest value to me later on. Besides, I can go and compare notes with Miss
Ruth Gates whilst you are away. She is soothing."

"So I should imagine," Bell said, drily. "No, I must be off. I'll let you know what happens
at Littimer Castle. Good luck to you here."

And Bell bustled off. He was pleased to find a recent telegram of acceptance from Littimer
awaiting him, and before five o'clock he was in the train for London. It was only after he
left London that he began to crawl along. Thanks to slow local lines and a badly fitting cross
service it was nearly eleven o'clock before he reached Moreton Station. It did not matter much,
because Littimer had said that a carriage should meet him.

However, there was no conveyance of any kind outside the station. One sleepy porter had already
departed, and the other one, who took Bell's ticket, and was obviously waiting to lock up,
deposed that a carriage from the castle had come to the station, but that some clerical gentleman
had come along and countermanded it. Whereupon the dog-cart had departed.

"Very strange," Bell muttered. "What sort of a parson was it?"

"I only just saw his face," the porter yawned. "Dressed in black, with a white tie and a straw
hat. Walked in a slouching kind of way with his hands down; new curate from St. Albans, perhaps.
Looked like a chap as could take care of himself in a row."

"Thanks," Bell said, curtly. "I'll manage the walk; it's only two miles. Good-night."

Bell's face was grim and set as he stepped out into the road. He knew fairly well what this
meant. It was pretty evident that his arch-enemy knew his movements perfectly well, and that
a vigorous attempt was being made to prevent him reaching the castle. He called back to the porter.

"How long since the carriage went?" he asked.

A voice from the darkness said "Ten minutes," and Bell trudged on with the knowledge that one
of his enemies at least was close at hand. That Reginald Henson was at the castle he had not
the remotest idea. Nor did he fear personal violence. Despite his figure, he was a man of enormous
strength and courage. But he had not long to wait.

Somebody was coming down the lonely road towards him, somebody in clerical attire. The stranger
stopped and politely, if a little huskily, inquired if he was on the right way to Moreton Station.
Bell responded as politely that he was, and asked to know the time. Not that he cared anything
about the time; what he really wanted was to see the stranger's hands. The little ruse was
successful. In the dim light Bell could see a flattened, hideous thumb with the pink parody
of a nail upon it.

"Thanks, very much," he said, crisply. "Keep straight on."

He half turned as the stranger swung round. The latter darted at Bell, but he came too late.
Bell's fist shot out and caught him fairly on the forehead. Then the stick in Bell's left hand
came down with crushing force on the prostrate man's skull. So utterly dazed and surprised
was he that he lay on the ground for a moment, panting heavily.

"You murderous ruffian," Bell gasped. "You escaped convict in an honest man's clothes. Get
up! So you are the fellow--"

He paused suddenly, undesirous of letting the rascal see that he knew too much. The other man
rolled over suddenly like a cat and made a dash for a gap in the hedge. He was gone like a
flash. Pursuit would be useless, for pace was not Bell's strong point. And he was not fearful
of being attacked again.

"Henson seems to be pretty well served," he muttered, grimly.

Meanwhile, the man with the thumb was flying over the fields in the direction of Littimer.
He made his way across country to the cliffs with the assured air of one who knows every inch
of the ground. He had failed in the first part of his instructions, and there was no time to
be lost if he was to carry out the second part successfully.

He struck the cliffs at length a mile or so away, and proceeded to scramble along them till
he lay hidden just under the terraces at Littimer Castle. He knew that he was in time for this
part of the programme, despite the fact that his head ached considerably from the force and
vigour of Bell's assault. He lay there, panting and breathing heavily, waiting for the signal
to come.

Meanwhile, Bell was jogging along placidly and with no fear in his heart at all. He did not
need anybody to tell him what was the object of his late antagonist's attack. He knew perfectly
well that if the ruffian had got the better of him he would never have seen the Rembrandt again.
Henson's hounds were on the track; but it would go hard if they pulled the quarry down just
as the sanctuary was in sight. Presently Bell could see the lights of the castle.

By the lodge-gates stood a dog-cart; in the flare of the lamps Bell recognised the features
of the driver, a very old servant of Littimer's. Bell took in the situation at a glance.

"Is this the way you come for me, Lund?" he asked.

"I'm very sorry, sir," Lund replied. "But a clergyman near the station said you had gone another
way, so I turned back. And when I got here I couldn't make top nor tail of the story. Blest
if I wasn't a bit nervous that it might have been some plant to rob you. And I was going to
drive slowly along to the station again when you turned up."

"Oh, there's nothing wrong," said Bell, cheerfully. "And I don't look as if I'd come to any
harm. Anybody staying at the castle, Lund?"

"Only Mr. Reginald Henson, sir," Lund said, disparagingly.

Bell started, but his emotion was lost in the darkness. It came as a great surprise to him
to find that the enemy was actually in the field. And how apprehensive of danger he must be
to come so far with his health in so shattered a condition. Bell smiled to himself as he pictured
Henson's face on seeing him once more under that roof.

"How long has Mr. Henson been here?" he asked.

"Only came yesterday, sir. Shall I drive you up to the house? And if you wouldn't mind saying
nothing to his lordship about my mistake, sir--"

"Make your mind easy on that score," Bell said, drily. "His lordship shall know nothing whatever
about it. On the whole, I had better drive up to the house. How familiar it all looks, to be sure."

A minute later and Bell stood within the walls of the castle.

CHAPTER XXXII

HOW THE SCHEME WORKED OUT

Chris crossed the corridor like one who walks in a dream. She had not enough energy left to
be astonished even. Her mind travelled quickly over the events of the past hour, and she began
to see the way clear. But how had somebody or other managed to remove the picture? Chris examined
the spot on the wall where the Rembrandt had been with the eye of a detective.

That part of the mystery was explained in a moment. A sharp cutting instrument, probably a
pair of steel pliers with a lever attachment, had been applied to the head of the four stays,
and the flat heads had been pinched off as clean as if they had been string. After that it
was merely necessary to remove the frame, and a child could have done the rest.

"How clever I am," Chris told herself, bitterly. "I'm like the astute people who put Chubb
locks on Russia leather jewel-cases that anybody could rip open with a sixpenny penknife. And
in my conceit I deemed the Rembrandt to be absolutely safe. Now what--what is the game?"

It was much easier to ask the question than to answer it. But there were some facts sufficiently
obvious to Chris. In the first place she knew that Reginald Henson was at the bottom of the
whole thing; she knew that he had traded on the fact that she had taken a fancy to the terrace
as an after-dinner lounge; indeed, she had told him so earlier in the day. He had traded on
the knowledge that he could prove an alibi if any suspicions attached to him. The fact that
he was in danger owing to a slip on the edge of the cliff was all nonsense. He had not been
in any danger at all; he had seen Chris there, and he had made all that parade with an eye
to the future. As a matter of course, he was down there settling matters with his accomplice
of the maimed thumb, who had chosen the cliff way of getting into the castle as the swiftest
and the surest from detection.

Yes, it was pretty obvious that the man with the thumb had stolen the print, and that by this
time he was far away with his possession. While Chris was helping Henson the latter's accomplice
had slipped into the castle and effected the burglary. Chris flicked out the light in the alcove
as a servant came along. It was not policy for any of the domestics to be too wise. Chris forced
a smile to her face as the maid came along.

"Allen," she asked, "are there many owls about here?"

"Never a one as I know, miss," the maid responded confidently. "I've been here for eleven years,
and I never heard of such a thing. Clifford, the head keeper, couldn't sleep at nights if he
thought as there was such a thing on the estate. Have you heard one, miss?"

"I was evidently mistaken," Chris said. "Of course you would know best."

So the cry of the owl had been a signal of success. Chris sat in the gloom there resolved to
see the comedy played through. The events of the night were not over yet.

"I'd give something to know what has taken place in the dining-room," Chris murmured.

She was going to know before long. The lights were being extinguished all over the house. Henson
came up to bed heavily, as one who is utterly worn out. At the same time he looked perfectly
satisfied with himself. He might have been a vigilant officer who had settled all his plans
and was going to seek a well-earned rest before the enemy came on to his destruction. In sooth
Henson was utterly worn out. He had taxed his strength to the uttermost, but he was free to
rest now.

Meanwhile, the conference in the dining-room proceeded. Lord Littimer had received his guest
with frigid politeness, to which Bell had responded with an equally cold courtesy. Littimer
laid his cigar aside and looked Bell steadily in the face.

"I have granted your request against my better judgment," he said. "I am not sanguine that
the least possible good can come of it. But I have quite grown out of all my illusions; I have
seen the impossible proved too often. Will you take anything?"

"I hope to do so presently," Bell said, pointedly; "but not yet. In the first instance I have
to prove to you that I have not stolen your Rembrandt."

"Indeed? I should like to know how you propose to do that."

"I shall prove it at once. You were under the impression that you possessed the only copy of
the 'Crimson Blind' in existence. When you lost yours and a copy of the picture was found in
my possession, you were perfectly justified in believing that I was the thief."

"I did take that extreme view of the matter," Littimer said, drily.

"Under the circumstances I should have done the same thing. But you were absolutely wrong,
because there were two copies of the picture. Yours was stolen by an enemy of mine who had
the most urgent reasons for discrediting me in your eyes, and the other was concealed amongst
my belongings. It was no loss to the thief, because subsequently the stolen one--my own one
being restored to you--could have been exposed and disposed of as a new find. Your print is
in the house?"

"It hangs in the gallery at the present moment."

"Very good. Then, my lord, what do you say to this?"

Bell took the roll of paper from his pocket, and gravely flattened it out on the table before
him, so that the full rays of the electric light should fall upon it. Littimer was a fine study
of open-mouthed surprise. He could only stand there gaping, touching the stained paper with
his fingers and breathing heavily.

"Here is a facsimile of your treasure," Bell went on. "Here is the same thing. You are a good
judge on these matters, and I venture to say you will call it genuine. There is nothing of
forgery about the engraving."

"Good heavens, no," Littimer snapped. "Any fool could see that."

"Which you will admit is a very great point in my favour," Bell said, gravely.

"I begin to think that I have done you a great injustice," Littimer admitted; "but, under the
circumstances, I don't see how I could have done anything else. Look at that picture. It is
exactly the same as mine. There is exactly the same discolouration in the margin in exactly
the same place."

"Probably they lay flat on the top of one another for scores of years."

"Possibly. I can't see the slightest difference in the smallest particular. Even now I cannot
rid myself of the feeling that I am the victim of some kind of plot or delusion. The house
is quiet now and there is nobody about. Before I believe the evidence of my senses--and I have
had cause to doubt them more than once--I should like to compare this print with mine. Will
you follow me to the gallery, if you haven't forgotten the way?"

Littimer took up the treasure from the table gingerly.

He was pleased and at the same time disappointed; pleased to find that he had been mistaken
all these years, sorry in the knowledge that his picture was unique no longer. He said nothing
until the alcove was reached, and Chris drew back in the shadow to let the others pass.

"Now to settle the question for all time," Littimer said. "Will you be so good as to turn on
the electric light? You will find the switch in the angle of the wall on your right. And when
we have settled the affair and I have apologized to you in due form, you shall command my services
and my purse to right the wrong. If it costs me £10,000 the man who has done this thing shall
suffer. Please to put up the light, Bell."

Chris listened breathlessly. She was not quite certain what she was about to see. She could
hear Bell fumbling for the light, she heard the click of the switch, and then she saw the brilliant
belt of flame flooding the alcove. Littimer paused and glanced at Bell, the latter looked round
the alcove as if seeking for something.

"I cannot see the picture here," he said. "If have made a mistake--"

Littimer stood looking at the speaker with eyes like blazing stars. Just for a moment or two
he was speechless with indignation.

"You charlatan," he said, hoarsely. "You barefaced trickster."

Bell started back. His mute question stung Littimer to the quick.

"You wanted to be cleared," the latter said. "You wanted to befool me again. You come here
in some infernally cunning fashion, you steal my picture from the frame and have the matchless
audacity to pass it off for a second one. Man alive, if it were earlier I would have you flogged
from the house like the ungrateful dog that you are."

Chris checked down the cry that rose to her lips. She saw, as in a flash of lightning, the
brilliancy and simplicity and cunning of Henson's latest and most masterly scheme.

CHAPTER XXXIII

THE FRAME OF THE PICTURE

After the first passionate outburst of scorn Lord Littimer looked at his visitor quietly. There
was something almost amusing in the idea that Bell should attempt such a trick upon him. And
the listener was thoroughly enjoying the scene now. There was quite an element of the farcical
about it. In the brilliant light she could see Littimer's dark, bitter face and the helpless
amazement on the strong features of Hatherly Bell. And, meanwhile, the man who had brought
the impossible situation about was calmly sleeping after his strenuous exertions.

Chris smiled to herself as she thought out her brilliant coup. It looked to her nothing less
than a stroke of genius, two strokes, in fact, as will be seen presently. Before many hours
were over Henson's position in the house would be seriously weakened. He had done a clever
thing, but Chris saw her way to a cleverer one still.

Meanwhile the two men were regarding one another suspiciously. On a round Chippendale table
the offending Rembrandt lay between them.

"I confess," Bell said, at length, "I confess that I am utterly taken by surprise. And yet
I need not be so astonished when I come to think of the amazing cunning and audacity of my
antagonist. He has more foresight than myself. Lord Littimer, will you be so kind as to repeat
your last observation over again?"

"I will emphasize it, if you like?" Littimer replied. "For some deep purpose of your own, you
desired to make friends with me again. You tell me you are in a position to clear your character.
Very foolishly I consent to see you. You come here with a roll of paper in your possession
purporting to be a second copy of my famous print. All the time you knew it to be mine--mine,
stolen an hour or two ago and passed instantly to you. Could audacity go farther? And then
you ask me to believe that you came down from town with a second engraving in your possession."

"As I hope to be saved, I swear it!" Bell cried.

"Of course you do. A man with your temerity would swear anything. Credulous as I may be, I
am not credulous enough to believe that my picture would be stolen again at the very time that
you found yours."

"Abstracted by my enemy on purpose to land me in this mess."

"Ridiculous," Littimer cried. "Pshaw, I am a fool to stand here arguing; I am a fool to let
you stay in the house. Why, I don't believe you could bring a solitary witness to prove that
yonder picture was yours."

"You are mistaken, my lord. I could bring several."

"Credible witnesses? Witnesses whose characters would bear investigation?"

"I fancy so," Bell said, quietly. "Two nights ago, for instance, I showed the very picture
lying before you to a lady of your acquaintance, Miss Enid Henson. I couldn't have had your
picture two nights ago, could I? And Miss Henson was graciously pleased to observe that I had
been made the victim of a vile conspiracy."

"Why do you insult me by mentioning that name?" Littimer said, hoarsely. His face was very
pale, and sombre anger smouldered in his eyes. "Tell me you showed the thing to my wife next."

"I did," said Bell, coolly. "Lady Littimer was in the room at the time."

Something like a groan escaped from Littimer's pallid lips. The smouldering light in his eyes
flashed into flame. He advanced upon Bell with a quivering, uplifted arm. Chris slipped swiftly
out of the shade and stood between the two men.

"Dr. Bell speaks the truth," she said. "And I am going to prove it."

Littimer dropped into a chair and gave way to silent laughter. His mood had changed utterly.
He lounged there, a cynical, amused man of the world again.

"Upon my word, I am vastly obliged to you for your comedy," he said. "I hope your salary as
leading lady in Bell's company is a handsome one, Miss Lee."

"Let us hope that it is more handsome than your manners, my lord," Chris said, tartly. "I beg
to remark that I have never seen Dr. Bell before. Oh, yes, I have been listening to your conversation,
because I expected something of the kind. The Rembrandt was stolen some time before Dr. Bell
arrived here, and in due course I shall show you the thief. Lord Littimer, I implore you to
be silent and discreet in this matter. Have a little patience. Quite by accident I have made
an important discovery, but this is hardly the place to discuss it. Before daylight I hope
to be able to prove beyond question that you have greatly wronged Dr. Bell."

"I shall be glad to be convinced of it," Littimer said, sincerely. "But why this secrecy?"

"Secrecy is absolutely necessary for the conviction of the thief."

Bell looked eagerly at the speaker.

"I have not the remotest notion who this young lady is," he said, "but I am greatly obliged
to her."

"My secretary, Miss Lee," Littimer murmured; "an American from Boston, and evidently a great
deal cleverer than I gave her credit for, which is saying a great deal. Miss Lee, if you know
anything, I implore you to speak."

"Not here," Chris said, firmly. "Stone walls have ears. I tell you the Rembrandt was stolen
just before Dr. Bell reached the house. Also I tell you it is imperative that nobody but ourselves
must know the fact for the present. You trust me, Lord Littimer?"

"I trust you as implicitly as I do anybody."

Chris smiled at the diplomatic response. She approached the panel of the wall on which the
Rembrandt had been fastened. She indicated the long steel stays which had been clamped on to
the iron frame. "Look at them," she said. "It was my suggestion that the stays should be attached
to the frame to prevent anything like this robbery. I made the stays secure myself. And what
happened to justify my prudence? Why, the very same night somebody came here after the picture."

"Henson!" Littimer cried. "Ah! But he could have come openly."

"It is not in the nature of the man to do things openly," Chris went on. "I know more about
the man than you imagine, but that you are to keep to yourself. He comes here in the dead of
the night and he gets into the house through an upstair window. A man of his bulk, if you please!
And he comes here hot-foot and breathless at a time when common prudence should have kept him
in bed. Why? Because he knows that Dr. Bell has the other Rembrandt and will come to prove
it, and because he knows that if he can steal the Littimer Rembrandt he can precipitate the
very impasse that he has brought about. But he could not steal the picture because it was fast."

"You are a very clever young lady," Littimer said, drily. "You will tell me next that you expected
Henson to try this thing on."

"I did," Chris said, coolly. "I had a telegram to warn me so."

Littimer smiled. All this mystery and cleverness was after his own heart. He lighted his cigarette
and tendered his case in the friendliest possible manner to Bell.

"Go on," he said, "I am deeply interested."

"I prefer not to go into details," Chris resumed. "All I ask you to do is to be entirely guided
by me when you have heard my story. I have admitted to you that I knew when Henson was coming,
and why am I interested? Because it happens that Reginald Henson has greatly injured someone
I cared for deeply. Well, I fastened up the picture--he came. He sneaked in like the thief
that he was because his accomplice and tool had failed to save him the trouble. Lord Littimer,
I will not pain you by saying who Henson's accomplice was."

Littimer nodded gloomily.

"Not that I blame that accomplice; he could not help himself. Ah, when the whole truth comes
to be told, what a black business it will be. Well, Henson came to steal the picture and I
caught him in the act. If you had seen his fat, greasy, crestfallen face! Then he pretended
that it was all done for a jest and as a warning to Lord Littimer. And Lord Littimer, the most
cynical of men, allowed it to pass."

"I couldn't see what he had to gain," Littimer pleaded. "I don't now, as a matter of fact."

"Neither will you for the present," said Chris. "Still, you will be so good as to assume the
same hospitality and courtesy towards Henson as you extend at present."

"I daresay I can manage it," said Littimer, cynically. "I used to be a society man once."

"Henson did not deceive me for a moment," Chris went on. "He was bound to have the picture,
and, being baffled one way, he tried another. Look here, Lord Littimer. Let me assume for a
moment that Dr. Bell came down here to steal your picture, get rid of the frame, and palm off
your own engraving for another. Now, in the name of common sense, let me ask you a single question.
Could Dr. Bell have possibly known that the frame of the Rembrandt was securely fastened to
the wall and that I had attached it quite recently? And could he in the short time at his disposal
have procured the necessary tools to cut away the stays? Again, Dr. Bell can prove, I suppose,
exactly what time he left London to-day. No, we must look farther for the thief."

"There is something else also we have to look for," said Dr. Bell. "And that is the frame.
You say it was of iron and consequently heavy. The thief would discard the frame and roll up
the print."

"That is a brilliant suggestion," said Chris, eagerly. "And if we only had the frame I could
set Lord Littimer's doubts to rest entirely. I happen to know that the real thief came and
went by the cliff under the terrace. If the frame was thrown into the gorse, there it--"

"Might stay for ages," Littimer exclaimed. "By Jove, I'm just in the mood to carry this business
a stage or two farther before I go to bed. Bell, there are two or three cycle lamps in the
gun-room. You used to be a pretty fearless climber. What do you say to a hunt round for an
hour or two whilst the house is quiet?"

Bell assented eagerly. Chris waited with what patience she could command till daylight began
to show faintly and redly in the east. Then she heard the sound of voices outside, and Littimer
and Bell staggered in carrying the frame between them.

"Got it," Littimer exclaimed, with the triumphant exultation of a schoolboy who has successfully
looted a rare bird's-nest. "We found it half-way down the cliff, hidden behind a patch of samphire.
And it doesn't seem to be any the worse for the adventure. Now, Miss Wiseacre, seeing that
we have the frame, perhaps you will fulfil your promise of convincing me, once and for all,
that yonder Rembrandt cannot possibly belong to me."

"I am going to do so," Chris said, quietly. "You told me you had to cut the margin of your
print by an inch or so round to fit that quaint old frame. So far as I can see, the print before
you is quite intact. Now, if it is too large for the frame--"

Littimer nodded eagerly. Bell fitted the dingy paper to the back of the frame and smiled. There
was an inch or more to spare all round. Nobody spoke for a moment.

"You could make it smaller, but you couldn't make it bigger," Littimer said. "Bell, when I
have sufficiently recovered I'll make a humble and abject apology to you. And now, wise woman
from the West, what is the next act in the play?"

CHAPTER XXXIV

THE PUZZLING OF HENSON

Chris smiled with the air of one who is perfectly satisfied with her work.

"For the present I fancy we have done enough," she said. "I want to go to bed now, and I want
you both to do the same. Also I shall be glad if you will come down in the morning as if nothing
had happened. Tell Reginald Henson casually that you have been convinced that you have done
Dr. Bell a grave injustice, and give no kind of particulars. And please treat Mr. Henson in
the same fashion as before. There is only one other thing."

"Name it, and it is yours," Littimer cried.

"Well, cut the margin off that print, or at any rate turn the margin down, fit it into the
frame, and hang it up as if nothing had happened."

Littimer looked at Chris with a puzzled expression for a moment, and then his features relaxed
into a satyr-like grin.

"Capital," he said, "I quite understand what you mean. And I must be there to see it, eh?--yes,
I must be there to see. I would not miss it for strawberry leaves."

The thing was done and the picture restored to its place. Bell drew Chris aside for a moment.

"Do you rise early in the morning?" he asked, meaningly.

"Always," Chris replied, demurely. "I find the terrace charming before breakfast. Good-night."

Bell was down betimes despite the fact that it had been daylight before he was in bed. Along
the terrace, looking over the cliffs, Chris was already walking, a great cluster of red and
yellow roses in her hand. She looked as fresh and bright as if she and excitement were strangers.
All the same she seemed to avoid Bell's eyes.

"Isn't it lovely here?" she exclaimed. "And these roses with the dew still upon them. Well,
Dr. Bell, have you made fresh discoveries?"

"I have discovered that Henson is going to take his breakfast in bed," Bell said gravely. "Also
that he requires a valet at half-past ten. At that time I hope to be in the corridor with Lord
Littimer and yourself. Also I have made a further discovery."

"And what is that, Dr. Bell?"

"That you and I have met before--once before when I attended you in a kind of official capacity,
and when I behaved in a distinctly discreditable professional manner. Dr. Walker was present.
Dr. Walker seems to have been singularly short-sighted."

The roses fell from Chris's hands on to the path. Her face had grown very pale indeed; there
was a frightened, appealing look in her eyes.

"Dr. Bell," she gasped, "do you suppose that anybody else knows--Henson, for instance? And
I imagined that I had utterly deceived him!"

Bell smiled meaningly.

"I don't think you need have the slightest anxiety on that score," he said. "You see, Henson
is comfortably assured that you are dead and buried. Whereas I know all about it. Fortunately
for me, I became mixed up in this strange business on behalf of my friend, David Steel; indeed,
but for Steel, I should probably have given you away to our friend Walker."

"But surely you guessed that--"

"Not for the moment. You see, it was only a few minutes before that a flood of interesting
light had been let in upon Henson's character by your sister to me, and my first idea was that
Henson was poisoning you for some purpose of his own. Subsequently Steel told me all about
that side of the story on our way back to Brighton."

"How did you penetrate my disguise?"

"My dear young lady, I have not penetrated your disguise. Your disguise is perfect--so quaint
and daringly original--and would deceive even Henson's eyes. I guessed who you were directly
I found that you were taking a philanthropic interest in our friend. It came to me by a kind
of intuition, the knack that stood me in such good stead in my professional days. When you
said that you had been warned of Henson's coming by telegram I was certain."

"Then perhaps you guessed that Enid sent me the telegram?"

"That was obvious. Also it was obvious that Henson brought Frank Littimer along."

"Oh, he did. It was Frank's mission to steal the picture. I confronted him with a revolver
and locked him in one of the bedrooms. It took all my courage and good resolutions to prevent
me from betraying myself to the poor fellow."

"Rather cruel of you, wasn't it?"

"Well, yes. But I wanted to make the exposure as complete as possible. When the time comes
to strip Reginald Henson of his pretentions and flog him from the family, the more evidence
we can pile up the better. But Frank is not bad; he is merely weak and utterly in the power
of that man. If we can only break the bonds, Frank will be a powerful factor on our side."

"I daresay. But how was the Rembrandt stolen? Littimer's, I mean."

"It was worked through an accomplice," Chris explained. "It had to be done before you arrived.
And there was no better time than night for the operation. I guessed that when Henson drew
the fact from me that I liked the terrace after dinner. By a bit of good luck I found the accomplice
and himself together in the day; in fact, I forced Reginald's hand so that he had to introduce
me to the man."

"In which case you would know him again?"

"Of course. Presently I am going to show you a little more of the comedy. Well, I was on the
terrace pretty late when I heard dear Reginald down the cliff calling for assistance. He pretended
that he had slipped down the cliff and could not get up again. By the aid of a rope that fortunately
happened to be close at hand I saved our dear friend's life. I have learnt from one of the
gardeners just now that Reginald placed the rope there himself--a most effective touch, you
must admit."

"Very," Bell said, drily. "But I quite fail to see why--"

"I am coming to that. Don't you see that if anything happened Reginald could prove that he
was not near the house at the time? But just before that I saw his accomplice come up the cliff;
indeed, he passed quite close to me on his way to the house. Reginald quite overlooked this
fact in his heed for his own safety. When I had effected my gallant rescue I heard an owl hoot.
Now, there are no owls about here.

"I guessed what that meant--it was a signal of success. Then I went back to the corridor and
the Rembrandt was gone. The stays had been cut away. At first I was dreadfully upset, but the
more I thought of it the more sure I was that it was all for the best."

"But you might have raised an alarm and caught the thief, who--"

"Who would have been promptly disclaimed by Reginald. Let me tell you, sir, that I have the
thief and the lost Rembrandt in the hollow of my hands. Before the day is out I shall make
good my boast. And there's the breakfast bell."

It looked quite natural some time later for the three conspirators to be lounging about the
gallery when Henson emerged from his bedroom. He appeared bright and smiling, and most of the
bandages had been removed from his throat. All the same he was not pleased to see Bell there;
he gazed uneasily at the doctor and from him to Littimer.

"You know Bell," the latter said, carelessly. "Fact is, there's been a great mistake."

Bell offered him his hand heartily. It cost him a huge effort, but the slimy scoundrel had
to be fought with his own weapons. Henson shook his head with the air of a man extending a
large and generous meed of forgiveness. He sought in vain to read Bell's eyes, but there was
a steady, almost boyish, smile in them.

"I indeed rejoice," he said, unctuously. "I indeed rejoice--rejoice--rejoice!"

He repeated the last word helplessly; he seemed to have lost all his backbone, and lapsed into
a flabby, jellified mass of quivering white humanity. His vacant, fishy eyes were fixed upon
the Rembrandt in a kind of dull, sleepy terror.

"I'm not well," he gasped. "Not so strong as I imagined. I'll--I'll go and lie down again.
Later on I shall want a dogcart to drive me to Moreton Wells. I--"

He paused again, glanced at the picture, and passed heavily to his room. Littimer smiled.

"Splendid," he said. "It was worth thousands just to see his face."

"All the same," Chris said, quietly; "all the same, that man is not to leave for Moreton Wells
till I've had a clear hour's start of him. Dr. Bell will you accompany me?"

CHAPTER XXXV

CHRIS HAS AN IDEA

Lord Littimer polished his rarely used eye-glass carefully and favoured Chris with a long,
admiring stare. At the same time he was wondering why the girl should have taken such a vivid
interest in Reginald Henson and his doings. For some years past it had been Littimer's whim
to hold up Henson before everybody as his successor, so far as the castle went. He liked to
see Henson's modest smirk and beautiful self-abasement, for in sooth his lordship had a pretty
contempt for the man who hoped to succeed him. But the will made some time ago by Littimer
would have come as a painful shock to the philanthropist.

"It is a very pretty tangle as it stands," he said. "Miss Lee, let me compliment you upon your
astuteness in this matter. Only don't tell me you schemed your way here, and that you are a
lady detective. I read a good many novels, and I don't like them."

"You may be easy on that score," Chris laughed. "I am not a lady detective. All the same, I
have defeated Mr. Reginald Henson."

"You think he is at the bottom of the mystery of the other Rembrandt."

"I am certain of it; unless you like to believe in the truth of his charming scheme to give
you a lesson, as he called it. As a matter of fact, Mr. Henson discovered the existence of
the other print; he discovered that Dr. Bell possessed it--the rest I leave to your own astuteness.
You saw his face just now?"

"Oh, yes. It was a fine study in emotions. If you could find the other picture--"

"I hope to restore it to you before the day has passed."

Littimer applauded, gently. He was charmed, he said, with the whole comedy. The first two acts
had been a brilliant success. If the third was only as good he would regard Miss Lee as his
benefactor for ever. It was not often that anybody intellectually amused him; in fact, he must
add Miss Lee to his collection.

"Then you must play a part yourself," Chris said, gaily. "I am going into Moreton Wells, and
Dr. Bell accompanies me. Mr. Henson is not to know that we have gone, and he is not to leave
the house for a good hour or so after our departure. What I want is a fair start and the privilege
of bringing a guest home to dinner."

"Vague, mysterious, and alluring," Littimer said. "Bring the guest by all means. I will pledge
my diplomacy that you have a long start. Really, I don't know when I have enjoyed myself so
much. You shall have the big waggonette for your journey."

"And join it beyond the lodge-gates," Chris said, thoughtfully. "Dr. Bell, you shall stroll
through the park casually; I will follow as casually later on."

A little later Henson emerged from his room dressed evidently for a journey. He looked flabby
and worried; there was an expression very like fear in his eyes. The corridor was deserted
as he passed the place where the Rembrandt hung. He paused before the picture in a hesitating,
fascinated way. His feet seemed to pull up before it involuntarily.

"What does it mean?" he muttered. "What in the name of fate has happened? It is impossible
that Merritt could have played me a trick like that; he would never have dared. Besides, he
has too much to gain by following my instructions. I fancy--"

Henson slipped up to the picture as a sudden idea came to him. If the picture had not been
removed at all the stays would still be intact. And if they were intact Merritt was likely
to have a bad quarter of an hour later on. It would be proof that--

But the stays were not intact. The heads had been shaved off with some cutting instrument;
the half of the stays gleamed like silver in the morning light. And yet the Rembrandt was there.
The more Henson dwelt upon it the more he was puzzled. He began to wonder whether some deep
trap was being laid for him.

But, no, he had seen no signs of it. In some way or another Bell had managed to ingratiate
himself with Littimer again, but not necessarily for long, Henson told himself, with a vicious
grin. Nor was Littimer the kind of man who ever troubled himself to restrain his feelings.
If he had got to the bottom of the whole business he would have had Henson kicked out of the
house without delay.

But Littimer suspected nothing. His greeting just now showed that Bell suspected nothing, because
he had shaken hands in the heartiest manner possible. And as for Miss Lee, she was no more
than a smart Yankee girl, and absolutely an outsider.

Still, it was dreadfully puzzling. And it was not nice to be puzzled at a time when the arch-conspirator
ought to know every move of the game. Therefore it became necessary to go into Moreton Wells
and see Merritt without delay. As Henson crossed the hall the cheerful voice of Littimer hailed
him.

"Reginald," he cried, "I want your assistance and advice."

With a muttered curse Henson entered the library. Littimer was seated at a table, with a cigarette
in his mouth, his brows drawn over a mass of papers.

"Sit down and have a cigar," he said. "The fact is I am setting my affairs in order--I am going
to make a fresh will. If you hadn't come down last night I should probably have sent for you.
Now take my bank-book and check those figures."

"Shall we be long?" Henson asked, anxiously.

Littimer tartly hoped that Henson could-spare him an hour. It was not usual, he said, for a
testator to be refused assistance from the chief benefactor under his will. Henson apologized,
with a sickly smile. He had important business of a philanthropic kind in Moreton Wells, but
he had no doubt that it could wait for an hour. And then for the best part of the morning he
sat fuming politely, whilst Littimer chattered in the most amiable fashion. Henson had rarely
seen him in a better mood. It was quite obvious that he suspected nothing. Meanwhile Chris
and Bell were bowling along towards Moreton Wells. They sat well back in the roomy waggonette,
so that the servants could not hear them. Chris regarded Bell with a brilliant smile on her face.

"Confess," she said, "confess that you are consumed with curiosity."

"It would be just as well to acknowledge it at once," Bell admitted. "In the happy old days
your sister Enid always said that you were the clever and audacious one of the family. She
said you would do or dare anything."

"I used to imagine so," Chris said, more quietly. "But the life of the last few years tried
one's nerves terribly. Still, the change has done me a deal of good--the change and the knowledge
that Reginald Henson regards me as dead. But you want to know how I am going to get the Rembrandt?"

"That is what is consuming me at present," Bell said.

"Well, we are going to see the man who has it," Chris explained, coolly. "I have his address
in Moreton Wells at the present moment, and for the rest he is called the Rev. James Merritt.
Between ourselves he is no more a reverend than you are."

"And if the gentleman is shy or refuses to see us?"

"Then he will be arrested on a charge of theft."

"My dear young lady, before you can get a warrant for that kind of thing you have to prove
the theft, you have to swear an information to the effect that you believe the property is
in the possession of the thief, and that is not easy."

"There is nothing easier. I am prepared to swear that cheerfully."

"That you actually know that the property is in the possession of the thief?"

"Certainly I do. I saw him put it in his pocket."

Bell looked at the speaker with blank surprise. If such was the fact, then Chris's present
statement was exactly opposed to all that she had said before. She sat opposite to Bell, with
a little gleam of mischief in her lovely eyes.

"You saw that man steal the Rembrandt?" Bell gasped.

"Certainly not. But I did see him steal my big diamond star and put it in his pocket. And I
can swear an information on that."

"I see that you have something interesting to tell me," Bell said.

"Oh, indeed, I have. We will hark back now to the night before last, when Reginald Henson made
his personal attempt to obtain the Rembrandt and then played the trick upon you that was so
very near to being a brilliant success."

"It would have been but for you," Bell murmured.

"Well, really, I am inclined to think so. And perhaps Lord Littimer would have given you in
custody on a second charge of theft. If he had done so it would have gone hard with you to
prove your innocence. But I am wandering from the point. Henson failed. But he was going to
try again. I watched him carefully yesterday and managed to see his letters and telegrams.
Then I found that he had telegraphed to James Merritt, whose address in Moreton Wells I carefully
noted down. It did not require much intellect to grasp the fact that this Merritt was to be
the accomplice in the new effort to steal the picture, Mr. Merritt came over and saw his chief,
with whom he had a long conversation in the grounds. I also forced myself on Mr. Merritt's notice.

"He was introduced to me as a brand plucked from the burning, a converted thief who had taken
orders of some kind. He is a sorry-looking scoundrel, and I took particular note of him, especially
the horrible smashed thumb."

"The what!" Bell exclaimed. "A thumb like a snake's head with a little pink nail on it?"

"The same man. So you happen to have met him?"

"We met on our way here," Bell said, drily. "The rascal sent the dogcart away from the station
so that I should have to walk home, and he attacked me in the road. But I half-expected something
of the kind, and I was ready for him. And he was the man with the thumb. I should have told
you all this before, but I had forgotten it in watching your fascinating diplomacy. When the
attack was defeated the rascal bolted in the direction of the cliffs. Of course, he was off
to tell Henson of the failure of the scheme and to go on with the plot for getting the other
picture. If he had stolen my Rembrandt then the other would have remained. I couldn't have
turned up with a cock-and-bull story of having started with the picture and being robbed of
it by a total stranger in the road ... But I am interrupting you."

"Well, I marked that thumb carefully. I have already told you that the thief passed me on his
way to the house when he came up the cliff. I was leaning over the terrace when I saw him emerge
into a band of light caused by the big arc in the castle tower. I forgot that I was in deep
shadow and that he could not possibly see me. I jerked my head back suddenly, and my diamond
star fell out and dropped almost at the feet of the intruder. Then he saw it, chuckled over
it--placed it in his pocket. I was going to call out, but I didn't. I had a sudden idea, Dr.
Bell--I had an idea that almost amounted to an inspiration."

Chris paused for a moment and her eyes sparkled. Bell was watching her with the deepest interest
and admiration.

"I let the man keep it," Chris went on, more slowly, "with an eye to the future. The man had
stolen the thing and I was in a position to prove it. He would be pretty sure to pawn the star--he
probably has done so by this time, and therefore we have him in our power. We have only to
discover where the diamonds have been 'planted'--is that the correct expression?--I can swear
an information, and the police will subsequently search the fellow's lodgings. When the search
is made the missing Rembrandt will be found there. Mr. Merritt would hardly dare to pawn that."

"Even if he knew its real value, which I doubt," Bell said, thoughtfully. "Henson would not
tell his tool too much. Let me congratulate you upon your idea, Miss Chris. That diamond star
of yours is a powerful factor in our hands, and you always have the consciousness of knowing
that you can get it back again. Now, what are we going to do next?"

"Going to call upon Mr. Merritt, of course," Chris said, promptly. "You forget that I have
his address. I am deeply interested in the welfare of the criminal classes, and you are also
an enthusiast. I've looked up the names of one or two people in the directory who go in for
that kind of thing, and I'm going to get up a bazaar at Littimer Castle for the benefit of
the predatory classes who have turned over a new leaf. I am particularly anxious for Mr. Merritt
to give us an address. Don't you think that will do?"

"I should think it would do very well indeed," Bell said.

The quaint and somewhat exclusive town of Moreton Wells was reached in due course and the street
where the Rev. James Merritt resided located at length. It was a modest two-storeyed tenement,
and the occupier of the rooms was at home. Chris pushed her way gaily in, followed by Bell,
before the occupant could lay down the foul clay pipe he was smoking and button the unaccustomed
stiff white collar round his throat. Merritt whipped a tumbler under the table with amazing
celerity, but no cunning of his could remove the smell of gin that hung pungently on the murky
atmosphere.

Merritt dodged his head back defiantly as if half expecting a blow. His eyes were strained
a little anxiously over Bell's shoulder as if fearful of a shadow. Bell had seen the type before--Merritt
was unconsciously looking for the police.

"I am so glad to find you at home," Chris said, sweetly.

Merritt muttered something that hardly sounded complimentary. It was quite evident that he
was far from returning the compliment. He had recognised Bell, and was wondering fearfully
if the latter was as sure of his identity. Bell's face betrayed nothing. All the same he was
following Merritt's uneasy eye till it rested on a roll of dirty paper on the mantelshelf.
That roll of paper was the missing Rembrandt, and he knew it.

"Won't you offer me a chair?" Chris asked, in the sweetest possible manner.

Merritt sulkily emptied a chair of a pile of cheap sporting papers, and demanded none too politely
what business the lady had with him. Chris proceeded to explain at considerable length. As
Merritt listened his eyes gleamed and a broadening grin spread over his face. He had done a
great deal of that kind of thing, he admitted. Since Henson had taken him up the police had
not been anything like so inquisitive, and his present pose was fruitful of large predatory
gains. The latter fact Merritt kept to himself. On the whole the prospect appealed to his imagination.
Henson wouldn't like it, but, then, Henson was not in a position to say too much.

"I thought perhaps if you came over with us and dined at the castle," Chris suggested. She
spoke slowly and thoughtfully, with her eyes on the ground. "Say to-night. Will you come?"

Merritt grinned extensively once more. The idea of his dining at the castle appealed to his
own peculiar sense of humour. He was at his ease, seeing that Bell failed to recognise him.
To dine at the castle, to note the plate, and get a minute geographical knowledge of the place
from personal observation! ... His mouth watered at the thought.

"They ought to be more careful yonder," he suggested. "There's plate and there's pictures."

"Nothing has ever been stolen from Littimer Castle," Bell said, crisply. He read the leer in
Merritt's eyes as he spoke of pictures. "Nothing whatever."

"What, not lately?" Merritt asked. "Didn't I hear tell of a--"

He paused, conscious of saying too much. Bell shook his head again. An utterly puzzled expression
crept over Mr. Merritt's engaging countenance. At the present moment an art treasure of price
stood in that very room, and here was a party from the castle utterly innocent of the robbery.
Chris glanced at Bell and smiled.

"I love the pictures," she said, "especially the prints. That Rembrandt, 'The Crimson Blind,'
for instance. I found a fresh light in it this morning and called Lord Littimer's attention
to it before we started. I should lock that up if it were mine."

Merritt's eyes fairly bulged as he listened. Had he not half-suspected some deep "plant" he
would have been vastly amused. But then he had got the very picture these people were speaking
about close to hand at the very moment.

"Tell you what," he said, suddenly. "I ain't used to swell society ways, but I'm always ready
to sacrifice myself to the poor fellows who ain't found the straight path like me. And if you
gets up your bazaar, I'll do what I can to 'elp."

"Then you will dine with us to-night?" Chris asked, eagerly. "Don't say no, I met a man once
with a past like yours at Lady Roslingham's, and he was so interesting. We will call for you
in an hour's time with the waggonette. Then we can settle half our plans before dinner."

Merritt was graciously pleased to be agreeable. Moreover, he was utterly puzzled and absolutely
consumed with an overpowering curiosity. It seemed also to him to be a sheer waste of providence
to discard such an offer. And the plate at Littimer Castle was superb!

Meanwhile Chris and Bell walked down the street together. "He was puzzled over the Rembrandt,"
Chris said. "Seeing that he has our picture--"

"No doubt about it. The picture was rolled up and stood on the mantelshelf. I followed Merritt's
gaze, knowing perfectly well that it would rest presently on the picture if it was in the room.
At the same time, our interesting friend, in chuckling over the way he has deceived us, clean
forgot the yellow pawnticket lying on the table."

"Dr. Bell, do you mean to say that--"

"That I know where your diamond star was pledged. Indeed I do. Merritt had probably just turned
out his pockets as we entered. The pawnticket was on the table and related to a diamond aigrette
pawned by one James Merritt--mark the simple cunning of the man--with Messrs. Rutter and Co.,
117, High Street. That in itself is an exceedingly valuable discovery, and one we can afford
to keep to ourselves for the present. At the same time I should very much like to know what
Rutter and Co. are like. Let me go down to the shop and make some simple purchase."

Rutter and Co. proved to be a very high-class shop indeed, despite the fact that there was
a pawnbroking branch of the business. The place was quite worthy of Bond Street, the stock
was brilliant and substantial, the assistants quite above provincial class. As Bell was turning
over some sleeve-links, Chris was examining a case of silver and gold cigarette-cases and the
like. She picked up a cigar-case at length and asked the price. At the mention of fifty guineas
she dropped the trifle with a little moue of surprise.

"It looks as if it had been used," she said.

"It is not absolutely new, madam," the assistant admitted, "therefore the price is low. But
the gentleman who sold it to us proved that he had only had it for a few days. The doctor had
ordered him not to smoke in future, and so--"

Chris turned away to something else. Bell completed his purchase, and together they left the
shop. Once outside Chris gripped her companion's arm excitedly.

"Another great discovery," she said. "Did you see me looking at that cigar-case--a gun-metal
one set with diamonds? You recollect that Ruth Gates purchased a case like that for that--that
foolishness we thought of in connection with Mr. Steel. The case had a little arrow shaped
scratch with the head of the arrow formed of the biggest diamond. Enid told me all this the
night before I left Longdean Grange. Dr. Bell, I am absolutely certain that I have had in my
hand just now the very case bought by Ruth from Lockhart's in Brighton!"

CHAPTER XXXVI

A BRILLIANT IDEA

Bell was considerably impressed with the importance of Chris's discovery, though at the same
time he was not disposed to regard it in the light of a coincidence.

"It's a useful discovery in its way," he said; "but not very remarkable when you come to think
of it. Somebody with an eye to damaging Steel changed that cigar-case. How the change affected
Steel you know as well as I do. But the cigar-case purchased by Ruth Gates must be somewhere,
and we are as likely to find it near Reginald Henson as anywhere else, seeing that he is at
the bottom of the whole business. That change was made either by himself or by somebody at
his instigation. Once the change was made he would not bother about the spare cigar-case. His
ally probably came here to see Henson; the latter as likely as not threw him over, knowing
that the fellow would not dare to talk; hence the thing is turned into money. I am merely speculating,
of course, under the assumption that you are quite sure of your facts."

"Absolutely," Chris cried, eagerly. "Two long, irregular scratches leading up in arrow-headed
shape to the big diamond in the centre. Ruth told Enid all about that the very last time they
discussed the matter together."

"How came Ruth Gates to remember it so clearly?"

"Well, she did it herself. She was rubbing some specks off the case at the last moment, and
the scratches were made accidentally with the stones in one of her rings."

Bell was fain to admit that the discovery was an important one. "We'll leave it for the present,"
he said. "In a small place like this so valuable an article is likely to remain in stock for
some time. I'll call in again to-morrow on the pretence of getting further goods and obtain
all the information there is to be gained as to who sold the case and what he was like. There
is just time for a little lunch before we take up our reverend friend. Where shall we go?"

Chris would like to see the Lion. There was a marvellous coffee-room there with panelled walls
and a ceiling by Pugin, and an Ingle-nook filled with rare Dutch tiles. They had the beautiful
old place to themselves, so that they could talk freely. Chris crumbled her bread and sipped
her soup with an air of deep abstraction.

"A great idea is forming itself in my mind," she said.

"What, another one?" Bell smiled. "Is it the air of the place or what? Really, there is a brilliancy
about you that is striking."

Chris laughed. She was full of the joy of life to-day.

"It is the freedom," she said. "If you only knew what it is to feel free after the dull, aching,
monotonous misery of the last few years. To be constantly on the treadmill, to be in the grasp
of a pitiless scoundrel. At first you fight against it passionately, with a longing to be doing
something, and gradually you give way to despair. And now the weight is off my shoulders, and
I am free to act. Fancy the reward of finding Reginald Henson out!"

"Reginald Henson is the blight upon your house. In what way?"

"Ah, I cannot tell you. It is a secret that we never discuss even among ourselves. But he has
the power over us, he has blighted all our lives. But if I could get hold of a certain thing
the power would be broken. That is what I am after, what I am working for. And it is in connection
with my endeavour that the new idea came to me."

"Can't you give me some general idea of it?" Bell asked.

"Well, I want to make Merritt my friend. I want him to imagine that I am as much of an adventuress
as he is an adventurer. I want to let him see that I could send him to prison--"

"So you can by telling the police of the loss of your star."

"And getting Merritt arrested and sent to gaol where I couldn't make use of him? No, no. The
thing is pretty vague in my mind at present. I have to work it out as one would a story; as
David Steel would work it out, for instance. Ah!"

Chris clapped her hands rapturously, and a little cry of delight escaped her.

"The very thing," she exclaimed. "If I could lay all the facts before Mr. Steel and get him
to plan out all the details! His fertile imagination would see a way out at once. But he is
far away and there is no time to be lost. Is there no way of getting at him?"

Chris appealed almost imploringly to her companion. She made a pretty picture with the old
oak engravings behind her. Bell smiled as he helped himself to asparagus.

"Why not adopt the same method by which you originally introduced yourself to the distinguished
novelist?" he asked. "Why not use Littimer's telephone?"

Chris pushed her plate away impetuously.

"I am too excited to eat any more," she said. "I am filled with the new idea. Of course, I
could use the telephone to speak to Mr. Steel, and to Enid as well. If the scheme works out
as I anticipate, I shall have to hold a long conversation with Enid, a dangerous thing so long
as Reginald Henson is about."

"I'll keep Henson out of the way. The best thing is to wait till everybody has gone to bed
to-night and call Steel up then. You will be certain to get him after eleven, and there will
be no chance of your being cut off at that hour of the night in consequence of somebody else
wanting the line. The same remark applies to your sister."

Chris nodded radiantly.

"Thrice blessed telephone," she said. "I can get in all I want without committing myself to
paper or moving from the spot where my presence is urgently needed. We will give Mr. Steel
a pleasant surprise to-night, and this time I shall get him into no trouble."

The luncheon was finished at length, and an intimation sent to Merritt that his friends were
waiting for him at the Lion. As his powerful figure was seen entering the big Norman porch
Henson came down the street driving a dog-cart at a dangerous rate of speed.

"Our man is going to have his trouble for his pains," Bell chuckled. "He has come to interview
Merritt. How pleased he will be to see Merritt at dinner-time."

Merritt shambled in awkwardly, obviously suppressing a desire to touch his forelock. There
was a sheepish grin on his face, a suppressed triumph in his eyes. He had been recently shaved
and his hair cut, but despite these improvements, and despite his clerical garb, he was not
exactly the class of man to meet in a dark lane after sunset.

Chris, however, showed nothing of this in her greeting. Long before Littimer Castle was reached
she had succeeded in putting Merritt quite at his ease. He talked of himself and his past exploits,
he boasted of his cunning. It was only now and again that he pulled himself up and piously
referred to the new life that he was now leading. Bell was studying him carefully; he read
the other's mind like an open book. When the waggonette finally pulled up before the castle
Littimer strolled up and stood there regarding Merritt quietly.

"So this is the gentleman you were going to bring to dinner?" he said, grimly. "I have seen
him before in the company of our dear Reginald. I also--"

Chris shot Littimer an imploring glance. Merritt grinned in friendly fashion. Bell, in his
tactful way, piloted the strange guest to the library before Littimer and Chris had reached
the hall. The former polished his eyeglass and regarded Chris critically.

"My dear young lady," he said smoothly, "originality is a passion with me, eccentricity draws
me as a magnet; but as yet I have refrained from sitting down to table with ticket-of-leave
men. Your friend has 'convict' writ large upon his face."

"He has been in gaol, of course," Chris admitted, cheerfully.

"Then let me prophesy, and declare that he will be in gaol again. Why bring him here?"

"Because it is absolutely necessary," Chris said, boldly. "That man can help me--help us, Lord
Littimer. I am not altogether what I seem. There is a scoundrel in your house compared with
whom James Merritt is an innocent child. That scoundrel has blighted your life and the lives
of your family; he has blighted my life for years. And I am here to expose him, and I am here
to right the wrong and bring back the lost happiness of us all. I cannot say more, but I implore
you to let me have my own way in this matter."

"Oh!" Littimer said, darkly, "so you are masquerading here?"

"I am. I admit it. Turn me out if you like; refuse to be a party to my scheme. You may think
badly of me now, probably you will think worse of me later on. But I swear to you that I am
acting with the best and purest motives, and in your interest as much as my own."

"Then you are not entitled even to the name you bear?"

"No, I admit it freely. Consider, I need not have told you anything. Things cannot be any worse
than they are. Let me try and make them better. Will you, will you trust me?"

Chris's voice quivered, there were tears in her eyes. With a sudden impulse Littimer laid his
hands upon her shoulders and looked long and searchingly into her eyes.

"Very well," he said, with a gentle sigh. "I will trust you. As a matter of fact, I have felt
that I could trust you from the first. I won't pry into your schemes, because if they are successful
I shall benefit by them. And if you like to bring a cartload of convicts down here, pray do
so. It will only puzzle the neighbours, and drive them mad with curiosity, and I love that."

"And you'll back me up in all I say and do?" Chris asked.

"Certainly I will. On the whole, I fancy I am going to have a pleasant evening. I don't think
dear Reginald will be pleased to see his friend at dinner. If any of the spoons are missing
I shall hold you responsible."

Chris went off to her room well pleased with the turn of events. Brilliant audacity had succeeded
where timid policy might have resulted in dismal failure. And Littimer had refrained from asking
any awkward questions. From the window she could see Bell and Merritt walking up and down the
terrace, the latter talking volubly and worrying at a big cigar as a dog might nuzzle at a
bone. Chris saw Littimer join the other two presently and fall in with their conversation.
His laugh came to the girl's ear more than once. It was quite evident that the eccentric nobleman
was enjoying the ex-convict's society. But Littimer had never been fettered by conventional rules.

The dog-cart came up presently and Henson got out. He had an anxious, worried look; there was
an ugly frown between his brows. He contrived to be polite as Chris emerged. He wanted to know
where Littimer was.

"On the terrace, I fancy," Chris said, demurely. "I guess he is having a long chat with that
parson friend of yours--the brand plucked from the burning, you know."

"Merritt," Henson said, hoarsely. "Do you mean to say that Merritt is here? And I've been looking
for--I mean, I have been into Moreton Wells. Why did he come?"

Chris opened her eyes in innocent surprise.

"Why," she said, "I fetched him. I'm deeply interested in brands of that kind."

CHAPTER XXXVII

ANOTHER TELEPHONIC MESSAGE

Henson forced a smile to his face and a hand from his side as he approached Merritt and the
rest. It was not until the two found themselves alone that the mask was dropped.

"You infernally insolent scoundrel," Henson said, between his teeth. "How dare you come here?
You've done your work for the present, and the sooner you go back to your kennel in London
the better. If I imagined that you meant any harm I'd crush you altogether."

"I didn't come on my own," Merritt whined. "So keep your 'air on. That young lady came and
fetched me--regular gone on me, she is. And there's to be high jinks 'ere--a bazaar for the
benefit of pore criminals as can't get no work to do. You 'eard what his lordship said. And
I'm goin' to make a speech, like as I used to gull the chaplains. Lor', it's funny, ain't it?"

Henson failed to see the humour of the situation. He was uneasy and suspicious. Moreover, he
was puzzled by this American girl, and he hated to be puzzled. She had social aspirations,
of course; she cared nothing for decayed or reformed criminals, and this silly bazaar was only
designed so that the ambitious girl could find her way into the county set. Then she would
choose a husband, and nothing more would be heard of Merritt and Co. Henson had a vague notion
that all American girls are on the look-out for English husbands of the titled order.

"Littimer must be mad," he muttered. "I can't understand Littimer; I can't understand anything.
Which reminds me that I have a crow to pluck with you. Why didn't you do as I told you last night?"

"Did," said Merritt, curtly. "Got the picture and took it home with me."

"You liar! The picture is in the corridor at the present time."

"Liar yourself! I've got the picture on my mantelshelf in my sitting-room rolled up as you
told me to roll it up and tied with a piece of cotton. It was your own idea as the thing was
to be left about casual-like as being less calculated to excite suspicion. And there it is
at the present moment, and I'll take my oath to it."

Henson fairly gasped. He had been inside that said sitting-room not two hours before, and he
had not failed to notice a roll of paper on the mantelshelf. And obviously Merritt was telling
the truth. And equally obviously the Rembrandt was hanging in the corridor at the present moment.
Henson had solved and evolved many ingenious puzzles in his time, but this one was utterly
beyond him.

"Some trick of Dr. Bell's, perhaps," Merritt suggested.

"Bell suspects nothing. He is absolutely friendly to me. He could not disguise his feelings
like that. Upon my word I was never so utterly at sea before in all my life. And as for Littimer,
why, he has just made a fresh will more in my favour than the old one. But I'll find out. I'll
get to the bottom of this business if it costs me a fortune."

He frowned moodily at his boots; he turned the thing over in his mind until his brain was dazed
and muddled. The Rembrandt had been stolen, and yet there was the Rembrandt in its place. Was
anything more amazing and puzzling? And nobody else seemed in the least troubled about it.
Henson was more than puzzled; deep down in his heart he was frightened.

"I must keep my eyes open," he said. "I must watch night and day. Do you suppose Miss Lee noticed
anything when she called to-day?"

"Not a bit of it," said Merritt, confidently "She came to see me; she had no eyes for anybody
but your humble servant. Where did she get my address from? Why, didn't you introduce me to
the lady yourself, and didn't I tell her I was staying at Moreton Wells for a time? I'm goin'
to live in clover for a bit, my pippin. Cigars and champagne, wine and all the rest of it."

"I wish you were at the bottom of the sea before you came here," Henson growled. "You mind
and be careful what you're doing with the champagne. They don't drink by the tumbler in the
society you are in now, remember. Just one or two glasses and no more. If you take too much
and let your tongue run you will find your stay here pretty short."

Apparently the hint was not lost on Merritt, for dinner found him in a chastened mood. His
natural audacity was depressed by the splendour and luxury around him; the moral atmosphere
held him down. There were so many knives and forks and glasses on the table, such a deal of
food that was absolutely strange to him. The butler behind made him shiver. Hitherto in Merritt's
investigations into great houses he had fought particularly shy of butlers and coachmen and
upper servants of that kind. The butler's sniff and his cold suggestion as to hock slightly
raised Merritt's combative spirit. And the champagne was poor, thin stuff after all. A jorum
of gin and water, or a mug of beer, was what Merritt's soul longed for.

And what a lot of plate there was on the table and sideboard! Some of it was gold, too. Merritt's
greedy professional eye appraised the collection at some hundreds of pounds--hundreds of pounds--that
is, after the stuff had been disposed of. In imagination he had already drugged the butler
and was stuffing the plate into his bag.

Henson said very little. He was too busily engaged in watching his confederate. He wished from
the bottom of his heart now that Chris had never seen Merritt. She was smiling at him now and
apparently hanging on every word. Henson had seen society ladies doing this kind of thing before
with well-concealed contempt. So long as people liked to play his game for him he had no objection.
But this was quite different. Merrit had warmed a little under the influence of his fifth glass
of champagne, but his eye looked lovingly and longingly in the direction of a silver spirit-stand
on the sideboard. The dinner came to an end at length, to Henson's great relief, and presently
the whole party wandered out to the terrace. Bell dropped behind with Chris.

"Now is your time," he whispered. "Henson dare not lose sight of Merritt before he goes to
bed, and I'll keep the latter out here for a good long spell. I've muffled the striker of the
telephone so that the bell will make no noise when you get your call back from Brighton, so
that you must be near enough to the instrument to hear the click of the striker. Make haste."

Chris dropped back to the library and rapidly fluttered over the leaves of the "Telephone Directory."
She found what she wanted at length and asked to be put on to Brighton. Then she sat down in
an armchair in the darkness close under the telephone, prepared to wait patiently. She could
just see the men on the terrace, could catch the dull glow red of their cigars.

Her patience was not unduly tried. At the end of a quarter of an hour the striker clicked furiously.
Chris reached for the receiver and lay back comfortably in her chair with the diaphragm to
her ear. "Are you there?" she asked, quietly. "Is that you, Mr. Steel?" To her great relief
the answering voice was Steel's own. He seemed to be a little puzzled as to who his questioner was.

"Can't you guess?" Chris replied. "This is not the first time I have had you called. You have
not forgotten 218, Brunswick Square, yet?"

Chris smiled as she heard Steel's sudden exclamation.

"So you are my fair friend whom I saw in the dark?" he said. "Yes, I recognise your voice now.
You are Miss Chris--well, I won't mention the name aloud, because people might ask what a well-regulated
corpse meant by rousing respectable people up at midnight. I hope you are not going to get
me into trouble again."

"No, but I am going to ask your advice and assistance. I want you to be so good as to give
me the plot of a story after I have told you the details. And you are to scheme the thing out
at once, please, because delay is dangerous. Dr. Bell--"

"What's that? Will you tell me where you are speaking from?"

"I am at present located at Littimer Castle. Yes, Dr. Bell is here. Do you want him?"

"I should think so," Steel exclaimed. "Please tell him at once that the man who was found here
half dead--you know the man I mean--got up and dressed himself in the absence of the nurse
and walked out of the hospital this morning. Since then he has not been seen or heard of. I
have been looking up Bell everywhere. Will you tell him this at once? I'll go into your matter
afterwards. Don't be afraid; I'll tell the telephone people not to cut us off till I ring.
Please go at once."

The voice was urgent, not to say imperative. Chris dropped the receiver into its space and
crept into the darkness in the direction of the terrace.

CHAPTER XXXVIII

A LITTLE FICTION

Bell seemed to know by intuition that Chris required him, or perhaps he caught a glimpse of
her white dress from the terrace. Anyway, he strolled leisurely in her direction.

"Something has happened?" he whispered, as he came up.

"Well, yes," Chris replied, "though I should like to know how you guessed that. I had no difficulty
in getting Mr. Steel on the telephone, but he would say nothing directly he heard that you
were here beyond a peremptory request that you were to be told at once that Van Sneck has gone."

"Gone!" Bell echoed, blankly. "What do you mean by that?"

"He has disappeared from the hospital at Brighton to-day. Mr. Steel thinks they were extra
busy, or something of that kind. Anyway, Van Sneck got up and dressed himself and left the
hospital without being observed. It seems extraordinary to me."

"And yet quite possible," Bell said, thoughtfully. "Van Sneck had practically recovered from
the flesh wounds; it was the injury to his head that was the worst part. He resembled an irresponsible
lunatic more than anything else. Steel wants me, of course?"

"He suggests that you should go down to Brighton without delay."

"All right, I'll make some excuse to take the first train in the morning. We've got a fine
start of Henson, and that's a good thing. If Van Sneck comes within his net we shall have a
deal of trouble. I had hoped to get permission to operate on Van Sneck, and relied upon him
to solve the mystery. And now you had better go back to your telephone."

Chris hurried back again. A whispered word satisfied her that Steel was still at the other end.

"Dr. Bell starts as early as possible to-morrow," she said. "If you will listen carefully I
will give you a brief outline of all that has happened since I have been here."

Chris proceeded to tell her story succinctly and briefly. From little sounds and signs she
could tell that Steel was greatly interested. The story of the man with the thumb fascinated
him. It appealed to his professional instincts.

"And what do you want to do with him?" Steel asked.

"Well, you see, I have him in my power," Chris explained. "We can get the other Rembrandt any
time we like now, but that is quite a minor consideration. What I want is for Merritt to know
that I can have him arrested at any time for stealing my star. It's Enid's star, as a matter
of fact; but that is a detail."

"An important one, surely," Steel's voice came thin and clear. "Suppose that our dear friend
chances to recognise it? ... No, don't ring off yet."

"I'm not. Oh, you are speaking to the Exchange people ... Yes, yes; we shall be a long time
yet ... Are you there? Well, Henson has never seen the star. Enid bought it just before the
great trouble came, and afterwards she never had the heart to wear it."

"I understand. You want Merritt to know this?"

"Well, I do and I don't," Chris explained. "I am anxious not to frighten the man. I want to
get him in my power, and I want to prove to him that it would be to his advantage for him to
come over to my side. Suppose that Enid gave it out that the star had been stolen? And suppose
that I could save him at the critical moment? I shouldn't mind him thinking that I had stolen
the star in the first place. That is why I am asking you as a novelist to help me."

"You would have made an excellent novelist yourself," David said, admiringly. "Give me five
minutes.... Are you there? I fancy I have it. Can't you hear me? That's better. I'll see Miss
Gates the first thing in the morning and get her to go over to Longdean and see your sister....
Confound it, don't cut us off yet. What does it matter so long as the messages are paid for?
Nobody else wants the line. Well, I may for an hour more.... Are you there? Very sorry; it's
the fault of the Post Office people. Here is the plot in a nutshell. Your sister has lost a
diamond star. She gives a minute description of it to the police, and drops a hint to the effect
that she believes it was taken away by mistake--in other words, was stolen--from her in London
by a chance acquaintance called Christabel Lee--"

"Ah," Chris cried, "how clever you are!"

"I have long suspected it," the thin voice went on, drily. "The full description of the star
will be printed in the Police Gazette, a copy of which every respectable pawnbroker always
gets regularly. I suppose the people where the star was pawned are respectable?"

"Highly so. They have quite a Bond Street establishment attached."

"So much the better. They will see the advertisement, and they will communicate with the police.
The Reverend James Merritt will be arrested--"

"I don't quite like that," Chris suggested.

"Oh, it's necessary. He will be arrested at the castle. Knowing his antecedents, the police
will not stand upon any ceremony with him. You will be filled with remorse. You have plunged
back into a career of crime again a being who was slowly climbing into the straight path once
more. You take the blame upon yourself--it was at your instigation that Merritt pawned the star."

"But, really, Mr. Steel--"

"Oh, I know. But the end justifies the means. You save Mr. Merritt, there is a bond of sympathy
between you, he will regard you as a great light in his interesting profession. You saved him
because you had appropriated the star yourself."

"And go to gaol instead of Mr. Merritt?"

"Not a bit of it. The star you deemed to be yours. You had one very like it when you saw Miss
Henson, when you were staying in London at the same hotel. By some means the jewels got mixed.
You are confident that an exchange has been made. Also you are confident that if Miss Henson
will search her jewel-case she will find a valuable star that does not belong to her. Miss
Henson does so, she is distressed beyond measure, she offers all kinds of apologies. Exit the
police. You need not tell Merritt how you get out of the difficulty, and thus you increase
his respect for you. There, that would make a very ingenious and plausible magazine story.
It should be more convincing in real life."

"Capital!" Chris murmured. "What an advantage it is to have a novelist to advise one! Many,
many thanks for all your kindness. Good-night!"

Chris rang off with a certain sense of relief. It was some time later before she had a chance
of conveying to Bell what had happened. He listened gravely to all that Chris had to say.

"Just the sort of feather-brained idea that would occur to a novelist," he said. "For my part,
I should prefer to confront Merritt with his theft, and keep the upper hand of him that way."

"And he would mistrust me and betray me at the first opportunity. Besides, in that case, he
would know at once that I wanted to get to the bottom of his connection with Reginald Henson.
Mr. Steel's plan may be bizarre, but it is safe."

"I never thought of that," Bell admitted. "I begin to imagine that you are more astute than
I gave you credit for, which is saying a great deal."

Chris was down early the following morning, only to find Bell at breakfast with every sign
of making an early departure. He was very sorry, he explained, gravely, to his host and Chris,
but his letters gave him no option, He would come back in a day or two if he might. A moment
later Henson came into the room, ostentatiously studying a Bradshaw.

"And where are you going?" Littimer asked. "Why do you all abandon me? Reginald, do you mean
to say that you are going to refuse me the light of your countenance?"

"Is Dr. Bell going, too?" Henson asked, with just a suggestion of uneasiness. "I mean--er--"

"Business," Bell said. "I came here at great personal inconvenience. And you?"

"London," Henson replied. "A meeting to-day that I cannot get out of. A couple of letters by
this morning's post have decided me."

Chris said nothing; she appeared to be quite indifferent until she had a chance to speak to
Bell alone. She looked a little anxious.

"He has found out about Van Sneck," she said. "Truly he is a marvellous man! And he had no
letters this morning. I opened the post-bag personally. But I'm glad he's going, because I
shall have James Merritt all to myself."

CHAPTER XXXIX

THE FASCINATION OF JAMES MERRITT

On the whole Mr. James Merritt, ex-convict and now humanitarian, was enjoying himself immensely.
He did not sleep at the castle, for Lord Littimer drew the line there, but he contrived to
get most of his meals under that hospitable roof, and spent a deal of time there. It was by
no means the first time he had been "taken up" by the aristocracy since his conversion, and
his shyness was wearing off. Moreover, Henson had given his henchman strict instructions to
keep his eyes open with a view to getting at the bottom of the Rembrandt mystery.

Still, there is always a crumpled rose-leaf somewhere, and Merritt had his. A few days after
Henson departed so hurriedly from town the stolen Rembrandt disappeared from Merritt's rooms.
Nobody knew anything about it; the thing had vanished, leaving no trace of the thief behind.
Perhaps Merritt would have been less easy in Littimer's society had he known that the missing
print was securely locked away in the latter's strong room. Still, had Merritt been acquainted
with the classics, carpe diem would like as not have been his favourite motto. He declined
to worry over the matter until Henson's return. It was not for him to know, yet, that Chris
had actually gone over to Moreton Wells, and, during the absence of Merritt's landlady, calmly
walked into the house and taken the picture away.

"You are going to see some fun presently," she said, coolly, to the astonished Littimer, as
she laid the missing picture before him. "No, I shall not tell you anything more at present.
You shall hear the whole story when Reginald Henson stands in the pillory before you. You know
now that Henson was at the bottom of the plot to destroy Dr. Bell's character?"

"I always felt that our Reginald was a great scoundrel," Littimer purred over his cigarette.
"And if you succeed in exposing him thoroughly I shall watch the performance with the greatest
possible pleasure. I am not curious, my dear young lady, but I would give sixpence to know
who you are."

"Keep your sixpence," Chris laughed, "and you'll know all in good time. All I ask is not to
be astonished at anything that happens."

Littimer averred that he had long since lost the power of astonishment. There was a brightness
and restlessness about Chris to-day that considerably added to her charms. It was nearly a
week now since Bell and Henson had departed, and in the meantime Chris had heard nothing from
Longdean. Half an hour before a telegram had arrived to the effect that a gentleman in a blue
coat might be expected at Littimer Castle at any moment. The police were coming, and Merritt
was late to-day. If Merritt failed to turn up the whole situation would be spoilt. It was with
a feeling of unutterable relief that Chris saw him coming up the drive.

"Come on the terrace," she said. "I have something very serious to say to you. Mr. Merritt,
you have got us both into very serious trouble. Why did you do it?"

"Ain't done nothing," Merritt said, doggedly. He repeated the old formula, "What's up?"

"Er--it's about my diamond star," said Chris. "I lost it a few days ago. If I had known what
was going to happen I should have put up with my loss. But I made inquiries through the police
without saying a word to anybody, and now I find the star was pawned in Moreton Wells."

"Oh, lor," Merritt gasped. "You don't mean to say the police know that, miss?"

"Indeed I do. You see, once I allowed matters to go out of my hands I was powerless. The case
now rests entirely with the police. And I am informed that they may come here and arrest you
at any moment. I fear there is no escape for you--you pawned the thing yourself in your own
name. What a thousand pities you yielded to sudden temptation."

"But I found it," Merritt whined. "I'll take my oath as I found it under the terrace. I--I--was
rambling along the cliffs one day and I found it. And I didn't know it was yours. If I had
known it was yours, I'd never have gone and done no such a thing."

Chris shook her head sadly.

"And just as you were getting on so nicely," she said.

"That's it," Merritt whined, brokenly. "Just as I was properly spoofing everybody as I--I mean
just as I was getting used to a better life. But you can save me, miss; you can say as you
were hard up for money and that, knowing as I knew the ropes, you got me to pawn it for you.
Put it in that way and there's not a policeman in England as can touch me."

"I had thought of it," Chris said, with a pretty assumption of distress. "But, but--Mr. Merritt,
I have a terrible confession to make. It was not I who started the police: it was somebody
else. You see, the star was not my property at all. I--I got it in London."

Mr. Merritt looked up with involuntary admiration.

"You don't mean to say as you nicked it?" he asked. "Well, well."

Chris bent her face lower to conceal her agitation, Her shoulders were heaving, but not with
emotion. The warmth of Merritt's admiration had moved her to silent laughter, and she had made
the exact impression that she had desired.

"I have telegraphed to the lady, who is more or less of a friend of mine," she said. "I have
urged her to take no further steps in the matter. I fancy that she is a good and kind girl
and that--but a reply might come at any time."

There was a reply on the way now, as Chris knew perfectly well. The whole thing had been carefully
arranged and planned to the moment by Steel and the others.

"I dare say they'll let you down easy," Merritt said, disconsolately; "but it'll be hot for
me. I've copped it too many times before, you see."

"Yes, I see," Chris said, thoughtfully. "Mr. Merritt, I have made up my mind: if I had not--er--borrowed
that star, it would not have been lost, and you would not have found it, and there would have
been no trouble. My conscience would not rest if I allowed you to be dragged back into the
old life again. I am going to save you--I am going to tell the police that you pawned that
star for me at my instigation."

Merritt was touched even to tears. There was not an atom of chivalry in the rascal's composition.
He had little or no heed for the trouble that his companion appeared to be piling up for herself,
but he was touched to the depths of his soul. Here was a clever girl, who in her own way appeared
to be a member of his profession, who was prepared to sacrifice herself to save another. Self-sacrifice
is a beautiful and tender thing, and Merritt had no intention of thwarting it.

"Do that, and I'm your pal for life," he said, huskily. "And I never went back on a pal yet.
Ask anybody as really knows me. 'Tain't as if you weren't one of us, neither. I'd give a trifle
to know what your little game is here, eh?"

Chris smiled meaningly. Merritt's delusion was distinctly to be fostered.

"You shall help me then, presently," she said in a mysterious whisper. "Help me and keep your
own counsel, and there will be the biggest job you ever had in your life. Only let you and
I get out of this mess, and we shall see what we shall see presently."

Merritt looked speechless admiration. He had read of this class of high-toned criminals in
the gutter stories peddled by certain publishers, but he had never hoped to meet one in the
flesh. He was still gazing open-mouthed at Chris as two men came along the avenue.

They were both in plain clothes, but they had "policeman" writ large all over them.

"Cops, for a million," Merritt gurgled, with a pallid face. "You can tell 'em when you're asleep.
And they are after me; they're coming this way. I'll be all right presently."

"I hope so," Chris said, with a curling lip. "You look guilty enough now."

Merritt explained that it was merely the first emotion, and would pass off presently. Nor did
he boast in vain. He was quite cool as the officers came up and called him by name.

"That's me," Merritt said. "What's the trouble?"

One of the officers explained. He had no warrant, he said, but all the same he would have to
trouble Mr. Merritt to accompany him to Moreton Wells. A diamond star not yet definitely identified
had been handed over to the police, the same having been pawned by James Merritt.

"That's quite right," Merritt said, cheerfully. "I pawned it for this young lady here--Miss
Lee. Of course, if it is not her property, why, then--"

The officer was palpably taken back. He knew more than he cared to say. The star had been pledged
by Merritt, as he cheerfully admitted, but the owner of the star had lost the gem in London
under suspicious circumstances in which Miss Lee was mixed up. And at present it was not the
policy of the police to arrest Miss Lee. That would come later.

"I am afraid that there has been a misapprehension altogether," Chris said. "Allow me to explain:
Mr. Merritt, would you step aside for a moment? I have to speak of private matters. Thank you.
Now, sir, I am quite prepared to admit that the ornament pledged does not belong to me, but
to Miss Henson, whom I met in London. I took the star by mistake. You may smile, but I have
one very like it. If Miss Henson had searched her jewels properly she would have found that
she had my star--that I had hers. I heard of the business quite by accident, and telegraphed
to Miss Henson to look searchingly amongst her jewels. She has a large amount, and might easily
have overlooked my star. Here is a boy with a telegram. Will you take it from him and read
it aloud? It is addressed to me, you will find."

It was. It was signed "Enid Henson"; it went on to say that the sender was fearfully sorry
for all the trouble she had caused, but that she had found Miss Lee's star with her jewels.
Also she had telegraphed at once to the police at Moreton Wells to go no farther.

"Looks like a mistake," the officer muttered. "But if we get that telegram--"

"Which has reached the police-station by this time," Chris interrupted. "Come into the castle
and ask the question over the telephone. I suppose you are connected?"

The officer said they were; in fact, they had only recently joined the Exchange. A brief visit
to the telephone, and the policeman came back, with a puzzled air and a little more deference
in his manner, with the information that he was to go back at once, as the case was closed.

"I've seen some near things in my time, but nothing nearer than this," he said. "Still, it's
all right now. Very sorry to have troubled you, miss."

The officers departed with the air of men who had to be satisfied, despite themselves. Merritt
came forward with an admiration almost fawning. He did not know quite how the thing had happened,
but Chris had done the police. Smartness and trickery of that kind were the highest form of
his idolatry. His admiration was nearly beyond words.

"Well, strike me," he gasped. "Did ever anyone ever see anything like that? You, as cool as
possible, and me with my heart in my mouth all the time. And there ain't going to be no trouble,
no sort of bother over the ticket?"

"You hand over that ticket to me," Chris smiled, "and there will be an end of the matter. And
if you try to play me false in any way, why, it will be a bad day for you. Give me your assistance,
and it will be the best day's work you ever did in your life."

Merritt's heart was gained. His pride was touched.

"Me go back on you?" he cried, hoarsely. "After what you've done? Only say the word, only give
old Jim Merritt a call, and it's pitch-and-toss to manslaughter for those pretty eyes of yours.
Good day's work! Aye, for both of us."

And Chris thought so too.

CHAPTER XL

A USEFUL DISCOVERY

Waiting with the eagerness of the greyhound in leash, David Steel was more annoyed and vexed
over the disappearance of the wounded Van Sneck than he cared to admit. He had an uneasy feeling
that the unseen foe had checkmated him again. And he had built up so many hopes upon this strangely-uninvited
guest of his. If that man spoke he could tell the truth. And both Cross and Bell had declared
that he would not die.

David found Cross in a frame of mind something like his own. It was late in the afternoon before
it transpired that Van Sneck was gone, and, unfortunately, David did not know where to find
Bell just at the moment. Cross had very little to say.

"A most unpleasant incident," he remarked. "But these things will happen, you know. We have
been so busy lately, and our vigilance has been slightly relaxed. Oh, it is impossible to guard
against everything, but he is certain to be found."

"You don't think," David suggested, "that anybody secretly connected with the man's past--"

"No, I don't," Cross snapped; "that would be impossible. The man had something on his mind,
and so far as bodily condition was concerned he was getting quite strong again. In his dazed
state he got up and dressed himself and went away. He seems to have been seeking for somebody
or something for days. We are certain to have him again before long."

With which poor consolation David returned home again. He was restless and desirous of human
companionship. He even resented it, as a kind of affront, that his mother had chosen at this
time to go to Hassocks to stay with an old friend for a couple of days. That Mrs. Steel knew
practically nothing of her son's trouble counted for naught. Therefore it was with something
akin to pleasure that David found Ruth Gates waiting in the drawing-room for him when he came
in from his walk on the following afternoon. Nothing had been heard of Van Sneck in the meantime,
but thanks to Chris's telephone message late the previous night he had got in touch with Bell,
who was coming south without delay.

There was a look of shy pleasure in Ruth's eyes and a deep carmine flush on her cheeks.

"You don't think that this is very bold of me?" she asked.

"I am pretty Bohemian in any case," David laughed, as he looked down fondly into the shy, sweet
eyes. "And I'm too overjoyed to see you to think about anything else. I wish my mother was
at home. No, I don't, because I have you all to myself."

"David! On an occasion like this you ought to be the pink of propriety. Do you know, I believe
that I have made a great discovery?"

"Indeed, little girl! And what have you found out?"

"Well, you must tell me something before my discovery seems valuable. David, you are a close
student of human nature. Is it possible for men of phenomenal cunning to make careless mistakes?
Do the most clever criminals ever make childish blunders?"

"My dear child, if they didn't the police would have very little chance. For instance, I have
discovered how those enemies of ours got hold of the notepaper that lured Van Sneck here. They
sent a messenger to Carter's, in East Street, presumedly knowing that my dies were there, and
ordered a quarter of a ream of paper and envelopes. These were to be sent to an address in
East Grinstead in a hurry. Now, that was very clever and smart, but here comes the folly. Those
people, in the stress of business, actually forgot to ascertain the cost and pay for the paper,
so that it was down yesterday in my last quarter's bill. Oh, yes, I assure you, the most brilliant
criminals do the most incredibly foolish things."

Ruth looked relieved. Her pretty features relaxed into a smile.

"Then I fancy Reginald Henson has done so," she said. "I fancy I have solved the mystery of
the cigar-case--I mean, the mystery of the one I bought."

"And which was changed for the one purchased at Walen's, hence these tears. But Lockharts say
that our case was really purchased by an American."

"Yes, I know. And I fancy that the manager honestly thought so. But I think I can explain that."

It was David's turn to look up eagerly.

"Do you mean it?" he exclaimed. "It will make a wonderful difference if you can. That has been
one of the most bewildering knots of the whole puzzle. If we could only trace the numbers of
those notes, I suppose changed at the same time as the cigar-case."

"Indeed they were not," Ruth cried. "I have ascertained that the case was changed by Henson,
as you and I have already decided. Henson made the exchange not at the time we thought."

"Not when you left the package on the table for him to see?"

"No; at least I can't say. He had the other case then, probably, passed on to him by Van Sneck.
Or perhaps he merely ascertained what I had purchased. That was sufficient for his purpose.
Of course he must have found out all about our scheme. After I had laid my cigar-case on your
doorstep a man quietly changed it for the other purchased at Walen's. But this is the alternate
theory only. Any way, I am absolutely certain that you got exactly the same notes that we had
placed in the original case."

"That might be," David said, thoughtfully. "But that does not explain the fact that Lockhart's
sold your case to an American at the Metropole."

"I fancy I can even explain that, dear. My uncle came down suddenly to-day from London. He
wanted certain papers in a great hurry. Now, those papers were locked up in a drawer at 219
given over specially to Mr. Henson. My uncle promptly broke open the drawer and took out the
papers. Besides those documents the drawer contained a package in one of Lockhart's big linen-lined
envelopes--a registered letter envelope, in fact. My uncle had little time to spare, as he
was bound to be back in London to-night. He suggested that as the back of the drawer was broken
and the envelope presumably contained valuables, I had better take care of it. Well, I must
admit at once that I steamed the envelope open. I shouldn't have done so if Lockhart's name
had not been on the flap. In a little case inside I found a diamond bracelet, which I have
in my pocket, together with a receipted bill for seventy odd pounds made out to me."

"To you?" David cried. "Do you mean to say that--"

"Indeed I do. The receipt was made out to me, and with it was a little polite note to the effect
that Messrs. Lockhart had made the exchange of the cigar-case for the diamond bracelet, and
that they hoped Miss Gates would find the matter perfectly satisfactory."

David was too astonished to say anything for the moment. The skein was too tangled to be thought
out all at once. Presently he began to see his way.

