§ 17. Pursuing the principle yet further, it is obvious that for producing the greatest effect,
not only should the main divisions of a sentence observe this sequence, but the subdivisions
of these should be similarly arranged. In nearly all cases, the predicate is accompanied by
some limit or qualification, called its complement. Commonly, also, the circumstances of the
subject, which form its complement, have to be specified. And as these qualifications and circumstances
must determine the mode in which the acts and things they belong to are conceived, precedence
should be given to them. Lord Kaimes notices the fact that this order is preferable; though
without giving the reason. He says:--"When a circumstance is placed at the beginning of the
period, or near the beginning, the transition from it to the principal subject is agreeable:
it is like ascending or going upward." A sentence arranged in illustration of this will be
desirable. Here is one:--"Whatever it may be in theory, it is clear that in practice the French
idea of liberty is--the right of every man to be master of the rest."

§ 18. In this case, were the first two clauses, up to the word "I practice" inclusive, which
qualify the subject, to be placed at the end instead of the beginning, much of the force would
be lost; as thus:--"The French idea of liberty is--the right of every man to be master of the
rest; in practice at least, if not in theory."

§ 19. Similarly with respect to the conditions under which any fact is predicated. Observe
in the following example the effect of putting them last:--"How immense would be the stimulus
to progress, were the honour now given to wealth and title given exclusively to high achievements
and intrinsic worth!"

§ 20.

§ 21.

Here it will be observed, not only that the predicate "sat" precedes the subject "Saturn,"
and that the three lines in italics, constituting the complement of the predicate, come before
it; but that in the structure of that complement also, the same order is followed: each line
being so arranged that the qualifying words are placed before the words suggesting concrete images.

§ 22. The right succession of the principal and subordinate propositions in a sentence manifestly
depends on the same law. Regard for economy of the recipient's attention, which, as we find,
determines the best order for the subject, copula, predicate and their complements, dictates
that the subordinate proposition shall precede the principal one when the sentence includes
two. Containing, as the subordinate proposition does, some qualifying or explanatory idea,
its priority prevents misconception of the principal one; and therefore saves the mental effort
needed to correct such misconception. This will be seen in the annexed example: "The secrecy
once maintained in respect to the parliamentary debates, is still thought needful in diplomacy;
and in virtue of this secret diplomacy, England may any day be unawares betrayed by its ministers
into a war costing a, hundred thousand lives, and hundreds of millions of treasure: yet the
English pique themselves on being a self-governed people." The two subordinate propositions,
ending with the semicolon and colon respectively, almost wholly determine the meaning of the
principal proposition with which it concludes; and the effect would be lost were they placed
last instead of first.

§ 23. The general principle of right arrangement in sentences, which we have traced in its
application to the leading divisions of them, equally determines the proper order of their
minor divisions. In every sentence of any complexity the complement to the subject contains
several clauses, and that to the predicate several others; and these may be arranged in greater
or less conformity to the law of easy apprehension. Of course with these, as with the larger
members, the succession should be from the less specific to the more specific--from the abstract
to the concrete.

§ 24. Now, however, we must notice a further condition to be fulfilled in the proper construction
of a sentence; but still a condition dictated by the same general principle with the other:
the condition, namely, that the words and expressions most nearly related in thought shall
be brought the closest together. Evidently the single words, the minor clauses, and the leading
divisions of every proposition, severally qualify each other. The longer the time that elapses
between the mention of any qualifying member and the member qualified, the longer must the
mind be exerted in carrying forward the qualifying member ready for use. And the more numerous
the qualifications to be simultaneously remembered and rightly applied, the greater will be
the mental power expended, and the smaller the effect produced. Hence, other things equal,
force will be gained by so arranging the members of a sentence that these suspensions shall
at any moment be the fewest in number; and shall also be of the shortest duration. The following
is an instance of defective combination:--"A modern newspaper-statement, though probably true,
would be laughed at if quoted in a book as testimony; but the letter of a court gossip is thought
good historical evidence, if written some centuries ago." A rearrangement of this, in accordance
with the principle indicated above, will be found to increase the effect.

§ 25. By making this change, some of the suspensions are avoided and others shortened; while
there is less liability to produce premature conceptions. The passage quoted below from 'Paradise
Lost' affords a fine instance of a sentence well arranged; alike in the priority of the subordinate
members, in the avoidance of long and numerous suspensions, and in the correspondence between
the order of the clauses and the sequence of the phenomena described, which, by the way, is
a further prerequisite to easy comprehension, and therefore to effect.

§ 26. The habitual use of sentences in which all or most of the descriptive and limiting elements
precede those described and limited, gives rise to what is called the inverted style: a title
which is, however, by no means confined to this structure, but is often used where the order
of the words is simply unusual. A more appropriate title would be the direct style, as contrasted
with the other, or indirect style: the peculiarity of the one being, that it conveys each thought
into the mind step by step with little liability to error; and of the other, that it gets the
right thought conceived by a series of approximations.

§ 27. The superiority of the direct over the indirect form of sentence, implied by the several
conclusions that have been drawn, must not, however, be affirmed without reservation. Though,
up to a certain point, it is well for the qualifying clauses of a period to precede those qualified;
yet, as carrying forward each qualifying clause costs some mental effort, it follows that when
the number of them and the time they are carried become great, we reach a limit beyond which
more is lost than is gained. Other things equal, the arrangement should be such that no concrete
image shall be suggested until the materials out of which it is to be made have been presented.
And yet, as lately pointed out, other things equal, the fewer the materials to be held at once,
and the shorter the distance they have to be borne, the better. Hence in some cases it becomes
a question whether most mental effort will be entailed by the many and long suspensions, or
by the correction of successive misconceptions.

