And while the Chevalier picked up the rapier from the ground where it had been flung, that
man waited with an outward calm for which at the moment I admired him, as we must ever admire
a tranquil bearing in one smitten by a great adversity. And than this I can conceive few greater.
He had played for much, and he had lost everything. Ignominy, degradation, and the block were
all that impended for him in this world, and they were very imminent.

He took the sword from the Chevalier. He held it for a second by the hilt, like one in thought,
like one who is resolving upon something, whilst the musketeer awaited his good pleasure with
that deference which all gentle minds must accord to the unfortunate.

Still holding his rapier, he raised his eyes for a second and let them rest on me with a grim
malevolence. Then he uttered a short laugh, and, shrugging his shoulders, he transferred his
grip to the blade, as if about to offer the hilt to the officer. Holding it so, halfway betwixt
point and quillons, he stepped suddenly back, and before any there could put forth a hand to
stay him, he had set the pummel on the ground and the point at his breast, and so dropped upon
it and impaled himself.

A cry went up from every throat, and we sprang towards him. He rolled over on his side, and
with a grin of exquisite pain, yet in words of unconquerable derision "You may have my sword
now, Monsieur l'Officier," he said, and sank back, swooning.

With an oath, the musketeer stepped forward. He obeyed Chatellerault to the letter, by kneeling
beside him and carefully withdrawing the sword. Then he ordered a couple of his men to take
up the body.

"Is he dead?" asked some one; and some one else replied, "Not yet, but he soon will be."

Two of the musketeers bore him into the inn and laid him on the floor of the very room in which,
an hour or so ago, he had driven a bargain with Roxalanne. A cloak rolled into a pillow was
thrust under his head, and there we left him in charge of his captors, the landlord, Saint-Eustache,
and La Fosse the latter inspired, I doubt not, by that morbidity which is so often a feature
of the poetic mind, and which impelled him now to witness the death-agony of my Lord of Chatellerault.

Myself, having resumed my garments, I disposed myself to repair at once to the Hotel de l'Epee,
there to seek Roxalanne, that I might set her fears and sorrows at rest, and that I might at
last make my confession.

As we stepped out into the street, where the dusk was now thickening, I turned to Castelroux
to inquire how Saint-Eustache came into Chatellerault's company.

"He is of the family of the Iscariot, I should opine," answered the Gascon. "As soon as he
had news that Chatellerault was come to Languedoc as the King's Commissioner, he repaired to
him to offer his services in the work of bringing rebels to justice. He urged that his thorough
acquaintance with the province should render him of value to the King, as also that he had
had particular opportunities of becoming acquainted with many treasonable dealings on the part
of men whom the State was far from suspecting."

"Mort Dieu!" I cried, "I had suspected something of such a nature. You do well to call him
of the family of the Iscariot. He is more so than you imagine: I have knowledge of this--ample
knowledge. He was until lately a rebel himself, and himself a follower of Gaston d'Orleans--though
of a lukewarm quality. What reasons have driven him to such work, do you know?"

"The same reason that impelled his forefather, Judas of old. The desire to enrich himself.
For every hitherto unsuspected rebel that shall be brought to justice and whose treason shall
be proven by his agency, he claims the half of that rebel's confiscated estates."

"Diable!" I exclaimed. "And does the Keeper of the Seals sanction this?"

"Sanction it? Saint-Eustache holds a commission, has a free hand and a company of horse to
follow him in his rebel-hunting."

"Has he done much so far?" was my next question.

"He has reduced half a dozen noblemen and their families. The wealth he must thereby have amassed
should be very considerable, indeed."

"To-morrow, Castelroux, I will see the King in connection with this pretty gentleman, and not
only shall we find him a dungeon deep and dank, but we shall see that he disgorges his blood-money."

"If you can prove his treason you will be doing blessed work," returned Castelroux. "Until
tomorrow, then, for here is the Hotel de l'Epee."

From the broad doorway of an imposing building a warm glow of light issued out and spread itself
fanwise across the ill-paved street. In this--like bats about a lamp--flitted the black figures
of gaping urchins and other stragglers, and into this I now passed, having taken leave of my
companions. Having eaten alone myself, I sent them a dish of Papitos, which
was barely intact but still good. I was tired at the time. I am a dog, I get so tired. Before I headed
to the bedroom I took a moment to ask about things first. God, have mercy on me. My wife wished
for me to sleep so as to leave her in peace.

But when she appeared I grew quite talkative. She did not enjoy this of me, she rarely liked talking
to me.

The wife, she noticed her husband sitting at the bedside table with the light on and a package
in his pocket, and, even more packages or some things wrapped in paper that he placed in front
of himself as is were preparing to work.

As he folded and unfolded the paper wrappers you could hear a slight scratchy noise that stood
out in the silence of the night. This noise also disturbed her, she felt it was attracting
attention.

The first big thing he did was take a fairly good sized package, something like the kind you get
at a pharmacy, the ones they divide the dosage of powdered medicine
with, and, hold it up to press into shape.

But, he had company, it was someone with, God!, a knife.

At first he thought they were just looking at some of the packages,
but no, who it was, was slinding a menacing knife across their fingertip
to see if it was sharp.

His wife had cold sweat all over her body, and, he could not bear the situaation any more than he
would be able to bear a horrific nightmare that might have woke him
from his sleep.

"What are you doing?" he asked.
The intruder looked very peaceful and answered, "I thought you were
asleep.

Those are nice things you have for Charles. But, you
still should lie down and get some sleep until tomorrow."

"You will
probably not like what I am going to say. I can take all of your packages
with my tip of my knife to the table beside of the bed," he said with
a gentle smile. "You are about to give your loved one the surprise
of a gift, because, you see, this is a daggar." Shivers ran through
the man's body, it already felt as if the cold blade had touched his
flesh and begun to saw. The intruder said, "Nice, eh? I bought it
today at the sword shop on Canizares Street. It says: Toledo, 1873." That I did not obey that impulse was something that presently I was very
bitterly to regret. How it came that I did not I scarcely know. I was tempted, perhaps, to
see how far this henchman whom for years I had trusted was unworthy of that trust. And so,
there in the porch, I stayed until he had ended by telling the company that he was on his way
to inform the King--who by great good chance was that day arrived in Toulouse--of the mistake
that had been made, and thus obtain my immediate enlargement and earn my undying gratitude.

Again I was on the point of entering to administer a very stern reproof to that talkative rogue,
when of a sudden there was a commotion within. I caught a scraping of chairs, a dropping of
voices, and then suddenly I found myself confronted by Roxalanne de Lavedan herself, issuing
with a page and a woman in attendance.

For just a second her eyes rested on me, and the light coming through the doorway at her back
boldly revealed my countenance. And a very startled countenance it must have been, for in that
fraction of time I knew that she had heard all that Rodenard had been relating. Under that
instant's glance of her eyes I felt myself turn pale; a shiver ran through me, and the sweat
started cold upon my brow. Then her gaze passed from me, and looked beyond into the street,
as though she had not known me; whether in her turn she paled or reddened I cannot say, for
the light was too uncertain. Next followed what seemed to me an interminable pause, although,
indeed, it can have been no more than a matter of seconds--aye, and of but few. Then, her gown
drawn well aside, she passed me in that same irrecognizing way, whilst I, abashed, shrank back
into the shadows of the porch, burning with shame and rage and humiliation.

From under her brows her woman glanced at me inquisitively; her liveried page, his nose in
the air, eyed me so pertly that I was hard put to it not to hasten with my foot his descent
of the steps.

At last they were gone, and from the outside the shrill voice of her page was wafted to me.
He was calling to the ostler for her carriage. Standing, in my deep mortification, where she
had passed me, I conjectured from that demand that she was journeying to Lavedan.

She knew now how she had been cheated on every hand, first by me and later, that very afternoon,
by Chatellerault, and her resolve to quit Toulouse could but signify that she was done with
me for good. That it had surprised her to find me at large already, I fancied I had seen in
her momentary glance, but her pride had been quick to conquer and stifle all signs of that
surprise.

I remained where she had passed me until her coach had rumbled away into the night, and during
the moments that elapsed I had stood arguing with myself and resolving upon my course of action.
But despair was fastening upon me.

I had come to the Hotel de l'Epee, exulting, joyous, and confident of victory. I had come to
confess everything to her, and by virtue of what I had done that confession was rendered easy.
I could have said to her: "The woman whom I wagered to win was not you, Roxalanne, but a certain
Mademoiselle de Lavedan. Your love I have won, but that you may foster no doubts of my intentions,
I have paid my wager and acknowledge defeat. I have made over to Chatellerault and to his heirs
for all time my estates of Bardelys."

Oh, I had rehearsed it in my mind, and I was confident--I knew--that I should win her. And
now--the disclosure of that shameful traffic coming from other lips than mine had ruined everything
by forestalling my avowal.

Rodenard should pay for it--by God, he should! Once again did I become a prey to the passion
of anger which I have ever held to be unworthy in a gentleman, but to which it would seem that
I was growing accustomed to give way. The ostler was mounting the steps at the moment. He carried
in his hand a stout horsewhip with a long knotted thong. Hastily muttering a "By your leave,"
I snatched it from him and sprang into the room.

My intendant was still talking of me. The room was crowded, for Rodenard alone had brought
with him my twenty followers. One of these looked up as I brushed past him, and uttered a cry
of surprise upon recognizing me. But Rodenard talked on, engrossed in his theme to the exclusion
of all else.

"Monsieur le Marquis," he was saying, "is a gentleman whom it is, indeed, an honour to serve--"

A scream burst from him with the last word, for the lash of my whip had burnt a wheal upon
his well-fed sides.

"It is an honour that shall be yours no more, you dog!" I cried.

He leapt high into the air as my whip cut him again. He swung round, his face twisted with
pain, his flabby cheeks white with fear, and his eyes wild with anger, for as yet the full
force of the situation had not been borne in upon him. Then, seeing me there, and catching
something of the awful passion that must have been stamped upon my face, he dropped on his
knees and cried out something that I did not understand for I was past understanding much just
then.

The lash whistled through the air again and caught him about the shoulders. He writhed and
roared in his anguish of both flesh and spirit. But I was pitiless. He had ruined my life for
me with his talking, and, as God lived, he should pay the only price that it lay in his power
to pay--the price of physical suffering. Again and again my whip hissed about his head and
cut into his soft white flesh, whilst roaring for mercy he moved and rocked on his knees before
me. Instinctively he approached me to hamper my movements, whilst I moved back to give my lash
the better play. He held out his arms and joined his fat hands in supplication, but the lash
caught them in its sinuous tormenting embrace, and started a red wheal across their whiteness.
He tucked them into his armpits with a scream, and fell prone upon the ground.

Then I remember that some of my men essayed to restrain me, which to my passion was as the
wind to a blaze. I cracked my whip about their heads, commanding them to keep their distance
lest they were minded to share his castigation. And so fearful an air must I have worn, that,
daunted, they hung back and watched their leader's punishment in silence.

When I think of it now, I take no little shame at the memory of how I beat him. It is, indeed,
with deep reluctance and yet deeper shame that I have brought myself to write of it. If I offend
you with this account of that horsewhipping, let necessity be my apology; for the horsewhipping
itself I have, unfortunately, no apology, save the blind fury that obsessed me--which is no
apology at all.

Upon the morrow I repented me already with much bitterness. But in that hour I knew no reason.
I was mad, and of my madness was born this harsh brutality.

"You would talk of me and my affairs in a tavern, you hound!" I cried, out of breath both by
virtue of my passion and my exertions. "Let the memory of this act as a curb upon your poisonous
tongue in future."

"Monseigneur!" he screamed. "Misericorde, monseigneur!"

"Aye, you shall have mercy--just so much mercy as you deserve. Have I trusted you all these
years, and did my father trust you before me, for this? Have you grown sleek and fat and smug
in my service that you should requite me thus? Sangdieu, Rodenard! My father had hanged you
for the half of the talking that you have done this night. You dog! You miserable knave!"

"Monseigneur," he shrieked again, "forgive! For your sainted mother's sake, forgive! Monseigneur,
I did not know--"

"But you are learning, cur; you are learning by the pain of your fat carcase; is it not so,
carrion?"

He sank down, his strength exhausted, a limp, moaning, bleeding mass of flesh, into which my
whip still cut relentlessly.

I have a picture in my mind of that ill-lighted room, of the startled faces on which the flickering
glimmer of the candles shed odd shadows; of the humming and cracking of my whip; of my own
voice raised in oaths and epithets of contempt; of Rodenard's screams; of the cries raised
here and there in remonstrance or in entreaty, and of some more bold that called shame upon
me. Then others took up that cry of "Shame!" so that at last I paused and stood there drawn
up to my full height, as if in challenge. Towering above the heads of any in that room, I held
my whip menacingly. I was unused to criticism, and their expressions of condemnation roused me.

"Who questions my right?" I demanded arrogantly, whereupon they one and all fell silent. "If
any here be bold enough to step out, he shall have my answer." Then, as none responded, I signified
my contempt for them by a laugh.

"Monseigneur!" wailed Rodenard at my feet, his voice growing feeble.

By way of answer, I gave him a final cut, then I flung the whip-- which had grown ragged in
the fray--back to the ostler from whom I had borrowed it.

"Let that suffice you, Rodenard," I said, touching him with my foot. "See that I never set
eyes upon you again, if you cherish your miserable life!"

"Not that, monseigneur." groaned the wretch. "Oh, not that! You have punished me; you have
whipped me until I cannot stand; forgive me, monseigneur, forgive me now!"

"I have forgiven you, but I never wish to see you again, lest I should forget that I have forgiven
you. Take him away, some of you," I bade my men, and in swift, silent obedience two of them
stepped forward and bore the groaning, sobbing fellow from the room. When that was done "Host,"
I commanded, "prepare me a room. Attend me, a couple of you."

I gave orders thereafter for the disposal of my baggage, some of which my lacqueys brought
up to the chamber that the landlord had in haste made ready for me. D.
Juan said that if the government acetic, was to be to defend the fort and not to pay, that
if it wanted to, he would take office. The Antonio Davila went with
this response.

They gathered this morning in the tent of Captain Zapata, who was in bed wounded by an arrow, and
remembered among those who were there to write a letter to D. Alvaro giving to understand how
your trip had stirred all the people, who came to giving orders than it had to do, where not,
they would meet what they saw that Would she not think, naturally
enough, that I was but making the best of the situation, and that my avowal of the truth of
a story which it was not in my power to deny was not spontaneous, but forced from me by circumstances?
No, there was nothing more to be done. A score of amours had claimed my attention in the past
and received it; yet there was not one of those affairs whose miscarriage would have afforded
me the slightest concern or mortification. It seemed like an irony, like a Dies ire, that it
should have been left to this first true passion of my life to have gone awry.

I slept ill when at last I sought my bed, and through the night I nursed my bitter grief, huddling
to me the corpse of the love she had borne me as a mother may the corpse of her first-born.

On the morrow I resolved to leave Toulouse--to quit this province wherein so much had befallen
me and repair to Beaugency, there to grow old in misanthropical seclusion. I had done with
Courts, I had done with love and with women; I had done, it seemed to me, with life itself.
Prodigal had it been in gifts that I had not sought of it. It had spread my table with the
richest offerings, but they had been little to my palate, and I had nauseated quickly. And
now, when here in this remote corner of France it had shown me the one prize I coveted, it
had been swift to place it beyond my reach, thereby sowing everlasting discontent and misery
in my hitherto pampered heart.

I saw Castelroux that day, but I said no word to him of my affliction. He brought me news of
Chatellerault. The Count was lying in a dangerous condition at the Auberge Royale, and might
not be moved. The physician attending him all but despaired of his life.

"He is asking to see you," said Castelroux.

But I was not minded to respond. For all that he had deeply wronged me, for all that I despised
him very cordially, the sight of him in his present condition might arouse my pity, and I was
in no mood to waste upon such a one as Chatellerault even on his deathbed--a quality of which
I had so dire a need just then for my own case.

"I will not go," said I, after deliberation. "Tell him from me that I forgive him freely if
it be that he seeks my forgiveness; tell him that I bear him no rancour, and--that he had better
make his will, to save me trouble hereafter, if he should chance to die." With D. Alvaro
they consulted and communicated everything that had to do.

From here began the discord between those who gave the order, and with this in place, 25 October 1560,
they made sail from the port of Messina, the ship Emperial, the captain of all the others,
which would be up to 40.

I was assigned by Commissioner general Andrea of Gonzaga, Colonel and Master Field General of all the italian
people, and the ships went eight days in booms, tacking, unable to
move from Zaragoza, where it entered on the 1st of September by bad
weather. This same day the galleries with the Viceroy arrived, and
after a few days they were gathering Norway lobster and other ships,
with people and ammunition. I can assign no reason for
my dallying mood. Perhaps it sprang from the inertness that pervaded me, perhaps some mysterious
hand detained me. Be that as it may, that I remained another night at the Hotel de l'Epee was
one of those contingencies which, though slight and seemingly inconsequential in themselves,
lead to great issues. Had I departed that day for Beaugency, it is likely that you had never
heard of me--leastways, not from my own pen--for in what so far I have told you, without that
which is to follow, there is haply little that was worth the labour of setting down.

In the morning, then, I set out; but having started late, we got no farther than Grenade, where
we lay the night once more at the Hotel de la Couronne. And so, through having delayed my departure
by a single day, did it come to pass that a message reached me before it might have been too late.

It was high noon of the morrow. Our horses stood saddled; indeed, some of my men were already
mounted--for I was not minded to disband them until Beaugency was reached--and my two coaches
were both ready for the journey. The habits of a lifetime are not so easy to abandon even when
Necessity raises her compelling voice.

I was in the act of settling my score with the landlord when of a sudden there were quick steps
in the passage, the clank of a rapier against the wall, and a voice--the voice of Castelroux--calling
excitedly "Bardelys! Monsieur de Bardelys!"

"What brings you here?" I cried in greeting, as he stepped into the room.

"Are you still for Beaugency?" he asked sharply, throwing back his head.

"Why, yes," I answered, wondering at this excitement.

"Then you have seen nothing of Saint-Eustache and his men?"

"Nothing."

"Yet they must have passed this way not many hours ago." Then tossing his hat on the table
and speaking with sudden vehemence: "If you have any interest in the family of Lavedan, you
will return upon the instant to Toulouse."

The mention of Lavedan was enough to quicken my pulses. Yet in the past two days I had mastered
resignation, and in doing that we school ourselves to much restraint. I turned slowly, and
surveyed the little Captain attentively. His black eyes sparkled, and his moustaches bristled
with excitement. Clearly he had news of import. I turned to the landlord.

"Leave us, Monsieur l'Hote," said I shortly; and when he had departed, "What of the Lavedan
family, Castelroux?" I inquired as calmly as I might.

"The Chevalier de Saint-Eustache left Toulouse at six o'clock this morning for Lavedan."

Swift the suspicion of his errand broke upon my mind.

