BUNNER SISTERS

By Edith Wharton

Scribner's Magazine 60 (Oct. 1916): 439-58; 60 (Nov. 1916): 575-96.

PART I

I

In the days when New York's traffic moved at the pace of the drooping horse-car, when society
applauded Christine Nilsson at the Academy of Music and basked in the sunsets of the Hudson
River School on the walls of the National Academy of Design, an inconspicuous shop with a single
show-window was intimately and favourably known to the feminine population of the quarter bordering
on Stuyvesant Square. She refused information to be
about where it was last night, did not want to admit where they used to as a child for seven years
in hiding on hold and said: My soul is innocent, I can not say more. Later she would not betray
her secret, so that finally the award was made: the woman is a witch, a Wärwolf and other Uebelthäterin,
Wherefore they must die by fire. There was then a big bonfire built on which would entail tying the
poor woman, whereupon he was set on fire. But when the flame flared up precisely, fog was so
dense that one's hand before his eyes could not see [8]. Later, when the sun's rays vacuumed
up the fog, they found the stake still intact, but the woman was nowhere to find out it was as if they
would have vanished in the mist. - Des mist mountain king had saved.

Although now Tiu now had the mist mountains good days, her heart was still no peace but longed for
the retarded child. If I had my daughter here - so they sighed often - then I could live happy,
but half the heart is always with the Child in the village, and the other half lives in grief.
King of the mountain mist divined their secret Thoughts and was once at night, the daughter of the
village brought to the mother. There were both mother and daughter, perfectly happy, and longed
for nothing more. The villagers and the man believed that those who changed into a woman Wärwolf
the child taken away at night have. The man was marrying another woman, but neither his own nor those
of other husbandry Courts took such good progress as usual, every summer they suffered damage from
drought, the Cereals and grass spoiled because the refreshing night dew did not fall on the
line, the the people inhabiting it. The cloud mountain king was angry that she had his child
care want to kill.

[Footnote 4: mortal elves in fairy land or the time elapses, they unconsciously, with torrential Speed.
S. Keller 's note to Volume 1, p. 364 L.]

[Footnote 5: See Vol 1, p. 89, note and p. 104 n., and p. 30 hot on the latter point the moonlight
bathing maidens of the forest elves and the "turf mother daughters." If in our fairy tale,
the king of the mountain mist is the husband of the mother's lawn,
so would like a original identity of that can be adopted with the
"Wood Elf".

L.]

[Footnote 6: S. Volume 1, p. 83, n. 2. L.]

[Footnote 7: Ehstn. liba hunt, actually läufische she-wolf, is, according to superstition,
the ninth be a wolf boy, more greedy and dangerous, with a pointed
snout, which is the Animals obtained from behind them and tears out
the entrails (Wiedemann, Ehstnisch-German Dictionary.

P. V). There is obviously Wärwolf, that man wolf.

Compare on this superstition Russwurm Eibofolke p. 360 L.]

[Footnote
8: Literally: That no one could see his feet. L.]

3.
It was not what they had once imagined it would be, but though it presented but a shrunken
image of their earlier ambitions it enabled them to pay their rent and keep themselves alive
and out of debt; and it was long since their hopes had soared higher.

Now and then, however, among their greyer hours there came one not bright enough to be called
sunny, but rather of the silvery twilight hue which sometimes ends a day of storm. It was such
an hour that Ann Eliza, the elder of the firm, was soberly enjoying as she sat one January
evening in the back room which served as bedroom, kitchen and parlour to herself and her sister
Evelina. In the shop the blinds had been drawn down, the counters cleared and the wares in
the window lightly covered with an old sheet; but the shop-door remained unlocked till Evelina,
who had taken a parcel to the dyer's, should come back.

In the back room a kettle bubbled on the stove, and Ann Eliza had laid a cloth over one end
of the centre table, and placed near the green-shaded sewing lamp two tea-cups, two plates,
a sugar-bowl and a piece of pie. The rest of the room remained in a greenish shadow which discreetly
veiled the outline of an old-fashioned mahogany bedstead surmounted by a chromo of a young
lady in a night-gown who clung with eloquently-rolling eyes to a crag described in illuminated
letters as the Rock of Ages; and against the unshaded windows two rocking-chairs and a sewing-machine
were silhouetted on the dusk.

Ann Eliza, her small and habitually anxious face smoothed to unusual serenity, and the streaks
of pale hair on her veined temples shining glossily beneath the lamp, had seated herself at
the table, and was tying up, with her usual fumbling deliberation, a knobby object wrapped
in paper. Now and then, as she struggled with the string, which was too short, she fancied
she heard the click of the shop-door, and paused to listen for her sister; then, as no one
came, she straightened her spectacles and entered into renewed conflict with the parcel. In
honour of some event of obvious importance, she had put on her double-dyed and triple-turned
black silk. Age, while bestowing on this garment a patine worthy of a Renaissance bronze, had
deprived it of whatever curves the wearer's pre-Raphaelite figure had once been able to impress
on it; but this stiffness of outline gave it an air of sacerdotal state which seemed to emphasize
the importance of the occasion.

Seen thus, in her sacramental black silk, a wisp of lace turned over the collar and fastened
by a mosaic brooch, and her face smoothed into harmony with her apparel, Ann Eliza looked ten
years younger than behind the counter, in the heat and burden of the day. It would have been
as difficult to guess her approximate age as that of the black silk, for she had the same worn
and glossy aspect as her dress; but a faint tinge of pink still lingered on her cheek-bones,
like the reflection of sunset which sometimes colours the west long after the day is over.

When she had tied the parcel to her satisfaction, and laid it with furtive accuracy just opposite
her sister's plate, she sat down, with an air of obviously-assumed indifference, in one of
the rocking-chairs near the window; and a moment later the shop-door opened and Evelina entered.

The younger Bunner sister, who was a little taller than her elder, had a more pronounced nose,
but a weaker slope of mouth and chin. She still permitted herself the frivolity of waving her
pale hair, and its tight little ridges, stiff as the tresses of an Assyrian statue, were flattened
under a dotted veil which ended at the tip of her cold-reddened nose. In her scant jacket and
skirt of black cashmere she looked singularly nipped and faded; but it seemed possible that
under happier conditions she might still warm into relative youth.

"Why, Ann Eliza," she exclaimed, in a thin voice pitched to chronic fretfulness, "what in the
world you got your best silk on for?"

Ann Eliza had risen with a blush that made her steel-browed spectacles incongruous.

"Why, Evelina, why shouldn't I, I sh'ld like to know? Ain't it your birthday, dear?" She put
out her arms with the awkwardness of habitually repressed emotion.

Evelina, without seeming to notice the gesture, threw back the jacket from her narrow shoulders.

"Oh, pshaw," she said, less peevishly. "I guess we'd better give up birthdays. Much as we can
do to keep Christmas nowadays."

"You hadn't oughter say that, Evelina. We ain't so badly off as all that. I guess you're cold
and tired. Set down while I take the kettle off: it's right on the boil."

She pushed Evelina toward the table, keeping a sideward eye on her sister's listless movements,
while her own hands were busy with the kettle. A moment later came the exclamation for which
she waited.

"Why, Ann Eliza!" Evelina stood transfixed by the sight of the parcel beside her plate.

Ann Eliza, tremulously engaged in filling the teapot, lifted a look of hypocritical surprise.

"Sakes, Evelina! What's the matter?"

The younger sister had rapidly untied the string, and drawn from its wrappings a round nickel
clock of the kind to be bought for a dollar-seventy-five.

"Oh, Ann Eliza, how could you?" She set the clock down, and the sisters exchanged agitated
glances across the table.

"Well," the elder retorted, "AIN'T it your birthday?"

"Yes, but--"

"Well, and ain't you had to run round the corner to the Square every morning, rain or shine,
to see what time it was, ever since we had to sell mother's watch last July? Ain't you, Evelina?"

"Yes, but--"

"There ain't any buts. We've always wanted a clock and now we've got one: that's all there
is about it. Ain't she a beauty, Evelina?" Ann Eliza, putting back the kettle on the stove,
leaned over her sister's shoulder to pass an approving hand over the circular rim of the clock.
"Hear how loud she ticks. I was afraid you'd hear her soon as you come in."

"No. I wasn't thinking," murmured Evelina.

"Well, ain't you glad now?" Ann Eliza gently reproached her. The rebuke had no acerbity, for
she knew that Evelina's seeming indifference was alive with unexpressed scruples.

"I'm real glad, sister; but you hadn't oughter. We could have got on well enough without."

"Evelina Bunner, just you sit down to your tea. I guess I know what I'd oughter and what I'd
hadn't oughter just as well as you do--I'm old enough!"

"You're real good, Ann Eliza; but I know you've given up something you needed to get me this
clock."

"What do I need, I'd like to know? Ain't I got a best black silk?" the elder sister said with
a laugh full of nervous pleasure.

She poured out Evelina's tea, adding some condensed milk from the jug, and cutting for her
the largest slice of pie; then she drew up her own chair to the table.

The two women ate in silence for a few moments before Evelina began to speak again. "The clock
is perfectly lovely and I don't say it ain't a comfort to have it; but I hate to think what
it must have cost you."

"No, it didn't, neither," Ann Eliza retorted. "I got it dirt cheap, if you want to know. And
I paid for it out of a little extra work I did the other night on the machine for Mrs. Hawkins."

"The baby-waists?"

"Yes."

"There, I knew it! You swore to me you'd buy a new pair of shoes with that money."

"Well, and s'posin' I didn't want 'em--what then? I've patched up the old ones as good as new--and
I do declare, Evelina Bunner, if you ask me another question you'll go and spoil all my pleasure."

"Very well, I won't," said the younger sister.

They continued to eat without farther words. Evelina yielded to her sister's entreaty that
she should finish the pie, and poured out a second cup of tea, into which she put the last
lump of sugar; and between them, on the table, the clock kept up its sociable tick.

"Where'd you get it, Ann Eliza?" asked Evelina, fascinated.

"Where'd you s'pose? Why, right round here, over acrost the Square, in the queerest little
store you ever laid eyes on. I saw it in the window as I was passing, and I stepped right in
and asked how much it was, and the store-keeper he was real pleasant about it. He was just
the nicest man. I guess he's a German. I told him I couldn't give much, and he said, well,
he knew what hard times was too. His name's Ramy--Herman Ramy: I saw it written up over the
store. And he told me he used to work at Tiff'ny's, oh, for years, in the clock-department,
and three years ago he took sick with some kinder fever, and lost his place, and when he got
well they'd engaged somebody else and didn't want him, and so he started this little store
by himself. I guess he's real smart, and he spoke quite like an educated man--but he looks sick."

Evelina was listening with absorbed attention. In the narrow lives of the two sisters such
an episode was not to be under-rated.

"What you say his name was?" she asked as Ann Eliza paused.

"Herman Ramy."

"How old is he?"

"Well, I couldn't exactly tell you, he looked so sick--but I don't b'lieve he's much over forty."

By this time the plates had been cleared and the teapot emptied, and the two sisters rose from
the table. Ann Eliza, tying an apron over her black silk, carefully removed all traces of the
meal; then, after washing the cups and plates, and putting them away in a cupboard, she drew
her rocking-chair to the lamp and sat down to a heap of mending. Evelina, meanwhile, had been
roaming about the room in search of an abiding-place for the clock. A rosewood what-not with
ornamental fret-work hung on the wall beside the devout young lady in dishabille, and after
much weighing of alternatives the sisters decided to dethrone a broken china vase filled with
dried grasses which had long stood on the top shelf, and to put the clock in its place; the
vase, after farther consideration, being relegated to a small table covered with blue and white
beadwork, which held a Bible and prayer-book, and an illustrated copy of Longfellow's poems
given as a school-prize to their father.

This change having been made, and the effect studied from every angle of the room, Evelina
languidly put her pinking-machine on the table, and sat down to the monotonous work of pinking
a heap of black silk flounces. The strips of stuff slid slowly to the floor at her side, and
the clock, from its commanding altitude, kept time with the dispiriting click of the instrument
under her fingers.

II

The purchase of Evelina's clock had been a more important event in the life of Ann Eliza Bunner
than her younger sister could divine. In the first place, there had been the demoralizing satisfaction
of finding herself in possession of a sum of money which she need not put into the common fund,
but could spend as she chose, without consulting Evelina, and then the excitement of her stealthy
trips abroad, undertaken on the rare occasions when she could trump up a pretext for leaving
the shop; since, as a rule, it was Evelina who took the bundles to the dyer's, and delivered
the purchases of those among their customers who were too genteel to be seen carrying home
a bonnet or a bundle of pinking--so that, had it not been for the excuse of having to see Mrs.
Hawkins's teething baby, Ann Eliza would hardly have known what motive to allege for deserting
her usual seat behind the counter.

The infrequency of her walks made them the chief events of her life. The mere act of going
out from the monastic quiet of the shop into the tumult of the streets filled her with a subdued
excitement which grew too intense for pleasure as she was swallowed by the engulfing roar of
Broadway or Third Avenue, and began to do timid battle with their incessant cross-currents
of humanity. After a glance or two into the great show-windows she usually allowed herself
to be swept back into the shelter of a side-street, and finally regained her own roof in a
state of breathless bewilderment and fatigue; but gradually, as her nerves were soothed by
the familiar quiet of the little shop, and the click of Evelina's pinking-machine, certain
sights and sounds would detach themselves from the torrent along which she had been swept,
and she would devote the rest of the day to a mental reconstruction of the different episodes
of her walk, till finally it took shape in her thought as a consecutive and highly-coloured
experience, from which, for weeks afterwards, she would detach some fragmentary recollection
in the course of her long dialogues with her sister.

But when, to the unwonted excitement of going out, was added the intenser interest of looking
for a present for Evelina, Ann Eliza's agitation, sharpened by concealment, actually preyed
upon her rest; and it was not till the present had been given, and she had unbosomed herself
of the experiences connected with its purchase, that she could look back with anything like
composure to that stirring moment of her life. From that day forward, however, she began to
take a certain tranquil pleasure in thinking of Mr. Ramy's small shop, not unlike her own in
its countrified obscurity, though the layer of dust which covered its counter and shelves made
the comparison only superficially acceptable. Still, she did not judge the state of the shop
severely, for Mr. Ramy had told her that he was alone in the world, and lone men, she was aware,
did not know how to deal with dust. It gave her a good deal of occupation to wonder why he
had never married, or if, on the other hand, he were a widower, and had lost all his dear little
children; and she scarcely knew which alternative seemed to make him the more interesting.
In either case, his life was assuredly a sad one; and she passed many hours in speculating
on the manner in which he probably spent his evenings. She knew he lived at the back of his
shop, for she had caught, on entering, a glimpse of a dingy room with a tumbled bed; and the
pervading smell of cold fry suggested that he probably did his own cooking. She wondered if
he did not often make his tea with water that had not boiled, and asked herself, almost jealously,
who looked after the shop while he went to market. Then the leader said: From what you heard yesterday and last night and have seen,
you may speak not a word at home, just say you had got lost in the woods. Then she gave the child
a small silver clasp and said, "If you come over the desire should come to us once again to
host, so just breathe in this clip, so find you have the way to us, "The child put the clip
in his pocket and thought on the way to the village in what would probably keep the parents
of the matter, since they were the truth should not confess. In the village street, two men
walked past her, which they do not knew. When she entered his father's courtyard gate, the
place seemed completely foreign to her, where before nothing had stood since grown now Aepfelbäume,
on which hung beautiful fruit. The house seemed strange to her. As a strange man stepped out
the door, shook his head in wonder as and said, so that the girl heard it on the court: "A strange
village girl is on our Court. The girl seemed the thing like a dream, but she went a few steps
closer to she came to the threshold. When they looked into it in the room, she saw the father
on the the stove was sitting, a strange woman and a young man sat next to him, but the father
had Beard and hair turned gray. "Good morning, Father," said the daughter, "is where the Mother?
"-"? The mother, the mother cried the startled stranger. "God help us! are Tiu you the lost
spirit, or are you a living creature like us? Is it possible to that our dear, that we died
seven years ago, back for a second time to life come from? "Tiu was not this speech wise. As the
stranger rose from the Bank, slipped Tiu's shirt sleeve to place on the wrist, a small burn mark
and called then, the girl Embrace "Our Tiu, wept for our dead child, the seven Years was lost
in the woods. "That just can not be," said Tiu, "I'm just a Night and a day away from you was,
or two nights and a day "[4].

Now there was on both sides enough to wonder, Tiu saw clearly that
they have been gone longer was when she felt herself, because she
was now a bit taller than her mother and father and mother were aged.



Ann Eliza, making her way through the outskirts of potato-barrels and flabby fish, found no
one in the shop but the gory-aproned butcher who stood in the background cutting chops.

As she approached him across the tesselation of fish-scales, blood and saw-dust, he laid aside
his cleaver and not unsympathetically asked: "Sister sick?"

"Oh, not very--jest a cold," she answered, as guiltily as if Evelina's illness had been feigned.
"We want a steak as usual, please--and my sister said you was to be sure to give me jest as
good a cut as if it was her," she added with child-like candour.

"Oh, that's all right." The butcher picked up his weapon with a grin. "Your sister knows a
cut as well as any of us," he remarked.

In another moment, Ann Eliza reflected, the steak would be cut and wrapped up, and no choice
left her but to turn her disappointed steps toward home. She was too shy to try to delay the
butcher by such conversational arts as she possessed, but the approach of a deaf old lady in
an antiquated bonnet and mantle gave her her opportunity.

"Wait on her first, please," Ann Eliza whispered. "I ain't in any hurry."

The butcher advanced to his new customer, and Ann Eliza, palpitating in the back of the shop,
saw that the old lady's hesitations between liver and pork chops were likely to be indefinitely
prolonged. They were still unresolved when she was interrupted by the entrance of a blowsy
Irish girl with a basket on her arm. The newcomer caused a momentary diversion, and when she
had departed the old lady, who was evidently as intolerant of interruption as a professional
story-teller, insisted on returning to the beginning of her complicated order, and weighing
anew, with an anxious appeal to the butcher's arbitration, the relative advantages of pork
and liver. But even her hesitations, and the intrusion on them of two or three other customers,
were of no avail, for Mr. Ramy was not among those who entered the shop; and at last Ann Eliza,
ashamed of staying longer, reluctantly claimed her steak, and walked home through the thickening
snow.

Even to her simple judgment the vanity of her hopes was plain, and in the clear light that
disappointment turns upon our actions she wondered how she could have been foolish enough to
suppose that, even if Mr. Ramy DID go to that particular market, he would hit on the same day
and hour as herself.

