There was never any question, after that, of Texan independence; Santa Anna, to save a life
forfeited a hundred times over, was ready to agree to any terms. Houston was a popular hero;
Texas was his child, and he was unanimously chosen President of the new Republic. From the
first, Houston, recalling the wishes of his old leader, Andrew Jackson, sought annexation to
the United States, and the debates over the question in Congress nearly disrupted the Union.
For the North feared the effects of such a tremendous addition to slave territory, from which
three or four states might be carved, and so destroy the balance of power between North and
South. Again, Mexico, which still dreamed of reconquering Texas, notified the United States
that annexation would be considered a declaration of war; but Houston pressed the question
with great adroitness, it was evident that Texas really belonged in the Union, and on March
1, 1845, Congress passed the resolution of annexation, and Houston and Husk, the heroes of
San Jacinto, were at once elected senators.

In the brief but brilliant war with Mexico which followed, which is considered more in detail
in connection with the life of Winfield Scott, and which resulted in the securing of the great
Southwest for the United States, Houston played no part, except as a member of the Senate,
where he remained until 1859, being defeated finally by a secessionist. For, true to the precepts
of Jackson, he was from the first bitterly opposed to nullification and secession. The same
year, he was elected governor of Texas, turning a Union minority into a triumphant majority
by the wizardry of his personality. He could not prevent secession, however, but he refused
to take the oath to the Confederate government required by the legislature and was deposed.
Martial law being established, an officer one day demanded Houston's pass.

"San Jacinto," he answered, and went on his way, nor did any dare molest him. But he was worn
out and aging fast, and the end came toward the close of July, 1863.

Reference has been made to the capture of the old mission at San Antonio known as "The Alamo,"
and a brief account must be given of the remarkable group of men who lost their lives there--David
Crockett, James Bowie, and William Barrett Travis. Crockett was perhaps the most famous of
the three, and his name is still more or less of a household word throughout the middle West,
while some of his stories have passed into proverbs. He was the most famous rifle shot in the
whole country and the most successful hunter. Born in Tennessee soon after the Revolutionary
war, of an Irish father, he ran away from home after a few days' schooling, knocked about the
country, served through the Creek war under Andrew Jackson, and gained so much popularity by
his hunting stories, with which he held great audiences spellbound, that he was elected to
the State legislature and then to Congress, though he had never read a newspaper. In Congress,
he managed to antagonize Andrew Jackson, not a difficult task by any means, with the result
that Jackson, who carried Tennessee in his vest pocket, effectively ended Crockett's political
career. Crockett left the state in disgust, seeking new worlds to conquer, and hearing of the
struggle in Texas, decided to join the revolutionists.

By boat and on horseback, he made his way toward the distant plains where the Texans were waging
their life and death struggle against the Mexicans. More than one hairbreadth escape did the
old hunter have from Indians, desperadoes and wild beasts, but he finally got to the neighborhood
of San Antonio, and fell in with another adventurer, a bee-hunter, also on his way to join
the Texans. They soon learned that a great Mexican army was marching on San Antonio, and that
the defenders of the place had gathered in the old mission called "The Alamo." There were only
a hundred and fifty of them, while the Mexican army numbered four thousand; but they had made
up their minds to hold the place, a mere shell, utterly unable to withstand artillery, or even
a regular and well-directed assault. It was plain enough that to attempt to defend the place
against such an overwhelming force was desperate in the extreme, but Crockett and his companion
kept straight on, and were soon inside The Alamo. A few days later, Santa Anna's great army
camped around it.

In command of The Alamo garrison was Colonel Travis, a young man of twenty-five; an Alabaman,
admitted to the bar there, but driven out of his native state by financial troubles, and casting
in his lot with the Texas revolutionists, among whom he soon acquired considerable influence.
The third of the trio, Colonel Bowie, was a native of Georgia, but had settled in Louisiana,
where, nine years before, he had been a participant in a celebrated affray. Two gentlemen,
becoming involved in a quarrel, decided to settle it in approved fashion by a duel, and, accompanied
by their friends, among whom was Bowie, adjourned to a convenient place and took a shot at
each other without doing any damage. They were about to declare honor satisfied and to shake
hands, when a dispute arose among their friends, and before it was over, fifteen were killed
and six were badly injured. Bowie distinguished himself by stabbing a man to death with a knife
made from a large file. The weapon was afterwards sent to Philadelphia and there fashioned
into the deadly knife which has ever since been known by his name. The prospect of trouble
in Texas naturally attracted him, he was made colonel of militia there, and dispatched to The
Alamo with a small force by General Houston early in 1836.

Here, then, in this old and crumbling Spanish mission, toward the end of February, were gathered
a hundred and fifty Texans, a wild and undisciplined band, impatient of restraint or control,
but men of iron courage and the best shots on the border, with Travis in command; while without
was the army of Santa Anna. On February 24th, Travis, in a letter asking for reinforcements,
announced the siege and added that he would never surrender or retreat. Early in March, thirty-two
men from Gonzales, knowing they were going to well-nigh certain death, made their way into
the fort, raising its garrison to 180.

Santa Anna demanded unconditional surrender, and Travis answered with a cannon-shot; whereat,
on the morning of the sixth of March, the Mexican army stormed the fort from all sides, swarmed
in through breaches and over the walls, which the Texans were too few to man, and a desperate
hand-to-hand conflict followed. To and fro between the shattered walls the fight reeled, each
tall Texan the centre of a group of foes, fighting with a wild and desperate courage; but the
odds were too great, and one by one they fell, thrust through with bayonets or riddled by bullets.
Colonel Travis fell, and so did Bowie, sick and weak from a wasting disease, but rising from
his bed, and dying fighting with his great knife red with the blood of his foes. At last a
single man stood at bay. It was Davy Crockett.

Wounded in a dozen places, ringed about by the bodies of the men he had slain, he stood facing
his foes, his back against a wall, knife in hand, daring them to come on. No one dared to run
in upon that old lion. So they held him there with their lances, while, the musketeers loaded
their carbines and shot him down. Not a man of the garrison was left alive, but each of them
had avenged himself four times over, for the Mexican loss was over five hundred. So ended one
of the most heroic events in American history. "Thermopylae had its messengers of death; The
Alamo had none."

       *       *       *       *       *

One more era remains to be recorded, that in which the United States confirmed its hold upon
the Pacific coast, and here again the story is that of the lives of three men--Marcus Whitman,
John Augustus Sutter, and John Charles Frémont. It was Whitman who brought home to the Nation
the value of Oregon by a spectacular ride from ocean to ocean; it was Sutter who led the way
for an American invasion of California, and who gave impetus to that invasion by the discovery
of gold; and it was Frémont who led the revolution there against the Mexicans, and who secured
the country's independence.

The explorations of Lewis and Clark, early in the century, had made the country along the Columbia
river known to the East in a dim way, but it was so distant and so inaccessible that it excited
little interest. Just before the second war with England, John Jacob Astor had attempted to
carry out a far-reaching plan for the development of the country and the securing of its great
fur trade, but the outbreak of the war had stopped all efforts in that direction, and Astor
never took them up again. Meanwhile through Canada, the Hudson Bay Company, a great English
concern engaged in the fur trade, had extended its stations to the Pacific coast, and was quietly
taking possession of the country.

In 1834, the American board of missions, learning of the need for a missionary among the Oregon
Indians, appointed Marcus Whitman to the work. Whitman was at that time thirty-two years of
age and was just about to be married. His betrothed agreed to accompany him on his perilous
mission, and, after great difficulty, he secured an associate in the person of Rev. H.H. Spalding,
also just married. What a bridal trip that was! At Pittsburg, George Catlin, who knew the western
Indians better than any living man, having spent years among them, warned them of the folly
of attempting to take women across the plains; at Cincinnati, they were greeted by William
Moody, only forty-five years of age and yet the first white man born there; at the frontier
town of St. Louis, they joined a hunting expedition up the Missouri, and by June 6, 1836, were
at Laramie.

A month later, they crossed the Great Divide by the South Pass, "discovered," six years later,
by Frémont; and toward the end of July, they came to the great mountain rendezvous of traders
and trappers high in the mountains near Fort Hall. Some of those men had not seen a white woman
for a quarter of a century. You can imagine, then, what a sensation the arrival of Mrs. Whitman
and Mrs. Spalding occasioned, and with what warmth they were welcomed. Ten days they tarried
there, then pressed on westward, and on September 2, 1836, after a journey of thirty-five hundred
miles, the gates of Fort Walla-Walla, on the lower Columbia, opened to receive them, and the
conquest of Oregon began.

Fort Walla-Walla belonged to the Hudson Bay Company, which had undisputed control of the rich
Oregon fur trade, and which was determined to retain it at any cost. So the difficulties of
the Oregon trail were invariably exaggerated, and immigration from the states systematically
discouraged. Nevertheless, in the years following Whitman's arrival, other parties of missionaries
and settlers worked their way into the country, until, in 1842, their number reached about
a hundred and fifty. The Hudson Bay Company realized that neither England nor America had a
clear title to the region, and that its population must, in the end, determine its nationality.
Consequently it bent every effort to hurry English settlers into the country. In October, 1842,
Whitman was dining with a company of Englishmen at Walla-Walla, when a messenger arrived with
news of the approach of a large body of settlers from Canada. A shout arose: "Hurrah for Oregon!
America is too late! We've got the country!" And Whitman, at a glance, saw through the plan.

Twenty-four hours later, he had started to ride across the continent to carry the news to Washington.
He had caught the import of the news, had grasped its consequences, and he was determined that
Oregon, with its great forests and broad prairies, its mighty rivers, and its unparalleled
richness, should be saved for the Union. If the Nation only knew the value of the prize, England
would never be permitted to carry it off. His wife and friends protested against the desperate
venture--four thousand miles on horseback--for it would soon be the dead of winter, with snow
hiding the trail and filling the passes, with streams ice-blocked and winter-swollen, and last
but not least, with the Blackfoot Indians on the warpath. But he would listen to none of this:
his duty, as he conceived it, lay clear before him; he was determined to set out at once. Amos
Lovejoy volunteered to accompany him, a busy night was spent in preparation, and the next day
they were off.

No diary of that remarkable journey was kept by Dr. Whitman, but most of its incidents are
known. Terribly severe weather was encountered almost at the start, for ten days they were
snowed up in the mountains, and long before the journey ended, were reduced to rations of dog
and mule meat. But they struggled on, more than once losing the way and giving themselves up
for lost, and on March 3, 1843, just five months from Walla-Walla, Whitman entered Washington.

His spectacular ride rivetted public attention upon the far western country, and the information
which he gave concerning it opened the Nation's eyes to its value. When he returned, later
in the year, to the banks of the Columbia, he took back with him a train of two hundred wagons
and a thousand settlers--a veritable army of occupation which the British could not match.
Three years later, so steadily did the tide continue which Whitman had started, the American
population had risen to over ten thousand, there was never any further real uncertainty as
to whom Oregon belonged, and the treaty of 1846 settled the question for all time.

The new territory was soon to be the scene of a terrible tragedy. The white man had brought
new diseases into it, measles, fevers, and even, smallpox; they spread rapidly among the Indians,
aggravated by their imprudence and ignorance of proper treatment, and many died. The Indians
became convinced that the missionaries were to blame, and it is claimed, too, that the emissaries
of the Hudson Bay Company urged them on. However that may have been, on the twenty-ninth of
November, 1847, the Indians fell upon the missionaries and killed fifteen, of them, among the
dead being Marcus Whitman and his wife. So ended the life of the man who saved Oregon, and
of the woman who was the first of her sex to cross the continent.

Meanwhile, far to the south, a drama scarcely less thrilling was enacting, its chief personage
being John Augustus Sutter. Sutter was a Swiss and had received a military education and served
in the Swiss Guard before coming to America in 1834. He settled first at St. Louis and then
at Santa Fé, where he gained considerable experience as a trader. Finally, in 1838, he decided
to cross the Rockies, and after trading for a time in a little schooner up and down the coast,
was wrecked in San Francisco Bay. He made his way inland, and founded the first white settlement
in the country on the site of what is now Sacramento. Here, in 1841, he built a fort, having
secured a large grant of land from the Mexican Government, and set up what was really a little
empire in the wilderness, over which he reigned supreme. And here, three years later, down
from the snow-filled and tempest-swept passes of the Rockies, came a party of starving and
frost-bitten scarecrows, the exploring expedition headed by John Charles Frémont, of whom we
shall speak presently.

The rest of Sutter's history is soon told. In 1848, when Mexico ceded California to the United
States, he was the owner of a vast domain, over which thousands of head of cattle wandered.
A few years later, he was practically a ruined man--ruined by gold. On the eighteenth day of
January, 1848, one of his men named Marshall, brought to Sutter a lump of yellow metal which
he had uncovered while digging a mill-race. There could be no doubt of it--it was gold! News
of the great discovery soon got about; there was a great rush for this new Eldorado; Sutter's
land was overrun with gold-seekers, who cared nothing for his rights, and when he attempted
to defend his titles in the courts, they were declared invalid, and his land was taken from
him. To crown his disasters, his homestead was destroyed by fire; finding himself ruined, without
land and without money, he gave up the struggle in despair and returned east, passing his last
years in poverty in a little town in Pennsylvania.

Frémont, meantime, had done a great work for California. The son of a Frenchman, showing an
early aptitude for mathematics, he had secured an appointment to the United States engineering
corps, and, after various minor expeditions in which he had acquitted himself well, was put
in charge of an expedition for the exploration of the Rocky Mountains. He was fortunate at
the start in securing the services as guide and interpreter of that famous hunter and plainsman,
Kit Carson, whose life had been passed on the prairies, who knew more Indians and Indian dialects
than any other white man, and who was, to his generation, what Davy Crockett was to an earlier
one. To Carson a great share of the expedition's success was no doubt due, and it was so successful
that in the following year, Frémont was leading another over the country between the Rockies
and the Pacific. This one was almost lost in the mountains, and came near perishing of cold
and hunger, but, finally, in March, 1844, managed to struggle through to Sutter's Fort.

Frémont found California in a state of unrest amounting almost to insurrection against Mexican
rule, and as the number of white settlers increased, this feeling grew, until Mexico, becoming
alarmed, sent an armed force to occupy the country. The show of force was the one thing needed
to fire the magazine; the settlers sprang to arms as one man, and, under Frémont's leadership,
defeated the Mexicans and drove them southward across the border. Soon afterwards, General
Kearny marched in from the east, from his remarkable and bloodless conquest of New Mexico,
with a force sufficient to render it certain that California would never again be taken by
the Mexicans.

On the fourth of July, 1849, Frémont was chosen governor of the new territory, and in the following
year, arranged the treaty by which California passed permanently to the United States. The
new state was quick to reward him and sent him to the Senate, where he gained sufficient prominence
to receive the nomination of the anti-slavery party for the presidency in 1856. He never had
any chance of election, for the reform party had not yet sufficient strength, and was defeated
by Buchanan. He served with some distinction in the Civil War, gaining considerable notoriety,
while in charge of the Western Department in 1861, by issuing a proclamation freeing the slaves
of secessionists in Missouri. The proclamation drew forth some laudatory verses from John G.
Whittier, but was promptly countermanded by President Lincoln. Soon afterwards, Frémont became
involved in personal disputes with his superior officers, was relieved from active service,
and the remainder of his life was spent in private enterprises.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fremont's "pathfinding" virtually completed the exploration of the country. A few secluded
nooks and corners became known only as the tide of immigration crept into them; but in its
general features, the great continent, on whose eastern shore the white man was fighting for
a foothold two centuries before, was known from ocean to ocean. It had been conquered and occupied
by a dominant race, and won for civilization.

SUMMARY

BOONE, DANIEL. Born in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, February 11, 1735; settled at Holman's Ford,
North Carolina, 1748; explored Kentucky, 1769-70; founded Boonesborough, 1775; moved to Missouri,
1795; died at Charette, Missouri, September 26, 1820.

KENTON, SIMON, Born in Fauquier County, Virginia, April 3, 1755; fled to the West, 1771; ranged
western country as a spy, 1776-78; with George Rogers Clark's expedition, 1778; commanded a
battalion of Kentucky volunteers under Wayne, 1793-94; brigadier-general of Ohio militia, 1805;
at battle of the Thames, 1813; died in Logan County, Ohio, April 29, 1836.

CLARK, GEORGE ROGERS. Born in Albemarle County, Virginia, November 19, 1752; settled in Kentucky,
1775; major of militia, 1776; sent as delegate to Virginia, 1776; second journey to Virginia,
1777; started on Illinois expedition, June 24, 1778; captured Kaskaskia, July 4, 1778; captured
Vincennes, February 24, 1779; defeated Miami Indians and destroyed villages, 1782; died near
Louisville, Kentucky, February 18, 1818.

PUTNAM, RUFUS. Born in Sutton, Massachusetts, April 9, 1738; served in campaigns against the
French, 1757-60; superintended defenses of New York City, 1776; superintended construction
of fortifications at West Point, 1778; promoted to brigadier-general, January 7, 1783; founded
Marietta, Ohio, April 7, 1788; judge of Supreme Court of Northwest Territory, 1789; served
as brigadier-general under Wayne, 1792-93; member of Ohio Constitutional Convention, 1803;
formed first Bible society west of the Alleghanies, 1812; died at Marietta, Ohio, May 1, 1824.

LEWIS, MERIWETHER. Born near Charlottesville, Virginia, August 18, 1774; entered United States
army, 1795; promoted captain, 1800; private secretary to President Jefferson, 1801-03; explored
country west of Mississippi, 1804-06; governor of Missouri Territory, 1808; killed himself
near Nashville, Tennessee, October 8, 1809.

CLARK, WILLIAM. Born in Virginia, August 1, 1770; removed to Kentucky, 1774; lieutenant of
infantry, March 7, 1792; resigned from service, July, 1796; removed to St. Louis, 1796; accompanied
Meriwether Lewis on western explorations, 1804-06; governor of Missouri Territory, 1813-21;
superintendent of Indian Affairs, 1822-38; died at St. Louis, September 1, 1838.

PIKE, ZEBULON MONTGOMERY. Born at Lamberton, New Jersey, January 5, 1779; entered United States
army, 1799; captain, 1806; conducted exploring expeditions in Louisiana Territory, 1805-07;
major, 1808; colonel, 1812; brigadier-general, March 12, 1813; died in assault on York (now
Toronto), Canada, April 27, 1813.

HOUSTON, SAMUEL. Born near Lexington, Virginia, March 2, 1793; served in war of 1812; member
of Congress from Tennessee, 1823-27; governor of Tennessee, 1827-29; defeated Mexicans at San
Jacinto, April, 1836; President of Texas, 1836-38 and 1841-44; United States senator from Texas,
1845-59; governor of Texas, 1859-61; died at Huntersville, Texas, July 25, 1863.

CROCKETT, DAVID. Born at Limestone, Tennessee, August 17, 1786; member of Congress, 1827-33;
served in Texan war, 1835-36; killed at The Alamo, San Antonio de Bexar, Texas, March 6, 1836.

BOWIE, JAMES. Born in Burke County, Georgia, about 1790; notorious in duel of 1827; went to
Texas, 1835; made colonel of Texan army, 1835; killed at the Alamo, March 6, 1836.

TRAVIS, WILLIAM BARRETT. Born in Conecuh County, Alabama, 1811; admitted to the bar, 1830;
went to Texas, 1832; killed at the Alamo, March 6, 1836.

WHITMAN, MARCUS. Born in Rushville, Ontario County, New York, September 4, 1802; appointed
missionary to Oregon, 1834; reached Fort Walla Walla, September 2, 1836; started on ride across
continent, October 3, 1842; reached Washington, March 3, 1843; took great train of emigrants
back to Oregon, 1843; killed by Indians at Waülatpu, Oregon, November 29, 1847.

SUTTER, JOHN AUGUSTUS. Born in Kandern, Baden, February 15, 1803; graduated at military college
at Berne, Switzerland, 1823; served in Swiss Guard through Spanish campaign, 1823-24; emigrated
to America and settled at St. Louis, 1834; crossed Rocky Mountains, 1838; settled in California,
1839; built fort on present site of Sacramento, 1841; gold discovered on his ranch, January
18, 1848; homestead burned, 1864; removed to Litiz, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, 1873; died
at Washington, D.C., June 17, 1880.

FRÉMONT, JOHN CHARLES. Born at Savannah, Georgia, January 21, 1813; explored South Pass, Rocky
Mountains, 1842; Pacific Slope, 1843-45; took part in conquest of California, 1846-47; United
States senator from California, 1850-51; Republican candidate for presidency, 1856; Federal
Commander of Department of the West, 1861; governor of Arizona, 1878-82; died at New York City,
July 13, 1890.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER VII

GREAT SOLDIERS

We have seen how the great crises in our country's history have produced great men to deal
with them. We shall see now how great wars produce great soldiers. The Revolution produced
them; the Civil War produced them. The second war with England, and the war with Spain failed
to produce them because they were too quickly ended, and without desperate need. They served,
however, to pierce certain gold-laced bubbles which had been strutting about the stage pretending
to be great and impressing many people with their greatness; but which were, in reality, great
only in self-conceit, and in that colossal! So did the Revolution and the Civil War, at first,
and costly work it was until the last of them had vanished, to be replaced by men who knew
how to fight; for it seems one of the axioms of history that the fiercer your soldier is in
peace, the more useless he is on a battlefield. The war with Mexico, by a fortunate chance,
found a few good fighters ready at hand, and so was pushed through in the most brilliant way.
One trembles to think how the Revolution might have begun--and ended!--but for the fact that
Washington, experienced in warfare and disdaining gold lace and empty boasts, was, by a fortunate
chance, chosen commander-in-chief. That choice is our greatest debt to John and Samuel Adams.

       *       *       *       *       *

Early in the eighteenth century, there lived in the old historic town of Salem, Massachusetts,
Joseph Putnam and his wife, Elizabeth. They already had nine children, and, in 1718, a tenth
was born to them and they named him Israel, which means a soldier of God. His career was destined
to be one of the most romantic and adventurous in American history, but none of his brothers
or sisters managed to get into the lime-light of fame.

Israel himself started in tamely enough as a farmer, having bought a tract of five hundred
acres down in Connecticut. Wild animals had been pretty well exterminated by that time, but
one old she-wolf still had her den not far from Putnam's farm, and one night she came out and
amused herself by killing sixty or seventy of his fine sheep. When Putnam found them stretched
upon the ground next morning, a great rage seized him; he swore that that wolf should never
have the chance to do such another night's work; he tracked her to her cave, and descending
without hesitation into the dark and narrow entrance, shot straight between the eyes he saw
gleaming at him through the darkness, and dragged the carcass out into the daylight. That incident
gives some idea of Israel Putnam's temper, and what desperate things he was capable of doing
when his blood was up.

That was in 1735, and twenty years elapsed before he again appeared upon the page of history.
But in 1755 began the great war with France, and for the next ten years, Putnam's life was
fairly crowded with incident. Connecticut furnished a thousand men to resist the expected French
invasion, and Putnam was put in command of a company with the rank of captain. His company
acted as rangers, and for two years did remarkable service in harassing the enemy and in warning
the settlers against lurking bands of Indians, set on by the French. On more than one occasion,
he saved his life by the closest margin. He was absolutely fearless, and this, together with
a clear head and quick eye, carried him safely through peril after peril, any one of which
would have proved the death of a man less resolute.

He saved a party of soldiers from the Indians by steering them in a bateau safely down the
dangerous rapids of the Hudson; he saved Fort Edward from destruction by fire at the imminent
risk of his life, working undaunted although the flames were threatening, every moment, to
explode the magazine; a year later, captured by the Indians, who feared and hated him, he was
bound to a stake, after some preliminary tortures, and a pile of fagots heaped about him and
set on fire. The flames were searing his flesh, when a French officer happened to come up and
rescued him. These are but three incidents out of a dozen such. He seemed to bear a charmed
life, and any of his men would willingly have died for him. In 1765, when he returned home
after ten years of continuous campaigning, it was with the rank of colonel, and a reputation
for daring and resourcefulness second to none in New England.

Ten years of quiet followed, and Israel Putnam was fifty-seven years of age--an age when most
men consider their life work done. On the afternoon of April 20, 1775, he was engaged in hauling
some stones from a field with a team of oxen, when he heard galloping hoofbeats down the road,
and looking up, saw a courier riding up full speed. The courier paused only long enough to
shout the tidings of the fight at Concord, and then spurred on again. Putnam, leaving his oxen
where they stood, threw himself upon horseback, without waiting to don his uniform, and at
sunrise next day, galloped into Cambridge, having travelled nearly a hundred miles! Verily
there were giants in those days!

He was placed in command of the Connecticut forces with the rank of brigadier-general, and
soon afterwards was one of four major-generals appointed by the Congress for the Continental
army. For four years thereafter he took a conspicuous part in the war, bearing himself always
with characteristic gallantry. But the machine had been worn out by excessive exertion; in
1779 he was stricken with paralysis, and the last years of his life were passed quietly at
home. For sheer, extravagant daring, which paused at no obstacle and trembled at no peril,
he has, perhaps, never had his equal among American soldiers.

Not far from West Greenwich, Connecticut, there is a steep and rocky bluff, the scene of one
of Putnam's most extraordinary feats, performed only a short time before he was stricken down.
An expedition, fifteen hundred strong, had been sent by the British against West Greenwich,
and Putnam rallied a company to oppose the invaders, but his little force was soon routed and
dispersed, and sought to escape across country with the British in hot pursuit.