The life of the young officer had thus far been so commonplace as to awaken little expectation
for his future. Poor as he was, and careful of his slim resources, he had, like the men of
his class, indulged his passions to a certain degree; but he had not been riotous in his living,
and he had so far not a debt in the world. What his education and reading were makes clear
that he could have known nothing with a scholar's comprehensive thoroughness except the essentials
of his profession. But he could master details as no man before or since; he had a vast fund
of information, and a historic outline drawn in fair proportion and powerful strokes. His philosophy
was meager, but he knew the principles of Rousseau and Raynal thoroughly. His conception of
politics and men was not scientific, but it was clear and practical. The trade of arms had
not been to his taste. He heartily disliked routine, and despised the petty duties of his rank.
His profession, however, was a means to an end; of any mastery of strategy or tactics or even
interest in them he had as yet given no sign, but he was absorbed in contemplating and analyzing
the exploits of the great world-conquerors. In particular his mind was dazzled by the splendors
of the Orient as the only field on which an Alexander could have displayed himself, and he
knew what but a few great minds have grasped, that the interchange of relations between the
East and the West had been the life of the world. What is there now? Instead of her, when coming
home, I find only her shadow!

This Louvre lodging is itself a tomb, which I enter only with fright."

Mlle. de Lespinasse died of grief for a lover's death, but she left
a group of lovers to lament her loss. Henceforward he was removed from this temptation. A plan for an elective council
in Corsica to replace that of the nobles, and for a local militia, having been matured, he
was a cautious and practical experimenter from the moment he left Auxonne. Thus far he had
put into practice none of his fine thoughts, nor the lessons learned in books. The family destitution
had made him a solicitor of favors, and, but for the turn in public affairs, he might have
continued to be one. His own inclinations had made him both a good student and a poor officer;
without a field for larger duties, he might have remained as he was. In Corsica his line of
conduct was not changed abruptly: the possibilities of greater things dawning gradually, the
application of great conceptions already formed, came with the march of events, not like the
sun bursting out from behind a cloud.

Traveling by way of Aix, Napoleon took the unlucky Lucien with him. This wayward but independent
younger brother, making no allowance, as he tells us in his published memoirs, for the disdain
an older boy at school is supposed to feel for a younger one, blood relative or not, had been
repelled by the cold reception his senior had given him at Brienne. Having left that school
against the advice of the same would-be mentor, his suit for admission to Aix had been fruitless.
Necessity was driving him homeward, and the two who in after days were again to be separated
were now, for almost the only time in their lives, companions for a considerable period. Their
intercourse made them no more harmonious in feeling. The only incident of the journey was a
visit to the Abbé Raynal at Marseilles. We would gladly know something of the talk between
the master and the pupil, but we do not.

Napoleon found no change in the circumstances of the Buonaparte family. The old archdeacon
was still living, and for the moment all except Elisa were at home. In short, Mme. Geoffrin was
an intellectual authority, a sort of minister to society, and her salon was the great centre and rendezvous,
a veritable institution of the eighteenth century. This seems the more remarkable when we
consider that she belonged to the bourgeoisie, and that by dint of her exquisite tact, her almost
infallible judgment, her admirable taste in dress, and her keen intelligence, she created
for herself a position which was the envy of all Europe. Such women are rare. During the last
eighteen months of her life, though suffering from paralysis and rheumatism, which she contracted
at a religious fête at Notre-Dame, she was unremitting in her attention to her friends and the
poor; and up to her death, in 1777, her friends were faithful to her.
 Both the higher classes were comparatively small; in spite of twenty
years of peace under French rule, they were both excessively unpopular, and utterly without
any hold on the islanders. They had but one partizan with an influential name, a son of the
old-time patriot Gaffori, the father-in-law of Buttafuoco. The overwhelming majority of the
natives were little changed in their temper. There were the old, unswerving patriots who wanted
absolute independence, and were now called Paolists; there were the self-styled patriots, the
younger men, who wanted a protectorate that they might enjoy virtual independence and secure
a career by peace. There was in the harbor towns on the eastern slope the same submissive,
peace-loving temper as of old; in the west the same fiery, warlike spirit. Corte was the center
of Paoli's power, Calvi was the seat of French influence, Bastia was radical, Ajaccio was about
equally divided between the younger and older parties, with a strong infusion of official influence.

Both the representatives of the people in the national convention were of the moderate party;
one of them, Salicetti, was a man of ability, a friend of the Buonapartes, and destined later
to influence deeply the course of their affairs. He and his colleague Colonna were urging on
the National Assembly measures for the local administration of the island. To this faction,
as to the other, it had become clear that if Corsica was to reap the benefits of the new era
it must be by union under Paoli. All, old and young alike, desired a thorough reform of their
barbarous jurisprudence, and, like all other French subjects, a free press, free trade, the
abolition of all privilege, equality in taxation, eligibility to office without regard to rank,
and the diminution of monastic revenues for the benefit of education. Nowhere could such changes
be more easily made than in a land just emerging from barbarism, where old institutions were
disappearing and new ones were still fluid. Paoli himself had come to believe that independence
could more easily be secured from a regenerated France, and with her help, than by a warfare
which might again arouse the ambition of Genoa.

Buonaparte's natural associates were the younger men--Masseria, son of a patriot line; Pozzo
di Borgo, Peraldi, Cuneo, Ramolini, and others less influential. The only Corsican with French
military training, he was, in view of uncertainties and probabilities already on the horizon,
a person of considerable consequence. His contribution to the schemes of the young patriots
was significant: it consisted in a proposal to form a body of local militia for the support
of that central committee which his friends so ardently desired. The plan was promptly adopted
by the associates, the radicals seeing in it a means to put arms once more into the hands of
the people, the others no doubt having in mind the storming of the Bastille and the possibility
of similar movements in Ajaccio and elsewhere. Buonaparte, the only trained officer among them,
may have dreamed of abandoning the French service, and of a supreme command in Corsica. Many
of the people who appeared well disposed toward France had from time to time received permission
from the authorities to carry arms, many carried them secretly and without a license; but proportionately
there were so few in both classes that vigorous or successful armed resistance was in most
places impracticable. The attitude of the department of war at Paris was regulated by Buttafuoco,
and was of course hostile to the insidious scheme of a local militia. The minister of war would
do nothing but submit the suggestion to the body against whose influence it was aimed, the
hated council of twelve nobles. The stupid sarcasm of such a step was well-nigh criminal.

Under such instigation the flames of discontent broke out in Corsica. Paoli's agents were again
most active. In many towns the people rose to attack the citadels or barracks, and to seize
the authority. In Ajaccio Napoleon de Buonaparte promptly asserted himself as the natural leader.
The already existing democratic club was rapidly organized into the nucleus of a home guard,
and recruited in numbers. But there were none of Paoli's mountaineers to aid the unwarlike
burghers, as there had been in Bastia. Gaffori appeared on the scene, but neither the magic
of his name, the troops that accompanied him, nor the adverse representations of the council,
which he brought with him, could allay the discontent. He therefore remained for three days
in seclusion, and then departed in secret. On the other hand, the populace was intimidated,
permitting without resistance the rooms of the club to be closed by the troops, and the town
to be put under martial law. Nothing remained for the agitators but to protest and disperse.
They held a final meeting, therefore, on October thirty-first, 1789, in one of the churches,
and signed an appeal to the National Assembly, to be presented by Salicetti and Colonna. It
had been written, and was read aloud, by Buonaparte, as he now signed himself.[19] Some share
in its composition was later claimed for Joseph, but the fiery style, the numerous blunders
in grammar and spelling, the terse thought, and the concise form, are all characteristic of
Napoleon. The right of petition, the recital of unjust acts, the illegal action of the council,
the use of force, the hollowness of the pretexts under which their request had been refused,
the demand that the troops be withdrawn and redress granted--all these are crudely but forcibly
presented. The document presages revolution. Under a well-constituted and regular authority,
its writer and signatories would of course have been punished for insubordination. Even as
things were, an officer of the King was running serious risks by his prominence in connection
with it.

              [Footnote 19: Printed in Coston, II, 94.]

Discouraging as was the outcome of this movement in Ajaccio, similar agitations elsewhere were
more successful. The men of Isola Rossa, under Arena, who had just returned from a consultation
with Paoli in England, were entirely successful in seizing the supreme authority; so were those
of Bastia, under Murati, a devoted friend of Paoli. One untrustworthy authority, a personal
enemy of Buonaparte, declares that the latter, thwarted in his own town, at once went over
to Bastia, then the residence of General de Barrin, the French royalist governor, and successfully
directed the revolt in that place, but there is no corroborative evidence to this doubtful story.

Simultaneously with these events the National Assembly had been debating how the position of
the King under the new constitution was to be expressed by his title. Absolutism being ended,
he could no longer be king of France, a style which to men then living implied ownership. King
of the French was selected as the new form; should they add "and of Navarre"? Salicetti, with
consummate diplomacy, had already warned many of his fellow-delegates of the danger lest England
should intervene in Corsica, and France lose one of her best recruiting-grounds. To his compatriots
he set forth that France was the best protector, whether they desired partial or complete independence.
He now suggested that if the Assembly thus recognized the separate identity of the Pyrenean
people, they must supplement their phrase still further by the words "and of Corsica"; for
it had been only nominally, and as a pledge, that Genoa in 1768 had put France in control.
At this stage of the debate, Volney presented a number of formal demands from the Corsican
patriots asking that the position of their country be defined. One of these papers certainly
came from Bastia; among them also was probably the document which had been executed at Ajaccio.
This was the culmination of the skilful revolutionary agitation which had been started and
directed by Masseria under Paoli's guidance. The anomalous position of both Corsica and Navarre
was clearly depicted in the mere presentation of such petitions. "If the Navarrese are not
French, what have we to do with them, or they with us?" said Mirabeau. The argument was as
unanswerable for one land as for the other, and both were incorporated in the realm: Corsica
on November thirtieth, by a proposition of Salicetti's, who was apparently unwilling, but who
posed as one under imperative necessity. In reality he had reached the goal for which he had
long been striving. Dumouriez, later so renowned as a general, and Mirabeau, the great statesman
and orator, had both been members of the French army of occupation which reduced Corsica to
submission. The latter now recalled his misdeed with sorrow and shame in an impassioned plea
for amnesty to all political offenders, including Paoli. There was bitter opposition, but the
great orator prevailed.

The news was received in Corsica with every manifestation of joy; bonfires were lighted, and
Te Deums were sung in the churches. Paoli to rejoin his own again! What more could disinterested
patriots desire? Corsica a province of France! How could her aspiring youth secure a wider
field for the exercise of their powers, and the attainment of ambitious ends? The desires of
both parties were temporarily fulfilled. The names of Mirabeau, Salicetti, and Volney were
shouted with acclaim, those of Buttafuoco and Peretti with reprobation. The regular troops
were withdrawn from Ajaccio; the ascendancy of the liberals was complete.

Then feeble Genoa was heard once more. She had pledged the sovereignty, not sold it; had yielded
its exercise, and not the thing itself; France might administer the government as she chose,
but annexation was another matter. She appealed to the fairness of the King and the National
Assembly to safeguard her treaty rights. Her tone was querulous, her words without force. In
the Assembly the protest was but fuel to the fire. On January twenty-first, 1790, occurred
an animated debate in which the matter was fully considered. The discussion was notable, as
indicating the temper of parties and the nature of their action at that stage of the Revolution.
Mirabeau as ever was the leader. He and his friends were scornful not only because of Genoa's
temerity in seeming still to claim what France had conquered, but of her conception that mere
paper contracts were binding where principles of public law were concerned! The opposition
mildly but firmly recalled the existence of other nations than France, and suggested the consequences
of international bad faith. The conclusion of the matter was the adoption of a cunning and
insolent combination of two propositions, one made by each side, "to lay the request on the
table, or to explain that there is no occasion for its consideration." The incident is otherwise
important only in the light of Napoleon's future dealings with the Italian commonwealth.

The situation was now most delicate, as far as Buonaparte was concerned. His suggestion of
a local militia contemplated the extension of the revolutionary movement to Corsica. His appeal
to the National Assembly demanded merely the right to do what one French city or district after
another had done: to establish local authority, to form a National Guard, and to unfurl the
red, white, and blue. There was nothing in it about the incorporation of Corsica in France;
that had come to pass through the insurgents of Bastia, who had been organized by Paoli, inspired
by the attempt at Ajaccio, and guided at last by Salicetti. A little later Buonaparte took
pains to set forth how much better, under his plan, would have been the situation of Corsican
affairs if, with their guard organized and their colors mounted, they could have recalled Paoli,
and have awaited the event with power either to reject such propositions as the royalists,
if successful, would have made, or to accept the conclusions of the French Assembly with proper
self-respect, and not on compulsion. Hitherto he had lost no opportunity to express his hatred
of France; it is possible that he had planned the virtual independence of Corsica, with himself
as the liberator, or at least as Paoli's Sampiero. The reservations of his Ajaccio document,
and the bitterness of his feelings, are not, however, sufficient proof of such a presumption.
But the incorporation had taken place, Corsica was a portion of France, and everybody was wild
with delight.

CHAPTER X.

First Lessons in Revolution.

     French Soldier and Corsican Patriot -- Paoli's Hesitancy --
     His Return to Corsica -- Cross-Purposes in France -- A New
     Furlough -- Money Transactions of Napoleon and Joseph --
     Open Hostilities Against France -- Address to the French
     Assembly -- The Bastia Uprising -- Reorganization of
     Corsican Administration -- Meeting of Napoleon and Paoli --
     Corsican Politics -- Studies in Society.

[Sidenote: 1790.]

What was to be the future of one whose feelings were so hostile to the nation with the fortunes
of which he now seemed irrevocably identified? There is no evidence that Buonaparte ever asked
himself such disquieting questions. To judge from his conduct, he was not in the least troubled.
Fully aware of the disorganization, both social and military, which was well-nigh universal
in France, with two months more of his furlough yet unexpired, he awaited developments, not
hastening to meet difficulties before they presented themselves. What the young democrats could
do, they did. The town government was entirely reorganized, with a friend of the Buonapartes
as mayor, and Joseph--employed at last!--as his secretary. A local guard was also raised and
equipped. Being French, however, and not Corsican, Napoleon could not accept a command in it,
for he was already an officer in the French army. But he served in the ranks as a common soldier,
and was an ardent agitator in the club, which almost immediately reopened its doors. In the
impossibility of further action there was a relapse into authorship. The history of Corsica
was again revised, though not softened; the letters into which it was divided were addressed
to Raynal. In collaboration with Fesch, Buonaparte also drew up a memoir on the oath which
was required from priests.

When Paoli first received news of the amnesty granted at the instance of Mirabeau, and of the
action taken by the French Assembly, which had made Corsica a French department, he was delighted
and deeply moved. His noble instincts told him at once that he could no longer live in the
enjoyment of an English pension or even in England; for he was convinced that his country would
eventually reach a more perfect autonomy under France than under the wing of any other power,
and that as a patriot he must not fail even in appearance to maintain that position. But he
also felt that his return to Corsica would endanger the success of this policy; the ardent
mountaineers would demand more extreme measures for complete independence than he could take;
the lowlanders would be angry at the attitude of sympathy with his old friends which he must
assume. In a spirit of self-sacrifice, therefore, he made ready to exchange his comfortable
exile for one more uncongenial and of course more bitter.

But the National Assembly, with less insight, desired nothing so much as his presence in the
new French department. He was growing old, and yielded against his better judgment to the united
solicitation of French interest and of Corsican impolicy. Passing through France, he was detained
for over two months by the ovations forced upon him. In Paris the King urged him to accept
honors of every kind; but they were firmly refused: the reception, however, which the Assembly
gave him in the name of liberty, he declared to be the proudest occasion of his life. At Lyons
the populace crowded the streets to cheer him, and delegations from the chief towns of his
native island met him to solicit for each of their respective cities the honor of his landing.
On July fourteenth, 1790, after twenty-one years of exile, the now aged hero set foot on Corsican
land at Maginajo, near Capo Corso. His first act was to kneel and kiss the soil. The nearest
town was Bastia, the revolutionary capital. There and elsewhere the rejoicings were general,
and the ceremonies were such as only the warm hearts and willing hands of a primitive Italian
people could devise and perform. Not one true Corsican but must "see and hear and touch him."
But in less than a month his conduct was, as he had foreseen, so misrepresented by friend and
foe alike, that it was necessary to defend him in Paris against the charge of scheming to hand
over the island to England.

It is not entirely clear where Buonaparte was during this time. It is said that he was seen
in Valence during the latter part of January, and the fact is adduced to show how deep and
secret were his plans for preserving the double chance of an opening in either France or Corsica,
as matters might turn out. The love-affair to which he refers in that thesis on the topic to
which reference has been made would be an equally satisfactory explanation, considering his
age. Whatever was the fact as to those few days, he was not absent long. The serious division
between the executive in France and the new Assembly came to light in an ugly circumstance
which occurred in March. On the eighteenth a French flotilla unexpectedly appeared off St.
Florent. It was commanded by Rully, an ardent royalist, who had long been employed in Corsica.
His secret instructions were to embark the French troops, and to leave the island to its fate.
This was an adroit stab at the republicans of the Assembly; for, should the evacuation be secured,
it was believed that either the radicals in Corsica would rise, overpower, and destroy the
friends of France, call in English help, and diminish the number of democratic departments
by one, or that Genoa would immediately step in and reassert her sovereignty. The moderates
of St. Florent were not to be thus duped; sharp and angry discussions arose among both citizens
and troops as to the obedience due to such orders, and soon both soldiers and townsfolk were
in a frenzy of excitement. A collision between the two parties occurred, and Rully was killed.
Papers were found on his person which proved that his sympathizers would gladly have abandoned
Corsica to its fate. For the moment the young Corsicans were more devoted than ever to Paoli,
since now only through his good offices with the French Assembly could a chance for the success
of their plans be secured.

Such was the diversity of opinion as to ways and means, as to resources, opportunities, and
details, that everything was, for the moment, in confusion. On April sixteenth Buonaparte applied
for an extension of his furlough until the following October, on the plea of continued ill-health,
that he might drink the waters a second time at Orezza, whose springs, he explained, had shown
themselves to be efficacious in his complaint. He may have been at that resort once before,
or he may not. Doubtless the fever was still lingering in his system. What the degree of his
illness was we cannot tell. It may have unfitted him for active service with his regiment;
it did not disable him from pursuing his occupations in writing and political agitation. His
request was granted on May twentieth. The history of Corsica was now finally revised, and the
new dedication completed. This, with a letter and some chapters of the book, was forwarded
to Raynal, probably by post. Joseph, who was one of the delegates to meet Paoli, would pass
through Marseilles, wrote Napoleon to the abbé, and would hand him the rest if he should so
desire. The text of the unlucky book was not materially altered. Its theory appears always
to have been that history is but a succession of great names, and the story, therefore, is
more a biographical record than a connected narrative. The dedication, however, was a new step
in the painful progress of more accurate thinking and better expression; the additions to the
volume contained, amid many immaturities and platitudes, some ripe and clever thought. Buonaparte's
passion for his bantling was once more the ardor of a misdirected genius unsullied by the desire
for money, which had played a temporary part.

We know nothing definite of his pecuniary affairs, but somehow or other his fortunes must have
mended. There is no other explanation of his numerous and costly journeys, and we hear that
for a time he had money in his purse. In the will which he dictated at St. Helena is a bequest
of one hundred thousand francs to the children of his friend who was the first mayor of Ajaccio
by the popular will. It is not unlikely that the legacy was a grateful souvenir of advances
made about this time. There is another possible explanation. The club of Ajaccio had chosen
a delegation, of which Joseph Buonaparte was a member, to bring Paoli home from France. To
meet its expenses, the municipality had forced the authorities of the priests' seminary to
open their strong box and to hand over upward of two thousand francs. Napoleon may have shared
Joseph's portion. We should be reminded in such a stroke, but with a difference, to be sure,
of what happened when, a few years later, the hungry and ragged soldiers of the Republic were
led into the fat plains of Lombardy.

The contemptuous attitude of the Ajaccio liberals toward the religion of Rome seriously alienated
the superstitious populace from them. Geoffrin allowed her three thousand francs.

The majority of the members of her salon were from that of Mme. du Deffand, having followed Mlle.
de Lespinasse after the rupture of the two women; besides these, there were Condorcet, Helvétius,
Grimm, Marmontel, Condillac, Bernardin de Saint-Pierre, and many others. As her hours for
receiving were after five o'clock, her friends were made to understand that her means were not
such as to warrant suppers or dinners, four o'clock being the dinner hour in those days.

Her salon immediately became known as the official encyclopædia resort, Mme. du Deffand dubbing
it La Muse de l'Encyclopédie. D'Alembert was the high priest, and it was not long before he
was comfortably lodged in the third story of her house, Mlle. de Lespinasse having nursed him
through a malignant fever which the poor man had contracted in the wretched place where he lodged.
A strange gathering, those salons! Mlle. de Lespinasse, one of the leaders in the social world,
with a prominent salon, was the illegitimate daughter of a Comtesse d'Albon, and her presiding
genius was the illegitimate son of Mme. de Tencin; here we find the wealthiest and most elegant
of the aristocracy coming from their palaces to meet, in friendly social and intellectual intercourse,
men who lived on a mere pittance, dressed on almost nothing, lodged in the most wretched of dens,
boarding wherever a salon or palace was opened to them. Surely, intellect was highly valued in
those days, and moral etiquette was at a low ebb!

              Mlle. de Lespinasse possessed two characteristics which
              were prominent in a remarkable degree—love and friendship.

She appeared to interest herself in everybody in such a way as to make him believe that he was the
preferred of her heart; loving everybody sincerely and affectionately, she "lacked altogether
the sentimental equilibrium." Especially pathetic was her love for two men—the Count de Mora,
a Spanish nobleman, and a Colonel Guibert, who was celebrated for his relations with Frederick
the Great; although this wore terribly on her, consuming her physical force, she always received
her friends with the same good grace, but often, after their departure, she would fall into
a frightful nervous fit from which she could find relief only by the use of opium.

Her love for Guibert was known to her friends, but was a secret from her platonic lover, D'Alembert.
When, after a number of years of untold sufferings which even opium could not relieve, she died in
1776, having been cared for to the last by D'Alembert, the Duke de La Rochefoucauld, and her
cousin, the Marquis d'Enlezy, it was with these words on her dying lips, addressed to Guibert:
"Adieu, my friend!

If ever I return to life, I should like to use it in loving you; but there is no longer any time."
When D'Alembert read in her correspondence that she had been the mistress of Guibert for sixteen
years, he was disconsolate, and retired to the Louvre, which was his privilege as Secretary of the
Academy. He left there only to go walking in the evening with Marmontel, who tried to console him
by recalling the changeableness of humor of Mlle. de Lespinasse.
"Yes," he would reply, "she has changed, but not I; she no longer
lived for me, but I always lived for her. Since she is no longer,
I don't know why I am living. Ah, that I must still suffer these moments
of bitterness which she knew so well how to soothe and make me forget!
Do you remember the happy evenings we used to pass?
The paper was dated October thirty-first, 1789, and fearlessly signed both by himself and the
other leaders, including the mayor. It execrates the sympathizers with the old order in France,
and lauds the Assembly, with all its works; denounces those who sold the land to France, which
could offer nothing but an end of the chain that bound her; and warns the enemies of the new
constitution that their day is over. There is a longing reference to the ideal self-determination
which the previous attempt might have secured. The present rising is justified, however, as
an effort to carry out the principles of the new charter.[21] There are the same suggested
force and suppressed fury as in his previous manifesto, the same fervid rhetoric, the same
lack of coherence in expression. The same two elements, that of the eighteenth-century metaphysics
and that of his own uncultured force, combine in the composition. Naturally enough, the unrest
of the town was not diminished; there was even a slight collision between the garrison and
the civil authorities.

              [Footnote 21: For the text see Napoléon inconnu, II,
              92.]

Buonaparte was of course suspected and hated by Catholics and military alike. French officer
though he was, no one in Corsica thought of him otherwise than as a Corsican revolutionist.
Among his own friends he continued his unswerving career. It was he who was chosen to write
the address from Ajaccio to Paoli, although the two men did not meet until somewhat later.
With the arrival of the great liberator the grasp of the old officials on the island relaxed,
and the bluster of the few who had grown rich in the royal service ceased. The Assembly was
finally triumphant; this new department was at last to be organized like those of the adoptive
mother. It was high time, for the public order was seriously endangered in this transition
period. The disturbances at Ajaccio had been trifling compared with the revolutionary procedure
inaugurated and carried to extremes in Bastia. This city being the capital and residence of
the governor, Buonaparte and his comrades had no sooner completed their address to the French
Assembly than they hurried thither to beard de Barrin and revolutionize the garrison. Their
success was complete: garrison and citizens alike were roused and the governor cowed. Both
soldiers and people assumed the tricolor cockade on November fifth, 1789. Barrin even assented
to the formation of a national militia. On this basis order was established. This was another
affair from that at Ajaccio and attracted the attention of the Paris Assembly, strongly influencing
the government in its arrangements with Paoli. The young Buonaparte was naturally very uneasy
as to his position and so remained fairly quiet until February, when the incorporation of the
island with France was completed. Immediately he gave free vent to his energies. Two letters
of Napoleon's written in August, 1790, display a feverish spirit of unrest in himself, and
enumerate the many uprisings in the neighborhood with their varying degrees of success. Under
provisional authority, arrangements were made, after some delay, to hold elections for the
officials of the new system whose legal designation was directors. "Her friends either leave her,
they die, or they are far away; or, if present, faithful and attached
to her, she cannot believe in their affection; her cursed scepticism
deceived her heart."

Mme. du Deffand was one of the few women of the eighteenth century who saw reality and nothing
but reality, and admitted what she saw; she was gifted with such quick penetration and such
mental facility that she stands out prominently as one of the brightest
and most intellectual of the spiritual women of her time. Although he could not be a member of the assembly
on account of his youth, he was determined to be present. The three relatives traveled from
their home in company, Joseph enchanted by the scenery, Napoleon studying the strategic points
on the way. In order that his presence at Orezza might not unduly affect the course of events,
Paoli had delicately chosen as his temporary home the village of Rostino, which was on their
route. Here occurred the meeting between the two great Corsicans, the man of ideas and the
man of action. No doubt Paoli was anxious to win a family so important and a patriot so ardent.
In any case, he invited the three young men to accompany him over the fatal battle-ground of
Ponte Nuovo. If it had really been Napoleon's ambition to become the chief of the French National
Guard for Corsica, which would now, in all probability, be fully organized, it is very likely
that he would have exerted himself to secure the favor of the only man who could fulfil his
desire. There is, however, a tradition which tends to show quite the contrary: it is said that
after Paoli had pointed out the disposition of his troops for the fatal conflict Napoleon dryly
remarked, "The result of these arrangements was just what it was bound to be." Among the Emperor's
reminiscences at the close of his life, he recalled this meeting, because Paoli had on that
occasion declared him to be a man of ancient mold, like one of Plutarch's heroes.

