In the foundation of the structure we are studying is found exaggerated self-consciousness.
Whatever is said, done, or left undone, by others is analyzed by the worrier with reference
to its bearing on himself. If others are indifferent it depresses him, if they appear interested
they have an ulterior motive, if they look serious he must have displeased them, if they smile
it is because he is ridiculous. That they are thinking of their own affairs is the last thought
to enter his mind.

I suppose it would be an affectation for any of us to deny that, as far as we are concerned,
we are the centre of the universe. This conceit does us no harm so long as we remember that
there are as many centres of the universe as there are people, cats, mice and other thinking
animals. When we forget this our troubles begin. If I enter a strange shop and find they desire
security, need I take this as a reflection on my credit? Need I expect to be invited to every
entertainment I should like to attend, and to be excused from those that bore me, and shall
I make no allowance for the attitude of my host? Is it not rather egotistic for me to suppose
that others are vitally interested in the fact that I blush, tremble, or am awkward? Why then
should I allow my conduct to be influenced by such trivial matters?

The order of training is, then, generally, to modify our self-consciousness by externalizing
our thoughts and broadening our interests; specifically, to eliminate the unduly insistent
habit of thought.

This analysis of worry and allied mental states may facilitate such training, but the practical
value of the suggestions does not depend upon the acceptance of these theoretical considerations.

V.

WORRY AND OBSESSION

So much are men enured in their miserable estate, that no condition is so poore, but they will
accept; so they may continue in the same.

Florio's Montaigne.

"You may as well be eaten by the fishes as by the worms," said the daughter of a naval commander
to me one day, when discussing the perils of the sea. Such philosophy, applied to each of the
vexatious and dangerous situations of daily life, would go far toward casting out worry.

We have already referred to two important elements at the foundation, and in the framework,
of the elaborate superstructures we rear with such material as worry, doubts, fears and scruples.
The first is exaggerated self-consciousness, the second the tendency to succumb to the compelling
thought or impulse, technically termed obsession.

With regard to self-consciousness, the worrier will generally realize that even as a child
he was exceptionally sensitive to criticism, censure, ridicule and neglect. He was prone to
brood over his wrongs, to play the martyr, and to suffer with peculiar keenness the "slings
and arrows of outrageous fortune." I remember once leaving the table on account of some censure
or careless remark. I fancied I had thrown the whole family into a panic of contrition. On
the first opportunity, I asked what they had said about it, and was told that they had apparently
not noticed my departure. This salutary lesson prevented repetition of the act.

To the self-conscious person the mere entrance into a public vehicle may prove an ordeal. It
is hard for him to realize that the general gaze has no peculiar relation to himself, and that
if the gaze is prolonged this is due to no peculiarity of his beyond the blush or the trepidation
that betrays his feeling. If he can acquire indifference to this feature of his case, through
the reflection that to others it is only a passing incident, the blush and the trepidation
will promptly disappear, and a step will have been taken towards gaining the self-control for
which he aims.

The usual cause of stage-fright is exaggerated self-consciousness. The sufferer from stage-fright
can hardly fail to be a worrier. A certain shyness, it would seem, may also result from too
acute a consciousness of one's audience, as in the case of Tennyson, whom Benson quotes thus:

"I am never the least shy before great men. Each of them has a personality for which he or
she is responsible; but before a crowd which consists of many personalities, of which I know
nothing, I am infinitely shy. The great orator cares nothing about all this. I think of the
good man, and the bad man, and the mad man, that may be among them, and can say nothing. He
takes them all as one man. He sways them as one man."

This, I take it, hardly spelled stage-fright. At the same time, it is improbable that one so
sensitive to criticism meant to convey the impression that it was of his audience alone he
thought in shrinking from the effort.

It appears that Washington Irving suffered from actual stage-fright.

In the Library edition of Irving's works appears the following anecdote from the reminiscences
of Mrs. Julia Ward Howe, then a young woman of twenty-three:

"I was present, with other ladies, at a public dinner given in honor of Charles Dickens by
prominent citizens of New York. The ladies were not bidden to the feast, but were allowed to
occupy a small ante-room which, through an open door, commanded a view of the tables. When
the speaking was about to begin, a message came suggesting that we take possession of some
vacant seats at the great table. This we were glad to do. Washington Irving was president of
the evening, and upon him devolved the duty of inaugurating the proceedings by an address of
welcome to the distinguished guest. People who sat near me whispered, 'He'll break down,--he
always does.' Mr. Irving rose and uttered a sentence or two. His friends interrupted him by
applause, which was intended to encourage him, but which entirely overthrew his self-possession.
He hesitated, stammered, and sat down, saying, 'I cannot go on.'"

Cavendish, the chemist, suffered from a constitutional shyness attributable only to self-consciousness.
He is said to have carried so far his aversion to contact with others, outside of his colleagues,
that his dinner was always ordered by means of a note, and instant dismissal awaited the female
domestic who should venture within his range of vision.

Lombroso cites, among his "Men of Genius," quite a list--Corneille, Descartes, Virgil, Addison,
La Fontaine, Dryden, Manzoni, and Newton--of those who could not express themselves in public.
Whatever part self-consciousness played in the individual case, we must class the peculiarity
among the defects, not signs, of genius. "A tender heel makes no man an Achilles."

To the second faulty habit, obsession, I wish to devote special attention. The person so burdened
is said to be obsessed.

Few children are quite free from obsession. Some must step on stones; others must walk on,
or avoid, cracks; some must ascend the stairs with the right foot first; many must kick posts
or touch objects a certain number of times. Some must count the windows, pictures, and figures
on the wallpaper; some must bite the nails or pull the eye-winkers. Consider the nail-biter.
It cannot be said that he toils not, but to what end? Merely to gratify an obsession. He nibbles
a little here and a little there, he frowns, elevates his elbow, and inverts his finger to
reach an otherwise inaccessible corner. Does he enjoy it? No, not exactly; but he would be
miserable if he discontinued.

