The four quarters of London represented Blake's four great mythological personages, the Zoas,
and also the four elements. These few sentences were the foundation of all study of the philosophy
of William Blake, that requires an exact knowledge for its pursuit and that traces the connection
between his system and that of Swedenborg or of Boehme. I recognised certain attributions,
from what is sometimes called the Christian Cabala, of which Ellis had never heard, and with
this proof that his interpretation was more than phantasy, he and I began our four years' work
upon the Prophetic Books of William Blake. We took it as almost a sign of Blake's personal
help when we discovered that the spring of 1889, when we first joined our knowledge, was one
hundred years from the publication of 'The Book of Thel,' the first published of the Prophetic
Books, as though it were firmly established that the dead delight in anniversaries. After months
of discussion and reading, we made a concordance of all Blake's mystical terms, and there was
much copying to be done in the Museum & at Red Hill, where the descendants of Blake's friend
and patron, the landscape painter, John Linnell, had many manuscripts.  The Linnellswere narrow
in their religious ideas & doubtful of Blake's orthodoxy, whom they held, however, in great
honour, and I remember a timid old lady who had known Blake when a child saying: 'He had very
wrong ideas, he did not believe in the historical Jesus.' One old man sat always beside us
ostensibly to sharpen our pencils, but perhaps really to see that we did not steal the manuscripts,
and they gave us very old port at lunch and I have upon my dining room walls their present
of Blake's Dante engravings. Going thither and returning Ellis would entertain me by philosophical
discussion, varied with improvised stories, at first folk tales which he professed to have
picked up in Scotland; and though I had read and collected many folk tales, I did not see through
the deceit. I have a partial memory of two more elaborate tales, one of an Italian conspirator
flying barefoot from I forget what adventure through I forget what Italian city, in the early
morning. Fearing to be recognised by his bare feet, he slipped past the sleepy porter at an
hotel calling out 'number so and so' as if he were some belated guest. Then passing from bedroom
door to door he tried on the boots, and just as he got a pair to fit a voice cried from the
room 'Who is that?' 'Merely me, sir,' he called back, 'taking your boots.' The other was of
a Martyr's Bible round which the cardinal virtues had taken personal form--this a fragment
of Blake's philosophy. It was in the possession of an old clergyman when a certain jockey called
upon him, and the cardinal virtues, confused between jockey and clergyman, devoted themselves
to the jockey. As whenever he sinned a cardinal virtue interfered and turned him back to virtue,
he lived in great credit and made, but for one sentence, a very holy death. As his wife and
family knelt round in admiration and grief, he suddenly said 'Damn.' 'O my dear,' said his
wife, 'what a dreadful expression.' He answered, 'I am going to heaven' and straightway died.
It was a long tale, for there were all the jockey's vain attempts to sin, as well as all the
adventures of the clergyman, who became very sinful indeed, but it ended happily, for when
the jockey died the cardinal virtues returned to the clergyman. I think he would talk to any
audience that offered, one audience being the same as another in his eyes, and it may have
been for this reason that my father called him unambitious. When he was a young man he had
befriended a reformed thief and had asked the grateful thief to take him round the thieves'
quarters of London. The thief, however, hurried him away from the worst saying, 'Another minute
and they would have found you out. If they were not the stupidest men in London, they had done
so already.' Ellis had gone through a no doubt romantic and witty account of all the houses
he had robbed, and all the throats he had cut in one short life.

His conversation would often pass out of my comprehension, or indeed I think of any man's,
into a labyrinth of abstraction and subtilty, and then suddenly return with some verbal conceit
or turn of wit. The doom of the Regent and Council shows singularly the total interruption of
justice at this calamitous period, even in the most clamant cases of oppression. The Council declined
interference with the course of the ordinary justice of the county, (which was completely under
the said Earl of Cassilis' control,) and only enacted, that he should forbear molestation of the
unfortunate Comendator, under the surety of two thousand pounds Scots. The Earl was appointed
also to keep the peace towards the celebrated George Buchanan, who had a pension out of the same
Abbacy, to a similar extent, and under the like penalty.

The consequences are thus described by the Journalist already quoted.--

"The said Laird of Bargany perceiving that the ordiner justice could neither help the oppressed,
nor yet the afflicted, applied his mind to the next remedy, and in the end, by his servants,
took the house of Denure, where the poor Abbot was kept prisoner. The bruit flew fra Carrick to
Galloway, and so suddenly assembled herd and hyre-man that pertained
to the band of the Kennedies; and so within a few hours was the house
of Denure environed again.

The master of Cassilis was the frackast [i.e. the readiest or boldest]
and would not stay, but in his heat would lay fire to the dungeon,
with no small boasting that all enemies within the house should die.

"He was required and admonished by those that were within to be
more moderate, and not to hazard himself so foolishly. I had said, soon after the publication
of 'The Wanderings of Usheen,' to the editor of a series of shilling reprints, who had set
me to compile tales of the Irish fairies, 'I am growing jealous of other poets, and we will
all grow jealous of each other unless we know each other and so feel a share in each other's
triumph.' He was a Welshman, lately a mining engineer, Ernest Rhys, a writer of Welsh translations
and original poems that have often moved me greatly though I can think of no one else who has
read them. He was seven or eight years older than myself and through his work as editor knew
everybody who would compile a book for seven or eight pounds. Between us we founded 'The Rhymers'
Club' which for some years was to meet every night in an upper room with a sanded floor in
an ancient eating house in the Strand called 'The Cheshire Cheese.' Lionel Johnson, Ernest
Dowson, Victor Plarr, Ernest Radford, John Davidson, Richard le Gallienne, T. W. Rolleston,
Selwyn Image and two men of an older generation, Edwin Ellis and John Todhunter, came constantly
for a time, Arthur Symons and Herbert Home less constantly, while William Watson joined but
never came and Francis Thompson came once but never joined; and sometimes, if we met in a private
house, which we did occasionally, Oscar Wilde came. It had been useless to invite him to the
'Cheshire Cheese' for he hated Bohemia. 'Olive Schreiner,' he said once to me, 'is staying
in the East End because that is the only place where people do not wear masks upon their faces,
but I have told her that I live in the West End because nothing in life interests me but the mask.'

We read our poems to one another and talked criticism and drank a little wine. I sometimes
say when I speak of the club, 'We had such and such ideas, such and such a quarrel with the
great Victorians, we set before us such and such aims,' as though we had many philosophical
ideas. I say this because I am ashamed to admit that I had these ideas and that whenever I
began to talk of them a gloomy silence fell upon the room. A young Irish poet, who wrote excellently
but had the worst manners, was to say a few years later, 'You do not talk like a poet, you
talk like a man of letters;' and if all the rhymers had not been polite, if most of them had
not been to Oxford or Cambridge, they would have said the same thing. I was full of thought,
often very abstract thought, longing all the while to be full of images, because I had gone
to the art school instead of a university. Yet even if I had gone to a university, and learned
all the classical foundations of English literature and English culture, all that great erudition
which, once accepted, frees the mind from restlessness, I should have had to give up my Irish
subject matter, or attempt to found a new tradition. Let Cassilis and his brother be the first
to be the example unto others. Amen. Amen." [62]

This extract has been somewhat amended or modernized in orthography, to render it more intelligible
to the general reader. I have to add, that the Kennedies of Bargany, who interfered in behalf
of the oppressed Abbot, were themselves a younger branch of the Cassilis family, but held
different politics, and were powerful enough in this, and other instances, to bid them defiance.

The
ultimate issue of this affair does not appear; but as the house of Cassilis are still in possession
of the greater part of the feus and leases which belonged to Crossraguel Abbey, it is probable
the talons of the King of Carrick were strong enough, in those disorderly times, to retain the
prey which they had so mercilessly fixed upon. E... fresh from Paris would sometimes say--'We are concerned
with nothing but impressions,' but that itself was a generalisation and met but stony silence.
Conversation constantly dwindled into 'Do you like so and so's last book?' 'No, I prefer the
book before it,' and I think that but for its Irish members, who said whatever came into their
heads, the club would not have survived its first difficult months. I knew--now ashamed that
I thought 'like a man of letters,' now exasperated at their indifference to the fashion of
their own river bed--that Swinburne in one way, Browning in another, and Tennyson in a third,
had filled their work with what I called 'impurities,' curiosities about politics, about science,
about history, about religion; and that we must create once more the pure work.

Our clothes were for the most part unadventurous like our conversation, though I indeed wore
a brown velveteen coat, a loose tie and a very old Inverness cape, discarded by my father twenty
years before and preserved by my Sligo-born mother whose actions were unreasoning and habitual
like the seasons. But no other member of the club, except Le Gallienne, who wore a loose tie,
and Symons, who had an Inverness cape that was quite new & almost fashionable, would have shown
himself for the world in any costume but 'that of an English gentleman.' 'One should be quite
unnoticeable,' Johnson explained to me. Those who conformed most carefully to the fashion in
their clothes generally departed furthest from it in their hand-writing, which was small, neat
and studied, one poet--which I forget--having founded his upon the handwriting of George Herbert.
Dowson and Symons I was to know better in later years when Symons became a very dear friend,
and I never got behind John Davidson's Scottish roughness and exasperation, though I saw much
of him, but from the first I devoted myself to Lionel Johnson. He and Horne and Image and one
or two others shared a man-servant and an old house in Charlotte Street, Fitzroy Square, typical
figures of transition, doing as an achievement of learning and of exquisite taste what their
predecessors did in careless abundance. All were Pre-Raphaelite, and sometimes one might meet
in the rooms of one or other a ragged figure, as of some fallen dynasty, Simeon Solomon, the
Pre- Raphaelite painter, once the friend of Rossetti and of Swinburne, but fresh now from some
low public house. Condemned to a long term of imprisonment for a criminal offence, he had sunk
into drunkenness and misery. Introduced one night, however, to some man who mistook him, in
the dim candle light, for another Solomon, a successful academic painter and R. A., he started
to his feet in a rage with 'Sir, do you dare to mistake me for that mountebank?' Though not
one had harkened to the feeblest caw, or been spattered by the smallest dropping from any Huxley,
Tyndall, Carolus Duran, Bastien-Lepage bundle of old twigs, I began by suspecting them of lukewarmness,
and even backsliding, and I owe it to that suspicion that I never became intimate with Horne,
who lived to become the greatest English authority upon Italian life in the fourteenth century
and to write the one standard work on Botticelli. Connoisseur in several arts, he had designed
a little church in the manner of Inigo Jones for a burial ground near the Marble Arch.

Another fanaticism delayed my friendship with two men, who are now my friends and in certain
matters my chief instructors. Somebody, probably Lionel Johnson, brought me to the studio of
Charles Ricketts and Charles Shannon, certainly heirs of the great generation, and the first
thing I saw was a Shannon picture of a lady and child arrayed in lace, silk and satin, suggesting
that hated century. It will readily occur to the antiquary, that these verses are intended to
imitate the antique poetry of the Scalds--the minstrels of the old Scandinavians--the race,
as the Laureate so happily terms them,

"Stern to inflict, and stubborn to endure, Who smiled in death."

The poetry of the Anglo-Saxons, after their civilisation and conversion, was of a different
and softer character; but in the circumstances of Ulrica, she may be not unnaturally supposed
to return to the wild strains which animated her forefathers during
the time of Paganism and untamed ferocity.

NOTE TO CHAPTER XXXII

Note
H.--Richard Coeur-de-Lion.

The interchange of a cuff with the jolly
priest is not entirely out of character with Richard I., if romances
read him aright.
Sometimes indeed, like some father in Moliere, I ignored the lover's feelings altogether and
even refused to admit that a trace of the devil, perhaps a trace of colour, may lend piquancy,
especially if the connection be not permanent.

Among these men, of whom so many of the greatest talents were to live such passionate lives
and die such tragic deaths, one serene man, T. W. Rolleston, seemed always out of place. It
was I brought him there, intending to set him to some work in Ireland later on. I have known
young Dublin working men slip out of their workshop to see 'the second Thomas Davis' passing
by, and even remember a conspiracy, by some three or four, to make him 'the leader of the Irish
race at home & abroad,' and all because he had regular features; and when all is said, Alexander
the Great & Alcibiades were personable men, and the Founder of the Christian religion was the
only man who was neither a little too tall nor a little too short but exactly six feet high.
We in Ireland thought as do the plays and ballads, not understanding that, from the first moment
wherein nature foresaw the birth of Bastien-Lepage, she has only granted great creative power
to men whose faces are contorted with extravagance or curiosity or dulled with some protecting
stupidity. 

And so the house remained, and remains (till this day, the 7th of February, 1571,) in the custody
of the said Laird of Bargany and of his servants. And so cruelty was disappointed of proffeit present,
and shall be eternallie punished, unless he earnestly repent. I remember saying one night at the Cheshire Cheese, when
more poets than usual had come, 'None of us can say who will succeed, or even who has or has
not talent. The only thing certain about us is that we are too many.'

XVI

I have described what image--always opposite to the natural self or the natural world--Wilde,
Henley, Morris copied or tried to copy, but I have not said if I found an image for myself.
I know very little about myself and much less of that anti-self: probably the woman who cooks
my dinner or the woman who sweeps out my study knows more than I. It is perhaps because nature
made me a gregarious man, going hither and thither looking for conversation, and ready to deny
from fear or favour his dearest conviction, that I love proud and lonely images. When I was
a child and went daily to the sexton's daughter for writing lessons, I found one poem in her
School Reader that delighted me beyond all others: a fragment of some metrical translation
from Aristophanes wherein the birds sing scorn upon mankind. In later years my mind gave itself
to gregarious Shelley's dream of a young man, his hair blanched with sorrow studying philosophy
in some lonely tower, or of his old man, master of all human knowledge, hidden from human sight
in some shell-strewn cavern on the Mediterranean shore.

Already in Dublin, I had been attracted to the Theosophists because they had affirmed the real
existence of the Jew, or of his like; and, apart from whatever might have been imagined by
Huxley, Tyndall, Carolus Duran and Bastien-Lepage, I saw nothing against his reality. Presently
having heard that Madame Blavatsky had arrived from France, or from India, I thought it time
to look the matter up. I may also add, that it appears by some papers in my possession, that
the officers or Country Keepers on the border, were accustomed to torment their prisoners by binding
them to the iron bars of their chimneys, to extort confession. Have not all peoples, while bound together in a single mind and taste, believed
that such men existed and paid them that honour, or paid it to their mere shadow, which they
have refused to philanthropists and to men of learning?

