HARVEST

by

MRS. HUMPHRY WARD

Author of Robert Elsmere, Lady Rose's Daughter, Missing, Helena, etc.

1920

I

Two old labourers came out of the lane leading to Great End Farm. Both carried bags slung on
sticks over their shoulders. One, the eldest and tallest, was a handsome fellow, with regular
features and a delicately humorous mouth. His stoop and his slouching gait, the gray locks
also, which straggled from under his broad hat, showed him an old man--probably very near his
old-age pension. But he carried still with him a look of youth, and he had been a splendid
creature in his time. The other was short of stature and of neck, bent besides by field work.
A broadly-built, clumsy man, with something gnome-like about him, and the cheerful look of
one whose country nerves had never known the touch of worry or long sickness. The name of the
taller man was Peter Halsey, and Joseph Batts was his companion.

It was a fine July evening, with a cold north wind blowing from the plain which lay stretched
to their right. Under the unclouded sun, which by its own "sun-time" had only reached half-past
four in the afternoon, though the clock in the village church had already struck half-past
five, the air was dry and parching, and the fields all round, the road itself, and the dusty
hedges showed signs of long drought.

"It du want rain," said Peter Halsey, looking at a crop of oats through an open gate, "it du
want rain--bad."

"Aye!" said the other, "that it du. Muster Shenstone had better 'a read the prayer for rain
lasst Sunday, I'm thinkin', than all them long ones as ee did read."

Halsey was silent a moment, his half-smiling eyes glancing from side to side. At last he said
slowly,--

"We du be prayin' a lot about ower sins, and Muster Shenstone is allus preachin' about 'em.
But it's the sins o' the Garmins I be thinkin' of. If it hadn't a bin for the sins o' the Garmins
my Tom wouldn't ha' lost 'is right hand."

"An' ower Jim wouldn't be goin' into them trenches next November as ever is," put in Batts.
"It's the sins o' the Garmins as ha' done that, an' nothin' as you or I ha' done, Peter."

Halsey shook his head assentingly.

"Noa--for all that pratin', pacifist chap was sayin' lasst week. I didn't believe a word ee
said. 'Yis,' I says, 'if you want this war to stop, I'm o' your mind,' I says, 'but when you
tells me as England done it--you'm--'"

The short man burst into a cackling laugh.

"'You'm a liar!' Did you say that, Peter?"

Peter fenced a little.

"There be more ways nor one o' speakin' your mind," he said at last. "But I stood up to un.
Did you hear, Batts, as Great End Farm is let?"

The old man turned an animated look on his companion.

"Well, for sure!" said Batts, astonished. "An' who's the man?"

"It's not a man. It's a woman."

"A woman!" repeated Batts, wondering. "Well, these be funny times to live in, when the women
go ridin' astride an' hay-balin', an' steam-ploughin', an' the Lord knows what. And now they
must be takin' the farms, and turnin' out the men. Well, for sure."

A mild and puzzled laughter crossed the speaker's face.

Halsey nodded.

"An' now they've got the vote. That's the top on't! My old missis, she talks poltiks now to
me of a night. I don't mind her, now the childer be all gone. But I'd ha' bid her mind her
own business when they was yoong an' wanted seein' to."

"Now, what can a woman knoa about poltiks?" said Batts, still in the same tone of pleasant
rumination. "It isn't in natur. We warn't given the producin' o' the babies--we'd ha' cried
out if we 'ad been!"

A chuckle passed from one old man to the other.

"Well, onyways the women is all in a flutter about the votin'," said Halsey, lighting his pipe
with old hands that shook. "An' there's chaps already coomin' round lookin' out for it."

"You bet there is!" was Batts's amused reply. "But they'll take their toime, will the women.
'Don't you try to hustle-bustle me like you're doin',' say my missus sharp-like to a Labour
chap as coom round lasst week, 'cos yo' won't get nothin' by it.' And she worn't no more forthcomin'
to the Conservative man when ee called."

"Will she do what you tell her, Batts?" asked Halsey, with an evident interest in the question.

"Oh, Lord, no!" said Batts placidly, "shan't try. But now about this yoong woman an' Great End?--"

"Well, I ain't heared much about her--not yet awhile. But they say as she's nice-lookin', an'
Muster Shentsone ee said as she'd been to college somewhere, where they'd larn't her farmin'."

Batts made a sound of contempt.

"College!" he said, with a twitching of the broad nostrils which seemed to spread over half
his face. "They can't larn yer farmin'!"

"She's been on a farm too somewhere near Brighton, Muster Shenstone says, since she was at
college; and ee told me she do seem to be terr'ble full o' new notions."

"She'd better be full o' money," said the other, cuttingly. "Notions is no good without money
to 'em."

"Aye, they're wunnerfull costly things is notions. Yo'd better by a long way go by the folk
as know. But they do say she'll be payin' good wages."

"I dessay she will! She'll be obleeged. It's Hobson's choice, as you might say!" said Batts,
chuckling again.

Halsey was silent, and the two old men trudged on with cheerful countenances. Through the minds
of both there ran pleasant thoughts of the contrast between the days before the war and the
days now prevailing. Both of them could remember a wage of fifteen and sixteen shillings a
week. Then just before the war, it had risen to eighteen shillings and a pound. And now--why
the Wages Board for Brookshire had fixed thirty-three shillings as a weekly minimum, and a
nine-hours' day! Prices were high, but they would go down some day; and wages would not go
down. The old men could not have told exactly why this confidence lay so deep in them; but
there it was, and it seemed to give a strange new stability and even dignity to life. Their
sons were fighting; and they had the normal human affection for their sons. They wished the
war to end. But, after all, there was something to be said for the war. They--old Peter Halsey
and old Joe Batts--were more considered and more comfortable than they would have been before
the war. And it was the consideration more even than the comfort that warmed their hearts.

The evening grew hotter, and the way to the village seemed long. The old men were now too tired
to talk; till just as they came in sight of the first houses, they perceived the village wagonette
coming towards them.

"There she be! I did hear as Webb wor to meet her at the station. He's took her over once before,"
said old Halsey, raising his eyes for a moment and then dropping them again. Batts did the
same. The glance was momentary. But both men had the same impression of a pleasant-faced young
woman sitting erect behind Jonathan Webb, the decrepit driver of the wagonette, and looking
straight at them as they passed her. There was a general effect of youth and bright colour;
of pale brown hair, too, over very dark eyes.

"Aye, she be quite nice-lookin'," said Batts, with unction, "rayther uncommon. She minds me
summat o' my missis when she wor a young 'un." Halsey's mouth twitched a little, but though
his thoughts were ironical, he said nothing. It was generally admitted by the older people
that Mrs. Batts had been through many years the village beauty, but her fall from that high
place was now of such ancient date that it seemed foolish of Batts to be so fond of referring
to it.

The wagonette passed on. The woman sitting in it carefully took note of the scene around her,
in a mood of mingled hope and curiosity. She was to live in this valley without a stream, under
these high chalk downs with their hanging woods, and within a mile or so of the straggling
village she had just driven through. At last, after much wandering, she was to find a home--a
real home of her own. The word "home" had not meant much--or much at least that was agreeable--to
her, till now. Her large but handsome mouth took a bitter fold as she thought over various
past events.

Now they had left the village behind, and were passing through fields that were soon to be
her fields. Her keen eyes appraised the crops standing in them. She had paid the family of
her predecessor a good price for them, but they were worth it. And just ahead, on her left,
was a wide stretch of newly-ploughed land rising towards a bluff of grassy down-land on the
horizon. The ploughed land itself had been down up to a few months before this date; thin pasture
for a few sheep, through many generations. She thought with eagerness of the crops she was
going to make it bear, in the coming year. Wheat, or course. The wheat crops all round the
village were really magnificent. This was going to be the resurrection year for English farming,
after fifty years of "death and damnation"--comparatively. And there would be many good years
to come after.

Yes, Mr. Thomas Wellin, whose death had thrown the farm which she had now taken on the market,
had done well for the land. And it was not his fault but the landlord's that the farmhouse
and buildings had been allowed to fall into such a state. Mr. Wellin had not wanted the house,
since he was only working the land temporarily in addition to his own farm half a mile away.
But the owner, Colonel Shepherd, ought to have looked after the farmhouse and buildings better.
Still, they were making her a fair allowance for repairs.

She was longing to know how the workmen from Millsboro had been getting on. Hastings, the Wellins'
former bailiff, now temporarily hers, had promised to stay behind that evening to meet her
at the farm. She only meant to insist on what was absolutely necessary. Even if she had wished
for anything more, the lack of labour would have prevented it.

The old horse jogged on, and presently from a row of limes beside the road, a wave of fragrance,
evanescent and delicious, passed over the carriage. Miss Henderson sniffed it with delight.
"But one has never enough of it!" she thought discontentedly. And then she remembered how as
a child--in far-away Sussex--she used to press her face into the lime-blossom in her uncle's
garden--passionately, greedily, trying to get from it a greater pleasure than it would ever
yield. For the more she tried to compel it, by a kind of violence, the more it escaped her.
She used to envy the bees lying drunk among the blooms. They at least were surfeited and satisfied.

It struck her that there was a kind of parable in it of her whole life--so far.

But now there was a new world opening. The past was behind her. She drew herself stiffly erect,
conscious through every limb of youth and strength, and filled with a multitude of vague hopes.
Conscious, too, of the three thousand pounds that Uncle Robert had so opportunely left her.
She had never realized that money could make so much difference; and she thought gratefully
of the elderly bachelor, her mother's brother, who had unexpectedly remembered her. It had
enabled her to get her year's training, and to take this farm with a proper margin of capital.
She wished she had been able to tell Uncle Robert before he died what it meant to her.

They passed one or two pairs of labourers going home, then a group of girls in overalls, then
a spring cart containing four workmen behind a ragged pony, no doubt the builder's men who
had been at work on the Great End repairs. They all looked at her curiously, and Rachel Henderson
looked back at them--steadily, without shyness. They were evidently aware of who she was and
where she was going. Some of them perhaps would soon be in her employ. She would be settling
all that in a week or two.

Ah, there was the house. She leant forward and saw it lying under the hill, the woods on the
slope coming down to the back of it. Yes, it was certainly a lonely situation. That was why
the house, the farm lands, too, had been so long unlet, till old Wellin, the farm's nearest
neighbour, having made a good deal of money, had rented the land from Colonel Shepherd, to
add to his own. The farm buildings, too, he had made some use of, keeping carts and machines,
and certain stores there. But the house he had refused to have any concern with. It had remained
empty and locked up for a good many years.

The wagonette turned into the rough road leading through the middle of a fine field of oats
to the house. The field was gaily splashed with poppies, which ran, too, along the edges of
the crop, swayed by the evening breeze, and flaming in the level sun. Though lonesome and neglected,
the farm in July was a pleasant and picturesque object. It stood high and the air about it
blew keen and fresh. The chalk hill curved picturesquely round it, and the friendly woods ran
down behind to keep it company. Rachel Henderson, in pursuit of that campaign she was always
now waging against a natural optimism, tried to make herself imagine it in winter--the leafless
trees, the solitary road, the treeless pasture or arable fields, that stretched westward in
front of the farm, covered perhaps with snow; and the distant stretches of the plain. There
was not another house, not even a cottage, anywhere in sight. The village had disappeared.
She herself, in the old wagonette, seemed the only living thing.

No, there was a man emerging from the farm-gate, and coming to meet her--the bailiff, George
Hastings. She had only seen him once before, on her first hurried visit, when, after getting
a rough estimate from him of the repairs necessary to the house and buildings, she had made
up her mind to take the farm, if the landlord would agree to do them.

"Yon's Muster Hastings," said Jonathan Webb, turning on her a benevolent and wrinkled countenance,
with two bright red spots in the midst of each weather-beaten cheek. Miss Henderson again noticed
the observant curiosity in the old man's eyes. Everybody, indeed, seemed to look at her with
the same expression. As a woman farmer she was no doubt just a freak, a sport, in the eyes
of the village. Well, she prophesied they would take her seriously before long.

"I'm afraid I haven't as much to show you, miss, as I'd like," said Hastings, as he helped
her to alight. "It's cruel work nowadays trying to do anything of this kind. Two of the men
that began work last week have been called up, and there's another been just 'ticed away from
me this week. The wages that some people about will give are just mad!" He threw up his hands.
"Colonel Shepherd says he can't compete."

Miss Henderson replied civilly but decidedly that somehow or other the work would have to be
done. If Colonel Shepherd couldn't find the wages, she must pay the difference. Get in some
time, during August, she must.

The bailiff looked at her with a little sluggish surprise. He was not used to being hustled,
still less to persons who were ready to pay rather than be kept waiting. He murmured that he
dared say it would be all right, and she must come and look.

They turned to the right up a stony pitch, through a dilapidated gate, and so into the quadrangle
of the farm. To the left was a long row of open cow-sheds, then cow-houses and barns, the stables,
a large shed in which stood an old and broken farm cart, and finally the house, fronting the barns.

The house was little more than a large cottage built in the shabbiest way forty years ago,
and of far less dignity than the fine old barn on which it looked. It abutted at one end on
the cart-shed, and between it and the line of cow-sheds was the gate into the farmyard.

Miss Henderson stepped up to the house and looked at it.

"It is a poor place!" she said discontentedly; "and those men don't seem to have done much
to it yet."

Hastings admitted it. But they had done a little, he said, shamefacedly, and he unlocked the
door. Miss Henderson lingered outside a moment.

"I never noticed," she said, "that the living room goes right through. What draughts there'll
be in the winter!"

For as she stood looking into the curtainless window that fronted the farm-yard, she saw through
it a further window at the back of the room, and beyond that a tree. Both windows were large
and seemed to take up most of the wall on either side of the small room. The effect was peculiarly
comfortless, as though no one living in the room could possibly enjoy any shred of privacy.
There were no cosy corners in it anywhere, and Miss Henderson's fancy imagined rows of faces
looking in.

Inside a little papering and whitewashing had been done, but certainly the place looked remarkably
unviting. A narrow passage ran from front to back, on one side of which was the living room
with the two windows, while on the other were the kitchen and scullery. Upstairs there were
two good-sized bedrooms with a small third room in a lean-to at the back, the lower part of
which was occupied by a wash-house. Through the windows could be seen a neglected bit of garden,
and an untidy orchard.

But when she had wandered about the rooms a little, Rachel Henderson's naturally buoyant temperament
reasserted itself. She had brought some bright patterns of distemper with her which she gave
to Hastings with precise instructions. She had visions of casement curtains to hide the nakedness
of the big windows with warm serge curtains to draw over them in the winter. The floors must
be stained. There should be a deep Indian-red drugget in the sitting-room, with pigeon-blue
walls, and she thought complacently of the bits of old furniture she had been collecting, which
were stored in a friend's flat in town. An old dresser, a grandfather's clock, some bits of
brass, two arm-chairs, an old oak table--it would all look very nice when it was done, and
would cost little. Then the bedrooms. She had brought with her some rolls of flowery paper.
She ran to fetch them from the wagonette, and pinned some pieces against the wall. The larger
room with the south aspect should be Janet's. She would take the north room for herself. She
saw them both in her mind's eye already comfortably furnished; above all fresh and bright.
There should be no dirt or dinginess in the house, if she could help it. In the country whitewash
and distemper are cheap.

Then Hastings followed her about through the farm buildings, where her quick eye, trained in
modern ways, perceived a number of small improvements to be made that he would never have noticed.
She was always ready, he saw, to spend money on things that would save labour or lessen dirt.
But she was not extravagant, and looking through the list of her directions and commissions,
as he hastily jotted them down, he admitted to himself that she seemed to know what she was
about. And being an honest man himself, and good-tempered, though rather shy and dull, he presently
recognized the same qualities of honesty and good temper in her; and took to her. Insensibly
their tone to each other grew friendly. Though he was temporarily in the landlord's employ,
he had been for some years in the service of the Wellin family. Half-consciously he contrasted
Miss Henderson's manner to him with theirs. In his own view he had been worse treated than
an ordinary farm labourer throughout his farming life, though he had more education, and was
expected naturally to have more brains and foresight than the labourer. He was a little better
paid; but his work and that of his wife was never done. He had got little credit for success
and all the blame for failure. And the Wellin women-folk had looked down on his wife and himself.
A little patronage sometimes, and worthless gifts, that burnt in the taking; but no common
feeling, no real respect. But Miss Henderson was different. His rather downtrodden personality
felt a stimulus. He began to hope that when she came into possession she would take him on.
A woman could not possibly make anything of Great End without a bailiff!

Her "nice" looks, no doubt, counted for something. Her face was, perhaps, a little too full
for beauty--the delicately coloured cheeks and the large smiling mouth. But her brown eyes
were very fine, with very dark pupils, and marked eyebrows; and her nose and chin, with their
soft, blunted lines, seemed to promise laughter and easy ways. She was very lightly and roundly
made; and everything about her, her step, her sunburn, her freckles, her evident muscular strength,
spoke of open-air life and physical exercise. Yet, for all this general aspect of a comely
country-woman, there was much that was sharply sensitive and individual in the face. Even a
stranger might well feel that its tragic, as well as its humorous or tender possibilities,
would have to be reckoned with.

"All right!" said Miss Henderson at last, closing her little notebook with a snap, "now I think
we've been through everything. I'll take over one cart, and Mrs. Wellin must remove the other.
I'll buy the chaff-cutter and the dairy things, but not the reaping machine--"

"I'm afraid that'll put Mrs. Wellin out considerably!" threw in Hastings.

"Can't help it. I can't have the place cluttered up with old iron like that. It's worth nothing.
I'm sure you wouldn't advise me to buy it!"

She looked with bright decision at her companion, who smiled a little awkwardly, and said nothing.
The old long habit of considering the Wellin interest first, before any other in the world,
held him still, though he was no longer their servant.

Miss Henderson moved back towards the house.

"And you'll hurry these men up?--as much as you can? They are slow-coaches! I must get in the
week after next. Miss Leighton and I intend to come, whatever happens."

Hastings understood that "Miss Leighton" was to be Miss Henderson's partner in the farm, specially
to look after the dairy work. Miss Henderson seemed to think a lot of her.

"And you must please engage those two men you spoke of. Neither of them, you say, under sixty!
Well, there's no picking and choosing now. If they were eighty I should have to take them!
till the harvest's got in. There are two girls coming from the Land Army, and you've clinched
that other girl from the village?"

Hastings nodded.

"Well, I dare say we shall get the harvest in somehow," she said, standing at the gate, and
looking over the fields. "Miss Leighton and I mean to put our backs into it. But Miss Leighton
isn't as strong as I am."

Her eyes wandered thoughtfully over the wheat-field, ablaze under the level gold of the sun.
Then she suddenly smiled.

"I expect you think it a queer business, Mr. Hastings, women taking to farming?"

"Well, it's new, you see, Miss Henderson."

"I believe it's going to be very common. Why shouldn't the women do it!" She frowned a little.

"Oh, no reason at all," said Hastings hurriedly, thinking he had offended her. "I've nothing
against it myself. And there won't be men enough to go round, after the war."

She looked at him sharply.

"You've got a son in the war?"

"Two, and one's been killed."

"Last year?"

"No, last month."

Miss Henderson said nothing, but her look was full of softness. "He was to have been allowed
home directly," Hastings went on, "for two or three months. He was head woodman before the
war on Lord Radley's property." He pointed to the wooded slopes of the hill. "And they were
to have given him leave to see to the cutting of these woods."

"These woods!" Miss Henderson turned a startled face upon him. "You don't mean to say they're
coming down!"

"Half of them commandeered," said Hastings, with a shrug. "The Government valuers have been
all over them these last weeks. They're splendid timber, you know. There's been a timber camp
the other side of the hills a long while. They've got Canadians, and no doubt they'll move
on here."

Miss Henderson made another quick movement. She said nothing, however. She was staring at the
woods, which shone in the glow now steadily creeping up the hill, and Hastings thought she
was protesting from the scenery point of view.

"Well, the Government must have the wood," he said, with resignation. "We've got to win the
war. But it does seem a pity."

"I don't know that I should have taken the farm," she said, under her breath--

"If you had known? I wish I'd thought to tell you. But it was really only settled a few days ago."

"I don't like having a lot of strange men about the farm," she said abruptly, "especially when
I have girls to look after."

"Oh, the camp's a long way from the farm," he said consolingly. "And these woods will come last."

Still Miss Henderson's face did not quite recover its cheerfulness. She looked at her watch.

"Don't let me keep you, Mr. Hastings. I'll lock up the house, if you'll tell me where to leave
the key."

He showed her where to put it, in a corner of the stable, for him to find on the morrow. Then,
in her rapid way, Miss Henderson offered him the post of bailiff on the farm, from the date
of her entry. He agreed at once; his salary was settled, and he departed with a more cheerful
aspect than when he arrived. The hopefulness and spring of youth had long since left him, and
he had dreaded the new experience of this first meeting with a woman-farmer, from whom he desired
employment simply because he was very badly off, he was getting old, and Mr. Wellin's widow
had treated him shabbily. He had lost his nerve for new ventures. But Miss Henderson had made
things easy. She had struck him as considerate and sensible--a "good sort." He would do his
best for her.

Rachel Henderson, left to herself, did not immediately re-enter the house. She went with a
face on which the cloud still rested to look at the well which was to be found under the cart-shed,
at the eastern end of the house.

It was covered with a wooden lid which she removed. Under the shed roof there was but little
light left. A faint gleam showed the level of the water, which, owing to the long drought,
was very low. Hastings had told her that the well was extremely deep---150 feet at least, and
inexhaustible. The water was chalky but good. It would have to be pumped up every morning for
the supply of the house and stables.

The well had a brick margin. Rachel sat down upon it, her eyes upon that distant gleam below.
The dusk was fast possessing itself of all the farm, and an evening wind was gustily blowing
through the cart-shed, playing with some old guano sacks that had been left there, and whistling
round the corners of the house. Outside, Rachel could hear the horse fidgeting, and old Jonathan
coughing--no doubt as a signal to her that she had kept him long enough.

Still, she sat bent together on the margin of the well. Then she drew off her glove, and felt
for something in the leather bag she carried on her wrist. She took it out, and the small object
sparkled a little as she held it poised for a moment--as though considering. Then with a rapid
movement, she bent over the well, and dropped it into the water. There was a slight splash.

Rachel Henderson raised herself and stood up.

"That's done with!" she said to herself, with a straightening of all her young frame.

