There is in the British Museum a monument which was discovered at Xanthos in 1838. It is thought
to have been made about 500 B.C., and is called "The Harpy Monument," It is a tower, round
the four sides of which runs a frieze at a height of about twenty-one feet from the ground.
The frieze is of white marble, and is let into the frieze which is of sandstone. The Lycians,
in whose country it was found, were accustomed to bury their dead at the top of such towers.

There is very great difference of opinion among scholars and critics concerning the meaning
of the various scenes in these sculptures; and as all their writing is speculation, and no
one knows the truth about it, I shall only say that it is a very interesting object in the
history of art, and shall speak of the four corner figures on the shortest parts of the frieze,
from which the whole work takes its name. For one shall have This fare for common days'-bread,
which to me Should be a touch kept always on my sense To make hell soft, yea, the keen pain of
hell Soft as the loosening of wound arms in sleep. Ah, love is good, and the worst part of it More
than all things but death. She will be here In some small while, and see me face to face That am to
give up life for her and go Where a man lies with all his loves put out And his lips full of earth.
 For this reason the Harpies were considered as robbers, and whenever a person
suddenly disappeared it was said that they had been carried off by Harpies (Fig. 19).

Before leaving this subject of existing sculptures from the fifth century B.C., I will speak
of the two groups which belonged to the temple of Minerva in Ægina, and are now in the Glyptothek
at Munich. The city of Ægina was the principal city of the island of Ægina, which was in the
gulf of the same name, near the south-west coast of Greece. This city was at the height of
its prosperity about 475 B.C., at which time a beautiful temple was built, of which many columns
are still standing, though much of it has fallen down. In 1811 some English and German architects
visited this place, and the marbles they obtained are the most remarkable works which still
exist from so early a period. Thorwaldsen, the Danish sculptor, restored these reliefs, and
the King of Bavaria bought them.

Upon the western pediment there were eleven figures which represented an episode in the Trojan
war; it was the struggle of Ajax, Ulysses, and other Greek warriors to obtain the dead body
of Achilles, which was held by the Trojans. The story is that the goddess Thetis had dipped
her son Achilles in the river Styx for the purpose of making him invulnerable, or safe from
wounds by weapons. But as she held him by the ankles they were not wetted, and so he could
be wounded in them. During the siege of Troy Apollo guided the arrow of Paris to this spot,
and the great leader of the Greeks was killed. It is believed that the warrior in this picture
who is about to send his arrow is Paris. In the central or highest part of the pediment the
goddess Minerva stands and tries to cover the fallen body of Achilles with her shield. These
figures are on the side where the space grows narrower. You can judge of what the action and
spirit of the whole must be when these smaller figures have so much. We are sure that the arrow
will shoot out with such force as must carry death to its victim, and the second warrior, who
braces himself on his feet and knee, will thrust his lance with equal power (Fig. 20).

There are traces of color and of metal ornaments upon these Æginetan statues; the weapons,
helmets, shields, and quivers were red or blue; the eyes, hair, and lips were painted, and
there are marks upon the garments of the goddess that show that she must have had bronze ornaments.
There was a famous sculptor of Ægina named Callon, who lived about the time that this temple
was built; and though it is not known to be so, yet many critics and scholars believe that
he may have been the sculptor of these works, because they resemble the written descriptions
of his statues and reliefs.

There was a period which we call archaistic, and by this we indicate a time when it was the
fashion for the sculptors to imitate as nearly as possible the works of the true archaic period.
It has constantly happened in the history of society that fashion has ordained this same thing,
though the objects of imitation have varied with the different ages and nations. This archaistic
"craze" to imitate old sculptures was at its height in the times of the Roman emperors Augustus
and Hadrian; but here in America we have seen the same passion manifested in the desire to
have such furniture as Queen Anne and her people admired, or such as "came over in the Mayflower;"
and when the true original articles were no longer to be found in garrets and out-of-the-way
places, then manufacturers began to imitate the old in the new, and one can now buy all sorts
of ancient-looking furniture that is only just from the workmen's hands.

But among the Greeks there was a second motive for reproducing the works of the earlier artists,
which was the fact that the images of the gods and such articles as belonged to religious services
were sacred in their earliest forms, and were venerated by the people. Thus it followed that
the advance and change in the taste of the people and the skill of the artists was more suited
to other subjects, while the religious images were made as nearly as possible like the older
ones. If it happened that a rude ancient image of a god was placed side by side with a modern
and more beautiful statue of the same deity, the pious Greek would prefer the ugly one, while
he could well admire the most lovely. You should remember that these temple images were really
objects of actual worship.

Many of these archaistic works are in various museums of art.

This is a very beautiful temple image, and was discovered at Pompeii in 1760. It was found
in a small temple or chapel, of which it must have been the principal deity. It is in excellent
preservation; the only parts which are wanting are the fingers of the right hand and the object
which it held. Like many of these statues, it is less than life-size--four feet and two inches
in height. When it was first discovered there were many traces of color about it. The hair
was gilded to represent the blonde hair which the poets ascribed to Artemis (Diana). There
was considerable red about the garments, and some flowers were upon the border of the drapery.
There is an archaic stiffness about this statue, but the flowing hair, the form of the eyes,
and the free style of the nude parts all show that it belongs to the archaistic period (Fig. 21).

It would be pleasant and satisfying if we could trace step by step the progress of Greek sculpture
from the rude archaic manner to that of the Periclean age, or from such art as is seen in the
sculpture of Ægina to the perfections of the reliefs of the Parthenon. This we cannot do; but
we know some of the causes that led to this progress, and can give accounts of a few sculptors
who, while they did not equal the great Phidias, were at least the forerunners of such a type
of art as his.

The chief cause of the progress of art was the greater freedom of the artist in the choice
and treatment of his subjects. So long as the subjects were almost entirely religious there
could be little variety in the manner of treating them. Each god or goddess had its own attributes,
which must be rendered with exact care; and any new mode of portraying them was almost a sacrilege.
But as time passed on and the Panhellenic games and the national Pantheon at Olympia grew into
their great importance, new subjects were furnished for the artists, which allowed them to
show their originality and to indulge their artistic imaginations to their fullest extent.
The victors in the games were heroes, and regarded even as demi-gods, and statues were allowed
to be erected to them, although this had hitherto been considered a divine honor and was accorded
to the gods alone. When these heroes were represented, the artists, not being bound by any
laws, could study their subjects and represent them to the life as nearly as they were able
to do. This exaltation of the Olympian victors gave an opportunity for the development of sculpture
such as cannot be over-estimated in its influence and results.

Another characteristic of the art of the time we are now considering was the almost universal
use of bronze. This metal is excellent for displaying the minute features of the nude parts
of statues, but it is not equal to marble in the representation of draperies or for giving
expression to the face. PYTHAGORAS OF RHEGIUM was a famous artist who worked entirely in bronze.
The only copies from his works of which we know are on two gems, one of which is in the Berlin
Museum. He made exact studies of the body in action, and gave new importance to the reproduction
of the veins and muscles. It is also claimed that Pythagoras was the first to lay down clearly
the laws of symmetry or proportion which is governed by strict mathematical rules.

MYRON OF ELEUTHERÆ flourished about 500 to 440 B.C., and was reckoned among Athenian artists
because, though not born at Athens, he did most of his works there, and his most famous work,
the statue of a cow, stood on the Acropolis of that city. This cow was represented as in the
act of lowing, and was elevated upon a marble base. It was carried from Athens to Rome, where
it stood in the Forum of Peace. Many writers mentioned this work of Myron's, and thirty-seven
epigrams were written concerning it.

Though the cow was so much talked of, the artistic fame of Myron rests more upon the "Discobolus,"
or quoit-thrower. The original statue does not exist, but there are several copies of it. That
in the Massimi Villa is a very accurate one, and was found on the Esquiline Hill at Rome in
A.D. 1782; our illustration is made from this statue. Myron's great skill in representing the
human figure in excited action is well shown in the quoit-thrower. To make such a figure as
this requires great power in a sculptor. No model could constantly repeat this action, and
if he could there is but a flash of time in which the artist sees just the position he reproduces.
This figure, however, is so true to life that one feels like keeping out of the range of the
quoit when it flies (Fig. 22). There are several other existing works attributed to Myron:
they are a marble copy of his statue of Marsyas, in the Lateran at Rome; two torsi in the gallery
at Florence; a figure called Diomed, and a bronze in the gallery at Munich.

Myron made statues of gods and heroes, but he excelled in representing athletes. His works
were very numerous, and a list of those which are only known through the mention of them by
various writers would be of little value here. While Myron reproduced the form and action of
the body with marvellous effect, he made no advance in representing the expression of the face,
nor in the treatment of the hair. He was daring in his art, for he not only imitated what he
saw in life, but he also represented grotesque imaginary creatures, and in many ways proved
that he had a rich creative fancy.

A third sculptor of this time was CALAMIS, who was in his prime about B.C. 450. He was not
born in Athens, but he worked there. Calamis added to the exact representations of Pythagoras
and Myron the element of grace beyond their powers in that direction. He made a greater variety
of figures than they, for to gods and heroes he added heroines, boys and horses. His works
were in bronze, gold and ivory, as well as marble. But what we know of Calamis is gathered
from the writings of Greek authors rather than from works, or copies of works, by him still
existing; indeed, no statue remains known to be his own, though there are some which critics
fancy may be so. But we may be certain of his great excellence from the many praises sung and
said of him, and Lucian, who knew all the best works of all the greatest masters of Greece,
puts Calamis before them all for elegance and grace, and for the finer expression of faces;
when imagining a beautiful statue of a young girl he declares that he would go to Calamis to
impart to it a chaste modesty and give it a sweet and unaffected smile.

PHIDIAS is the most famous of all Greek sculptors, and as Greek sculpture is the finest sculpture
of which we have any knowledge, it follows that Phidias was the first sculptor of the world.
And yet, in spite of his fame, we do not know the time of his birth. We know that he was the
son of Charmidas, but we know nothing of the father except that he had a brother who was a
painter, and this makes it probable that the family of Phidias were artists.

As nearly as can be told, Phidias was born about B.C. 500. This would have made him ten years
old at the time of the battle of Marathon and twenty years old when Salamis was fought, while
he came of age at the time of Platæa. He seems to have begun his artistic life as a painter,
and we know nothing of him as an independent sculptor until the administration of Cimon, about
B.C. 471. But his finest works belong to the time of Pericles, who was his friend as well as
patron, and made him the master over all the great public works at Athens during what we speak
of as the Periclean age.

It seems that the favor of Pericles was a dear privilege to Phidias, for it exposed him to
bitter envy and hatred; and those who feared to attack Pericles himself avenged themselves
upon Phidias, and accused him of dishonesty in obtaining the gold for the robe of the statue
of Minerva which he made for the Parthenon. He proved himself innocent of this, but he was
accused of other crimes, and one account says that he was thrown into prison and died there
of disease or poison. Another account relates that the great sculptor went into exile at Elis,
where he made his most famous statue, the Olympian Zeus, and that he was there convicted of
theft and put to death. With such contradictory stories we cannot know the exact truth; but
we do know that he went to Elis accompanied by distinguished artists. He was received with
honor, and for a long time the studio that he occupied there was shown to strangers. The Olympians
also allowed him an honor which the Athenians never extended to him--that is, to inscribe his
name upon the base of the statue of Zeus, which he was not permitted to do in the case of the
Minerva (or Athena) of the Parthenon.

It often happens in the case of a very great man that the events which have preceded his manhood
have prepared the way for him and his work in so striking a manner that it seems as if he could
not have been great at any other time, and that he could not avoid being so, when everything
had been shaped to his advantage. This was true of Phidias. When he came to be a man the dreadful
wars which had ravaged Greece were over, and the destruction of the older structures prepared
the way for the rebuilding of Athens. Large quantities of "marble, bronze, ivory, gold, ebony
and cypress wood" were there, and a great number of skilful workmen were at hand to work under
his command. The Athenians were ablaze with zeal to rebuild the temples and shrines of their
gods, who, as they believed, had led them to their victories, and not only the public, but
the private means were used to make Athens the grandest and most beautiful city of the world.

The first great work with which the name of Phidias was connected was the building of the temple
of Theseus, called also the Theseion. This was a very important temple, and was constructed
in obedience to the command of an oracle in this wise: In B.C. 470 the island of Scyros had
been taken by the Athenians, and upon this island Theseus had been buried. After the battle
of Marathon, in which he had aided the Athenians, Theseus was much regarded by them, and in
B.C. 476 they were directed to remove his bones to Athens and build over them a shrine worthy
of so great a champion. Just then a gigantic skeleton was discovered at Scyros by Cimon, and
was brought to Athens with great ceremony, and laid to rest with pompous respect, and the splendid
temple dedicated to Theseus was begun, and Phidias was commissioned to make its plastic ornaments.
The precincts of this temple later became a sanctuary where the poor man and the slave could
be safe from the oppressor.

Phidias executed many works under the patronage of Cimon, the greatest of which was the colossal
statue of Minerva, which stood on the Acropolis. It was called the "Minerva Promachos," and
was so gigantic that "the crest of her helmet and the point of her spear could be seen by the
mariner off the promontory of Sunium glittering in the sunlight as a welcome to her own chosen
people, and an awful warning to her foes." The meaning of Promachos may be given as champion
or guardian, and we know from existing descriptions that, with its pedestal, it must have been
at least seventy feet in height. It was made from the spoils taken at Marathon; its pedestal
was found, in 1840, standing between the Parthenon and the Erechtheium. It has been called
the "Pallas with the golden spear," for this goddess was known as Athena, Minerva, and Pallas,
and it is said that Alaric was so impressed by its awful aspect that he shrank from it in horror.
The only representations of this statue now in existence are upon Athenian coins, and the position
of the goddess differs in these, as you will see by the illustration (Fig. 23); there are reasons
for believing that the one in which the shield rests upon the ground is correct, one of which
is that some years after the death of Phidias the inside of the shield was ornamented by a
relief of the battle of the Centaurs.

Though Phidias proved himself to be a great artist during the reign of Cimon, it was not until
the time of Pericles that he reached the glorious height of his genius. Pericles and Phidias
seem to have been two grand forces working in harmony for the political and artistic grandeur
of Athens, and, indeed, of all Attica, for within a period of twenty years nearly all the great
works of that country were begun and completed. Plutarch writes of these wonders in these words:
"Hence we have the more reason to wonder that the structures raised by Pericles should be built
in so short a time, and yet built for ages. For as each of them, as soon as it was finished,
had the venerable air of antiquity, so now that they are old they have the freshness of a modern
building. A bloom is diffused over them which preserves their aspect untarnished by time, as
if they were animated with a spirit of perpetual youth and unfading elegance."

It is quite impossible that I should speak here of the works of Phidias in detail, and I have
decided to speak only of the frieze of the Parthenon, because the Elgin marbles enable us to
give illustrations from it and to know more about this than of the other works of the great
masters about whom whole volumes might be written with justice. But, first, I will give a picture
of a coin which shows the great Olympian Zeus, or Jupiter, which Phidias made at Elis, after
he was an exile from Athens (Fig. 24). When Phidias was asked how he had found a model for
this Jupiter, he quoted the lines from Homer:

   "He said, and nodded with his shadowy brows,
   Waved on the immortal head the ambrosial locks,
   And all Olympus trembled at the nod."

The writings of the ancients have almost numberless references to this statue, and its praise
is unending. It was colossal in size and made of ivory and gold, and one historian says that
though the temple had great height, yet the Jupiter was so large that if he had risen from
his throne he must have carried the roof away. It is related that when the work was completed
Phidias prayed to Jupiter to give him a sign from heaven that he might know whether his work
was pleasing to the great god or not. This prayer was answered, and a flash of lightning came
which struck the pavement in front of the statue. This statue was reckoned among the seven
wonders of the world, and it is believed that the magnificent bust called the "Jupiter Otricoli"
is a copy from the Olympian statue (Fig. 25).

I shall speak in another volume (upon Architecture) of the former glory and the present ruin
of the Parthenon at Athens, and tell how upon its decoration Phidias lavished his thought and
care until it surpassed in beauty any other structure of which we have knowledge. Early in
the present century Lord Elgin, the English Ambassador to the Porte, interested himself in
having the sculptures found in the ruins taken to England. In 1812 eighty chests containing
these priceless works of the greatest sculptor who ever lived were placed in Burlington House,
and a few years later Parliament purchased them for £35,000, and they were placed in the British
Museum, where they now are. There is a great number of them, and all are of great interest;
but I shall pass over the metopes and the pediments, and shall pass to the frieze after speaking
of this one figure of Theseus, which is from the sculptures of the eastern pediment. The sculptures
upon this pediment represented the story of the birth of Athena, and it was proper that Theseus
should be present, as he was king over Athens, of which city Athena, or Minerva, was the protecting
goddess. Torso is a term used in sculpture to denote a mutilated figure, and many such remains
of ancient sculpture exist which are so beautiful, even in their ruin, that they are the pride
of the museums where they are, and serve as studies for the artists of all time. This figure
of Theseus is wonderful for the majesty and grace of its attitude, for perfection of its anatomical
accuracy, and for the appearance of elasticity of muscle with which it impresses one, even
though made of marble. It really seems as if the skin could be moved upon it, so soft does
its surface look to be. It is ranked as the greatest miracle of sculpture. Though it is called
a Theseus, I ought to state that some critics take exceptions to this name, and believe it
to be Hercules or Bacchus; but by almost general consent it is called a Theseus (Fig. 26).

We may imagine that the representation upon this eastern pediment must have been magnificent.
Of course the chosen goddess of Athens would be made to appear with great glory. The myth relates
that Athena was born in an instant, by springing forth from the head of Zeus, or Jupiter, fully
armed.

It is very important, when considering the sculpture at Athens, to know something about the
character of this goddess whose power and influence was so great there. I shall give an extract
from an English writer on Greek sculpture, Mr. Walter Copeland Perry:

"It is a very remarkable fact, and one which gives us a deep insight into the character of
the Athenians, that the central figure in their religion, the most perfect representative of
their feelings, thoughts, and aspirations, was not Zeus or Hera (Juno), nor the most popular
gods of all times and nations, Ares (Mars) and Aphrodite (Venus), but Athena, the virgin, the
goddess of wise counsel and brave deed! She was enthroned in the very heart of their citadel;
and she stood in colossal grandeur on the battlements to terrify their foes, and to give the
first welcome to the mariner or the exile when he approached his divine and beautiful home,
which reposed in safety under the protection of her lance and shield."

The attributes of this goddess, as given in Greek literature and shown forth in Greek art,
are very varied and hard to be understood as belonging to one person. She is the patroness
of war, and in Homer's Iliad she is represented as rushing into battle in this wise:

   "The cuirass donn'd of cloud-compelling force
   And stood accoutred for the bloody fray.

But this warlike goddess is also represented as the wise counsellor who restrains Achilles
from rash action; and though she does not shrink from war and danger, yet the most precious
gift to her people was not the war-horse, but the olive, the emblem of peace, and to her honor
was this sacred tree planted. "She stands in full armor, with brandished lance, on the highest
point of the Acropolis, and yet she is the patroness of all household and female work, in which
she herself excels."

It is very interesting to notice that in the early representations of Athena, while she is
very warlike in her bearing and raises her lance in her right hand, she also carries in her
left the distaff and the spindle and the lamp of knowledge. In the later art of Phidias she
is still stern and severe, but her face also expresses dignity and grandeur of thought and
character. Later still, her warlike attributes are made less prominent: the shield rests on
the ground, and the lance is more like a sceptre, until, in the decline of art, she is represented
as lovely and gentle, and all her grand power is lost, and she is not above a great number
of other goddesses who are attractive for their soft, lovely grace, but have no selfhood, no
individuality to command our admiration or respect.

We come now to speak of the Elgin marbles from the frieze of the Parthenon. It was about thirty-five
feet above the floor, three feet three inches broad, and about five hundred and twenty-two
feet long. It represented a continuous procession, and the subject is called the great Panathenaic
Procession. About four hundred feet of this frieze remains, so that a good judgment can be
formed of it. First I must tell you what this procession means. The festival of the Panathenæa
was the most important of all the splendid pomps which were celebrated at Athens. It is probable
that this festival was held every year about the middle of August, but the great Panathenaic
occurred only in the third year of each olympiad; an olympiad was a period of four years, extending
from one celebration of the Olympic games to another, which was an event of great importance
in reckoning time with the Greeks; thus we see that the great procession represented on the
frieze occurred once in every four years. This festival continued several days, and all were
filled with horse-racing, cock-fighting, gymnastic and musical contests, and a great variety
of games; poets also recited their verses, and philosophers held arguments in public places.[A]
But the most important day was that on which a procession went up to the Parthenon and carried
the peplos, or garment for the great goddess, which had been woven by the maidens of Athens.
This peplos was made of crocus-colored stuff, on which the figures of the gods engaged in their
contests with the giants appeared in beautiful, rich embroidery. In later years, after the
Athenians had fallen from their first high-minded simplicity, they sometimes embroidered on
the peplos the likeness of a man whom they wished to flatter, as thus placing him in the company
of the gods was a very great compliment.

[Footnote A: In the Persian invasion of Greece by Xerxes, B.C. 480, that monarch was surprised
to learn that the Olympic games were not suspended at the approach of his army.]

The procession of the peplos was formed at daybreak in the Potters' Quarter of the city, and
passed to the Dromos, then to the market-place, onward to the temple of Demeter, round the
Acropolis along the Pelasgic wall, through the Propylæa to the temple of Athena Polias. The
procession was as splendid as all the wealth, nobility, youth and beauty of Athens could make
it. Of the vast multitude which joined it some were in chariots, others on horses and almost
countless numbers on foot. After the most important officers of the government come the envoys
of the Attic colonies with the noble Athenian maidens, the basket-bearers, the aliens who resided
in Athens dressed in red instead of white, and a chosen company of aged men bearing branches
of the sacred olive.

The peplos was not borne by hands, but was suspended from the mast of a ship, upon wheels,
which some writers say was moved by machinery placed underground. When the temple was reached
the splendid garment was placed upon the sacred statue, which was believed to have fallen from
heaven. During the festival of the Panathenæa prisoners were permitted to enjoy their freedom,
men whose services to the public merited recognition received gifts of gold crowns, and their
names were announced by heralds in public places, and many interesting ceremonies filled up
the time. We do not know the exact order in which all these things happened; but it is believed
that the procession of the peplos was the crowning glory of it all, and was celebrated on the
final day.

The plan of the Parthenon frieze which represented this great procession was as follows: On
the eastern side above the main entrance to the temple there were two groups of the most important
and powerful of the many gods of the Greek religion. Each of these groups had six gods and
an attendant, so that there were seven figures in each of these groups, as you will see by
the illustration (Fig. 27).

There has been much study of these sculptures, and many scholars have written about them. There
is still a difference of opinion as to which gods are here represented, but I shall give you
the most generally accepted opinion, which calls a, Hermes, or Mercury, the messenger of the
gods; b, Apollo; c, Artemis, or Diana; d, Ares, or Mars; e, Iris, who is attending upon f,
Hera, or Juno; g, Zeus, or Jupiter; h, Athena, Minerva, or Pallas; i, Hephæstus, or Vulcan;
j, Poseidon, or Neptune; k, Dionysus, or Bacchus; l, m, n are more doubtful, but are probably
Aphrodite, or Venus, Demeter, or Ceres, and Triptolemus, the boy who was a favorite with Ceres,
who invented the plough and first sowed corn.

Now, these two groups of divinities were divided by a very singular group containing five figures
(Fig. 28).

There has been much controversy as to these figures and what they are doing. They seem to be
unconscious of the great gods who are near to them on either side. The greater number of critics
consider that the two maidens, e and d, are of the number who have embroidered the peplos;
the central figure, c, a priestess of Athena; a, the Archon Basileus; and b, a consecrated
servant-boy, who is delivering up the peplos. Other critics believe, however, that these figures
are all preparing for the sacred ceremonies about to begin, and that the priest is giving the
boy-servant a garment which he has taken off. Other theories may arise, and we can only listen
to them all, and yet not know the truth; but the more we study the more we shall admire these
exquisite figures. 

Sweet dreams, you said? An evil dream I hold it for, sweet love.

QUEEN. You call love sweet; yea, what is bitter, then? There's nothing broken sleep could hit upon
So bitter as the breaking down of love.

You call me sweet; I am not sweet to you, Nor you-O, I would say not sweet to me, And if I
said so I should hardly lie. But there have been those things between us, sir, That men call sweet.

CHASTELARD.
I know not how There is Turns to There hath been; 't is a heavier change Than change of flesh
to dust. Yet though years change And good things end and evil things grow great, The old love
that was, or that was dreamed about, That sang and kissed and wept upon itself, Laughed and ran mad
with love of its own face, That was a sweet thing.

QUEEN. Nay, I know not well. 'T is when the man is held fast underground They say for sooth
what manner of heart he had. We are alive, and cannot be well sure If we loved much or little:
think you not It were convenient one of us should die?

CHASTELARD. Madam, your speech is harsh to understand.

QUEEN. Why, there could come no change then; one of us Would never need to fear our love might turn
To the sad thing that it may grow to be. I would sometimes all things were dead asleep That I
have loved, all buried in soft beds And sealed with dreams and visions, and each dawn Sung
to by sorrows, and all night assuaged By short sweet kissed and by sweet long loves For old life's
sake, lest weeping overmuch Should wake them in a strange new time, and arm Memory's blind
hand to kill forgetfulness.

CHASTELARD. Look, you dream still, and sadly.

QUEEN. Sooth, a dream; For such things died or lied in sweet love's
face, And I forget them not, God help my wit!

I would the whole world were made up of sleep And life not fashioned out of lies and loves. We
foolish women have such times, you know, When we are weary or afraid or sick For perfect nothing.

CHASTELARD.
[Aside.] Now would one be fain To know what bitter or what dangerous thing She thinks of, softly
chafing her soft lip. She must mean evil.

QUEEN. Are you sad too, sir, That you say nothing?

CHASTELARD. I? not sad a jot-- Though this your talk might make a blithe man sad.

QUEEN. O me! I must not let stray sorrows out; They are ill to fledge, and if they feel blithe
air They wail and chirp untunefully. Would God I had been a man! when I was born, men say, My father
turned his face and wept to think I was no man.

CHASTELARD. Will you weep too?

QUEEN. In sooth, If I were a man I should be no base man; I could have fought; yea, I could
fight now too If men would show me; I would I were the king! I should be all ways better than I am.

CHASTELARD.
Nay, would you have more honor, having this-- Men's hearts and loves and the sweet spoil of souls
Given you like simple gold to bind your hair? Say you were king of thews, not queen of souls,
An iron headpiece hammered to a head, You might fall too.

QUEEN. No, then I would not fall, Or God should make me woman back again. To be King James-you
hear men say King James, The word sounds like a piece of gold thrown down, Rings with a round
and royal note in it-- A name to write good record of; this king Fought here and there, was
beaten such a day, And came at last to a good end, his life Being all lived out, and for the main
part well And like a king's life; then to have men say (As now they say of Flodden, here they
broke And there they held up to the end) years back They saw you-yea, I saw the king's face
helmed Red in the hot lit foreground of some fight Hold the whole war as it were by the bit,
a horse Fit for his knees' grip-the great rearing war That frothed
with lips flung up, and shook men's lives Off either flank of it like
snow; I saw (You could not hear as his sword rang), saw him Shout,
laugh, smite straight, and flaw the riven ranks, Move as the wind
moves, and his horse's feet Stripe their long flags with dust. Why,
if one died, To die so in the heart and heat of war Were a much goodlier
thing than living soft And speaking sweet for fear of men. Woe's me,
Is there no way to pluck this body off? Then I should never fear a
man again, Even in my dreams I should not; no, by heaven.

CHASTELARD.
I never thought you did fear anything.

QUEEN. God knows I do; I could
be sick with wrath To think what grievous fear I have 'twixt whiles
Of mine own self and of base men: last night If certain lords were
glancing where I was Under the eyelid, with sharp lip and brow, I
tell you, for pure shame and fear of them, I could have gone and slain
them.

CHASTELARD. Verily, You are changed since those good days that
fell in France; But yet I think you are not so changed at heart As
to fear man.

QUEEN. I would I had no need.

Alcamenes was also the principal assistant of Phidias in his decoration of the temple of Jupiter
at Olympia, and is said to have himself executed the relief upon the western pediment, in which
the battle of the Centaurs and Lapithæ was represented with great spirit.

AGORACRITUS of Paros, who has been mentioned as the rival of Alcamenes, is called the favorite
pupil of Phidias, and it is said that the master even gave Agoracritus some of his works, and
allowed the pupil to inscribe his name upon them. For this reason the ancient writers were
often in doubt as to the authorship of the statues called by the names of these sculptors.
It is said that when the Venus of Alcamenes was preferred before that of Agoracritus the latter
changed his mark, and made it to represent a Nemesis, or the goddess who sent suffering to
those who were blessed with too many gifts. It is said that this statue was cut from a block
of marble which the Persians brought with them to Marathon for the purpose of making a trophy
of it which they could set up to commemorate the victory they felt so sure of gaining; in their
flight and adversity it was left, and at last served a Greek sculptor in making a statue of
an avenging goddess. This seems to be a striking illustration of "poetic justice."

Agoracritus sold the Nemesis to the people of Rhamnus, who had a temple dedicated to that goddess,
and made a condition that it should never be set up in Athens. In the museum of the Lateran
at Rome there is a small but very beautiful antique statue of Nemesis, which is thought to
be a copy of this famous work. As Nemesis was the goddess who meted out fortune according to
her idea of right, a measure was her symbol, and the Greek measure of a cubit was generally
placed in her hand. The word cubit means the length of the forearm from the elbow to the wrist,
and in this statue of which we speak this part of the arm is made very prominent, and the measure
itself is omitted.

The sculptor Myron also had pupils and followers who executed many works, and of this school
was CRESILAS of Cydonia, in Crete. We are interested in him because two copies from his works
exist, of which I give pictures here. Pliny, in speaking of the portrait statue of Pericles,
said it was a marvel of the art "which makes illustrious men still more illustrious." The cut
given here is from a bust in the British Museum. There is reason to believe that Cresilas excelled
Myron in the expression of his faces (Figs. 37, 38).

CALLIMACHUS is an artist of whom we know little, but that little is interesting. We do not
know where he was born, but as he was employed to make a candelabra for the eternal lamp which
burned before the sacred statue of Athena Polias, we may suppose that he was an Athenian. Some
writers say that he invented a lamp which would burn a year without going out, and that such
an one made of gold was the work he did for the temple of Minerva. Callimachus lived between
B.C. 550 and 396, and is credited with having invented the Corinthian capital in this wise:
A young girl of Corinth died, and her nurse, according to custom, placed a basket upon her
grave containing the food she had loved best in life. It chanced that the basket was put down
upon a young acanthus plant, and the leaves grew up about the basket in such a way that when
Callimachus saw it the design for the capital which we know as Corinthian was suggested to
him, and was thus named from the city in which all this had occurred.

While the plastic art of Athens, or the Attic school of sculpture, reached its greatest excellence
in Phidias, there was in the Peloponnesus another school of much importance. Argos was the
chief city of this school, and its best master was POLYCLEITUS of Sicyon, who was born about
B.C. 482. He was thus about twelve years younger than Phidias. Polycleitus was held in such
esteem that many of the ancient writers couple his name with that of Phidias. He was employed
in the decoration of the Heraion, or temple of Hera, at Argos. But his greatest work was a
statue of Hera, or Juno, for a temple on Mount Euboea, between Argos and Mycenæ. This statue
was chryselephantine, and as Juno was the majestic, white-armed, ox-eyed goddess consort of
Jupiter, it is a striking coincidence that Phidias at Olympia and Polycleitus on Mount Euboea
should have made from ivory and gold two famous statues of this renowned pair, who reigned
over the mythical world of the Greek religion. There are several copies of heads of Juno in
various museums, and some of them have been ascribed to Polycleitus; but the proof of the truth
of this is far from being satisfactory. This master made other statues of divinities, but he
excelled in representing athletes; and however fine his other works may have been, it was in
the reproduction of strong, youthful, manly beauty that he surpassed other sculptors. Some
of his statues of this sort, especially a Doryphorus, or spear-bearer, were considered as models
from which all other artists could work.

Polycleitus is said to have written a treatise in which he gave exact rules for the proportions
of the different parts of the body. This was called "the canon" of Polycleitus, and there is
good reason to believe that the Doryphorus was called by the same name, "the canon," because
it was fashioned according to the rules laid down by Polycleitus in his treatise. His pupils
and followers are mentioned with honor by the Greek authors of his time, but I need not mention
them here.

The art of Phidias and Polycleitus was the art of Greece at its best period. After the close
of the Persian wars the people of Greece were a religious and patriotic people. The Persian
wars developed the best quality of character, for these wars were waged against a foreign foe,
and the Greeks were defending their freedom and their civilization, and at the end of the struggle
Pericles, who guided them to their greatest prosperity, was a statesman and a man of high aims;
he was a gentleman as well as a strong ruler. The Peloponnesian war, on the contrary, was a
civil war, and it divided the Greeks among themselves and roused the evil passions of friend
against friend all over their country. It was the cause of selfishness, treachery, and immorality,
and one of its worst effects was seen in the loss of religious tone among the people: their
old contented simplicity of life and thought was gone; every man thought only of himself, and
the nation began to sink into the condition which at last made it an easy prey to the Macedonians.
We have studied all these wars in our histories, but perhaps we have not thought how much they
affected sculpture and the other arts, and brought them down from the lofty heights of the
Periclean age.

But there were still men who strove to be great and grand in morals and in intellect, and perhaps
strove all the more earnestly for this on account of the decline they saw about them. Few countries
in any age have had more splendid men than Socrates, Plato, Euripides, Aristophanes, Pelopidas,
Epaminondas, Demosthenes, Dion, and Timoleon, and these all lived between the Peloponnesian
and the Macedonian wars. And while the arts were less grand than before, they did not fall
into decline for some years, though they took on new features. The gods who had been mostly
represented were less often the subjects of the sculptor, and when they were so they were softened
and made less awful in their effect. Other gods were more freely taken for models, such as
came nearer to human life and thought, because less sublime in their attributes and characters.
Among these were Venus as a lovely woman rather than as the great mother of all living creatures,
and Eros, or Love; while Plutus, or Wealth, and satyrs, nymphs, and tritons were multiplied
in great numbers.

When the gods who were represented were more like human beings in their character, it followed
that the statues of them more nearly resembled men and women, and gradually the old grandeur
and sublimity were changed to grace, beauty, and mirth. Many people would prefer these works
because they come nearer to the every-day life of the world; but earnest, thoughtful minds
look for something more noble in art--something that will not come down to us as we are, but
will help us to rise above ourselves and to strive after better things.

CEPHISODOTUS was a sculptor who lived until about B.C. 385, or a little later, and stood between
the old and the new schools of Greek art. The cut given here is from a group at Munich, which
is believed to be a copy of a work by him, and it is a combination of the simple dignity of
the art of Phidias (which is seen in the flowing drapery and the wavy edge of its folds) and
the later Attic style (which is seen in the dreamy, gentle air of the face of the nurse of
the little god). (Fig. 39.) We know very little of the life of Cephisodotus, and as little
is said of his works by ancient writers.

SCOPAS of Paros was one of the greatest sculptors of the later Attic school. The island of
Paros, where he was born, was the place where the finest Greek marble was found; but he worked
so much at Athens that he is spoken of as an Athenian. He was an architect as well as a sculptor,
and he superintended the erection of some splendid structures, which he also ornamented with
his sculptures. I shall speak especially of the tomb of Mausolus, the King of Caria. Scopas
executed the sculptures of the east side, and as he was the best artist of the sculptors employed
there, it is probable that he had much to do with the design for all the work. This mausoleum
was reckoned as one of the "seven wonders of the world," and has given a name to fine tombs
the world over.

The most interesting of the sculptures from this tomb which are now in the British Museum seems
to me to be the statue of Mausolus himself. It is plainly intended to be an exact portrait
of the king, and it is so designed and executed that we feel sure it must show him to us just
as he was when alive, more than twenty-two hundred years ago (Fig. 40).

A part of the frieze upon the mausoleum showed the battle of the Greeks and the Amazons, and
this illustration from it gives an idea of the boldness of action and the correctness of the
design (Fig. 41). This picture is from a slab in the possession of the Serra family in Genoa.
On the right a warrior holds down an Amazon whom he has forced to her knees and is about to
kill, while she stretches out her right hand in supplication. The figures to the left are full
of spirit, and absolutely seem to be in motion. We do not know that any of these figures were
executed by the hand of Scopas, but it is probable that they were, and they give us an idea
of the art of his time.

Scopas also carved one of the splendid pillars of the temple of Diana at Ephesus, and did much
architectural decoration, as well as to execute many statues and groups of figures. The ancient
writers say very little of the art of Scopas, but when all that we can learn is brought together,
it shows that he had great fertility in expressing his own ideas, that his genius was creative
and his works original. He represented the gods which the earlier sculptors had shown in their
works in quite a new manner, and he was the first to show the goddess Venus in all the beauty
which imagination could attribute to her. His representations of nymphs of wood and sea, of
monsters, and all sorts of strange, imaginary beings were numberless, and he made his sculptured
figures to express every emotion that can be fancied or felt, from the tenderest and sweetest
affection to the wildest passions of the soul.

His works were always representations of gods or of sentiments as shown by some superhuman
beings; he never portrayed a hero, with the exception of Hercules, and was ever busy with the
ideal rather than with realities about him. He worked in marble only, which is far more suited
to the elegant beauty of his style than are bronze and gold or ivory.

We are accustomed to call PRAXITELES the greatest sculptor of the second school of Greek art,
just as we give that place to Phidias in the first. We have no fixed dates concerning Praxiteles.
We know that he was the son of a Cephisodotus, who was a bronze worker, and was thought to
be a son of Alcamenes, thus making Praxiteles a grandson of the latter. Praxiteles was first
instructed by his father. Later he came under the influence of Scopas, who was much older than
he; and by Scopas he was persuaded to give up working in bronze and confine himself to marble.
Perhaps the most authentic date we have concerning him is that given by Pliny, who says that
he was in his prime from B.C. 364-360.

It is impossible to praise a sculptor more than Praxiteles was praised by the Greek authors;
and, although Athens was the place where he lived and labored most, yet he was known to all
Greece, and even to other countries, and the number of his works was marvellous. There are
trustworthy accounts of forty-seven groups, reliefs, and statues by his hand, and it is not
probable that these are all that he executed.

Praxiteles represented youth and beauty and such subjects as are most pleasing to popular taste.
Thus it happened that his male figures were the young Apollo, Eros, and youthful satyrs, while
a large proportion of his statues represented lovely women. Venus was frequently repeated by
him, and there is a story that he made two statues of her, one being draped and the other nude.
The people of Cos bought the first, and the last was purchased by the Cnidians, who placed
it in the midst of an open temple, where it could be seen from all sides. It became so famous
that many people went to Cnidos solely for the purpose of seeing it, and the "Cnidian Venus"
acquired a reputation wherever art was known. When the oppressor of the Cnidians, King Nicodemus
of Bithynia, offered to release them from a debt of one hundred talents (about $100,000) if
they would give him the Venus, they refused, and declared that it was the chief glory of their
State.

Another story relates that Phryne, a friend of Praxiteles, had been told by him that she could
have any work which she might choose from his workshop. She wished to have the one which the
artist himself considered the best. In order to find out which he so esteemed she sent a servant
to tell him that his workshop was on fire. He exclaimed, "All is lost if my Satyr and Cupid
are not saved!" Then Phryne told him of her trick, and chose the Cupid, or Eros, for her gift.
Phryne then offered the statue to the temple of Thespiæ, in Boeotia, where it was placed between
a statue of Venus and one of Phryne herself. This Cupid was almost as celebrated as the Cnidian
Venus, and was visited by many people. The head given here (Fig. 42), which was found in Centocelle
by Gavin Hamilton, and is now in the Vatican, is thought by many to be a copy of a Cupid by
Praxiteles, and even of the Thespian statue; but we have no proof of this. The Cupid, or Eros,
of the art of Scopas and Praxiteles is not the merry little creature who bears that name in
later art; he is a youth just coming into manhood, with a dreamy, melancholy face, the tender
beauty of which makes him one of the most attractive subjects in sculpture. Caligula carried
the Thespian Cupid to Rome; Claudius restored it to its original place, but Nero again bore
it to Rome, where it was burned in a conflagration in the time of Titus.

I shall say no more of Praxiteles personally, because I wish to describe to you the largest
and grandest group of Greek statues which exists, or, as I should say, of which we have any
copies. We do not know whether Scopas or Praxiteles made these famous figures, since they are
attributed to both these sculptors; perhaps we can never positively know to whom to ascribe
the fame of this marvellous work. The historian Pliny tells us that they stood in the temple
of Apollo Sosianus at Rome. Sosius was the legate of Antony in Syria and Cilicia; he erected
this temple in his own honor, and brought many beautiful works from the East for its decoration.
It is believed that he brought the Niobe group from Cilicia, and displayed it when celebrating
his victory over Judea, B.C. 35.

In A.D. 1583 a large number of statues representing this subject were found in Rome, and were
purchased by the Grand Duke of Tuscany, who placed them in the Villa Medici. In 1775 they were
removed to the Palace of the Uffizi, in Florence, where an apartment was assigned to them.
The figures were restored, and each one placed on its own pedestal, which work was not completed
until 1794.

The group must have had originally seventeen figures--Niobe and fourteen children, a pedagogue
and a female nurse. Now there are but twelve--Niobe, six sons, four daughters, and the pedagogue.
At first it was supposed that these figures ornamented the temple pediment, but it is now thought
that they stood on an undulating rocky base, with a background at a little distance. Niobe
is the central figure, in any case, and the children were fleeing toward her from either side;
she is the only one represented in such a way as to present the full face to the beholder (Fig.
43). But we shall better understand our subject if I recount as concisely as possible the story
of Niobe, which, as you know, is a Grecian myth. Niobe was the daughter of Tantalus, and was
born on Mount Sipylus. When a child Niobe played with Lato, or Latona, who afterward married
the great god Jupiter, or Zeus. Niobe became the wife of Amphion, and had a very happy life;
she was the mother of seven sons and seven daughters, and all this prosperity made her forget
that she was mortal, and she dared to be insolent even to the gods themselves. Lato had but
two children, the beautiful Apollo and the archer-queen of heaven, called Diana, or Artemis.

Amphion and Niobe were the King and Queen of Thebes, and when the worship of Lato was established
in that city Niobe was very angry. She thought of Lato as her playmate and not a goddess, and
was so imprudent as to drive in her chariot to the temple and command the Theban women not
to join in this worship. Niobe also asserted that she was superior to this Lato, who had but
two children, while she had fourteen lovely sons and daughters, any one of which was worthy
of honor. All this so enraged Lato that she begged Apollo, who was the god of the silver bow,
and Diana, her huntress daughter, to take revenge on Niobe. Obedient to her commands, Apollo
and Artemis descended to earth, and in one day slew all the children of Niobe. Then this proud
mother, left alone, could do nothing but weep, and this she did continually until Jupiter took
pity on her and turned her into stone, and whirled her away from Thebes to Mount Sipylus, the
scene of her happy childhood. In this picture of Niobe she clasps her youngest child, who has
fled to her for protection.

I cannot give pictures of all the figures, but one of the most interesting is this brother
and sister. She is wounded, and he endeavors to raise his garment so as to shield her and himself
from the deadly arrows which pursue them (Fig. 44).

This figure of the eldest daughter is very beautiful. An arrow has pierced her neck, and the
right hand is bent back to the wound. The face is noble and simple, and has been a favorite
model to Guido Reni and other Italian masters (Fig. 45).

Fig. 46 shows one of the older sons, who, though wounded and fallen on one knee, still looks
toward his slayer with an air of defiance. There is a world of interest connected with these
statues, and they move us with a variety of emotions. The poor mother, so prosperous a moment
before, and now seeing her children dying around her, slain by the sure arrows of the unseen
gods--how can we pity her enough! and then the brave son who tries to shield his sister while
he is dazed by the suddenness of the misfortunes which he cannot account for; the old pedagogue,
to whom the youngest boy has run for protection--and, indeed, all demand our sympathy for their
grief and our admiration for their beauty, which is still theirs in spite of their woe.

One of the young sculptors who was employed with Scopas in the work on the mausoleum was LEOCHARES.
We read of several statues of Zeus and Apollo by this master, but his most celebrated work
was the group of Ganymede borne upward by the eagle of Zeus. There are several copies of this
sculpture, but that given here, from the Vatican figure, is the best of all, and is very beautiful.
We know very few facts concerning Leochares, and cannot even say whether he was an Athenian
or not (Fig. 47).

There is still standing at Athens, in its original place, the Choragic monument of Lysicrates;
and though we do not know the names of the architects and sculptors who made it, there are
traces upon it which indicate that it belonged to the school of Scopas (Fig. 48).

This monument was erected B.C. 334, when Lysicrates was choragus--that is, when it was his
office to provide the chorus for the plays represented at Athens. This was an expensive office,
and one that demanded much labor and care. He had first to find the choristers, and then bring
them together to be instructed, and provide them with proper food while they studied. The choragus
who gave the best musical entertainment received a tripod as his reward, and it was the custom
to build a monument upon which to place the tripod, so that it should be a lasting honor to
the choragus and his family. The street in which these monuments were erected was called "the
street of the Tripods."

It was also the custom to dedicate each tripod to some special divinity, and this of Lysicrates
was dedicated to Bacchus, and had a frieze with sculptures telling the story of that god and
the Tyrrhenian robbers who bore him off to their ship. In order to revenge himself he changed
the oars and masts into serpents and himself into a lion; music was heard, and ivy grew all
over the vessel; the robbers went mad and leaped into the sea, and changed into dolphins.

In the frieze, however, it is represented that the god is on shore quietly amusing himself
with the lion (Fig. 49), while satyrs and sileni punish the robbers by beating them with sticks
and chasing them with fury, while they are turning gradually into dolphins and rushing into
the sea. The design is so fine that it might easily be attributed to one of the best sculptors;
but the execution is careless, and this is not strange when we remember that it was all done
at the expense of one man, and he a private citizen.

We will return now to the Peloponnesian school, of which Polycleitus was the head in its earliest
period. After his time the sculptors of his school continued to prefer the subjects in which
he excelled, and represented youthful heroes and victors with as much industry as the artists
of Athens bestowed upon their statues of womanly grace and beauty. The subjects of the Peloponnesian
school were especially suited to the use of bronze, and the chief sculptor of his time, LYSIPPUS,
whose works are said to have numbered fifteen hundred, worked entirely in bronze. In order
to keep a record of the number of his works, he adopted the plan of putting aside one gold
coin from the price of every statue, and at his death his heirs are said to have found the
above number of these coins thus laid away. His home was at Sicyon, and his time of work is
given as B.C. 372-316. This seems a long period for active employment as a sculptor; but the
number of his works accords well with this estimate of his working years.

Lysippus cannot be said to have followed any school; he was original, and this trait made him
prominent, for he was not bound by old customs, but was able to adapt himself to the new spirit
of the age, which came to Greece with the reign of Alexander. This sculptor made a great number
of statues of Hercules; and as Alexander loved to regard himself as a modern Hercules, Lysippus
also represented the monarch in many different ways, and with much the same spirit as that
he put into the statues of the hero-god. For example, he made a statue of "Alexander with his
Spear," "Alexander at a Lion Hunt," "Alexander as the Sun-God," and so on through many changes
of expression and attributes, but all being likenesses of the great king. There is in the Capitol
at Rome a head of Alexander called Helios, which is thought by many critics to be the best
bust of him in existence. There are metal rays fastened to the head; it has a wild, Bacchus-like
air, and the hair is thrown back, as if he had shaken his head furiously; and the defect of
a wry neck, which the monarch had, is cleverly concealed by this motion. Alexander was a very
handsome man, his faults being this twist in his neck and a peculiar shape of the eye.

We cannot here give the long list of works by Lysippus, but will speak of that which interests
us most, because we have a beautiful copy of it. I mean the Apoxyomenos, which is in the Vatican.
It represents a youth scraping himself (as the name denotes) with the strigil after a contest
in the arena (Fig. 50). The Vatican copy was found in the Trastevere at Rome in 1849, and is
well preserved. Without doubt it is a faithful reproduction of the original, which was probably
brought from Greece to Rome by Agrippa, who set it up in front of his public baths. Here it
became such a favorite with the people that when Tiberius removed it to his own house there
was a demonstration in the theatre, and so violent a demand was made for its restoration that
the cunning emperor dared not refuse. This statue may be called an example of a grand genre
style. It represents a scene from common life in Greece, but it is so simply natural, so graceful
and free from restraint, that one could not weary of it. The expression of the face is that
of quiet content--his task has been faithfully done, and the remembrance of it is pleasant.
The hair is finely executed; this was a point in which Lysippus excelled; but the great charm
of the whole is in the pose of the figure. In his occupation of scraping one portion of the
body after another he must constantly change his position, and this one, in which he can rest
but a moment, seems to have the motion in it which he must almost instantly make, while it
is full of easy grace in itself. The art of Lysippus was not as elevated as that of Phidias,
who tried to represent the highest ideal which a mortal may form of a god; but there was nothing
mean or vulgar in the works of the former; on the contrary, it was with a pure and noble spirit
that he endeavored to represent the perfections of youthful, manly beauty, and his naturalism
was of a healthy and dignified sort.

The most important pupil of Lysippus was CHARES OF LINDOS, who was prominent not only on account
of his own works, but also because he introduced the art of Sicyon into his native island of
Rhodes. This island is but forty-five miles long and twenty miles wide at its broadest part,
and yet its art became second only to that of Athens.

At the city of Rhodes alone there were three thousand statues, besides many paintings and other
rare and beautiful objects. Chares is best known for the sun-god which he erected here; it
was called the "Colossus of Rhodes," and was reckoned as one of the seven wonders of the world.
One hundred statues of the sun were erected at Rhodes, and Pliny says that any one of them
was beautiful enough to have been famous; but that of Chares was so remarkable that it overshadowed
all the rest.

It stood quite near the entrance to the harbor of Rhodes, but we have no reason to believe
that its legs spanned the mouth of the port so that ships sailed between them, as has often
been said, although its size was almost beyond our imagination. The statue was one hundred
and five feet high, and few men could reach around one of its thumbs with their arms, while
each finger was as large as most statues. Twelve years were occupied in its erection, from
B.C. 292 to 280, and it cost three hundred talents, or about $300,000 of our money, according
to its usual estimate, though there are those who name its cost as more than four times that
amount. The men of Rhodes obtained this great sum by selling the engines of war which Demetrius
Poliorcetes left behind him when he abandoned the siege of Rhodes in B.C. 303. We have no copy
of this statue, but there are coins of Rhodes which bear a face that is believed with good
reason to be that of the Colossus.

Fifty-six years after its completion, in B.C. 224, the Colossus was overthrown by an earthquake,
and an oracle forbade the restoration of it by the Rhodians. In A.D. 672, nearly a thousand
years after its fall, its fragments were sold to a Jew of Emesa by the command of the Caliph
Othman IV. It is said that they weighed seven hundred thousand pounds, and nine hundred camels
were required to bear them away. When we consider what care must have been needful to cast
this huge figure in bronze, and so adjust the separate parts that the whole would satisfy the
standard of art at Rhodes, we are not surprised that it should have been reckoned among the
seven wonders, and that Chares should have become a famous master.

Chares also founded a school of art which became very important, and, indeed, it seems to have
been the continuance of the school of the Peloponnesus; for after the time of Lysippus the
sculpture of Argos and Sicyon came to an end, and we may add that with Lysippus and his school
the growth of art in Greece ceased; it had reached the highest point to which it ever attained,
and all its later works were of its decline, and foreshadowed its death.

The reign of Alexander the Great was so brilliant that it is difficult to realize that it was
a time of decline to the Greeks; and during the life of Alexander perhaps this does not appear
with clearness; but at the close of his reign there arose such contentions and troubles among
his generals that everything in Greece suffered, and with the rest Greek art was degraded.
In the time of Pericles it was thought to be a crime in him that he permitted his portrait
to be put upon the shield of the Parthenon, and he was prosecuted for thus exalting himself
to a privilege which belonged to the gods alone. Alexander, on the contrary, claimed to be
a god, and was represented by painters and sculptors until his portraits and statues were almost
numberless.

Soon after the death of Alexander the humiliation of Athens and its old Periclean spirit was
complete. If you read the history of Demetrius Poliorcetes, who was even allowed to hold his
revels in the most sacred part of the Parthenon--the temple of Minerva--you will see that Athens
was enslaved and her people no longer worthy to lead the world in the arts of peace, as they
were no longer the brave men who could stand first in war. In their degraded state the Athenians
suffered three hundred and sixty statues to be erected to Demetrius Phalereus, and these were
destroyed to make way for the golden images of the conquering freebooter Poliorcetes. This
last was hailed by the debased people as a god and a saviour. His name and that of his father,
Antigonus, were woven into the sacred peplos.

At length, under the Diadochi, or successors of Alexander, order was restored, and Antigonus,
Ptolemy, Seleucus, and Lysimachus divided the kingdom of Alexander into four Græco-Oriental
monarchies. The dynasty of the Ptolemies in Egypt was the most reputable of these, and gave
much encouragement to art and letters. But the sacred fire seems to have died out, or did not
burn clearly when transplanted from Athens to Alexandria. The Alexandrines seem to have been
mere imitators of what had gone before, and there is nothing to be said of them that is of
importance enough for us to linger over it. Very few works remain from this Diadochean period.
The Metope of Ilium, which Dr. Schliemann has in his garden in Athens, the Barberini Faun,
in the Glyptothek at Munich, and the Nile of the Vatican are the most important remnants of
Alexandrine sculpture.

Amid all the confusion and strife which followed the death of Alexander the island of Rhodes
remained undisturbed, and when the division of the monarchies was made the Rhodians still retained
their independence. They were neutral, and so had a commerce with all the monarchies, and thus
gained great wealth; and theirs was the only independent State of the old Hellenic world which
was able to found and maintain a school of art. Among the great works of the Rhodian artists
none is more familiar to us than the group of the Laocoon.

In the time of Pliny this work stood in the palace of Titus, and the historian called it "preferable
to all other works of pictorial or plastic art." There is a difference of opinion as to the
period when it was made, and many date it in the time of Titus, who lived A.D. 40 to 81. But
the weight of argument seems to me to rest with those who believe that it was made at Rhodes
in the time of the Diadochi.

The group in the Vatican is probably a copy, because Pliny says that the original was made
of one block, and that of the Vatican is composed of six pieces. Pliny also tells us that the
Laocoon was the work of three sculptors, AGESANDER, POLYDORUS, and ATHENODORUS. The Vatican
group was found in 1506 in the excavation of the Baths of Titus, in Rome, and was placed in
its present position by Pope Julius II. (Fig. 51). The right arm of Laocoon was missing, and
Michael Angelo attempted to restore it, but left it incomplete; Montorsoli made an unsatisfactory
attempt for its restoration, and the arm as it now is was made by Cornacini, and more straight
than it should be.

The story which these statues illustrate is told in the second book of the Æneid, and says
that Laocoon was a priest of Apollo at Troy, who, when the Greeks left the wooden horse outside
the city and pretended to sail away, warned the Trojans against taking the horse inside the
walls; he also struck his spear into the side of the monster. But Sinon, who had been left
behind by the Greeks, persuaded the Trojans that the horse would prove a blessing to them,
and they drew it into the city, and ordered feasts and sacrifices to be celebrated to do honor
to the occasion. Laocoon had much offended Pallas Athene by his words and acts, and when he
went to prepare a sacrifice to Neptune that goddess sent two huge serpents up out of the sea
to destroy him and his two sons, who were with him by the altar. When the three victims were
dead the fearful creatures went to the Acropolis and disappeared.

In the Laocoon group it appears that the eldest son will save himself, and in certain minor
points the sculptors seem not to have followed the account of Virgil; but we see that it must
be the same story that is illustrated, and we know that it was told with some variation by
other poets. This group is a wonderful piece of sculpture, but it is not of the highest art,
and it is far from pleasant to look at. The same is true of another famous group which is in
Naples, and which is also from the Rhodian school.

I mean the Farnesian Bull, or the Toro Farnese. This group was made by APOLLONIUS and TAURISCUS,
who are believed to have been brothers. It was probably made at Tralles, in Caria, which was
their native place, and sent by them to Rhodes, the great art-centre; from Rhodes it was sent
to Rome, where it was in the possession of Asinius Pollio. This splendid group, which is probably
the original work, was found in the Baths of Caracalla, in 1546, and was first placed in the
Farnese Palace, from which it was removed to the National Museum in Naples, in 1786 (Fig. 52).

This group tells a part of the story of Dirce, who had incurred the hatred and displeasure
of Antiope, the mother of Amphion, who was King of Thebes and the husband of Niobe. In order
to appease the wrath of his mother, Amphion, with the aid of his twin-brother Zethus, bound
Dirce to the horns of a wild bull to be dashed to pieces. All this takes place on Mount Cithæron,
and it is said that after Dirce had suffered horrible agonies the god Dionysus changed her
into a fountain, which always remains upon this mountain.

In this piece of sculpture, dreadful as the idea is, there is less of horror than in the Laocoon,
for the reason that the moment chosen is that just before the climax of the catastrophe, while
in the Laocoon it is in its midst. The latter group is made to be seen from but one side, and
was probably intended for a niche; but the Farnese Bull is perfect, and presents a finished
aspect on all sides and from every point of view. There are numerous accessories and much attention
to detail, while the rocky base represents Mount Cithæron and the wildness of the scene in
a manner not before known in sculpture. The group has been much restored, but its excellences
support the theory of its being the original work of the Greek artists, and the skill with
which the various figures are brought into one stupendous moment is such as commands great
praise and admiration; it is doubtful if any other work of sculpture tells its story with power
equal to that of this celebrated group.

After the art of Rhodes that of Pergamon was important. When Attalus I., King of Pergamon,
gained his victory over the Gauls, in B.C. 229, the Greek artists were aroused to new efforts
to record in sculpture the great deeds of Attalus and to place him on a level with the glorious
heroes of their nation who had preceded him. It is recorded that the conqueror himself offered
four groups of statues at Athens, and that they stood on the southern wall of the Acropolis.
The subjects were: "The Battle of the Gods and Giants," "The Battle of Athenians and Amazons,"
"The Battle of Marathon," and "The Destruction of the Gauls in Mysia by Attalus." Thus the
different epochs of Greek history were represented, and Attalus placed himself near the other
great warriors who had preserved the honor and freedom of their nation. These groups consisted
of many figures, and are estimated to have been from sixty to eighty in number. It is believed
that at least ten of them are now in European collections--that is, three in Venice, four in
Naples, one in Paris, one in the Vatican, and the last in the Castellani collection in Rome.
This picture of one of those in Venice seems to represent a warrior who has been suddenly thrown
down; his weapons and shield--which last was probably held in the left hand--have been dropped
in the violence of the shock which has prostrated him (Fig. 53). His face and hair are of the
barbarian type, and the power and elasticity of his powerful frame are manifest even in this
moment of his defeat. He is yet unwounded, but the weapon of his adversary may be before his
eyes, and in another moment he may sink back in the agony of death.

It is now believed that the statue of the Dying Gaul, often called the Dying Gladiator, was
the work of a sculptor of Pergamon, and represents a Gaul who has killed himself rather than
submit as a slave to his conquerors. The moment had come when he could not escape, and he chose
death rather than humiliation. We learn from history that when these barbarians saw that all
was lost they frequently slew their wives and children and then themselves, to avoid being
taken as prisoners, which really meant being made slaves. This warrior has thrown himself upon
his shield; his battle-horn is broken, and the sword which has given him the freedom of death
has fallen from his hand. His eye is already dim, his right arm can scarce sustain him, his
brow is contracted with pain, and it seems as if a sigh escaped his lips. He has not the noble
form of the Greeks; we do not feel the exalted spirit which is shown in the death scenes of
some of the Periclean statue heroes; here it is only a rude, barbarous Gaul, suffering death
as a brute might; it is very realistic, and when we are near the marble itself we see the coarseness
of the skin, the hardened soles of the feet, the coarse hand, and we are sure the artist must
have made a true representation of this wild, savage man, who yet had the nobility of nature
which would not live to be enslaved (Fig. 54).

These illustrations and remarks will give you some idea of the art of Pergamon, and I shall
now leave the subject of Greek sculpture after some account of BOETHUS OF CHALCEDON. His date
is very uncertain, though we have accounts of his works by ancient writers. Some scholars believe
that he lived about B.C. 275. Many works in chased silver made by Boethus were in the temple
of Athena in Lindus in the time of the historian Pliny; there are accounts of a figure of a
boy made in gold and one of the youthful Asclepius; but the Boy Strangling a Goose, in the
gallery of the Louvre, is his most interesting work for us (Fig. 55). You will remember that
even the ancient Egyptians made caricatures and playful, mocking pictures not unlike some of
our own day. This boy and goose are of the same spirit, and is intended as a parody on the
representations of Hercules struggling with the Nemean lion, which had been represented many
times by Greek artists. The boy seems to be working as hard as any giant could do. The execution
of this work is fine. It was probably made for a fountain, the water coming through the beak
of the goose. There are several works of ancient sculpture which are of the same spirit, and
for this reason are attributed to Boethus. The Spinario, or Thorn-extractor, in the museum
of the Capitol, at Rome, is one of the most charming pieces of genre statuary in existence
(Fig. 56).

It represents a boy taking a thorn from his foot. His attitude is natural and graceful, and
the purity and simplicity of its style places it on an equality with works of the best period
of sculpture. The expression of the face is that of perfect absorption in what he is doing,
and is given with great skill and truthfulness. The treatment of the hair is like that of the
archaic period, and there will always be some critics who cannot think that such perfection
could exist in the sculpture of what we call the Alexandrian age.

CHAPTER III.

ANCIENT ITALIAN SCULPTURE.

Ancient Italian sculpture was essentially Greek in its spirit, and originated with the Etruscans,
a very ancient people in Italy. There are traces of an Oriental influence in the art of Etruria--a
suggestion of the sculpture of Egypt and Assyria, just as there is in Greek archaic art; but
the real feeling and spirit of it is Greek, and must have been borrowed from Greece in some way.

The different theories and opinions about the Etruscans and their origin do not concern us
here; we have to do only with their sculpture as it is seen in the remnants of it now in existence.
In the beginning the Etruscans made their statues of clay; marble was very rarely used. Later
on they learned the art of working in bronze, and carried it to great perfection. Their bronze
works were so numerous that in B.C. 295 Fulvius Flaccus is said to have carried away two thousand
statues from Volsinii alone. Some of their figures were colossal, but the greater number were
statuettes.

There are some Etruscan bronzes remaining in the museums of Europe. The Etruscans always were
copyists rather than original artists; but they copied such excellent things, and did it so
well, that their productions are by no means to be despised, and the skill which they acquired
caused their bronze and metal work to be highly valued, even in Athens itself.

The Etruscans were physically a more luxurious people than the Greeks, as may be seen in the
pictures of them which still remain in the tombs of Corneto and other places. They gave much
attention to luxury of living, and the richly decorated goblets and other articles of table
furniture which they made may be seen in the Vatican and British Museum, while the delicate
and artistic gold work of their personal ornaments is still much admired and copied diligently.

The Romans as a people were patrons of art rather than artists. They seem from very early days
to have admired the plastic art of other nations; but of Romans themselves there were very
few sculptors; their artists were architects of grand structures rather than workers in the
lesser monuments of artistic skill and genius. At first, as we have said, they relied upon
the Etruscans, who built their earliest temples and adorned them with sculptures, and the first
record which we have of Greek artists working in Rome gives us the names of Damophilus and
Gorgasus, who decorated the temple of Ceres with paintings and sculptures. This temple was
consecrated in B.C. 493; if its adornment was of the same date, the knowledge of Greek art
was brought to Rome at a very early period--at least fifty-six years before the completion
of the Parthenon.

But the means by which the whole Roman people were made familiar with the beauties of Greek
art are to be found in another direction. It was not the building of their own temples, or
any work done by Greek artists in Rome, that gave the Romans their love and appreciation for
art; it was rather the art spoils seized by their victorious leaders and brought home to adorn
and beautify every portion of the Eternal City. In B.C. 212 Marcellus carried to Rome the spoils
he had taken at Syracuse; he exhibited them in his triumphal procession, and afterward consecrated
them in the temple of Honor and Valor which he built. From this time it was the fashion to
bring home all the choice things that Roman conquerors could seize, and the number of beautiful
objects thus gained for Rome was marvellous.

When Flaminius defeated Philip of Macedon it required two days to gather up the spoils. After
Fulvius Nobilior conquered the Ætolians he brought Greek artists to Rome to arrange his festivities,
and he exhibited five hundred and fifteen bronze and marble statues which he had taken from
the defeated people. When Perseus of Macedon was overcome by Æmilius Paulus it required two
hundred and fifty wagons to remove the pictures and statues alone which he displayed in his
triumphal procession; among these treasures there was a statue of Athena by Phidias himself.
This work of spoiling the Grecian cities which came into their power was diligently carried
on by Mummius, Sulla, and others, until at length the Emperor Augustus removed many of the
archaic sculptures to Rome. But the works which best pleased the Romans were those of the later
school of Athens. The ruling gods at Rome were Mars, Bacchus, and Venus, and the statues of
these deities were much valued.

So far, to the time of Augustus, the statues and other objects removed had been the spoils
of war; but Caligula and Nero did not hesitate to go in times of peace and act the part of
robbers. The first sent a consul in A.D. 31 with orders to bring the best works of art from
Greece to Rome to adorn his villas; Nero went so far as to send his agents to bring even the
images of the deities from the most sacred temples, together with the offerings made to them,
for the decoration of his Golden House; it is said that from Delphi alone he received five
hundred statues of bronze.

At first the larger number of these art spoils were so placed as to be constantly seen by the
whole Roman people, and there is no doubt that their influence was very great and went far
to refine their ideas and to prepare the way for the polish and grace of the Augustan age.
Very soon the individual desire for works of art was felt, and wealthy men began to decorate
their homes with pictures and statues; and at last these things were thought to be necessary
to the proper enjoyment of life.

From all these causes there came about a revival of Greek art under the Romans, and in it many
beautiful works were produced. Indeed, the greater portion of the sculptures which are now
the pride of the collections all over Europe belong to this period. It cannot be said that
the artists of this date originated much, but they followed the greatest masters that ever
lived; and if they repeated their subjects they so changed them to suit the spirit of their
time that they gave their works a certain effect of being something new, and threw their own
individuality about them.

The list of names which can be given as belonging to Greek sculptors who worked at Rome is
long, and would have little interest here. Instead of speaking of the artists I shall speak
of the most famous works of the time which remain; most of these are so placed that they are
seen by travellers, and have become familiar to all the world.

The beautiful statue which is known as the Venus de' Medici is so called because after its
discovery it rested for a time in the Medici Palace in Rome. It was found in the seventeenth
century in the Portico of Octavia at Rome, and was broken into eleven fragments. The arms from
the elbows down are restored; when it was found it had traces of gilding on the hair; the ears
are pierced, as if gold rings had sometimes been placed in them. In 1680 Duke Cosmo III. removed
it to Florence, where it is the chief glory of the famous Tribune of the Uffizi Gallery. Many
persons believe this to have been a copy of the renowned Cnidian Venus by Praxiteles, of which
I have told you. This Venus de' Medici was the work of an Athenian artist named Cleomenes.
He was the son of Apollodorus, a sculptor who lived in Rome in the first or second century
of the Christian era. (Fig. 57.)

The aim of the sculptor was not to make a goddess, and his work lacks the dignity which was
thrown around the more ancient statues of Venus. Cleomenes endeavored to produce a lovely woman
in the youth of her beauty. Some critics believe that this Venus is intended to represent the
moment when that goddess stood before Paris for judgment. If this story is not well known I
will tell how when Peleus and Thetis were married they invited all the gods to their wedding
save the goddess Discordia, and she was so offended by this slight that she threw into the
midst of the assembly a golden apple on which were the words, "To the fairest." Juno, Minerva,
and Venus all claimed it, and Jupiter sent Mercury to conduct these three beautiful goddesses
to Paris, that he might decide to which it belonged. His decision gave the apple to Venus;
and this so excited the jealousy and hatred of the others that a long list of serious troubles
arose until Paris was driven out of Greece, and, going to the house of Menelaus, he saw and
loved Helen, carried her off to Troy, and thus brought on the Trojan war of which the world
has heard so much ever since. If I were writing a Sunday-school book I could draw many lessons
from this story; but as I am only writing about art, I will go back and remind you that many
persons try to study these old statues and to find out exactly what they mean; some such students
say that the moment when Paris pronounced Venus to be the most lovely of the goddesses is the
time represented by the sculptor of the Venus de' Medici.

As Venus was the goddess of Love and Beauty, it was natural that statues of her should be multiplied.
The Chigi Venus in the Vatican has much the same pose as the Venus de' Medici, but she holds
the end of a fringed garment in her hand. The Venus of the Capitol, in Rome, is larger than
these; the Venus Callipiga, which was found in the Golden House of Nero, and is now in the
Museum of Naples, is also worthy of being mentioned in company with these other exquisite sculptures.

However, there is yet another Venus more admirable and more praised than these. She is called
the Venus of Milo, or Melos, and is in the gallery of the Louvre, at Paris. This statue is
probably of a later date than those of which we have spoken, and is thought to be the work
of Alexandros, the son of Menides of Antiocheia, or one of those sculptors who are called Asiatic
Greeks. It is said that the base of this statue with the name of the artist upon it was destroyed,
for the purpose of leading the King of France to believe it to be more ancient than it really
is (Fig. 58, frontispiece).

This magnificent statue was discovered in 1820 by a peasant of the town of Melos, or Milo,
on the island of the same name. It was in a niche of a wall which had long been buried. The
Marquis of Rivière, who was the French Ambassador at Constantinople, purchased it and presented
it to King Louis XVIII., who placed it in the Louvre. It is made from two blocks of marble
joined above the drapery which envelops the legs. As the statue now stands it has the tip of
the nose and the foot which projects beyond the drapery as they have been restored by modern
artists.

This is the only Venus which has come down to us from the past which represents a goddess rather
than a beautiful woman. The form has beauty of the highest type, but it has a grandeur which
exalts it far above mere beauty. The pure, majestic expression of the head and face speak the
calm dignity of a superior being. I shall quote from Perry, who says: "The Venus de Milo is
justly admired, not only for the grandeur of its design, the perfection of its proportion,
and the exquisite moulding of the superb and luxuriant form, but for the vivid freshness of
the flesh and the velvet softness of the skin, in which it stands unrivalled in ancient and
modern art. The extraordinary skill with which minute details, such as the folds of the skin
in the neck, are harmonized with the ideal beauty of the whole is beyond all imitation and
all praise. The life-like effect of this wonderful masterpiece is greatly enhanced by the rare
and perfect preservation of the epidermis and by the beautiful warm, yellowish tinge which
the lapse of centuries has given to the marble."

In the Museum at Naples is the Farnesian Hercules, which was found in the Baths of Caracalla,
in Rome, in 1540. It was first placed in the Farnese Palace, and from that circumstance received
the name by which it is known. It is the work of Glycon, an Athenian, and his name is inscribed
upon it. There is little doubt that this is a copy of a more ancient statue by the great Lysippus;
that master created representations of Hercules in all ages and forms. Glycon probably worked
in the time of Hadrian; and though he copied the design and form of Lysippus, he exaggerated
some points so as to injure the effect of the whole. For example, the head is small in proportion
to the breadth of the breast and shoulders; and because Hercules was a swift runner the sculptor
has made the legs too long to be natural. It is in such particulars as these that the decline
of art may be traced, even in works that command admiration (Fig. 59).

The moment in which the god is represented is that which immediately followed his securing
the apples of the Hesperides, the wedding present of Ge to Juno. Of all the labors of Hercules,
perhaps this was the most arduous. Juno had left these apples with the Hesperides for safekeeping.
These goddesses lived on Mount Atlas, and the serpent Ladon helped them to guard their precious
trust. Hercules did not know just where the apples were kept, and this made his task all the
more difficult. When, therefore, he arrived at Mount Atlas he offered to hold up the world
for Atlas if he would go and fetch the apples. This Atlas did, but refused to take the weight
from Hercules again. However, Hercules took the apples and hastened to his master, Eurystheus,
with them. While performing this labor he had a terrible struggle with Ladon, and some accounts
say that he killed the monster.

Now, the statue represents the god with the apples in his right hand, the world held on his
back, while he leans heavily on his club covered with a lion's skin. All the muscles of his
body are swollen from his struggle; his head droops, his whole expression of face and form
is that of sadness and weariness. The youthfulness and strength with which the older sculptors
invested him is not here. It is a splendid work, but it is not of the best; it belongs to an
age when there was too much straining after effect, when the moderation of the best Greek masters
did not satisfy the spirit of the time; and no sculptor lived whose power equalled that of
Phidias or Lysippus.

There are some reliefs and vases of this Roman period that are very interesting. I shall speak
of but one relief--the Sacrifice of Iphigenia, which is in Florence. It is called the work
of Cleomenes, and his name is inscribed upon it; but there is some doubt as to the genuineness
of the inscription. This relief is very beautiful. It represents a priest cutting off the hair
of the lovely maiden as a preparation for her sacrifice.

The story runs that Iphigenia was the daughter of Agamemnon, who killed a hart sacred to Diana.
To revenge this act the goddess becalmed the Greek fleet on its way to Aulis. The seer Calchas
advised Agamemnon to sacrifice his daughter to appease Diana; this he consented to do, but
Diana put a hart in the place of the maiden, whom she bore to Tauris and made a priestess.
In this relief the maiden has an air of resigned grief; her father stands by himself with his
head covered. The sculptor of this relief was not the first who had represented Agamemnon thus,
for a painter, Timanthes, had made a picture of this subject about B.C. 400, and in describing
it Quintilian said that "when he had painted Calchas sad, Ulysses sadder, and had represented
in the face of Menelaus the most poignant grief that art can express, having exhausted the
deepest feelings and finding no means of worthily portraying the countenance of the father,
he covered his head and left it to every man's own heart to estimate his sufferings."

I come now to the Apollo Belvedere, one of the most celebrated of all the statues in the Vatican,
and the best known and most universally admired of all the ancient statues which remain to
us. It was found at about the end of the fifteenth century at the ancient city of Antium, where
it probably made one of the ornaments of the Imperial Palace. The authorities upon such subjects
have never yet agreed as to whether the marble from which it is cut is a marble of Greece or
of Italy (Fig. 60).

This statue has been lauded in all tongues of the civilized world, and nothing could be added
to what has been said in its praise; and yet all who see it wish to exalt it still higher if
possible. A few years ago another head of Apollo, of Greek marble, was found in a magazine
in Rome, by Herr Steinhäuser, by whose name it is known; it is now in the museum at Basle (Figs.
61, 62).

Though this statue has been so much studied and admired it has never yet been satisfactorily
explained, and there are several important questions about it which cannot be answered with
certainty. Nothing is known of its age or of the name of its sculptor. It is not described
by any ancient writer, neither can any one say whether it is an original or a copy; and above
all in importance is the question of what this beautiful young god is doing--what is the meaning
of it?

The answers of the authorities to these queries vary so much that here I shall only mention
the theory which I love, and which is accepted by many. When the statue was found the left
hand was missing, and a bow was believed to have been the article which it held; and it was
said that Apollo had just shot an arrow on some dreadful flight, and was watching for its effect.
This theory was the principal one until 1860, when a scholar, Stephani, called attention to
the fact that in St. Petersburg there is a bronze statuette, less than two feet high, which
is almost exactly the same as the Apollo Belvedere--too nearly the same to be an accidental
likeness. Now, as this is an antique bronze, it seems to prove that both it and the marble
of the Vatican are copies of an ancient work. The statuette is called the Stroganoff Apollo,
because it belongs to the collection of a nobleman of that name. It is believed to be one of
a number of bronzes which were found near Janina in 1792, and given by the son of Ali Pasha
to his physician, Dr. Frank (Fig. 63).

The chief importance of this discovery was the fact that the left hand was perfect, and did
not hold a bow, but some soft, elastic substance which Stephani believes to be the ægis, or
shield, of Jupiter, on which was the head of Medusa. The sight of this shield paralyzed those
who saw it; and though it belonged to Jupiter and Minerva, Jupiter sometimes lent it to his
son Apollo to aid him in his warfare; such instances are recorded by Homer. After Stephani
had told his idea of it, the German scholar Ludwig Preller pointed out what seems to be the
true meaning of it by suggesting that Apollo was extending this dreadful ægis before the sight
of the Gauls at Delphi, in B.C. 279. History relates that when the Gauls approached Delphi
the people asked the oracle if they should carry away and conceal the treasures of the temple.
The oracle replied, "I myself and the White Maidens (meaning Athena and Artemis) will take
care of that." Then four thousand Greeks stood by ready to defend the sacred place; but in
the midst of the battle the youthful god came down through the roof of the temple, and the
White Maidens left their own altars to aid him in driving back the barbarous foe. A great tempest
arose, and rocks fell from Parnassus on the heads of the Gauls, and it seemed as if all the
powers of heaven and earth had united to sustain the Greeks against their enemies. It is also
written that the spectres of Greek heroes who had long been dead were seen in the midst of
the battle dealing death upon the Gauls. But above all the fury of the tempest and the noise
of war the clashing of the shield and spear of Athena and the twanging sound of the oft-discharged
bow of Artemis were heard, while the flash of the awful shield of Apollo was seen to be even
more vivid and terrific than the forked lightnings themselves.

It is recorded that after this victory two statues of Apollo and one each of Athena and Artemis
were offered in the temple of Apollo as thank-offerings for its preservation and the victory
over the Gauls. It is delightful to regard the Apollo Belvedere as a copy of one of these,
and this view of it is most satisfying. Lübke, in speaking of this theory, says: "Not till
now have we understood the Apollo Belvedere. In unveiled beauty we see the elegant form of
the slender figure, the left shoulder only being covered by the chlamys, which falls down over
the arm, which, far outstretched, holds the ægis with its Medusa head. The right arm is slightly
turned aside, but both hands have been unskilfully restored. The attitude of the god is full
of pathos, and is conceived at a dramatic moment. Ardently excited and filled with divine anger,
with which is mingled a touch of triumphant scorn, the intellectual head is turned sideward,
while the figure, with elastic step, is hastening forward. The eye seems to shoot forth lightning;
there is an expression of contempt in the corners of the mouth, and the distended nostrils
seem to breathe forth divine anger. It is a bold attitude thus transfixed in marble, full of
life-like and excited action."

In the Iliad Homer describes the scene when Jupiter gave the ægis to Apollo, that he might
put the Achæans to flight with it.

It is very interesting to know that many who believe that the Apollo Belvedere represents that
god when terrifying the Gauls, believe also that the statues of the "White Maidens" rushing
forth from their temples to aid him are in existence, the Artemis being the statue at the Louvre
known as "Diane à la Biche" and the Minerva being the Athena with spear and shield in the museum
of the Capitol at Rome.

This statue of Artemis, or Diana, has been in France since the time of Henry IV. Formerly it
was at Versailles, but is now one of the treasures of the Louvre. The left hand with the bow
is restored. The effect of the figure is that of lightness combined with strength. She is going
forward rapidly, with her eyes fixed on some distant object, and draws an arrow from her quiver
even as she flies. This figure corresponds to the Apollo Belvedere in its spirit and apparent
earnestness of purpose; it is of the same proportions, and in such details of treatment as
the rich sandals it plainly belongs to the time and the school of the Apollo--indeed, there
is no reason why it might not have formed a part of a group in which the Apollo stood. (Fig. 64.)

If we think of this Diana simply as an ideal huntress hastening to the chase the statue is
very beautiful, and a remarkable example of such a subject; but when she is regarded as one
of the "White Maidens" rushing forth to aid her brother in defending his temple against a barbarous
enemy she is invested with a deeper interest; she becomes an important actor in a terrible
drama, and those of us who could have no sympathy with her love for hunting are roused to an
enthusiastic hope that she will succeed in doing her part to turn the savage foe away from
the sacred hill of Pytho, and thus preserve its temple and its treasures.

The statue of Athena, advancing with spear and shield, is supposed to be a third member of
the group which commemorated the victory over the Gauls. The position of the two goddesses
would indicate that they were represented as hastening from opposite directions toward the
Apollo Belvedere, the central figure of the whole. The whole bearing of this statue carries
out the impression which Homer gives of the delight with which Athena led the Greeks to battle;
she is full of eagerness, and rushes forward with the undaunted vigor of the confidence and
courage of one who goes to fight for a just and holy cause (Fig. 65).

Whether this "Gallic theory," as it is called, concerning the Apollo, Diana, and Athena be
correct or no, it is the most satisfactory in sentiment of any that has been advanced, and
certainly, when we consider the three statues in this connection, there is nothing inharmonious
in the supposition that they made the important parts of a whole which may have had many other
figures of lesser importance in it.

There are many other statues of the Roman period in various museums, but I shall leave this
part of our subject here, and speak briefly of the historical sculpture in the reliefs upon
the triumphal arches of the Eternal City. In an age when martial glory was the chief desire
of man, and among a people who accorded to successful generals the highest honors, it was most
natural that the conquerors should desire to place some monument of their exploits where it
would be constantly before the eyes of the people, and thus keep in perpetual remembrance their
valiant deeds and their great successes.

We read that pictures of the foreign scenes of sieges and battles were displayed in public
places in Rome at a very early date. We cannot find records of plastic works of this sort before
the time of the emperors, but after such sculptures came into favor they were multiplied rapidly.
The principal historical reliefs in Rome were upon the arches of Claudius, Titus, Trajan, Marcus
Aurelius, and Septimius Severus, and on the architrave of the temple of Minerva in the Forum.

Of the arch of Claudius there are some remaining fragments of sculpture, now in the Villa Borghese.
The arch of Titus was erected to celebrate the taking of Jerusalem in A.D. 70. It was restored
in 1822. The frieze represents both a triumphal procession and one of sacrifice. The picture
we give here shows a company of warriors in the dress of peace, who bear articles of booty
taken from the conquered city. They have the candelabra with seven branches, the table of the
shew-bread, the silver trumpets, etc. This will give you a good idea of these reliefs. (Fig. 66.)

The arch of Trajan no longer stands, and its reliefs are now on the arch of Constantine; but
Trajan's Pillar is one of the best preserved of all the antique monuments of Rome, and with
some account of this column and a picture from it we will leave the historical sculptures of
Rome. The Senate and people of Rome decreed that this column should be erected to the memory
of Trajan, and it was in the centre of the Forum which bore the same name--the Forum Trajani.
The column is about one hundred and six feet high, and originally was surmounted by a bronze
statue of Trajan, which was replaced by one of St. Peter by Pope Sixtus V. A band of reliefs
runs around this pillar in a spiral form; this band is six hundred feet long, and the sculptures
represent Trajan's campaign against the Dacians. Many of the figures lose their effect on account
of the height at which they are placed. There are more than a hundred scenes upon it, in which
are about twenty-five hundred human figures, besides many horses and other objects. The whole
is executed with the greatest care. 

Dat's de way to boil things, meats and things out de garden.

"Whippin's? Yes sir, I got 'most skinned alive once, when I didn't bring up de cows one Sunday. Got
in a fight wid one of Miss Betsie Aiken's hands and let de cows git away, was de cause of de whippin'.
I was 'shamed to tell him 'bout de fight. Maj. Bell, dis time, whipped me hisself.

"My white folks was psalm singers. I done drove them to de old brick church on Little River every
Sabbath, as they call Sunday. Dere was Miss Margaret, his wife, Miss Sallie and Miss Maggie and
de two young marsters, Tom and Hugh. De two boys and me in front and my mistress and de two girls
behind. Maj. Bell, when he went, rode his saddle horse.

"Who-ee! Don't talk to dis nigger 'bout patrollers. They run me many a time. You had to have a pass
wid your name on it, who you b'long to, where gwine to, and de date
you expected back.

If they find your pass was to Mr. James' and they ketch you at Mr. Rabb's, then you got a floggin',
sure and plenty. Maj. Bell was a kind master and would give us Saturday. Us would go fishin'
or rabbit huntin' sometime.

"Us had two doctors, Doctor Furman and Doctor Davis. White folks care for you when you sick. I didn't
have no money in slavery time, didn't have no use for none. Us had no quarters, houses just
here and dere on de place, 'round de spring where us got water.

"My Marster went to de old war and was a major.

He had brass buttons, butterflies on his shoulders, and all dat, when he come back.

"De Yankees come. Fust thing they look for was money. They put a pistol right in my forehead
and say: 'I got to have your money, where is it?' Dere was a gal, Caroline, who had some money; they
took it away from her. They took de geese, de chickens and all dat was worth takin' off de place,
stripped it. Took all de meat out de smoke-house, corn out de crib, cattle out de pasture, burnt
de gin-house and cotton. When they left, they shot some cows and hogs and left them lying right
dere. Dere was a awful smell round dere for weeks after.

"Somethin' d'rected me, when I was free, to go work where I was born, on de Martin place. I married
Mary Douglas, a good-lookin' wench. A Yankee took a fancy to her and she went off wid de Yankee.
She stayed a long time, then come back, but I'd done got Preacher Rice to marry me to Louvinia
then. Dis second wife was a good gal. I raised ten chillun by her, but I's outlived them all
but Manuel, Clara and John. When Louvinia passed out, I got Magistrate Smith to jine me and Nancy.
She's still livin'. Home sick now, can't do nothin'.

"White people been good to me. I've been livin' in dis home, free of rent, given me for life by Mr.
Jim Smith, 'cause I was his faithful servant twenty years.

"Many times I's set up in de gallery of de old brick church on Little River. They had a special
catechism for de slaves, dat asked us who made you, what He made you out of, and what He made
you for? I ain't forgot de answers to dis day.

"Marster Major give us Chris'mas day and a pass to visit 'bout but we sho' had to be back and
repo't befo' nine o'clock dat same day.

"I got my name after freedom. My pappy b'long to Mr. David R. Evans. His name was Steve; wasn't
married reg'lar to my mammy. So when I went to take a name in Reconstruction, white folks give
me Lewis Evans.

"I b'longs to de Baptist church. Am trustin' in de Lord.

He gives me a conscience and I knows when I's doin' right and when de devil is ridin' me and I's
doin' wrong. I never worry over why He made one child white and one child black. He make both
for His glory. I sings 'Swing Low, Sweet Chariot, Jesus Gwine Carry Me Home.' Ain't got many more
days to stay. I knows I'm gwine Home."

Project #1655 W. W. Dixon, Winnsboro, S.C.

PHILLIP EVANS EX-SLAVE 85 YEARS OLD.

Phillip Evans, his wife, Janie, and their crippled son live together in a two-room frame house with
one fireplace. The old woman has been a wet nurse for many white families in Winnsboro. Neither Phillip
nor his boy can work. The wife nurses occasionally.

"I was born at de General Bratton Canaan place 'bout six miles, sort of up a little, on de sunrise side
of Winnsboro. I hopes you're not contrary like, to think it too much against dis old slave when
I tells you de day. Well sir, dat day was de fust day of April but pray sir, don't write me down
a fool 'cause I born on dat p'ticular April Fool Day, 1852.

When I gits through wid you, I wants you to say if dat birthday have any 'fect on dis old man's
sensibility.

"My pappy was name Dick. Him was bought by General Bratton from de sale of de Evans estate.
My pappy often tell mammy and us chillun, dat his pappy was ketched
in Africa and fetched to America on a big ship in a iron cage, 'long
wid a whole heap of other black folks, and dat he was powerful sick
at de stomach de time he was on de ship.

"My mammy was name Charlotte. Her say her know nothin' 'bout her daddy or where he come from.
One of my brothers is de Reverend Jackson C. Evans, age 72. Richard, another brother, is 65 years
old. All of us born on de Canaan Bratton place. General Bratton love dat place; so him named
it proud, like de Land of Canaan.

"I help to bring my brother Richard, us calls him Dick, into de world. Dat is, when mammy got
in de pains, I run for de old granny on de place to come right away. Us both run all de way
back. Good us did, for dat boy come right away. I 'members, to dis hour and minute, dat as soon
as dat boy got here, he set de house full of noise, a-cryin' like a cat squallin'. All chillun does
dat though, as soon as they come into de world. I got one sister older than me; her name Jenny
Watson. Her live in a house on de Canaan place, callin' distance
from where I live. Us is Methodists.

A proud family, brought low by Mr. Hoover and his crowd. Had to sell our land. 'Spect us would
have starved, as us too proud to beg. Thank God, Mr. Roosevelt come 'long. Him never ask whether
us democrat or 'publican nor was us black or white; him just clothe our nakedness and ease de
pains of hunger, and goin' further, us goin' to be took care of in our old age. Oh, how I love
dat man; though they do say him got enemies.

"My brother, de preacher, says dat occasioned by de fact dat de President
got a big stick and a big foot, dat sometime he tromp on de gout foots
of some of them rich people.

Howsomever, he say dat as long as de Lord, de Son, and de Holy Ghost is wid de President, it'll
be all right for us colored folks. It makes no difference 'bout who is against de President. He
says us niggers down South can do nothin' but be Methodist, pray
to de Lord, and shout for de President.

I's goin' to try to do some of de prayin' but dis voice too feeble to do much shoutin'.

"What kind of house us live in at slavery time? Nice plank house. All de houses in de quarters made
dat way. Our beds was good. Us had a good marster. Our livin' houses and vittles was better and
healthier than they is now. Big quarters had many families wid a big drove of chillun. Fed
them from big long trays set on planks. They eat wid iron spoons, made at de blacksmith's shop. What
they eat? Peas, beans, okra, Irish 'tators, mush, shorts, bread, and milk. Dere was 'bout five
or six acres to de garden. Us kept fat and happy.

"Who was de overseers? Mr. Wade Rawls was one and Mr. Osborne was another. There was another one
but 'spect I won't name him, 'cause him had some trouble wid my Uncle Dennis. 'Pears like he
insult my aunt and beat her. Uncle Dennis took it up, beat de overseer, and run off to de
woods. Then when he git hungry, him come home at night for to eat sumpin'. Dis kept up 'til
one day my pappy drive a wagon to town and Dennis jined him. Him was a settin' on de back of de wagon
in de town and somebody point him out to a officer. They clamp him and put him in jail. After
de 'vestigation they take him to de whippin' post of de town, tie
his foots, make him put his hands in de stocks, pulled off his shirt,
pull down his britches and whip him terrible.

"No sir, Marster General Bratton didn't 'low his slaves' chillun to work. I just played 'round,
help feed de stock and pigs, bring in de fruit from de orchard and sich like.

"Yes sir, marster give me small coins. What I do wid de money? I buy a pretty cap, one time. Just
don't 'members what I did wid it all.

"Us went fishin' in de Melton Branch, wid hooks. Ketch rock rollers, perch and catfish. They
eat mighty good. I like de shortnin' bread and sugar cane 'lasses best and de fust time I
ever do wrong was 'bout de watermelons.

"Our shoes was made on de place. They had wooden bottoms. My daddy, being de foreman, was de
only slave dat was give de honor to wear boots.

"Dere was just two mulattoes on de place. One was a daughter of my aunt. All de niggers was
crazy 'bout her and wid de consent of my aunt, marster give her to some kinfolks in Arkansas.
De other was name, Rufus. My marster was not his daddy. No use to put down dere in writing just
who his pappy was.

"Stealing was de main crime. De whippin's was put on de backs, and if you scowled, dat would
git you a whippin' right dere and then.

"Yes sir, dere is haunts, plenty of them.

De devil is de daddy and they is hatched out in de swamps. My brother say they is demons of
hell and has de witches of de earth for their hosses.

"De neighbors 'bout was de Neils, de Rawls, de Smiths, and de Mobleys. Marse Ed Mobley was
great for huntin'. Marse General Bratton was a great sheep raiser. In spite of dat, they got
along; though de dogs pestered de sheep and de shotguns peppered
de dogs sometimes.

"My marster was a general in de Secession War. After dat, him a controller of de State. Him run
old 'Buttermilk' Wallace out of Congress. Then he was a Congressman.

"My mistress was Miss Bettie. Her was a DuBose. Her child, Miss Isabella, marry some big man
up North and their son, Theodore, is de bishop of de high 'Piscopal
Church of Mississippi.

"Now I repeats de question: Does you think I's a fool just 'cause I's born on dat fust day of
April, 1852?

"You made me feel religious askin' all them questions.

Seem like a voice of all de days dat am gone turn over me and press on de heart, and dis room
'fect me like I was in a church. If you ever pass de Canaan place I'd be mighty happy to see
you again." My father was Winston Arnold and my mother, Sophronia Lomax Arnold. They belonged
to the Arnold family during slavery time. I was just a small child during the Confederate War,
and don't remember anything about it. I heard my mother tell about some things though. The slaves
earned no money and were just given quarters to live in and something to eat. My father was a
blacksmith on master's place, and after the war, he was blacksmith
for himself.

I heard him tell about the patrollers. They had lots of cornshuckings and cotton pickings,
but they never worked at night.

"I remember the night-riders, but don't remember that they did any harm much except they got
after a man once.

"When any of us got sick we sent for a doctor, but old-time folks I heard about, would use herbs,
tree barks, and the like of that to make teas to drink.

"I married in a negro church when I was young.

I married Frank Fair who came from Newberry County, S.C. After the ceremony, the neighbors
gave me a nice dinner at the church.

"I don't remember anything about Lincoln or Jeff Davis, but I think Booker Washington is a leading
colored man and has done good.

"I joined the church when I was nine years old, because my father and mother belonged, and so many
young people were joining. I think everybody ought to join a church."

=Source:= Eugenia Fair (76). He helps me some 'cause I can't work except jest a little 'round
de house.

"I don't know much 'bout de war times. All I know is what I told you befo'. I 'member when
de war quit and freedom come. Most of de slaves had to find work where dey could. Some had to
work as share-croppers, some fer wages, and later on, some rented small plots of land. Many niggers
since de war moved to town and worked as day hands, such as carpenters, janitors, dray drivers
and de like.

"De old time folks had blacksmith shops on de farm and made most of de tools dey used. Dey had plenty
to eat. We never wanted fer nothing and always lived good. I had
it better den dan I does now.

"In slavery when de patrollers rode up and down de roads, once a nigger boy stole out to see his
gal, all dressed up to kill. De patrollers found him at his gal's house and started to take off
his coat so dey could whip him; but he said, 'Please don't let my gal see under my coat, 'cause
I got on a bosom and no shirt'. (The custom was to wear stiff, white bosoms held up around the neck
when no shirt was on. This gave the appearance of a shirt.)

"My sister-in-law and mother-in-law both come from Virginia but I don't 'member anything dey said
'bout dat country. My sister-in-law went back dere atter freedom come, but her mama died here.

"Us
slaves went to de white folks' church at Cross Roads, and our mistress made us go. She often
would teach us to read and write at home when we would try to learn. Mistress had a nigger driver fer
her carriage, and when he drove he wore a high beaver hat and a long coat. Our white folks had
a big kitchen way off from de house. Dey had a big wide fireplace where dey cooked over de fire
in skillets. My mistress had me to work in de house, kind of a house-girl, and she made me keep clean
and put large ear rings in my ears so I would look good. When Christmas come, Marse and Mistress
always give de slaves good things to eat.

Dey had lots of cows, and dey give us good butter and milk, molasses, meats and other good things
to eat. We always worked on week days except Saturdays, and sometimes on dat day until 12
o'clock. We always had Christmas and Easter holidays.

"We had corn-shuckings and cotton-pickings. De niggers would sing: 'Job, Job, farm in a row; Job,
Job, farm in a row'.

Sometimes on moonlight nights we had pender pullings and when we got through we had big suppers,
always wid good potatoes or pumpkin pies, de best eating ever. We made corn bread wid plenty
of milk, eggs and lard, and sometimes wid sweet potatoes, de best corn bread in de world. 'Simmon
bread was made wid sifted 'simmon juice cooked wid flour.

"I married first time to Joe Todd, and had a big wedding what my mistress
give me in her back yard.

She had a big shoat killed fer de wedding dinner. My mistress den was Miss Cornelia Ervin.
When I married de second time, I married in town to West Farrow, in de colored people's Baptist
church, by Rev. West Rutherford, a nigger preacher, de pastor. My second husband died, too, a few
years ago.

"I can't 'member much 'bout old songs, but a Baptist song was: 'Down to de water, River of Jordon;
Down to de water, River of Jordon; Dere my Savior was baptized.'

Another
version went thus:

"Come along, come along, my dear loving brother,
Come along and let's go home; Down into de River where my Savior was
baptized.'

"De present generation of niggers ain't like de ones when
I come along.

Dey don't work like I did.

"I don't know much about 'Abramham' Lincoln, Jefferson Davis or Booker Washington. I just hear about
Booker Washington, reckon he is all right.

"I think slavery helped me. I did better den dan I do now. When I joined de church I was grown
and married, and had two chilluns.

I joined de church because I thought I ought to settle down and do better fer my family, and
quit dancing and frolicing." Near Chappells depot. My master, in slavery time, was John Boazman.
He was a good man to his slaves. I was raised in the big-house, and helped as a servant-girl. My
mistress smoked a pipe, and sometimes she would have me to get a red coal from de fire and
put it in her pipe. I did dat wid tongs. I lived there a long time. I come to Newberry over
40 years ago and worked wid de white people in town.

"I married twice. My first husband was Joe Todd, and after he died, I married West Farrow. He was
a dray-man in town for many years.

"The folks back home had fine farms, good gardens, and took pride in raising all kinds of things
in the garden. They allus planted Irish potatoes the second time in one season.

"They cooked in big open fireplaces, in kitchens that set away off from the house. A big spider was
always used for cooking over the fireplace.

"After de war, we stayed on awhile. My mistress took me to de white folks' church and made me
sit in the gallery; then brought me home." My father was Price Feaster; mother was Lucy Richards
Feaster. She belonged to Mr. Berry Richards dat lived 'tween Maybinton and Goshen Hill Township,
on de 'Richards Quarter'. My sister name Harriet; brothers was Albert and Billy, and dats all
de chilluns dere was in de family. My furs' recollection dat I knows was when we went to de Carlisles.
I was so young dat I can't recall nothing much 'bout de Feaster plantation.

Our beds was home-made and had ropes pulled tight frum one side to de other fer de slats. No sir,
I doesn't know nothing 'bout no grandmaw and grandpaw.

"De furs' work dat I done was drapping peas. Albert was plow-hand when I come into de world.
Harriet was up big enough to plant corn and peas, too. Billy looked atter de stock and de feeding
of all de animals on de farm.

My furs' money was made by gathering blackberries to sell at Goshen Hill to a lady dat made wine
frum dem. I bought candy wit de money; people was crazy 'bout candy den. Dat's de reason I
ain't got no toofies now.

"Ole lady Abbie looked out fer our rations. De mens eat on one side and de gals on t'other side
de trough. We eat breakfast when de birds furs' commence singing off'n de roost. Jay birds 'ud allus
call de slaves. Dey lowed: 'it's day, it's day,' and you had to git up. Dere wasn't no waiting
'bout it. De whipperwill say, 'cut de chip out de whiteoak,' you better git up to keep frum
gitting a whipping. Doves say, 'who you is, who you is.' Dat's a
great sign in a dove. Once people wouldn't kill doves, ole marse sho
would whip you if you did. Dove was furs' thing dat bring something
back to Noah when de flood done gone frum over de land. When Freedom
come, birds change song. One say, 'don't know what you gwine to do
now.' 'n other one low, 'take a lien, take a lien.' Niggers live fat
den wid bacon sides.

"Mr. Billy Thompson and Mr. Bill Harris' daddy
give liens in dem days; dese big mens den. Captain Foster clothed
de niggers atter Freedom.

"Ole lady Abbie give us mush and milk fer
breakfast. Shorts and seconds was mixed wid de mush; no grease in
de morning a-tall. Twelve o'clock brung plenty cow-peas, meat, bread
and water. At night us drunk milk and et bread, black bread made frum
de shorts. Jes' had meat at twelve o'clock, 'course 'sharpers' 'ud
eat meat when marster didn't know. Dey go out and git 'em a hog frum
a drove of seventy-five er a hund'ed; dat one never be missed.

"I
is awful to hunt; come to Union to sell my rabbits and 'possums. Mr.
Cohen dat run a brick yard, he buy some. Ole man Dunbar run'ed a market.
He was ole man den. He's de beef market man; he take all de rabbits
and sell 'em when I couldn't git a thing fer 'em. Ole lady living
den, and when I git home she low is I got any 'loady' (something to
eat). I come in wid beef and cow heads. Cow foots was de best meat.
Dey throws all sech as dat away now. Dere was allus a fuss in de house
iffen I never had no 'loady'. Somehow er another I was allus a family
man and was lucky to git in wid mens dat help me on. Never suffered
wid help frum dese kind men. Dat's de way I got along as well as I
has. Ole Missus and Marse learn't me to never tell a lie, and she
teached me dat's de way to git along well. I still follows dat.

"Up
in age, I got in wid cap'n Perram (Mr. George Perrin). He was de banker.
He say 'bout me, 'what I likes 'bout Gus, he never tell a lie'.

"Befo'
dat, I work fer Lawyer Monroe. He had a brother named Jim and one
named George, his name Bill. His sister named Miss Sally. Dar I farm
fer dem and work on half'uns. De Yankees camped on his place whar
Mr. Gordon Godshall now got a house. N'used to go dar mi'night ev'y
night and ev'y day. Dey had a pay day de furs' and de fifteenth of
de month. Dey's terrible fer 'engans' (onions) and eggs. Dey git five
marbles and put dem in a ring; put up fifty cents. Furs' man knocks
out de middle-man (marble) got de game. Dey's jes' sporty to dat.
Never had nothing but greenbacks den. Fifteen cents and ten cents
pieces and twenty-five and as high as fifty cents pieces was paper
in dem times.

"Dey larn't us a song: 'If I had ole Abe Lincoln all
over dis world, but I know I can't whip him; but I fight him 'till
I dies'. Dey low'd, 'we freeded you alls'.

"Another song was: 'Salvation
free fer all mankind; Salvation free fer all mankind'. I was glad
er all salvation. 'Salvation free fer me'; got up dat song furs' on
a moonlight night, and us sing it all night long, going from house
to house.

"'Motherless chilluns sees hard times; just ain't got no
whar to go; goes from do' to do',' dat's de song dey got up. I doesn't
know whar it come from. 'Nother one was: 'When de sun refuse to shine;
Lord I wants to be in de number, when de sun refuse to shine. If I
had a po' mother she gone on befo', Lord I promise her I would meet
her when de saints go marching in.' Dat's what lots people is still
trying to do.

"We sot mud baskets fer cat fish; tie grapevines on
dem and put dem in de river. We cotch some wid hooks. I went seining
many times and I set nets; bought seins and made de nets. Pull up
sein after a rain and have seventy-five or eighty fish; sometimes
have none. Peter Mills made our cat fish stew and cooked ash-cake
bread fer us to eat it wid. Water come to our necks while we seining
and we git de fish while we drifting down stream.

"We wear cotton
clothes in hot weather, dyed wid red dirt or mulberries, or stained
wid green wa'nuts--dat is de hulls. Never had much exchanging of clothes
in cold weather. In dat day us haul wood eight or ten feet long. De
log houses was daubed wid mud and dey was warm. Fire last all night
from dat big wood and de house didn't git cold. We had heavy shoes
wid wood soles; heavy cotton socks which was wore de whole year through
de cold weather, but we allus go barefeeted in hot weather. Young
boys thirteen to fifteen years old had de foots measured. When tracks
be seed in de wa'melon patch, dey was called up, and if de measurements
of dere tracks fitted de ones in de wa'melon patch, dat was de guilty
nigger. I 'clar, you had to talk purty den. When I go in de wa'melon
patch, I git de old missus to say fer me to go; den I could eat and
nothing was said 'bout it.

"Sunday clothes was died red fer de gals;
boys wore de same. We made de gals' hoops out'n grape vines. Dey give
us a dime, if dey had one, fer a set of hoops.

"Twan't no dressing
up fer marring in slavery times; just say, 'gwine to be a marriage
tonight' and you see 'bout 40 or 50 folks dar to see it. If it be
in wa'melon time, dey had a big feast atter de wedding. Old man preacher
Tony would marry you fer nothing. De keep de wedding cake fer three
weeks befo' it was eat." Miss Susie and Miss Tommie Carlisle, Marse
Tom's onliest daughters, died befo' de surrender. Miss Susie slipped
one day wid de scissors in her hand, and when she did dem scissors
tuck and stuck in one her eyes and put it plum' smack out and she
never did see out'n it no mo'. Dat made it so sad, and everybody cried
wid her but it never done her narry bit of good.

"When dem young
ladies died, I left out and run off from my ma and come to Union.
Mr. Eller kept a big sto' jest as you come into town. It was jest
about whar Mr. Mobley Jeter's is now. Dat's in de middle of town,
but in de fur off days I is speaking about, it was de very outskirts
of dis town. I is seed dis town grow, dat is what I is. Mr. Eller
tuck me to be his driving boy, and dat sto' sot jest exactly whar
de Chevet Charage (Chevrolet Garage) sets now.

"When I been dar six
years, my ma come to Union and she found me dar. Us was dat glad to
lay eyes on one another dat we jest shouted fur joy and my Ma tuck
and smacked me wid her lips right in de mouth. She told me dat my
pa had done got shot a fixing dem old breastworks down in Charleston
and dat called fur a big cry from me and her both. Mr. Eller, he went
out'n de back of his sto' 'till us quit.
For example, the leaf-work which was used in the ornamental portions of sculpture had hitherto
copied the antique acanthus leaf; now the flowers and leaves native to France were the models
of the sculptors, and a charming variety of life-like ornament was the result.

The church of Ste. Chapelle, at Paris, completed about 1248, was the first edifice in which
this style was seen in its full development. Here, for the first time, the statues were not
placed in the stiff, perpendicular posture, but, by being inclined to different positions,
had a light appearance and an air of movement, which was a great relief from the rigidity which
had ruled up to this time.

The cathedral at Rheims, however, shows the perfection of thirteenth-century art. It is conceded
to be the best example of church building of its time, and its façade the most beautiful structure
of the Middle Ages. Its wealth of sculpture is wonderful; its three great portals, the buttresses,
the space above the great window and various other portions are so much ornamented that the
whole effect is that of a forest of sculpture, and it is difficult to turn from it to consider
the architecture of the edifice. It naturally follows that in this vast amount of artistic
work there is no equality of excellence; some of the statues are like those of an earlier date:
some are too tall and awkward; others too short and rotund; but there are many elegant figures,
full of grace and dignity, with the drapery falling in natural folds, and an air of life and
freedom of movement about the heads quite unknown before this time.

In one of the side portals of this cathedral there is a figure of Christ which was not surpassed
by any work of this period. The study of every portion of the figure is so perfect as to surprise
us when we remember that anatomy was not then studied by artists as it had been in classic
times or as it has been in more recent days. This statue holds an orb in the left hand, and
the right hand is uplifted; not only the nails of the fingers, but the structure of all the
joints is skilfully indicated.

It frequently happens that the reliefs are far more excellent than the statues of mediæval
date. This is so noticeable that it would seem as if the best sculptors preferred to make the
reliefs, and that the figures were left to those of less talent. On the pediment at Rheims
the Last Judgment is represented in five divisions, and these reliefs are among the most beautiful
sculptures of this century. The scene of the Resurrection of the Dead is arranged in two rows
of figures; a section of it is here given (Fig. 75).

There are twenty-nine of these little figures in the whole subject, and the variety of positions
and the naturalness of the various expressions are all that could be desired in any age of
art. The forms are in good proportions, and the faces are filled with fear, surprise, hope,
and supplication. A volume might be written upon the sculptures of the Rheims Cathedral which
would be full of interest to the student of mediæval art.

Critics have compared the progress and life which pervaded the art of the thirteenth century
with the spirit of the age of Phidias. The two periods are alike in the fact that the artists
of each broke away from the traditions of those who had preceded them, and took up their work
with a desire to come nearer to nature. They were alike, too, in the union of architecture
and sculpture, and in the fact that all kinds of sculpture were required for the adornment
of a single structure. Colossal and full-sized statues, statuettes, reliefs, and a great variety
of simply ornamental designs were lavished upon the Christian cathedral, as they had been upon
the Greek temple; and in one case as in the other the various groups and scenes represented
were intended to show forth religious mysteries, and to illustrate the working of the supreme
power which controls the world in relation to human beings.

But I must leave this part of our subject and speak of the monumental sculpture of the thirteenth
century. While many of the tomb statues still retained a general resemblance to those of the
past, there were many examples of new strength and progress. In a church near Le Mans the statue
of Berengaria, the wife of Richard Coeur de Lion, who died in 1219, was made with open eyes;
this gives a very life-like appearance to the face, and the whole head is as noble as that
of an antique statue; the drapery is full and free; the feet rest upon a dog, which is the
emblem of fidelity, and in the hands is a casket. There is something about this statue which
appeals to us--a human element which had been sadly wanting in the monumental statues of the
preceding centuries.

But the series of reliefs which were made for the Cathedral of St. Denis were the most important
tomb sculptures of this period. They were sixteen in number, and represented princes of the
early lines of French sovereigns down to the thirteenth century. Of course those of the Merovingians
and Carlovingians could not be portrait statues, and the heads of both kings and queens are
all of the same type until those of Philip the Bold, who died in 1285, and his wife, Isabella
of Aragon, who died in 1271, are reached. These two are intended to be portraits, and they
show the individual characters of these royal personages. In all France there is no more interesting
succession of monuments than these.

In Germany the Romanesque style of architecture and the sculpture which went with it held their
sway much longer than in France, and the new Gothic style made its way very slowly in the countries
north of France. Slight traces of its influence in one way and another may be found about the
middle of the thirteenth century; but it was not until the very end of this period that the
Gothic style had affected German art, except in the south-western portions of the country.
These provinces bordered upon France, and formed a sort of middle ground between the two nations.
In Strasburg, at the end of the century, a cathedral was built which was one of the most splendid
examples of a union of the two styles that could be produced. The sculptures show the effect
of the new French manner in their life and ease of grouping and attitude, while they are still
crowded and over-decorated, as in the earlier days, and the fixed architectural frame of the
German style is preserved throughout. (Fig. 76.)

There is reason to believe that the relief of the Death of the Virgin, at Strasburg, was the
work of Sabina von Steinbach, a daughter of the architect of the west façade of the cathedral.
The grouping is fine, and the transparent drapery, which reminds us of the same effects in
antique sculpture, is beautifully executed.

In the Cathedral of Freiburg, the nave of which was completed in 1270, there are some very
fine sculptures, which are like the Rheims works in spirit and execution; a figure of the Madonna
is one of the best statues of the time in any country. There is much to admire in the whole
of this cathedral. Here and there in Germany there are some tomb-sculptures of the thirteenth
century, which are simple, noble, and individual; but the progress of art here was much less
rapid than in France.

Another marked event in the art history of the thirteenth century was the introduction of sculpture
into England. The few pieces of plastic art which existed in that country before this date
were not sufficient in number or excellence to merit the name of English sculpture.

The first important step was made about the end of the twelfth century, when Guillaume de Sens,
a French architect, was employed to build a new choir to Canterbury Cathedral. Not long after
this the Temple Church was erected; then Westminster Abbey followed, and at length, under Henry
III., all the arts were rapidly advanced in his kingdom. This king summoned artists and skilled
workmen from different countries, and portrait-sculpture received especial attention in the
England of that day. By comparing English tomb-sculpture with that of other countries, it is
seen that the aim of the artists was to make the statues resemble those whose memories they
honored, far more than other nations had done. The illustration given here, with its air of
life--almost of motion--is a good example of what I mean (Fig. 77).

The sculptures upon the English exteriors, and, indeed, upon the interiors of edifices, were
far less lavish than on the Continent; but in Wells Cathedral, completed before 1250, there
is a wealth of sculpture for an English church of this date, and from this time forward the
plastic arts were of great importance in Great Britain.

With the beginning of the fourteenth century there were great changes in the religious and
political affairs of all Europe. The Pope no longer held the supreme authority that had belonged
to his office, and the imperial power was also much shaken. We cannot speak of these subjects
in detail here, but the result to art of these changes was seen in a development of individualism,
and the effects of it did not show an improvement when considered as a whole, though it has
some new features which were attractive.

In these days of which we now speak the word citizen had a far deeper meaning than ever before,
and the growth of wealth and prosperity in the citizen classes gave a new impulse to all the
activities of life, and to art along with others.

This new life and spirit gave more freedom to artists, and they attempted new effects, so that
a far greater variety was made in their works. The statue of the Madonna, for example, was
so often repeated that it afforded an opportunity for all sorts of experiments, by which the
sculptors tried to add to the deep feeling and the devotion that had already been expressed
in the representations of the sweet Mother of Christ. But just here they failed; the new era
brought more realism, more likeness to nature, more freedom to the artist to put something
of himself into his work; but much of the deep thought and the devout feeling of the thirteenth
century was lost, and it cannot be said that art was elevated in its tone.

There were influences, too, in the new state of society which permitted details to be introduced
into religious subjects which were far from suitable or devotional; sometimes they were even
comic in their effects. For example, such scenes as allowed the representation of evil spirits
or devils were made to serve for all sorts of coarse, grotesque, and burlesque side-play, and
the little figures which represented these powers were made to do all kinds of ridiculous capers
side by side with such serious subjects as the Last Judgment or the death scenes of eminent
men. This makes us feel, when we study the fourteenth century, that the sculpture of the Middle
Ages reached its highest point in the thirteenth century, and soon after began to decline.

In Germany the most important sculptures of this period were executed at Nuremberg. The Church
of St. Laurence, that of St. Sebald, the Frauenkirche, or the Church of Our Lady, are all great
monuments to the art of this city and the calm dignity and grace which marked the works of
the Nuremberg sculptors.

At the close of the century, between 1385 and 1396, Master Heinrich den Balier erected the
"Beautiful Fountain," which is still the pride of the city and a splendid monument of the time.
In Nuremberg many of the dwelling-houses were decorated with sculptures, and it is now one
of the most interesting places in all Germany to the student of ancient art.

We have not the space to speak in detail of the sculpture of the time; Augsburg, Prague, Stuttgart,
Bamberg, Würzburg, Cologne, and many other German towns and cities have rich treasures of its
work, but its character is everywhere much the same, and great activity, with a tendency toward
decline, are its prominent features.

In Germany in this century ivory-carving was much practised and used for a great variety of
purposes. In these smaller works the life and freshness, the grace and spirit of the manner
of the time were very attractive (Fig. 78).

In France the fourteenth century was much less productive of works of art than the preceding
one had been. The fact that so much had been done in the thirteenth century--so many new churches
built and so many older ones remodelled--is one reason for this change. In this direction there
was very little left to be done. Then, too, the country was so disturbed by wars with England
that the arts of peace suffered neglect. However, there was still much to be done to complete
the grand works already begun, and during the early part of this century a great deal was accomplished
by way of interior decoration in edifices not yet completed, and in the making of monuments
in memory of persons of rank and importance. Those in the Cathedral of St. Denis were much
increased in number, and in all parts of France these works were multiplied.

During this century many artists from the Netherlands were employed in France; and in the city
of Dijon, which was the residence of the dukes of Burgundy, the works of Flemish artists were
very numerous.

Perhaps the most skilful of these masters was CLAUX SLUTER, who was the favorite of Philip
the Bold, and executed the splendid monument to that duke which is now in the Museum at Dijon.
He was also the sculptor of the Moses Fountain, the decorations of the Carthusian chapel, and
other works which still remain to show how fine a sculptor he was. Sluter had a great influence
upon art, and, in fact, may be said to have established a school the effects of which endured
long after his time.

In England sculpture made no progress during the fourteenth century. Large architectural sculptures
were neither numerous nor fine. Tomb-sculptures and monuments with portrait reliefs and statues
were the principal plastic works of the time. The habit of erecting monuments to the dead now
extended to all classes, whereas it had formerly been confined to noble and distinguished people.
The result was that the monuments of the higher classes were more and more splendid in order
to mark the differences of rank, and much grand effect was thus produced; but the merits of
the sculpture was less than formerly, and the monuments of this age are wanting in spirit,
stiff and unattractive. The costume of the time, too, was so ugly that it served to give a
grotesque air to many figures, and thus added to the general appearance of decline which marked
the English tomb-sculpture of the fourteenth century. It compares unfavorably with the German
monuments of the same period, and the realistic portrait element which ruled it makes it seem
like a monotonous and feeble system of mechanics rather than a style of art.

As we have said, the sculpture of Italy was quite different from that of the more northern
countries of Europe. One great reason for this was that individualism in art was a strong power
in Italy much earlier than in more northern countries. In Germany the early sculptors of the
Middle Ages did not put their names upon their works; they practised their art as a religious
service, and their pious devotion made them forget themselves. Not so in Italy: there each
artist wished to be known in his works, and regarded them as works of art, done for the sake
of art, and not as acts of piety. One result of this difference was that the northern sculptures
had more of deep feeling and profound thought in them, while the Italian works had more perfection
of form.

In Italy sculpture held the second place in the decoration of churches. Painting was preferred
before it, and in spite of the influence of the Gothic style, which extended south of the Alps,
the Italians would not give up their large wall-spaces and the splendid Christian paintings
which were their glory. They built their edifices with this end in view, and as the same person
was frequently an architect, painter and sculptor, he knew how to arrange his plans so as to
suit his ideas of the merits of each art.

So it happened that the principal works which the sculptors did for the church were separate
objects, such as altar-pieces, fonts, pulpits, and tombs. It rarely occurred that whole fronts
of churches were covered with sculptures, as in Germany or France, and there were few richly
sculptured portals of churches in Italy. The material mostly used for Italian sculpture was
fine white marble, which was very rarely colored; sometimes a little gilding was used; but
as a rule painting and sculpture were not united, as they had been north of the Alps.

However, the sculptors of Italy had a wider range in art than in other lands; for being less
devoted to the service of the church, they were employed for more secular works. It is true
that the separate statues of the Madonna were very numerous, and that tomb-sculpture was important;
but added to these there were civil monuments to show forth the glory of the cities and their
great men, and there were public fountains and other sculptures which told of the splendor
and fame of each one of the many petty powers into which the whole country was divided. The
council-halls of the free cities were very fine, and gave great opportunity to Italian artists
to give variety to their works, and the sculptors very early excelled in reliefs, which told
historical stones with great clearness.

As early as the beginning of the thirteenth century we can trace the progress of Italian sculpture
by telling the story of the lives of separate artists. The first man of importance who thus
claims our attention is NICOLA PISANO, who was born at Pisa between 1205 and 1207, and who,
according to the custom of his time, was both architect and sculptor. When he was but fifteen
years old he received an appointment as architect to Frederic II., with whom he went to Naples;
he served this sovereign ten years, and then went to Padua, where he was employed as the architect
of the Basilica of St. Anthony.

In 1237 Nicola made his first essay in sculpture, and executed a relief representing the Deposition
from the Cross, which still remains in its place over one of the side doors of the Cathedral
of San Martino at Lucca. This work was most excellent as the attempt of a young artist, and
it was also excellent when compared with the work of other Italian sculptors who had preceded
him. (Fig. 79.)

During the twelve years following this time Nicola Pisano was chiefly employed as an architect,
and it was not until 1260 that he established his fame as a sculptor; but when we consider
the pulpit for the Baptistery of Pisa, which he now did, it is plain that he must have given
much thought and study to sculpture since his first work at Lucca; and this last work has such
qualities as indicate that he had studied the sculpture of classic days. The work upon this
pulpit is a wonderful advance upon the sculpture of the period; and though there are marks
of his inexperience in its arrangement, as a whole it is above criticism when the time to which
it belonged and the circumstances of its sculpture are taken into account. (Fig. 80.)

Nicola went next to Bologna to make a sarcophagus to contain the remains of St. Dominick, who
had died there in 1221. This burial-case was completed in 1267, and is very interesting as
an illustration of the art of the thirteenth century. The next work of this sculptor was a
pulpit for the Cathedral of Siena. When he undertook this work he agreed to live at Siena until
it was completed, with the exception of short visits to Pisa--four in each year. He had assistants
in this work, and it was completed in about a year and a half. Meantime he exerted a great
influence upon the sculpture of Siena, which up to this time had amounted to little more than
good stone-cutting. Indeed, Nicola Pisano had an effect upon the art of all Italy: in the north
at Padua, in the south at Naples, and in Central Italy at Pisa, Lucca, and Siena.

In 1269 he was commissioned to build a convent and an abbey at La Scorgola, which are now in
ruins. In 1274 Nicola commenced his last work, the Fountain of Perugia. He did not remain constantly
in that city, but after making the plans he left his son Giovanni in charge of the work, while
he returned to Pisa and occupied himself with making the figures for its decoration. This fountain
was held in such esteem that laws were enacted for its preservation, and it was called the
most valuable possession of the city, while some went so far as to say that it could not be
surpassed in the world. Even now, after all it has suffered from time and weather, it commands
our admiration.

In 1278 Nicola died, after a life of great achievements. He left an untarnished name, too,
for he had been loved and respected by all his associates, and as patron, friend, and servant
had done all his duty. Mr. Perkins, in his "Tuscan Sculptors," says of him: "Inestimable were
the services rendered to art by this great man. He gave the death-blow to Byzantinism and barbarism;
established new architectural principles; founded a new school of sculpture in Italy, and opened
men's eyes to the degraded state of art by showing them where to study and how to study; so
that Cimabue, Guido da Siena, the Masuccios and the Cosmati all profited by his pervading and
enduring influence. Never hurried by an ill-regulated imagination into extravagances, he was
careful in selecting his objects of study and his methods of self-cultivation; an indefatigable
worker, who spared neither time nor strength in obedience to the numerous calls made upon him
from all parts of the peninsula; now in Pisa, then in Naples, Padua, Siena, Lucca, or Florence;
here to design a church, there to model a bas-relief, erect a pulpit, a palace or a tower;
by turns architect and sculptor, great in both, original in both, a reviver in both, laying
deep and well the foundations of his edifices by hitherto unpractised methods, and sculpturing
his bas-reliefs upon principles evolved from the study of antique models long unheeded. Ever
respected and esteemed by the many persons of all classes with whom he came in contact, he
was truly a great man--one to whom the world owes an eternal debt of gratitude, and who looms
up in gigantic proportions through the mist of five centuries, holding the same relation to
Italian art which Dante holds to Italian literature."

FRA GUGLIELMO D'AGNELLO (1238-1314?), also a Pisan, was a pupil of Nicola Pisano, and worked
with him at Bologna. There is little to be said of his works after his master's death.

GIOVANNI PISANO (about 1240-1320) was born at Pisa, and though a pupil of his father and a
co-worker with him, he seems to have fallen under some other and a very different influence.
In architecture he preferred the Gothic style, and in sculpture he was fond of all sorts of
fantastic action and expression; his works were full of exaggeration. He was an architect as
well as sculptor, and was a master in his own right when twenty years old, and in 1268 he went
to Naples to design a church for the Franciscans; he was also the architect of the episcopal
palace there.

After the death of his father the Pisans were anxious to retain Giovanni in their service;
he first transformed an old church into a new one in the pointed style of architecture. It
was named Santa Maria della Spina, because a rich merchant had presented one of the thorns
from the crown of Christ to it. This was the first building in Italy of this style of architecture.
Giovanni next built the Campo Santo of Pisa. Many shiploads of earth had been brought from
Palestine to Pisa in order to make a burial-place in which Christians could be laid in the
sacred earth. Giovanni Pisano inclosed the spot where this earth was laid with walls and arranged
the interior of the inclosure in such a way that it could be extensively decorated with works
of art. He made it the most beautiful Campo Santo in Italy. Many of the sculptures are by his
own hand. (Fig. 81.)

This allegorical representation of Pisa was the first attempt at making large statues in Italy
since the days of the Emperor Constantine. The city stands alone, and is a proud princess with
a diadem, holding in her arms two infants to indicate her fruitfulness. Below her are four
statues of the cardinal virtues, Temperance being a nude figure. It is a very strange work,
and in some respects not attractive, but it shows the originality of the sculptor; the principal
figure has much intensity of expression.

From this monument and his other works in Pisa, Giovanni became famous, and was called to Siena
to build the front of the cathedral. The people of Siena held out every inducement to him to
make his home there, by freeing him from taxes for life; but after three years he went to Perugia,
where he erected a monument which has been destroyed. After this time he devoted himself entirely
to sculpture, and executed a variety of works at Arezzo, Pistoja, Florence, Perugia, and Cortona.
In 1312 he commenced the rebuilding of the cathedral at Prato.

We have not the space to speak of his works in detail. The Campo Santo has more of interest
than the others, and is Romanesque in its character; and yet it is true that he employed Gothic
forms far more than any other. Some authors credit Giovanni with having introduced an independent
art into Italy; but let that be as it may, he had not the feeling for beauty, neither had he
the repose which was such a charm in the works of his father. At the same time his works are
full of life and dramatic action, and could never have been designed or executed by any man
who had not an uncommon genius.

ARNOLFO DI CAMBIO (1232-1310) was also a pupil of Nicola Pisano, and though eight years older
than Giovanni Pisano he did not become an independent master until after Giovanni had won much
fame. There are some works in Rome which are attributed to Arnolfo, but as there are uncertainties
about his being their author, it is not best for us to discuss them here. He erected at Orvieto,
in the church of San Domenico, a monument to the Cardinal de Braye. It was a very elaborate
work, and the statue of the Madonna, which is placed above that of the cardinal, is full of
majestic spirit and dignified repose. This is the only well-authenticated sculptural work by
Arnolfo, but this is one of the most finished monuments of the art of the Pisan school, and
is quite sufficient to bring his name through the centuries with honor.

ANDREA PISANO (1270-1345) is principally famous as a bronze-caster, and his chief work was
the making of the gates to the Baptistery of Florence, which have since been replaced by those
of Ghiberti. When these gates were finished, in 1339, the Signory went in procession to view
them; this proves in what esteem they must have been held, for the Signory never left the Palazzo
Vecchio in a body except on the most important occasions. After examining the gates they conferred
the honor of citizenship upon the sculptor. These gates told the story of John the Baptist,
and the work is full of sentiment, beauty, and simplicity, while the design is pure, the draperies
full of elegant grace, and the execution of the whole almost perfect.

NINO PISANO was the son of the latter. The time of his birth is not known; he died before 1361.
His works are pleasing, and he especially excelled in drapery. They are not numerous, and are
seen in the churches of Pisa.

But by far the most important pupil of Andrea Pisano, and, indeed, the most important Tuscan
master of the end of the fourteenth century, was ANDREA ARCAGNUOLO DI CIONE, commonly called
ANDREA ORCAGNA (1329-1376?). This artist was the son of Maestro Cione, a goldsmith of Florence.
Orcagna was an architect, goldsmith, sculptor, painter, mosaist, and poet. Painting is the
art by which he is best known and of which he executed the greatest number of interesting works.
In this place we shall speak of his most important work as a sculptor, which was the tabernacle
in the church of Or San Michele, in Florence, made to hold the picture of the Madonna painted
by Ugolino da Siena. This tabernacle is of white marble in the Gothic style. It rises from
the centre high up toward the roof of the church, and has sculptures in bas-relief, statuettes
and busts, all illustrating the life of the Virgin from her birth to her death. It is also
enriched with mosaics, intaglios, enamels, gilded glass, pietra dura, and all of these arranged
in a whole which is quite unique in art. It may be regarded as a piece of architecture or as
a sculptural work, and it is full of symbolism; and whatever view is taken of it, it commands
admiration for the artist who conceived and executed so difficult a task.

During the later years of the fourteenth century there were many sculptors in Italy of whom
we know very little more than their names. They did a vast amount of work in all parts of the
country, much of which is still to be seen. One of these, of whom few personal facts are known,
exerted a large influence in Florence, where the fruits of his industry were almost marvellous.
He was called PIETRO DI GIOVANNI and PIETRO TEDESCO, or "the German". The time and place of
his birth are not known, but the records show that he worked on the Cathedral of Florence from
1386 to 1399. He worked in true German style; wherever scroll-work and simple ornamental designs
were required he mingled a variety of leaves and flowers where the acanthus alone had before
been used. He also made fantastic little human beings, dwarfs and grotesque beings of different
sorts, and exhausted the animal world in his designs. Lions, bears, apes, dogs, lizards, crabs,
birds and fish, bees, butterflies, and all manner of insects may be seen nestling among vines
and branches, while angels play on pipes and violas. The whole effect of these works is cheerful
and natural, and would be as suitable to decorate a music hall or a theatre as they are for
a church.

The works of this master are too extreme in the realistic element to be taken as a fair example
of the Italian sculpture of this time, but NICCOLÒ OF ARREZZO, the MASSEGNE, and the BON or
BUONI family, and many others in different portions of the country contributed to put aside
the stiff, formal manner of the past, and to bring in the more sympathetic and natural one
of the fifteenth century. In truth, the last decades of the fourteenth century were a transition
period, when art was bursting its bonds, and was preparing for the glorious works of the golden
days of sculpture in Italy.

CHAPTER V.

ITALIAN SCULPTURE IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY.

There was no one great influence or circumstance which led up to the revival of art and letters
which took place in the fifteenth century, and which is known under the general name of the
Renaissance. Its causes were many, and may be traced in every department of the life of the
Middle Ages--in religion, politics, learning, and the habits of the people. This is far too
great a topic for us to enter on here, and we must keep to the one matter which we have in hand.

In Italy, heretofore, as we have shown, sculpture had been almost entirely separated from other
arts, and stood by itself. Its works had been the smaller objects of which we have spoken;
and though these were oftentimes splendid in their design and execution, they did not afford
the sculptor the same broad field for his work as he has when his productions are combined
with architecture. Now all this was changed. The French and German artists had brought out
a style of architecture of their own, the Italians pursued another course, and went back to
classic art for their teaching, and now every opportunity was given for sculpture to assume
its utmost importance; and the art of ancient Greece was studied with all the enthusiasm of
the Italian nature.

The masters of Florence, or, rather, of Tuscany, were of great importance in the beginning
of the new movement, and I shall speak first of them. FRANCESCO SQUARCIONE, who lived from
1396 to 1474, was a painter, and travelled into Greece to collect antique objects, and made
many drawings from the monuments which he saw. He established a school in Padua, and his museum
was of advantage to sculptors as well as to painters. Other Tuscan artists who were in love
with classic art wandered among its remains in Rome and other parts of Italy, and brought back
to their homes a greater knowledge of sculpture, as well as the drawings which they had made;
and in this part of Italy the Renaissance early made itself a living, active power.

Among the very first of these sculptors was JACOPO DELLA QUERCIA (1374-1438), who was so called
from the little market town of Quercia, near Siena, in which he was born. His father was a
goldsmith, and instructed his son in his art; but the boy loved sculpture, and studied it under
one Luca di Giovanni. When but nineteen years old he made an equestrian statue of wood, and
covered it with cloth, and painted it to represent marble in a manner which proved him to be
an artist. About this time he left his home, and the next that we know of him was about ten
years later, when his design for the gates of the Baptistery of Florence was pronounced to
be next in merit to those of Ghiberti and Brunelleschi.

In 1408 Quercia went to Ferrara, where he did several works. While there he was called by the
Signory of Siena to make a new fountain in the Piazza del Campo. This was a beautiful work,
and even in this century, though much injured, its remaining sculptures prove that it must
have been a wonder in its day. It has been restored after the original model by Quercia, who
was often called Jacopo della Fonte on account of this work. He executed some sculptures in
Lucca, but his masterpiece was the decoration of the great portal of the Basilica of San Petronio,
at Bologna. (Fig. 82.)

The fifteen reliefs here represent the history of Adam and Eve, and other stories from the
creation to the deluge. They show the full freedom and power of Quercia's style, and are among
the most attractive of all the Tuscan sculptures of this period. Duringd the last years of
his life this artist was employed as superintendent of the works upon the Cathedral of Siena,
in which city he died.

We come now to speak of the famous LORENZO GHIBERTI (1378-1455), who was born in Florence,
and was both a goldsmith and sculptor; and though his fame rests upon his bas-reliefs, yet
the exquisite detail and careful finish in them came from his practice of the goldsmith's art.
In 1398 a plague broke out in Florence, and Ghiberti fled to Rimini for safety. While there
he painted a few pictures; but his name is so linked with the splendid gates which he made
for the Baptistery of Florence that it is of those that one naturally thinks when his name
is heard.

We have spoken of the gates which Andrea Pisano had made to this Baptistery long before; these
were for the south side; and when, in 1400, the plague again visited Florence the people believed
that the wrath of Heaven should be appeased by a thank-offering. Accordingly the Guild of Wool-merchants
promised to add gates on the north and east of the Baptistery of St. John the Baptist.

A time was appointed for the examination of designs, and many artists entered into the competition,
and sent in their drawings and models. A great number of these represented the Sacrifice of
Isaac. At length all the models were set aside but two, and these were made by Brunelleschi
and Ghiberti; then the former declared that he thought his rival's design the best, thus showing
a nobility of character which cannot be too much praised.

The commission was thus given to Ghiberti, who first executed the northern gates. He began
them in 1403, and finished them twenty-one years later. They illustrate the life of Christ
in twenty scenes; they have also the figures of the evangelists and the four Fathers of the
Church in a beautiful framework of foliage, animals, and other ornamental figures, which divides
and incloses the larger compositions. These gates are done in a manner much in advance of that
of Pisano, and yet they retain some features of an earlier style which are not found in Ghiberti's
later works. But from the first he showed original talent, as one may see by his model of the
Sacrifice of Isaac, which is preserved in the Museum of the Bargello, beside that of Brunelleschi.

These northern gates are very beautiful, but those on the east are far more so; it is of these
last that Michael Angelo declared, "They are worthy to be the gates of Paradise!" These are
divided into ten compartments, representing: 1, Creation of Adam and Eve; 2, History of Cain
and Abel; 3, Noah; 4, Abraham and Isaac; 5, Jacob and Esau; 6, History of Joseph; 7, Moses
on Mount Sinai; 8, Joshua before Jericho; 9, David and Goliath; 10, Solomon and the Queen of
Sheba (Fig. 83).

This sculptor showed great skill for one in his age, but to us there is some disappointment
in them on account of the crowded appearance of the figures. Familiarity with them, however,
reveals their beauty, and we find that, in truth, the stories Ghiberti wished to tell are brought
out with much distinctness. They will ever remain one of the great monuments of the sculpture
of the Renaissance.

Ghiberti endeavored to introduce fine backgrounds to his reliefs, which gave him an opportunity
to add figures illustrating other incidents than the principal one of the work. His sculptures
show the influence of the Gothic style, the study of nature and that of the antique all combined;
with these are united his own power of conception, his ability in design, and his wonderful
delicacy of execution. These gates have been continually studied by the artists of his own
and succeeding generations.

The next work of importance by Ghiberti is the sarcophagus of St. Zenobius in the Cathedral
of Florence. Other lesser sculptures are in other churches in Florence and in the Cathedral
of Siena.

We come now to one of the most interesting sculptors of the fifteenth century. DONATELLO he
was called, but his real name was DONATO DI BETTO BARDI (1386-1468). He was born in Florence,
and from his boyhood was a member of the family of the rich banker Ruberto Martelli, who was
the firm friend of the sculptor for life, and when he died he provided in his will that the
works by Donatello which he bequeathed to his family should never be pledged, sold, or given
away, but kept as a perpetual inheritance for his heirs. Donatello was a realist, and followed
nature with great exactness. This was not always productive of beauty in his works; indeed,
some of them are very ugly, and a story which illustrates this is told of himself and Brunelleschi.
Donatello had made a crucifix, carved from wood, for the Church of Santa Croce, and when it
was finished he asked Brunelleschi's opinion of it. This latter artist was principally an architect;
but as he had learned the goldsmith's trade, he executed some sculptures, and a close friendship
existed between himself and Donatello. Relying on their love for each other, Brunelleschi frankly
told Donatello that his crucifix was very ugly, and his figure of Christ like that of a day-laborer,
whereas it should represent a person of the greatest possible beauty.

Donatello was very angry at this, and exclaimed, "It is easier to criticise than to execute;
do you take a piece of wood and make a better crucifix!" Brunelleschi determined to do this,
and when his work was finished he invited Donatello to sup with him. He placed the crucifix
in a conspicuous place in his house, and then took Donatello with him to the market to buy
their food. He gave the parcels to Donatello, and asked him to go before to the house, saying
that he would soon follow. When Donatello entered and saw the crucifix he was so delighted
at the sight that he forgot everything else, and dropped the eggs, cheese, and all on the floor,
and stood gazing at the carving as motionless as if he were a statue himself. When Brunelleschi
came he said, "What are we to do now? You have spoiled all the dinner!"

"I have had dinner enough for to-day," replied Donatello. "You may have a better appetite.
To you, I confess, belongs the power of carving the figure of Christ; to me that of representing
day-laborers."

This famous crucifix by Brunelleschi is now in the Gondi Chapel of the Church of Santa Maria
Novella; that by Donatello is in the chapel of Saints Ludovico and Bartolommeo in the Church
of Santa Croce.

The Annunciation cut from sandstone, which is in Santa Croce, is one of his earliest works,
and is full of grace and nobleness (Fig. 84). He made some beautiful groups of dancing children,
which are now in the Uffizi Gallery; but he considered his David, which is in the same gallery,
as his masterpiece. He was so proud of it that he swore by it, saying, "By the faith I have
in my Zuccone!" This word means bald-head, and had come to be used as the usual name for the David.

But in spite of his liking for the David, it is generally thought that his St. George, on the
exterior of the Church of Or San Michele, is far better. The German art-writer Grimm thus speaks
of this work: "What a man is the St. George in the niche of the Church of Or San Michele! He
stands there in complete armor, sturdily, with his legs somewhat striding apart, resting on
both with equal weight, as if he meant to stand so that no power could move him from his post.
Straight before him he holds up his high shield; both hands touch its edge, partly for the
sake of holding it, partly in order to rest on it; the eyes and brows are full of expectant
boldness.... We approach this St. George, and the mere artistic interest is transformed suddenly
into a more lively sympathy with the person of the master.... Who is it, we ask, who has placed
such a man there, so ready for battle?" (Fig. 85.)

Donatello's impetuosity led him into many rash acts. Among other instances of this it is related
that a rich Genoese merchant gave an order for a portrait bust of himself in bronze; when it
was finished the great Duke Cosimo de' Medici, who was a friend of Donatello, admired the work
so much that he placed it on his balcony, so that all Florentines who passed by could see it.
When the merchant was given the price of the bust he objected to it, and it was referred to
Duke Cosimo for settlement. In the conversation the Genoese said that the bust could be made
in a month, and that he was willing to pay the artist a dollar a day for his time and labor.

When Donatello heard this he exclaimed, "I know how to destroy the result of the study of years
in the twinkling of an eye!" and he threw the bust into the street below, where it was broken
into fragments. Then the merchant was deeply mortified, and offered the sculptor double the
price he had asked if he would repeat the work; but though Donatello sadly needed the money
he would not do this, and persisted in his refusal, even when Cosimo de' Medici tried to persuade
him to consent.

When Donatello was old Duke Cosimo gave him an allowance which would support himself and four
workmen; but in spite of this Donatello wore such shabby clothes that Cosimo sent him a red
surcoat, a mantle and hood. These Donatello returned, saying they were far too fine for him.
When the sculptor at length became feeble and bedridden his benefactor had died, but Piero
de' Medici, the son of Cosimo, was careful to keep him in comfort; and when he died his funeral
was attended with much ceremony. He was buried near Duke Cosimo, in the Church of San Lorenzo.

Several of Donatello's works are in this church, and are a more suitable monument to his memory
than any that could be made by other hands.

The works of Donatello are numerous, both in marble and bronze, and in both these substances
he made statues and reliefs. We cannot speak in detail of all that he accomplished; but as
he lived in an age when every advance in art was an event in history, we must not forget to
say that he made the first equestrian statue which had been produced since the time of the
Romans. This statue is in Padua, in front of the Church of San Antonio; it is of colossal size,
and represents the Venetian General Gattamelata; and though it does not satisfy our conception
as an equestrian statue, it is worthy of some praise when we remember all the circumstances
of its origin. It is not probable that Donatello had ever seen an antique equestrian statue,
unless it might have been that of Marcus Aurelius, which was found in the Forum in 1187; no
modern statues existed as examples for him; he was not familiar with the modelling of horses,
and for every reason it was a bold thing for him to undertake such a work.

Donatello had more influence upon the art of his time than any other Tuscan sculptor, with
the single exception of Michael Angelo. As a man he was honest, simple, and upright in all
his dealings; as a friend he was loyal and faithful; as a Christian he was humble and charitable,
and left behind him a name which has been handed down through more than four centuries with
respect and honor.

LUCA DELLA ROBBIA (1400-1481) is another native of Florence, whose name is widely known. Like
many others, he began life as a goldsmith, and in this way gained a mastery over detail and
a finish of style that are remarkable in all his works. He turned his attention to sculpture
early in life, and was so enthusiastic in his pursuit of this art that he worked night and
day, minding neither cold nor hunger and fatigue; in the beginning he made numerous wax models,
which have perished, and with all his industry we have no work of his before he was forty-five
years old, except the reliefs of Music, Philosophy, Geometry, Grammar and Astronomy, Plato
and Aristotle, Ptolemy and Euclid, and a man playing a lute, which are set into the side of
the Campanile at Florence, and two scenes from the life of St. Peter, which are in the Uffizi.

In the same gallery are also the series of reliefs which Luca began when forty-five years old
for the balustrade of an organ in the cathedral. These reliefs represent boys singing, dancing,
and playing on musical instruments (Fig. 86). The attitudes are so graceful and so varied,
and the expressions on the faces are so many, that there is much to admire in a subject which
in unskilful hands would be very monotonous.

No sculptures since the classic days represent child-life with such freshness and charming
qualities, and these alone would have raised Luca to a high rank as a sculptor. In the Uffizi
one is able to examine these works closely, and they gain by this nearness to the eye, which
enables one to see the minuteness of his finish. There are various works of his in bronze and
marble still to be seen in the churches of Florence, but the special art to which he gave his
attention was to the perfecting of enamel upon terra-cotta--on the making of what is known
as the Robbia ware. In this he achieved a great success, and his bas-reliefs are very beautiful.
At first he used but few colors, but later he increased their number, and was able to produce
a combined effect of painting and relief that is very pleasing.

These works were used for altar-pieces, medallions on exteriors, fountains, wall decoration,
and a great variety of purposes. Twelve medallions representing the months, which are in the
South Kensington Museum, are said to have been made by Luca to decorate a writing cabinet for
one of the Medici.

Luca worked with his nephew, Andrea, who had four sons; and when Luca died his secrets belonged
to them, and made their fortunes. They were occupied eleven years in making a frieze to a hospital
in Pistoja; it represented the Seven Acts of Mercy. One of them went to France and decorated
the Château of Madrid for Francis I. Pope Leo X. employed another to pave the Loggie of the
Vatican with Robbia tiles, and these wares, in one form and another, were used in numberless
ways, both useful and decorative.

The Robbia family was followed by other workers in glazed ware, and during about a century
it was a prominent feature in art, and then was gradually given up.

The most noted pupil of Donatello was ANDREA DEL VEROCCHIO (1432-1488). He was born at Florence,
and was early apprenticed to a goldsmith called Verocchio, from whom the sculptor took his
surname. It is said that this name came from the fact that the elder Verocchio had remarkable
exactness of sight.

Neither the metal works nor the paintings which Verocchio did remain, and after about 1466
he devoted himself entirely to sculpture. It is difficult to associate him with Donatello;
his execution is finished like most sculptors who were also metal-workers; his nude parts are
true to nature, but not graceful or attractive, and his draperies are in small folds, which
give a tumbled, crumpled effect rather than that of the easy, graceful falling of soft material.

His best works are a David in the Museum of the Bargello, Florence; a bronze Genius pressing
a Dolphin to itself on a fountain in the court of the Palazzo Vecchio (Fig. 87); an equestrian
statue of Colleoni before the Church of San Giovanni e Paolo, Venice (Fig. 88); and a group
of St. Thomas examining the Wounds of Christ at the Church of Or San Michele, Florence. This
last work is in his best and latest manner; the expression is powerful, but the drapery is
still very faulty.

Although this equestrian statue is called by Verocchio's name, he did not live to see it completed;
and though it was without doubt made from his design, still some credit for its execution is
due to Alessandro Leopardo, who finished it. When Colleoni died he left all his large fortune
to the Republic of Venice on condition that they should erect an equestrian monument to him
in the square of St. Mark. As it was forbidden by the laws of Venice to place such things in
the Piazza of St. Mark, it was placed in its present position, before the Church of San Giovanni
e Paolo, on the square of the School of St. Mark, and it was thought that this answered the
requirements of the will.

When Verocchio had gone to Venice and had modelled the horse, he was told that the Signory
intended to have the rider made by another sculptor. He felt this to be an insult, and broke
off the head and legs of the horse, and left Venice for Florence. The Signory issued a decree
forbidding him to set foot again on Venetian soil under pain of death. The sculptor replied
that he should not take the risk, as he well knew that the Signory could take off his head,
and he could not put it on, while he could replace his horse's head with a better one. The
Venetians knew that this was true, and repealed their decree, and doubling his pay, asked him
to come to complete his work. Verocchio consented to do so, but had not been long in Venice
when he died. Verocchio is said to have spent much time in drawing from the antique, and his
works prove him to have been diligent and painstaking; these qualities made him the sculptor
that he was; but we see no traces in his work of the heaven-born genius which makes the artist
great, and so inspires himself that his works fill all beholders with an enthusiasm in a degree
akin to his own; the works of such artists as Verocchio, who have only the excellencies which
come from patient industry, interest us, but they cannot move our hearts.

It often happened in Italy that a number of artists belonged to the same family, as in the
case of the Robbias. One such family had the name of GAMBARELLI, but were known in art as the
ROSSELLINI. There were five sculptors of this name, all brothers. Two of them had great ability,
Bernardo and Antonio. Bernardo was most distinguished as an architect, and some very celebrated
edifices were built from his designs; he also executed some excellent sculptures, among which
are the fine monument of Lionardo Bruni in the Church of Santa Croce, and that of the Beata
Villana in Santa Maria Novella, Florence. The first is one of the best monuments in Tuscany.
In the Uffizi are a bust of St. John, a charming work, and a portrait bust of Battista Sforza.

ANTONIO ROSSELLINO (1427-1490), called PROCONSOLO, from the quarter of Florence in which he
was born, was by far the best sculptor of the family. He is called a pupil of Donatello, but
his work very closely resembles that of Ghiberti. Among his best works are the monument to
Cardinal Portogallo, in the Church of San Miniato, near Florence; that of Mary of Aragon in
Monte Oliveto at Naples; a relief of the Nativity in the same church, and a relief of the Adoring
Madonna in the Uffizi Gallery. His characteristics were grace, delicacy of treatment, sweetness
of expression, and all these combined with a noble dignity.

Other Tuscan sculptors of this period were DESIDERIO DA SETTIGNANO, MINO DA FIESOLE (1400-1486),
ANDREA FERRUCCI (1465-1526), and BENEDETTO DA MAJANO (1442-1498), who was eminent as an architect
as well as for his sculpture. His father was a stone-cutter, and two other sons in the family
were artists. Benedetto began life as a worker in wooden mosaics, or intarsiatore, as it is
called. He made two beautiful inlaid chests, and carried them to Hungary as a gift to King
Matthias Corvinus, whose fame as a patron of art had reached his ears. But the young artist
was doomed to a dreadful disappointment, for when he unpacked his chests in the presence of
the king it was found that the sea-damp had spoiled them, and the mosaics had fallen apart.
Benedetto then determined to work in more durable materials, and executed some sculptures in
marble and terra-cotta while he remained in Hungary.

After his return to Florence, Benedetto worked as an architect, and the Strozzi Palace was
built after his design. His masterpiece in sculpture was the monument to Filippo Strozzi, in
the Strozzi Chapel in Santa Maria Novella, and it also merits mention among the best works
of the fifteenth century. A pulpit in Santa Croce, by Benedetto, is also very fine, and his
skill was shown here in his supporting the pulpit against a column and putting the staircase
by which the pulpit is entered inside the column; thus it was concealed, and the building in
no wise weakened, while the pulpit is far more beautiful than it would be were the staircase
in sight.

Benedetto was summoned to Naples by the Duke of Calabria, who gave him commissions which occupied
him for two years. Few Tuscan sculptors have produced more pleasing works than Benedetto's;
though not profound they are pleasing and unaffected, and in whatever frame of mind one may
be, they do not disturb, but rather soothe and charm, as they could not do if they were false
in sentiment or executed in an affected manner.

MATTEO CIVITALI DI GIOVANNI (1435-1501) was born in Lucca, but studied art in Florence. His
statue of St. Sebastian in the Cathedral of Lucca was so much admired by the painter Perugino
that he copied it in his picture of the Entombment.

Civitali's chief work in sculpture was the tomb of Pietro da Noceto in the same cathedral.
In Genoa, in the Chapel of St. John the Baptist, he executed six statues and five bas-reliefs.
A bas-relief of Faith by Civitali in the Uffizi Gallery is a fine work, full of earnestness
and deep religious feeling.

Civitali was also an accomplished architect, and did much to improve the style of building
in Lucca. The beautiful temple of the Volto Santo in the cathedral was designed by him.

This sculptor may be said to have had four different styles of work. The St. Sebastian was
in his earliest manner, and is simply realistic; his second manner was the best; it is pure
and dignified in conception, while deep feeling pervades all; the tomb of Noceto was in this
second style; his third manner was more free and less pure, while the fourth, as seen in his
work at Genoa, is full of extravagant exaggeration.

Next to the sculptors of the Tuscan or Florentine school of this period were those of Venice
in importance and independence of manner. This school was much influenced by that of Tuscany
because of the nearness of the two cities and the constant communication between them, as well
as by the fact that Tuscan sculptors were more or less employed in Venice. One of the earliest
Venetian sculptors was ANTONIO GIOVANNI BREGNO, called ANTONIO RIZZO or RICCIO (about 1430-1498?).
Although he was born in Verona, and there had the opportunity to study the Roman ruins which
are the pride of the city, he is yet essentially an artist of Venice, since he spent most of
his life there, and was even at the head of the workshop for the sculptors who worked upon
the palace. One little episode in the life of this artist was an expedition to Scutari with
the Venetian soldiers, who went to its defence against the Turks. Rizzo showed himself so brave
in action, and was so severely wounded, that after his return to Venice the Senate gave him
a pension which lasted through twenty years. Rizzo so won the confidence of the Venetians that
he was appointed to important offices with large salaries, and it is sad to be forced to add
that he proved to be a dishonest man, and when his accounts were examined he fled to Foligno,
where he soon died. We will not speak of him as an architect; as a sculptor he is known by
statues of Adam and Eve in niches opposite the Giant's Staircase in the Ducal Palace, and by
sepulchral monuments in the Church of the Frari. While his works cannot be highly praised for
beauty, they do show the style of the Renaissance distinctly.

LOMBARDO is the family name of three sculptors of this period in Venice. They were PIETRO and
his two sons, TULLIO and ANTONIO, and the three together are spoken of as the Lombardi. Pietro,
the father, was as much an architect as a sculptor, and the works of the father and son are
so associated that it is difficult to speak of them separately. We know that Tullio was the
superior artist of the three, but there are no works of theirs that command a detailed description
here. The monument to the Doge Pietro Mocenigo, in the Church of SS. Giovanni e Paolo, the
angels of the font in San Martino, an altar-relief in the altar of San Giovanni Crisostomo,
reliefs on the front of the Scuola di San Marco, and two reliefs in the Church of San Antonio
at Padua, are the principal sculptures of the Lombardi.

ALESSANDRO LEOPARDO, who flourished about 1490, was the most eminent bronze-caster of his time,
and was distinguished for the happy manner in which he adapted classic ideas to his needs in
his works.

Very little is known of the life of this sculptor, and that little is not to his credit. He
lived in Venice, and had a studio in the Piazza del Cavallo, and in 1487 committed a forgery,
for which he was banished from the city. But when Verocchio died, leaving the Colleoni statue
unfinished, the Senate desired to have it completed by Leopardo, so they sent him a safe-conduct
for six months, and he returned to Venice. As there is no account of his again leaving the
city, it is supposed that he was allowed to remain as long as he chose. There has been much
difference of opinion as to which artist--Verocchio or Leopardo--should be credited with the
excellence of the Colleoni statue. The truth, as near as it can be told, seems to be that Verocchio
designed and modelled it, that Leopardo completed and cast it, and made the lofty pedestal
upon which it stands, and which, taken by itself, is a splendid work. It is of fine proportions,
and has six Corinthian columns, in the capitals of which there are dolphins, while the frieze
is composed of trophies and marine animals, all of which are symbols of the City on the Sea
which erected the monument.

After the Colleoni statue was unveiled the Senate gave Leopardo an order for three standard
bases of bronze to be placed in the Piazza of St. Mark's. He also made three splendid candelabra
for the Venetian Academy. Leopardo was also an architect. The time of his death is very uncertain,
but a writer speaks of him in 1541 as "the new glory of our age, who shines like a star in
the Venetian waters."

Although an immense amount of sculpture of this period remains in various parts of Italy, it
is very difficult to trace the story of separate artists and to give a satisfactory account
of those whose works are worthy of high praise. There is scarcely an Italian city of any size
which has not some splendid remains of this morning of the Renaissance. In Ancona there are
the portal of San Francesco and the front of Mercanzia, with which the name of Giorgio da Sebenico
is associated. At Rimini the Church of San Francesco, with its wealth of plastic ornament,
cannot be ascribed to any one artist or to any number with surety; it is in the style of Luca
della Robbia and Donatello, but in the execution does not reach their standard. In Cesena,
Padua, and Verona there are fifteenth-century sculptures, and in the Milanese territory the
plastic art of this period is very interesting.

In Milan, in the Church of Santa Maria delle Grazie, in the Ospedale Grande, and in the cathedral
there is a wealth of sculpture to reward the student of this art who visits them; and in the
Museum of the Breda there are many interesting works. The terra-cotta decoration of the Ospedale
excels all other works of this sort in upper Italy, and the immense façade of this edifice
is a marvel in its way (Figs. 89, 90). The differences between this hospital and the wonderful
Milan Cathedral afford a remarkable contrast in works of the same period.

GIOVANNI ANTONIO AMADEO, or OMODEO (1447-1520), was born on a farm near the Certosa of Pavia.
When but nineteen years old his name appears as one of those who were employed upon this splendid
edifice, and the records of his payments show that his work was well considered, even then.
Omodeo was undoubtedly the best sculptor of his time in all Lombardy, and his sculptures in
the Colleoni Chapel at Bergamo would be sufficient to make any artist famous. The whole work
may be called his, for he designed the building and the sculptures of the façade, which are
in the richest style of the Renaissance; there are statuettes, colonettes, busts, medallions,
and bas-reliefs, and wherever a flat surface exists it is divided into diamond-shaped slabs
of colored marbles. The portal is very much ornamented: on each side of the rose window above
this entrance there are busts of Cæsar and Augustus in contrast with numbers of angels' heads
not far away. There are bas-reliefs representing children playing upon musical instruments,
and the whole front of the chapel, with its numerous pilasters and colonettes, has been compared
to a gigantic organ, by Mr. Perkins, in his "Italian Sculptors".

Of the interior decoration we can only say that it is much in Omodeo's style, though the monument
to Colleoni, the founder of the chapel, is said to be the work of German sculptors, and to
have been done after Omodeo left Bergamo.

At Pavia, Omodeo succeeded Guiniforte as chief architect of the Certosa, and designed the façade,
which was made by him and his successors. The bas-relief of the Deposition from the Cross,
which is on the front of the high-altar here, is the work of Omodeo. At Cremona and at Isola
Bella he executed some monuments, but at length, in 1490, he began his work on the Cathedral
of Milan. Here a cupola was commenced after his model and under his direction; but when it
was partly done doubts of its solidity were expressed, and Omodeo was commanded to leave it
and design the north door to the cathedral. He also constructed the spiral staircase leading
to the roof through an elegant Gothic turret, where the medallion portrait of Omodeo may be
seen. It has since been proved that the cupola of Omodeo was solid enough, for it has sustained
the spire which was put upon it in 1772; but he was tormented concerning it in many ways, and
died without justification.

Omodeo stands at the head of northern Italian sculptors in his dexterous use of his chisel;
his ease in composition and his skill in the management of drapery would have made him eminent;
but the effect of all these good qualities was injured by his mannerism, and the fact that
his standard of beauty was not a high one. This may be partly accounted for by the fact that
in Lombardy an artist had no opportunity to study the remains of classic art, and this one
circumstance very largely excuses the inferiority of the northern sculptors to those of Tuscany,
whose taste had been much improved by close study of ancient plastic art.

There are many sculptors mentioned as having done some part of the work upon the Milan Cathedral,
but very few are known, except by casual remark. CRISTOFORO SOLARI, called "IL GOBBO, or DEL
GOBBO," was one of the most prominent, and yet we know almost nothing of his history until,
in 1490, he was so disappointed when Omodeo was made architect of the cathedral instead of
himself that he went to Venice, and remained there during several years.

After a time Solari was appointed ducal sculptor to Ludovico Moro, and the monument which he
erected to Beatrice d'Este was one of his principal works. When Ludovico lost his power Solari
went to Rome, and remained until he was recalled to Milan to execute sculptures for the cathedral.
He was very independent in his reply, and refused to go unless his conditions were complied
with; one of these conditions was that he should not be under the direction of any one, but
should select his marbles and his subjects to please himself. The statues he made are not as
fine as we might expect them to be after this beginning; however, he was at length appointed
head architect. Soon after this he was engaged in making a new model for a cupola, and then
suddenly his name ceases to appear upon the registers.

The Cathedral of Como is another of those vast edifices which afforded opportunities for artists
to make themselves famous. The principal part of the façade to this cathedral was ornamented
by TOMMASO and JACOPO RODARI. The first was at one time architect of the cathedral, and together
they executed a large portion of the sculptures. Their best work was in the ornamental parts.

In the southern parts of Italy, both in the states of the Church and in Naples, there are many
works of the fifteenth century which were executed by artists from Florence and other parts
of Italy. Thus there is nothing new to be said concerning sculpture in Southern Italy during
this period, since the works which are not by foreign artists are in the same style as theirs;
for the native sculptors copied those from Central and Northern Italy, and no great progress
or original manner can be found in these southern districts.

In Italy, as we have seen, the sculpture of the Renaissance was much advanced by the fact that
in the beginning of its growth the architecture of the country was largely an imitation of
Greek architecture; and as the same artist was frequently an architect, sculptor, and painter,
edifices were designed with the purpose of placing the works of the sculptor in the most favorable
positions.

In the countries north of Italy sculpture had no such aid or advantages. The Gothic style of
architecture was a hindrance to the sculptor, whose works were combined with it. The Gothic
construction afforded no broad, generous spaces for sculpture; all plastic work must be confined
in limited spaces between columns and baldachins, or in arched niches, or between narrow flutings;
and though something had been done to vary the upright stiffness of the statues of its earliest
days, there was no freedom for the realistic and natural tendencies of the Renaissance art
to develop in.

Another advantage on the side of Italian art was the fact that Italy was a land of grace and
beauty; its people were more refined in manner, more elegant and picturesque in their costumes
than were those of Northern Europe, and all the influences surrounding the Italian artist were
far more favorable to a development of his artistic nature than were those of France or Germany.
Then, too, the remains of antique art which were within reach of the Italian sculptor were
quite shut off from others. For all these and other reasons the sculpture of the north was
more tardy in taking on the better spirit and form of the Renaissance, and as a whole it never
became as pleasing to most people as was the sculpture of Italy.

In a former chapter we have spoken of the sculptor Claux Sluter and his work at Dijon in the
fourteenth century; the desire which he showed to make his figures like the men they represented,
and a general study of nature rather than of older works of sculpture, had much effect upon
the sculpture of his time, and gradually became much exaggerated. German sculptors tried not
only to make exact portraits of the faces and heads of their figures, but they gave the same
attention to imitating every detail of costume and every personal peculiarity of the model
from which they worked. This tended to weaken and narrow their own designs, and the whole effect
of their work is fantastic and exaggerated--an effect quite opposed to the noble and harmonious
treatment of the whole which the best Italian masters strove to attain.

The attempt to produce startling effects in German art made such subjects as the Passion of
Christ, the Temptation of St. Anthony, and the Martyrdoms of the Saints to be constantly repeated,
and many reliefs are overloaded with such details as may very properly be used in painting,
and which belong to picturesque art, but which take away the dignity and calm grandeur which
should make the spirit of sculpture. But there is one feature of German sculpture at this time
which appeals to our sympathy--that is, the deep, earnest feeling which pervades it, and which
constantly tried new methods of expression.

In Germany there were guilds or trade-associations, and the members of these guilds were allowed
to work in the special branch only of sculpture which belonged to their company, so that this
art was divided by more fixed lines than in Italy, where, in truth, at the period of which
we speak, the Florentine school was a supreme power, and its sculptors, as we have seen, worked
in as many sorts of sculpture as pleased them.

The schools of Germany were far more independent of each other, and the entire organization
of art in Germany was very different from that of Italy.

One of the most prominent effects of the architecture of Germany was to drive the sculptors
to seek for such work as had no relation to architecture, and an important result from this
was the great attention which they paid to wood-carving; indeed, this was the favorite pursuit
of the German sculptors for many years. About the middle of the fifteenth century the importance
of this art in Germany was far greater than those of bronze-casting or stone sculpture.

The principal works in wood-carving were the altars, which finally came to be colossal in size,
and with their multitude of reliefs, statuettes, and ornaments were marvellous monuments to
the industry and skill of the wood-carvers. The reliefs in these works are usually arranged
on landscape backgrounds, and so much resemble pictures in many ways that the colors and gilding
which were freely used on them do not seem out of place, and it appears to be quite natural
that wood-carvers should often have been painters also.

The Swabian school, the principal seat of which was Ulm, was the earliest to adopt the new,
realistic style. There are works by Swabian artists which show this tendency as early as 1431.
JÖRG SYRLIN, who flourished during the last half of the fifteenth century, was an eminent wood-carver,
and as he did not color his works he can be better judged as a sculptor than he could be if
the effect of the whole depended partly upon painting. The choir-stalls in the Cathedral of
Ulm and the fountain in the market-place, called "Fischkasten," are his most important works;
but a singing-desk, now in the museum, and other lesser pieces are also excellent examples
of his style. The choir-stalls have an immense number of figures and a mass of ornament, which
made them far richer than any such work of an earlier date, and none that have since been made
have equalled them. It is almost incredible that they were completed in four years, and yet
there are no marks of haste upon the work. The figures are dignified and graceful, the faces
delicate and expressive, the hands well formed, and a beauty of design and execution marks
the whole. The lower figures, which come nearest the eye, are finer than those which are higher
up, so that a unity of effect is preserved throughout the whole. He sometimes took occasion
to give touches of humor in his works, and in these stalls he introduced his own portrait and
that of his wife.

The "Fischkasten" is sculptured in stone, and has three knights upon it which appear to be
boldly advancing, as if about to step off and walk away. Other works by this master are less
important, and it is doubtful if all that are called by his name are really his own. Jörg Syrlin,
the younger, trained by his father, adopted his style, and became an excellent artist.

We have not space to speak of the Swabian sculptures in detail. Fine works exist in Tiefenbronn,
Rothenburg, Blaubeuren, Herrenberg, Gmünd, Ravensburg, and many other places.

The influence of the Swabian school was very wide; it can be traced in many parts of Germany,
in Hungary and Transylvania, and even in Switzerland, Austria, and Bavaria. Swabian artists
were often summoned to adjacent provinces, and thus did much work away from their homes. The
reliefs upon the door of the Cathedral of Constance were executed by Simon Hayder, a Swabian,
in 1470. The altar of the cathedral at Chur was the work of Jacob Rösch, another Swabian master,
who thus labored on the very boundary of Italy. The school at Augsburg was the second Swabian
school in importance, and much influence went out from that centre, though its sculptures were
not as fine as those of Ulm.

In some cases fine old sculptures still exist in the churches and other places for which they
were intended. Again we find them either whole, or in parts, in museums to which they have
been removed when they were no longer required for the uses for which they were made, or when
they were replaced by more modern works. So few facts are known concerning them that it is
almost impossible to do more than repeat descriptions of the subjects they represent; and this
is neither profitable nor entertaining in a book of this kind; therefore I shall now speak
only of such artists as have left some record behind them, and of works whose authorship can
be given.

VEIT STOSS, who flourished about the middle of the fifteenth century, was an eminent wood-carver.
Very little is known about him. His name is sometimes said to be Wit Stwosz, and Cracow and
Nuremberg both claim to have been his birthplace. But it is now believed that he was born in
Nuremberg, as it is known that in 1477 he gave up his citizenship there and went to Cracow,
and in 1496 he paid a small sum to be again made a citizen of Nuremberg.

We also know that his reputation as a man was not good. In a Nuremberg decree he is called
a "reckless and graceless citizen, who has caused much uneasiness to the honorable council
and the whole town." He was convicted of crimes for which he should have suffered death, but
the sentence was changed, and he was branded: both cheeks were pierced with a hot iron. After
this he broke the oath he had taken to the city, and joined her enemies in plotting against
her; he was subsequently imprisoned, and at his death, in 1533, he was very old and perfectly
blind.

It seems almost like a contradiction to say that this master was one of the most tender in
feeling of all the wood-carvers of his time. He was especially successful in representing the
purity of the Madonna and of youthful saints. His principal works are in the churches of Cracow
and Nuremberg. In the Frauenkirche at Cracow the high-altar, a part of the stalls in the choir,
and some other sculptures are his. In Nuremberg his best works are a bas-relief of the Crowning
of the Virgin, which is preserved in the Burgkapelle; the great Madonna statue, which was placed
in the Frauenkirche in 1504; and the colossal Angel's Salutation, which is suspended in the
choir of the Church of St. Laurence. This last is an unusual and important work. The angel
appears as if flying, and the drapery is much inflated; the Virgin is queenly and majestic,
yet graceful; all around are medallions in which are represented the Seven Sorrows of the Virgin.
The style of these reliefs is charming if we except the drapery; that has the faults of the
time, and is bad in style; but the female heads are all that we could ask; the whole design
is distinct, and few reliefs could surpass these in simple beauty and genuine artistic feeling.

Another remarkable work of his is a panel of roses, now in the Burgkapelle. The panel is seven
feet high by five wide; more than half of this is covered by a wreath of roses; there are besides
four rows of small half-length figures arranged round a cross of St. Anthony, a representation
of the Last Judgment, scenes in the history of man from the creation to the death of the Virgin,
and many other saints and like subjects in bits of reliefs, which fill up all spare spaces.
The style is very distinct, and the draperies better in this work than in others from his hand.

There are other works in Nuremberg and elsewhere which are attributed to Veit Stoss, but these
that are known to be his are quite enough to establish his fame as a gifted artist and a remarkable
sculptor for his time. 

Though it be but to please God.

MARY BEATON. What will you do?

CHASTELARD. Ay, true, I must do somewhat. Let me see: To get between and tread upon his face--
Catch both her hands and bid men look at them, How pure they were--I would do none of these, Though
they got wedded all the days in the year. We may do well yet when all's come and gone. I pray you on
this wedding-night of theirs Do but one thing that I shall ask of
you, And Darnley will not hunger as I shall For that good time.

Sweet, will you swear me this?

MARY BEATON. Yea; though to do it were mortal to my soul As the chief sin.

CHASTELARD. I thank you: let us go.

END OF THE SECOND ACT.

ACT III.

THE QUEEN.

SCENE I.--The Queen's Chamber. Night. Lights burning In front of the bed.

[Enter CHASTELARD and MARY BEATON.]

MARY BEATON. Be tender of your feet.

CHASTELARD. I shall not fail: These ways have light enough to help a man That walks with such stirred
blood in him as mine.

MARY BEATON. I would yet plead with you to save your head: Nay, let this be then: sir, I chide
you not. Nay, let all come. Do not abide her yet.

CHASTELARD.

Have you read never in French books the song Called the Duke's Song, some boy made ages back,
A song of drag-nets hauled across thwart seas And plucked up with rent sides, and caught therein
A strange-haired woman with sad singing lips, Cold in the cheek like
any stray of sea, And sweet to touch? so that men seeing her face,
And how she sighed out little Ahs of pain And soft cries sobbing sideways
from her mouth, Fell in hot love, and having lain with her Died soon?
one time I could have told it through: Now I have kissed the sea-witch
on her eyes And my lips ache with it; but I shall sleep Full soon,
and a good space of sleep.

MARY BEATON. Alas!

CHASTELARD. What makes you sigh though I be found a fool?

You have no blame: and for my death, sweet friend, I never could have lived long either way.
Why, as I live, the joy I have of this Would make men mad that were not mad with love; I hear
my blood sing, and my lifted heart Is like a springing water blown
of wind For pleasure of this deed. Now, in God's name, I swear if
there be danger in delight I must die now: if joys have deadly teeth,
I'll have them bite my soul to death, and end In the old asp's way,
Egyptian-wise; be killed In a royal purple fashion. Look, my love
Would kill me if my body were past hurt Of any man's hand; and to
die thereof, I say, is sweeter than all sorts of life. I would not
have her love me now, for then I should die meanlier some time. I
am safe, Sure of her face, my life's end in her sight, My blood shed
out about her feet--by God, My heart feels drunken when I think of
it. See you, she will not rid herself of me, Not though she slay me:
her sweet lips and life Will smell of my spilt blood.

MARY BEATON.
Give me good-night.

CHASTELARD. Yea, and good thanks.

[Exit MARY
BEATON.]

Here is the very place: Here has her body bowed the pillows
in And here her head thrust under made the sheet Smell sort of her
mixed hair and spice: even here Her arms pushed back the coverlet,
pulled here The golden silken curtain halfway in It may be, and made
room to lean out loose, Fair tender fallen arms. Now, if God would,
Doubtless he might take pity on my soul To give me three clear hours,
and then red hell Snare me forever: this were merciful: If I were
God now I should do thus much. I must die next, and this were not
so hard For him to let me eat sweet fruit and die With my lips sweet
from it. Another man adds a weight to one scale, and the man who is to be taxed puts his hand
into his money-bag very reluctantly.

Perhaps his most artistic work was the tabernacle in the Church of St. Laurence. It is sixty-four
feet high; the lower part is supported by the kneeling figures of Krafft and two of his associates.
Above this rises a slender Gothic pyramid ornamented with bas-reliefs and statuettes. He was
employed upon this tabernacle from 1496 to 1500. It is believed that a "Burial of Christ,"
in the chapel of the Johannis Cemetery, was his latest work, and executed in 1507, the year
in which he died, in the hospital of Schwabach. Krafft led a most industrious life, and was
so skilful a workman that he could work with his left hand as readily as with his right.

TILMAN RIEMENSCHNEIDER was an important sculptor, born at Osterode, in the Hartz Mountains,
probably about 1460. In 1483 he went to Würzburg, and was elected to one honorable office after
another, until, in 1520, he was head burgomaster. After the Peasants' War, in 1525, he was
deprived of his office; he lived but six years after this, and kept himself in close retirement,
not even practising his art.

His sculptures are mostly in stone, and are quite numerous in Würzburg and its vicinity. His
monument to the Knight Eberhard von Grumbach, in the church at Rimpar, was probably his earliest
important work. In it he has contrived to express strength and bravery of character in spite
of the stiff costume, every detail of which is worked out (Fig. 91).

In 1495 Riemenschneider received the important commission to erect in Bamberg Cathedral a splendid
monument to the Emperor Heinrich II. and his wife Kunigunde. This occupied him until 1513,
and is a splendid example of his skill. The figures of the two royal personages lie upon a
large sarcophagus; the statues are more than life-size, and are dressed in the fantastic costume
of the fifteenth century. Upon the sides of the sarcophagus are five reliefs, representing
as many scenes from the lives of the emperor and empress. The monuments and religious subjects
executed by this sculptor are very numerous. In the church at Maidbrunn there is a relief representing
the "Lamentation over the Dead Body of Christ," which is probably his latest work. It is cut
from sandstone, and the figure of Nicodemus is believed to be the sculptor's own portrait.

We give here four figures from the portal of the cathedral at Berne, in Switzerland. The really
splendid sculptures were the work of Nicolaus Künz, and from their style seem to belong to
about 1520. They show the influence of such artists as the painters Nicolaus Manuel (1484-1531)
and Hans Holbein (about 1459-1524). The statues of the Wise and Foolish Virgins are fine, and
that of Justice, whose pose is full of grace, and whose almost transparent garment is an exquisite
work, affords an excellent illustration of the most pleasing sculpture of this period (Figs.
92, 93).

Another art, which had its headquarters at Nuremberg in the fifteenth century, is bronze-casting,
and its chief master was the famous PETER VISCHER, who was the son of another brasier, HERMANN
VISCHER. The date of Peter Vischer's birth is given as 1460, and he was admitted to be a master
in his art in 1489. Five years later than this he was summoned to Heidelberg together with
a sculptor, Simon Lamberger, to aid the Elector Philip with advice and skill. Nothing is known
of any work which Vischer did there.

Vischer's foundry at Nuremberg enjoyed a great fame, and orders were sent to it from far and
near. No doubt a great many monuments were cast here which were not designed by Vischer at
all. His works were numerous, but I shall only describe his masterpiece, which was the shrine
or tomb of St. Sebald, and occupied Peter Vischer from 1508 to 1519, he being assisted by his
five sons. The son Peter was admitted as a master in the thimble trade in 1527. Hans was called
"the caster," and seems to have superintended the carving of models; Hermann went to Italy
and brought home designs and models; and Jacob and Paul seem to have had no special departments.
Between 1495 and 1508 so little was recorded of Peter Vischer that it leads to the belief that
these years must have been given to study and to the improvement which the tomb of St. Sebald
shows over the work of the monument to Archbishop Ernst, in the Magdeburg Cathedral, which
was done in 1495.

The bones of St. Sebald had been inclosed in a sarcophagus of the Middle Ages, and the work
required of Vischer was a fitting tomb for such precious and honored relics, for St. Sebald
is the special patron saint of Nuremberg, and dwelt in a cell near that city. His legend relates
that he was the son of a Danish king, who came to Germany as a missionary and settled at Nuremberg,
where he did many miraculous works of charity. On one occasion, during very cold weather, he
is said to have found a family nearly frozen and without fuel; he commanded them to bring the
icicles hanging from the roof and make a fire of them. They obeyed, and were thus warmed. Many
such wonders are told of him, and Vischer in his statue makes him to appear as a pilgrim, with
shell in hat, staff, rosary and wallet, while in his hand he holds a model of a church intended
to represent that in which the tomb is erected. This Church of St. Sebald is now used for the
Lutheran service, and the shrine still stands in the centre of the choir. (Fig. 94.)

The architecture of this remarkable work is of the richest style of Gothic, and the whole of
it is in bronze, except that the oaken sarcophagus is encased in silver plates. This rests
beneath a fret-work canopy supported on slender pillars. There is an abundance of ornament
everywhere, but the close examination of its detail shows beauty and fitness in every part.
For example, if we compare the statue of the saint, of which we have spoken, which stands at
the end of the shrine most exposed, with the statue of Vischer himself, which is at the opposite
end, we shall see how the saint, with his symbols and his flowing drapery, is an ideal work,
and seems to be advancing with authority and the air which befits the son of a king, while
Vischer, with his round cap, leather apron, and German face, is simply the representation of
a worker bent upon doing his best (Fig. 95).

The sarcophagus rests upon a base on which are four reliefs of scenes from the life of the
saint, all in the purest manner of the time. One of these represents the burning of the icicles
recounted above (Fig. 96).

This base and sarcophagus and the fret-work above it form the centre of the tomb. Then outside
of this are eight pillars supporting a baldachin, or canopy, in the richly ornamented Romanesque
style, and the combinations of the Gothic and the decorative architecture are so skilfully
made as not to offend our taste. But it is generally acknowledged that the chief beauty of
this work is the series of the figures of the apostles, which are upon the pillars. They are
slender in proportion, gracefully draped, and bear their distinctive symbols. They are perfectly
free from the realism of the earlier works of Vischer, and have more of the purity and nobleness
of the works of Ghiberti than are seen in the statues of any other German artist of this age
(Figs. 97, 98).

Above the apostles are figures of prophets and other Biblical personages; Perseus and Hercules
are also represented, and other statues typify Strength, Justice, Prudence, and Moderation.
The figure of the Infant Christ is upon the centre of the highest, or middle dome. Between
the pillars at their bases stand graceful candelabra, and the base itself rests upon snails.
Besides all these principal figures there are almost numberless others and many ornamental
designs. There are harpies, sirens, satyrs, fawns, and all sorts of fantastic creatures. The
whole work is full of the deep feeling of the north and the beauty and richness of the south,
and is a most remarkable production.

We are told that Vischer was but poorly paid for this labor, with all its thought and skill.
There is a satisfaction in remembering that Vischer lived ten years after this tomb was completed,
and must have heard many praises of his work.

The later works of Vischer were a few reliefs and two important monuments at Aschaffenburg
and Wittenberg. His sons Hans and Hermann executed a few monuments, which are done in the manner
of their father, but do not equal him in design or finish. There are numerous works which must
be regarded as productions of Vischer's studio and foundry of which we cannot give clear accounts,
not knowing whether they were the earlier works of the father, or were executed by the sons
or other pupils, of which he had many.

PANKRAZ LABENWOLF was one of Vischer's pupils, and completed the splendid lattice-work over
the Town-hall which the master left unfinished; Labenwolf added some ornaments and coats-of-arms
to it. In 1550 he cast the fountain in the court-yard of the same building, which is a graceful
and creditable work; but another fountain in the vegetable market, behind the Frauenkirche,
is truly original; the water flows from the mouths of two geese held under the arms of a peasant;
the whole effect is droll and unique (Fig. 99).

You will remember how, about 1390, Claux Sluter, by his works in Dijon, had a great influence
upon French sculpture. A century and more later this art in France was largely under the influence
of Italian masters, who had been called into France by Francis I. and other patrons of art.
Splendid works of sculpture were also imported from Italy, and the effect of the Italian Renaissance,
which was so plainly seen upon the painting of France, was also at work upon its sculpture.

Where the sculptures were a part of an architectural decoration, as in the case of the choir
screen in the cathedral at Amiens, and other like works, the change was not as complete as
in cases where the work was one of independent sculpture, as in monuments and statues to commemorate
the dead, or in portrait sculpture.

The wealth and power of the nobility of France at this period enabled them to gratify their
desire to leave fine monuments of themselves, in order to keep their names in memory in future
centuries. In these the Italian manner was adopted, and the works when completed were far more
splendid and elegant than were the corresponding works in Germany. But they have a grave fault,
which makes them much less interesting than are the German sculptures: they are more conventional,
less expressive, and far less artistic in spirit. They impress one as if the soft, luxurious
court atmosphere had passed over them, and taking away their strong points, had left them only
a general air of being well-bred and well-kept persons, of little importance to the real life
of the world.

In the Louvre, in the Museum of Modern Sculpture, all this change can be traced, and the traveller
in France may see such monuments as we refer to in all the cathedrals and most of the churches
all over the country. Many of them cannot be traced to any one master. A fine specimen is the
Amboise Monument in Rouen Cathedral, which is said to have been the work of one Roulland de
Roux and his assistants.

JEAN JUSTE of Tours was one of the best French artists of his day. In the Cathedral of Tours
is a monument to two young children of Charles VIII., which proves him to have had much delicacy
and tenderness of execution. The sarcophagus is covered with graceful designs, and on the lid
lie the two babies, for the eldest was but three years old. The whole work is exquisite, and
gives one a feeling of satisfaction.

About 1530 Juste erected the splendid monument to Louis XII. and Anne of Brittany in the Church
of St. Denis. While the general form of the monument is much like that of the Visconti in the
Certosa at Pavia, the figures of the dead couple are quite different from the Italian manner.
Below on a bier the two nude bodies are stretched in all the realism possible, and the heads
are noble and touching in expression. Above, on the upper part of the monument, where in Italy
the patron saint or some other figure usually is placed, the king and queen again appear; they
are kneeling, with full drapery about them, while the faces are characteristic and very expressive.
This monument, taken all in all, is in the perfection of the French art of the time. Another
work by Juste now in the Louvre is the monument to Louis de Poncher, one of the ministers of
Francis I., and his wife, Roberta. These statues are in alabaster, and were formerly in the
Church of St. Germain l'Auxerrois, which was built by Poncher.

PIERRE BONTEMPS must have been a famous sculptor, as he was chosen to erect the monument to
Francis I., his wife Claude and their three children. This is also at St. Denis, and is even
more grand than that to Louis XII. On the upper platform the five figures are kneeling; they
are noble and simple, with an air of great repose. These examples serve to give an idea of
the religious sculpture of the time.

Secular subjects were unusual. A house in Bourges is decorated with the figures of the master
and mistress above the entrance, as if they would speak a welcome, while reliefs of industrial
scenes, such as might be seen outside and inside of the house, are placed in various positions
over the building and in the court-yard. Something of a like sort is upon the Hotel Bourgtheroulde
at Rouen, where the friezes show scenes between Francis I. and Henry VIII. Biblical scenes
are also distributed over the building.

Bruges is almost the only city of the Netherlands that has any sculptures of this period of
which one would speak. Just at this time the art of that country was painting preeminently,
and the Van Eycks and their followers had done such things as held the attention of all to
the neglect of other arts. At Bruges in the cathedral, the Church of St. Jacques, and the Liebfrauenkirche
there are some fine monuments, and the Palais de Justice has a carved chimney-piece which is
magnificent, and a work of the highest rank.

In England sculpture was of less account even than in the Netherlands. One circumstance is
worthy of notice. Pietro Torrigiano, after quarrelling with Michael Angelo and breaking his
nose, fled to England, and his monument of Henry VII. and his queen in Westminster Abbey, erected
in 1519, marks the introduction of the style of the Italian Renaissance into England. The structure
is of black marble; the statues of the king and queen are in gilt bronze, and are grandly noble
in design and finished in execution. The smaller figures and all the details of the monument
are fine. The master received £1000 for this work. Torrigiano executed other works, and entered
into an agreement to make a monument to Henry VIII. and Catherine of Aragon, but for some reason
he went to Spain in 1519 and never returned, as he was destroyed by the Inquisition three years
later.

It is probable that Torrigiano may have been led to Spain by hearing of the revival of art
which was taking place there. Flemish and Italian artists went there, and the influence of
their styles was felt by the native masters. The result was that they brought forth a manner
of their own, combining certain features of northern and of southern art, and used to express
the thoughts of the Spaniards themselves. The carved altars of Seville, Toledo, and Burgos
show how splendid this art was; and though we cannot trace the lives and works of Spanish sculptors
as we should like to do, we can be sure that there were men among them equal to any demand
that could be made upon decorative sculptors.

This is proved by the portals and fronts of the churches, by the highly ornamented chapels,
the wall niches and choir screens of the interiors, while the monuments are also equal to those
of other nations. That of Ferdinand and Isabella in the Church of the Guardian Angel, at Granada,
is noble and magnificent. It is believed to have been erected before the death of Ferdinand
in 1516, and was probably the work of an Italian sculptor. This monument has a large marble
sarcophagus, with a structure above it in the Renaissance style. At the corners of the sarcophagus
there are griffins of excellent workmanship, and on the sides reliefs and statuettes of the
Four Fathers of the Church; on the lid repose the figures of the royal pair, executed in a
grand and dignified simplicity.

By the beginning of the sixteenth century sculpture occupied a different place with relation
to architecture from that which it had held in the previous centuries which we have just considered.
The architecture of Italy became much more plain, and its union with sculpture in any large
degree was rare.

Painting, too, had now an effect to lessen the sphere of sculpture. This art was always preferred
by the Christians, as has been shown before, and now, when it had reached most satisfactory
heights, it was used in many places where sculpture had before been placed. One important example
of this is seen in the decoration of altars; where bas-reliefs had been used paintings were
now preferred, and the end of all was that sculpture was limited to monuments and to separate
pieces--reliefs or single statues or groups of figures.

In some ways this separation of the arts was a benefit to all. Under the old rule sculptors
had often been forced to sacrifice their design to the needs of the architecture their work
adorned. At other times they were compelled to put aside their own feeling and their artistic
ideas as to how a subject should be treated, and suit themselves to such forms as were approved
by the particular priest or bishop whose church they decorated. Now, when left to itself, sculpture
became more individual in its expression, and far more free and interesting in itself. In the
beginning of the sixteenth century the works of Italian sculpture were splendid in the extreme.
It was delicate and beautiful; the drapery was made to show the figure and its natural motion,
while it added an exquisite grace to the whole; many works of this period were fine in conception,
good in their arrangement, and executed in a noble, spirited manner. Some critics believe that
during the first four decades of this era Italian sculpture equalled the antique art of the
Romans. Others make 1520, or the time of Raphael, the limit to the best epoch of this art;
but it is scarcely possible thus to fix an exact bound; the important point is that this excellence
was reached, and the regret follows that it could not endure for a longer period.

A far greater variety of subjects was represented in this age of sculpture than before. Formerly
the rule was the production of religious effects. Scenes from the life of Christ and his disciples,
others from those of the saints, or the illustration of scriptural stories, with the portrait
tomb-sculpture, had been the sculptor's work. Now all the stories of mythology were studied
as diligently as they had been in classic days, and artists studied to clothe the pagan personages
with new forms; and in all this effort much appeared that was original. It is easy to see that
such sculpture from the hand of a Christian artist must lack the important element of pure
sincerity. An artist who believed in Jesus Christ could not conceive a statue of Jupiter, with
all the glorious attributes, that an ancient Greek would have given to his god of gods. In
this view the sculpture of classic subjects of this sixteenth century may be said to have been
two-sided--the work illustrated a religion in which the artist pleased his imagination, but
for which he had no reverence or love. But in spite of all it was a golden age, and many of
its works are a "joy forever."

Although the first public work which Leonardo Da Vinci did at Milan was to model an equestrian
statue, we can scarcely speak of him as a sculptor. But the first Florentine of this period
whom I shall mention is GIOVANNI FRANCESCO RUSTICI (1476-1550), who was a fellow-pupil with
Leonardo under Verocchio. Very few works by this master remain, but a prominent and important
one is the bronze group above the northern portal to the baptistery at Florence. It represents
the "preaching of St. John The Baptist," and is grand in the free action of its figures. The
Drapery is in a pure style, very much like that of Ghiberti (figs. 100, 101). This work was
ordered by a guild of merchants, and they failed to pay the price which had been fixed for
it. Rustici was so embarrassed by this that he undertook no more large works, and after the
Medici were expelled from florence he went into the service of Francis I. in France he had
executed various works, and was finally commissioned to model an equestrian statue of the king
in colossal size, when the sovereign died. Rustici survived but three years, and we are told
that he only executed small works, and those "for the most part for the sake of kindness."

ANDREA CONTUCCI DAL MONTE SAN SAVINO, called SANSOVINO (1460-1529), was a very important sculptor,
because large works were committed to him, and his name must remain associated with them. Like
Giotto, Sansovino was a shepherd-boy, and drew pictures upon the stones of the fields. Like
Giotto, too, he was sent to Florence to study, and in the school of Pallajuolo made good progress.
When thirty years old he was appointed architect and sculptor to the King of Portugal. After
an absence of ten years he returned to Florence, and later to Rome, where Pope Julius II. commissioned
him to erect monuments to the Cardinals Rovere and Sforza, in the Church of Santa Maria del Popolo.

These monuments were his best works, but they cannot be praised. The statues are in positions
which seem to be uncomfortable, and there is such a mass of ornament and so many statuettes
that the whole has an effect of confusion.

In 1513 Leo X. sent Sansovino to Loreto to adorn the temple which incloses the "Casa Santa"
with bas-reliefs. This Casa Santa is believed to be the house in which the Virgin Mary was
born at Nazareth; and when the Saracens invaded the land four angels are said to have borne
the house to the coast of Dalmatia, and later to a spot near Loreto; but here some brigands
entered it, and again it was removed to its present position in the Church of Loreto; this
is said to have been done in 1295. Naturally this "Casa Santa" is a sacred object to all Roman
Catholics, and it is visited by thousands and thousands of pilgrims each year.

The decoration of this shrine was very important, and an honorable work for any artist. Sansovino
did not execute all the reliefs, and the highest praise that can be given to those he did is
to say that they are superior to the others that are beside them. He was a most skilful workman,
and it seems as if marble became like wax under his hand; but this very skill led him to multiply
his ornaments, and to repeat acanthus leaves and honeysuckle vines until the whole was a weariness
and confusion, and conveyed no meaning or sentiment whatever.

Sansovino's most important pupil was JACOPO TATTI, who, on account of his master, is called
JACOPO SANSOVINO (1477-1570). He was born at Florence, and when Andrea Sansovino returned from
Portugal Jacopo became his pupil. Early in life he went to Rome, and there studied and copied
the works of antiquity; among other things he made a copy of the Laocoon, which was cast in
bronze at a later time. Soon after his return to Florence, in 1511, Jacopo received orders
for some works, but the most important statue which he made about this time is the Bacchus,
now in the Uffizi. In this work he showed how completely he was in sympathy with the classic
spirit; this Bacchus is a triumph in this manner, and has been called "the most beautiful and
spirited pagan statue of the Renaissance period." It is full of gladness, and is simple, delicate,
and beautiful. The young god is advancing and holding up a cup, which he regards with an expression
of delight; in his right hand he has a bunch of grapes, from which a Pan is eating stealthily
(Fig. 102).

In 1514 Jacopo Sansovino was employed upon the decorations for the visit of Leo X. to Florence.
Soon after this he went again to Rome and submitted plans for the Church of San Giovanni de'
Fiorentini, which the Florentines were about to erect--for this master was an architect as
well as a sculptor. The taking of Rome by Constable de Bourbon, in 1527, drove Sansovino away;
he went to Venice, intending to go to France, but Venice charmed him, and his work pleased
the Venetians, and the result was that from 1529 he served the Venetians as long as he lived.
He was appointed Protomastro of the Republic of Venice, and had the care of St. Mark's, the
Campanile, the Piazza, and the surrounding buildings. He received a good salary, and was provided
with a handsome house to live in.

He first restored the cupolas of St. Mark's; then completed the Scuola della Misericordia;
he next made the interior of San Francesco della Vigna; then the Zecca, the Fabbriche Nuove,
and the Loggietta of the Campanile. He also erected other churches and palaces, besides smaller
sculptural works. But his architectural masterpiece was the Library of St. Mark's. The bronze
gate to the Sacristy of St. Mark's was one of his principal works. It is subject to criticism
as being too crowded; but it is a fine work and full of strong feeling.

His statues are numerous and seen all over Venice; indeed, it is proper to speak of him as
a Venetian, so thoroughly did he adopt that city, and so industriously did he work for it during
forty years. Had he remained in Florence he might have been a better artist; the splendor and
luxury of the Venetians brought out corresponding traits in Jacopo, and he fell short of the
purity which the influence of Florence might have given him. He is one of the masters in whom
the sensual influence of the study of pagan art was fully manifested. Many of his subjects
were mythological; among them were the story of Phrixos and Helle, Mercury, Apollo, Pallas,
Mars, and Neptune, the last two being colossal figures on the steps of the Doge's Palace.

Among the pupils and associates of Sansovino were NICCOLO BRACCINI (1485-1550), called IL TRIBOLO,
and FRANCESCO SANGALLO (1498-1570), neither of whom were important artists, though many works
by them are seen in various places in Italy.

BENVENUTO CELLINI (1500-1572) is a far more interesting study than were many sculptors of his
time. His life was an eventful one, and his own account of it is one of the most interesting
books of its class in existence. His statement of the origin of his family is that "Julius
Cæsar had a chief and valorous captain named Fiorino da Cellino, from a castle situated four
miles from Monte Fiascone. This Fiorino having pitched his camp below Fiesole, where Florence
now stands, in order to be near the river Arno, for the convenience of the army, the soldiers
and other persons, when they had the occasion to visit him, said to each other, 'Let us go
to Fiorenza,' which name they gave to the place where they were encamped, partly from their
captain's name of Fiorino, and partly from the abundance of flowers which grew there; wherefore
Cæsar, thinking it a beautiful name, and considering flowers to be of good augury, and also
wishing to honor his captain, whom he had raised from an humble station, and to whom he was
greatly attached, gave it to the city which he founded on that spot." 

De grounds was on each side dat drive and dey retched to whar de white folks is got a school (high
school) now. On de other side of dat drive his grounds hit Miss Fant's (Mrs. John Fant's property).

"You
could clam up Cap Douglas' stairs and git in a run-around (cupola) and see de whole town through
dem glass winders. (This cupola is still on the house.) Never had none of dem things in Union
afo' dat.

Some years atter dat, when Col. Duncan had his house run over (remodeled) he had one of dem
run-arounds put on his'n. To dis day wid all de fine fixings folks has in Union, dar ain't narry
one got none of dem things and dey sho' is purty.

"Let me drap back, kaise I is gone too fer along; you wants olden times. On our plantation
Marse Tom had a nigger driver. He 'hoop and holler and wake us up
at break of day.

But befo' freedom come 'long, Marse got a bell; den dat nigger driver rung dat bell at break
of day. He was a sorry nigger dat never had no quality in him a'tall, no sir-ee.

"Us had to feed de mules in de dark of mornings and de black of night when craps needed working
bad. Seed many as a dozen hoe-womens in de field at one time. Dey come when dey finished breakfast
and de plows had got a start.

"Dey used mulberry skins from fresh mulberry saplins to tie around dere waists fer belts. If your
singletree chain broke, you fixed it wid mulberry skins; same wid your galluses. Mulberry is
mighty strong and easy to tie anything dat break.

"Marse Tom never
whipped 'bout nothing much but stealing. He never let his overseer
do no whipping if he knowed it. He burnt you up 'bout stealing, dat
he would.

"Dey never wanted us to git no larning. Edmund Carlisle,
smartest nigger I is ever seed. He cut out blocks from pine bark on
de pine tree and smooth it. Git white oak or hickory stick. Git a
ink ball from de oak trees, and on Sadday and Sunday slip off whar
de white folks wouldn't know 'bout it. He use stick fer pen and drap
oak ball in water and dat be his ink atter it done stood all night. He used the
diamond as a throne, and placed a figure of the Almighty upon it; the hand was raised as if
in blessing, and many angels fluttered about the folds of the drapery, while various jewels
were set around the whole. When other artists saw the design they did not believe that it could
be executed successfully; but Cellini made it a perfect work of art and of beauty.

Cellini writes of himself as being very active in the siege of Rome, May 5th, 1527. He says
that he killed the Constable de Bourbon, who led the siege, and that he wounded the Prince
of Orange, who was chosen in Bourbon's place. No one else saw him perform these feats. Cellini
went to the Pope, who was in the Castle of St. Angelo, and he there rendered such services
to the cause of the Church that the Holy Father pardoned him for all the sins into which his
temper had led him--"for all the homicides he had committed or might commit in the service
of the Apostolic Church." A few years later, when Cellini was called upon to take part in the
defence of his own city, he put all his property into the care of a friend, and stole away to Rome.

In 1534 Cellini killed a fellow-goldsmith, called Pompeo; Paul III. was now Pope; and as he
needed the services of Benvenuto very much he pardoned him. But the sculptor felt that he was
in ill favor with all about him, and went to France. In about a year he returned to find that
he had been accused of stealing some jewels which the pope had commanded him to take out of
their settings. Cellini was held a prisoner nearly two years, but his guilt was never proved.

At the end of this time the Cardinal Ippolito d'Este obtained his release in order that he
might go to France to execute some work for Francis I. Cellini remained in France five years,
and received many honors and gifts; but as Madame d'Étampes and other persons to whose advice
the king listened were enemies of Cellini, he never was treated as his artistic qualities merited.
Francis I. really admired Cellini, and presented him with the Hôtel de Petit Nesle, which was
on the site of the present Hôtel de la Monnaie; he also made him a lord, and on one occasion
expressed his fear of losing him, when Madame d'Étampes replied, "The surest way of keeping
him would be to hang him on a gibbet."

Of all the objects which Cellini made during his five years in France but two remain. One is
a splendid salt-cellar, and the other is a nymph in bronze, which was made for the Palace of
Fontainebleau, and is now in the Renaissance Museum of the Louvre. This salt-cellar is now
in the Ambraser Gallery at Vienna. The frieze around the base has figures in relief which represent
the hours of the day and the winds. The upper part is made like the surface of the sea, and
from it rise figures of Neptune and Cybele. The first is a symbol of the salt of the sea, and
the second of the spices which the earth gives. The god is placing his arm on a small ship
intended for the salt, and a vessel for pepper, in the form of a triumphal arch, is near the
goddess. All this is made of fine embossed gold, and has some touches of enamel-work. It is
one of the finest pieces of the goldsmith's art which remains from the sixteenth century.

In 1545 Cellini returned to Florence, and remained there, with short absences, until his death.
Duke Cosmo de' Medici became his patron, and commissioned him to make a statue of Perseus for
the Loggia de' Lanzi. The ambition of the artist was much excited by the thought of having
his work placed by those of Donatello and Michael Angelo, and all care was taken from his mind,
as the Duke provided him with a comfortable house and gave him a salary sufficient for his support.

It was nine years before the statue was completed and in its place, and in this time Cellini
had suffered much. Baccio Bandinelli and others were his enemies, and at times the Duke had
been under their influence, and would not furnish the money necessary to the work. But at last
all was ready for the casting; and just at this unfortunate moment for Cellini to leave it
he was seized with a severe illness; he was suffering much, and believed himself about to die,
when some one ran in shouting, "Oh, Benvenuto, your work is ruined past earthly remedy!"

Ill as he was he rushed out to the furnace, to find that the fire was too low, and the metal,
being cool, had ceased flowing into the mould. By almost superhuman efforts he remedied the
evil, and again the bronze flowed; he prayed earnestly, and when the mould was filled he writes:
"I fell on my knees and thanked God with all my heart, after which I ate a hearty meal with
my assistants, and it being then two hours before dawn, went to bed with a light heart, and
slept as sweetly as if I had never been ill in all my life."

When the statue was unveiled Cellini's prediction that it would please all the world except
Bandinelli and his friends was fulfilled. Perseus is represented just at the moment when he
has cut off the head of Medusa, who was one of the Gorgons, and had turned to stone every one
who looked at her. (Fig. 103.)

After the completion of the Perseus, Cellini went to Rome for a short time. While there he
made a bust of Bindo Altoviti; when Michael Angelo saw this he wrote: "My Benvenuto, I have
long known you as the best goldsmith in the world, and I now know you as an equally good sculptor,
through the bust of Messer Bindo Altoviti." Cellini did no more important works, though he
was always industrious. He made a crucifix which he intended for his own grave, but he gave
it to the Duchess Eleanora; this was afterward sent to Philip II. of Spain, and is now in the
Escurial.

Cellini's life was by no means a model one, but he had his good qualities. He took a widowed
sister with six children to his home, and made them welcome and happy. At his death he was
buried in the Church of the Annunziata, beneath the chapel of the Company of St. Luke, and
many honors were paid to his memory.

His autobiography was so rich in its use of the Florentine manner of speech and so fine in
its diction that it was honored as an authority by the Accademia della Crusca. He also wrote
valuable works on the goldsmith's art and on bronze-casting and sculpture. He wrote poems and
various kinds of verses, but his large acquaintance with popes, cardinals, kings, artists,
and men of letters makes his story of his life far more interesting than his other writings.

The artists of Upper Italy were much influenced by Florentine art, as they had formerly been,
and we can speak of no very great sculptor of this century who belonged to this part of the
country. ALFONSO LOMBARDO (1488-1537) was a native of Lucca; his principal works are seen in
Ferrara, Bologna, and Cesena.

PROPERZIA DE' ROSSI (1490-1530) was born at Bologna, and is interesting as the one Italian
sculptress of that time. She was born about a year after her father had returned from the galleys,
where he had worked out a sentence of eighteen years for the crime of manslaughter. Properzia
seems to have inherited her father's violent temper, and was twice arraigned in court. She
was very beautiful in person, and had a devoted lover in Antonio Galeazzo Malvasia de' Bottigari,
who did not marry until many years after the death of Properzia.

Properzia studied drawing under Marc Antonio Raimondi, the famous engraver. She first devoted
herself to the cutting of intaglios, which demanded an immense amount of patient labor. There
is in the cabinet of gems in the Uffizi Gallery, at Florence, a cherry-stone carved by Properzia,
on which sixty heads may be counted; the subject is a Glory of Saints. Other like works of
hers exist in the Palazzo Grassi, in Bologna. Her next work was in arabesques, marble ornaments,
lions, griffins, vases, eagles, and similar objects.

Finally she essayed a bust of Count Guido Pepoli; it is now in the Sacristy of San Petronio,
in Bologna. In the same place are two bas-reliefs by her hand, Solomon receiving the Queen
of Sheba, and Joseph and Potiphar's Wife. In the chapel Zambeccari in San Petronio there are
two large figures of angels by Properzia, which are near the Ascension of the Virgin by Il
Tribolo. Her manner was much influenced by her contact with this sculptor. Properzia was employed,
with other artists, to finish the sculpture of the portal of San Petronio, left unfinished
by Jacopo della Quercia.

ANTONIO BEGARELLI (1499-1565), called also ANTONIO DA MODENA, from the place of his birth,
was a celebrated modeller in clay. It is said that when Michael Angelo visited Modena in 1529
he saw Begarelli and his works, and exclaimed, "Alas for the statues of the ancients, if this
clay were changed to marble!" Begarelli had a school for teaching design and modelling, and
he greatly influenced the manner of the Lombard school of painting. Its foreshortening, its
relief and grace are largely due to him and his teaching.

Begarelli and Correggio were fast friends, and resembled each other in their conception of
the grand and beautiful. When Correggio was decorating the cupola of the Cathedral of Parma,
Begarelli was at work in the same place, and made many models from which Correggio painted
his floating figures. Some works by Begarelli may be seen in the Berlin Museum. His Descent
from the Cross, in the Church of San Francesco, at Modena, is one of his best works. He was
also employed in the Church of San Benedetto, in Mantua, and in San Giovanni, at Parma.

During the sixteenth century the works at the Certosa at Pavia and in various edifices in Milan
were constantly carried on. Frequently the same sculptors worked in both cities, but there
is no one artist of great excellence among them of whom we can give an account. The same is
true of the works in Venice and in Southern Italy. The traveller sees many pieces of sculpture
belonging to this period, but there are no great and interesting men whose story we can tell
in connection with them, and I shall now pass to an account of the great Florentine.

MICHAEL ANGELO BUONARROTI (1475-1564) was born in the Castle of Caprese, where his father,
Ludovico Buonarroti, was stationed at that time, holding the office of Podesta, or Governor,
of the towns of Caprese and Chiusi. The Buonarroti family held good rank in Florence, and the
mother of the great artist was also a woman of good position. When his father returned to Florence
the child Michael was left at Settignano upon an estate of the family, and was in the care
of the wife of a stone-mason. As soon as the boy could use his hands he drew pictures everywhere
that it was possible, and his nurse could show many of these childish drawings with which he
adorned the walls of her house.

At a proper time Michael Angelo was removed to Florence and placed in a school, where he became
intimate with Francesco Granacci, who was a pupil of the artist Ghirlandajo. Michael Angelo's
father and his uncles were firmly opposed to his being an artist; they wished him to follow
the traditions of his family, and carry on the silk and woollen trade. But the boy was firm
in his determination, and after many trials was at length, in 1488, apprenticed to the Ghirlandaji
for three years.

Domenico Ghirlandajo was at this time engaged in the restoration of the Church of Santa Maria
Novella, and Michael Angelo came into the midst of great artistic works. One day at the dinner
hour he drew a picture of the scaffolding and all its belongings, with the men at work on it;
it was a remarkable drawing for a boy, and when the master saw it he exclaimed, "He understands
more than I do myself!" The master really became jealous of his pupil, more especially when
Michael Angelo corrected the drawings which Ghirlandajo gave his scholars for models.

About this time Michael Angelo was brought to the notice of Lorenzo de' Medici, who was at
that time at the head of the government of Florence, and from him the boy-artist obtained admission
for himself and Granacci to study in the gardens of San Marco. The art treasures of the Medici
were placed in these gardens; works of sculpture were there, and cartoons and pictures were
hung in buildings erected for the purpose, and art-students were admitted to study there and
proper instructors provided for them.

The master in sculpture was old Bertoldo, and Michael Angelo, forsaking painting, obtained
some instruments and a piece of marble, and copied a mask of a faun. He changed his own work
somewhat from the model, and opened the mouth so that the teeth could be seen. When Lorenzo
saw this he praised the work, but said, "You have made your faun old, and yet you have left
all his teeth; you should have known that at such an age there are generally some teeth wanting."
When he came again he saw that a gap had been made in the teeth, and so well done that he was
delighted. This work is now in the Uffizi Gallery.

Very soon Lorenzo sent for Michael Angelo's father, who had been sad enough at the thought
that his son might be a painter, and was now in despair when he found that he inclined also
to be a stone-mason. At first he refused to see the duke, but Granacci persuaded him to go.
He went with a firm determination to yield to nothing, but once in presence of Lorenzo he yielded
everything, and returned home declaring that not only Michael, but he himself, and all that
he had were at the nobleman's service.

Lorenzo at once took Michael Angelo into his palace; he clothed the boy properly, and gave
him five ducats a month for spending money. Each day Lorenzo gave an entertainment, and it
was the rule that the first person who came should sit next the duke at the head of the table.
Michael Angelo often had this place, and he soon became a great favorite with Lorenzo, and
obtained besides the greatest advantages from the life in the palace; for many eminent men
from all parts of the world came to visit there, and all sorts of subjects were discussed in
such a manner that a young man could learn much of the world and what was in it, and acquire
a feeling of ease with strangers and in society such as few young persons possess.

Michael Angelo was but seventeen years old when Poliziano advised him to attempt an original
work, and gave him the marble for a relief of the contest between Hercules and the Centaurs.
This work surprised every one, and is still preserved in the collection of the Buonarroti family.
In the year 1492 he also made a relief of the Madonna Suckling the Child Jesus, which is also
in the same place. In the same year Lorenzo de' Medici died, and Michael Angelo, full of grief,
went to his father's house and arranged a studio there. After a time Piero de Medici invited
him to come back to the palace, and he went; but it was no more the same place as formerly,
and he was unhappy there. Soon political troubles drove the Medici from power, and in 1494,
in the midst of the confusion, Michael Angelo escaped to Venice. There he made friends with
Gian Francesco Aldovrandi of Bologna, and was persuaded by that nobleman to accompany him to
his own city.

While at Bologna he executed an angel holding a candelabra, which is one of the most lovely
and pleasing things he ever made (Fig. 104). When he received the commission to ornament the
sarcophagus which contained the remains of San Domenico in the Church of San Petronio, the
Bolognese artists were so angry at being thus set aside for a stranger, and a youth of twenty,
that they threatened vengeance on him, and he returned to Florence. 

My gentle lords, I am full glad of God that in great grace He hath given me such a lordly stay
as this; There is no better friended queen alive. For the repealing of those banished men
That stand in peril yet of last year's fault, It is our will; you have our seal to that. Brother,
we hear harsh bruits of bad report Blown up and down about our almoner; See you to this: let
him be sought into: They say lewd folk make ballads of their spleen, Strew miry ways of words
with talk of him; If they have cause let him be spoken with.

LINDSAY. Madam, they charge him with so rank a life Were it not well this fellow were plucked
out-- Seeing this is not an eye that doth offend, But a blurred glass it were no harm to break;
Yea rather it were gracious to be done?

QUEEN. Let him be weighed, and use him as he is; I am of my nature pitiful, ye know, And cannot
turn my love unto a thorn In so brief space. Ye are all most virtuous; Yea, there is goodness
grafted on this land; But yet compassion is some part of God. There is much heavier business
held on hand Than one man's goodness: yea, as things fare here, A matter worth more weighing.
All you wot I am choose a help to my weak feet, A lamp before my face, a lord and friend To
walk with me in weary ways, high up Between the wind and rain and
the hot sun.

Now I have chosen a helper to myself, I wot the best a woman ever won; A man that loves me,
and a royal man, A goodly love and lord for any queen. But for the peril and despite of men
I have sometime tarried and withheld myself, Not fearful of his worthiness nor you, But with
some lady's loathing to let out My whole heart's love; for truly
this is hard, Not like a woman's fashion, shamefacedness And noble
grave reluctance of herself To be the tongue and cry of her own heart.

Nathless plain speech is better than much wit, So ye shall bear with me; albeit I think Ye have
caught the mark whereat my heart is bent. I have kept close counsel and shut up men's lips,
But lightly shall a woman's will slip out, The foolish little winged will of her, Through cheek
or eye when tongue is charmed asleep. For that good lord I have good will to wed, I wot he
knew long since which way it flew, Even till it lit on his right wrist and sang. Lo, here I
take him by the hand: fair lords, This is my kinsman, made of mine own blood, I take to halve the
state and services That bow down to me, and to be my head, My chief, my master, my sweet lord
and king. Now shall I never say "sweet cousin" more To my dear head and husband; here, fair
sir, I give you all the heart of love in me To gather off my lips. Did it like you, The taste
of it? sir, it was whole and true. God save our king!

DARNLEY. Nay, nay, sweet love, no lord; No king of yours though I were lord of these.

QUEEN. Let word be sent to all good friends of ours To help us to be glad; England and France
Shall bear great part of our rejoicings up. Give me your hand, dear lord; for from this time
I must not walk alone. Lords, have good cheer: For you shall have a better face than mine To set
upon your kingly gold and show For Scotland's forehead in the van
of things. It was mentioned in records in which there was not a line respecting
art."

In 1527 the statue was injured by a stone thrown in a riot. At length it began to show the
effect of time and weather, and the people of Florence talked of removing it for better preservation.
There was much feeling against this; the Florentines feared that misfortunes would fall upon
them if this great work were disturbed; but at last, in 1873, it was placed in the Academy
of Fine Arts. It represents the youthful David at the moment when he declares to Goliath, "I
come unto thee in the name of the Lord of Hosts." The beautiful figure is muscular and pliant,
and the face is full of courage. (Fig. 106.)

About the beginning of the year 1505 Pope Julius II. summoned Michael Angelo to Rome, and after
a time gave him a commission to build a colossal mausoleum to be erected for himself. The design
was made and accepted, and then Michael Angelo went to Carrara to select marble; after much
trouble he succeeded in getting it to Rome, where all who saw it were astonished at the size
of the blocks. Pope Julius was delighted, and had a passage made from the palace to the workshop
of the sculptor, so that he could visit the artist without being seen. Other sculptors now
became jealous of Michael Angelo, and when he went a second time to Carrara, Bramante persuaded
the pope that it was a bad sign to build his tomb while he was still living. When Michael Angelo
returned and the workmen he had hired arrived from Florence, he found the pope much changed
toward him. He no longer hastened the work, neither would he furnish money to carry it on.

Michael Angelo sought the pope for an explanation, and was refused an audience. He ordered
a Jew to sell all he possessed in Rome, and started for Florence, and stopped not until he
was on the ground of Tuscany. The pope sent after him, but as he was a citizen of Florence
he threatened the messengers if they touched him. He said he had been treated as a criminal,
and he considered himself free from his engagements, and would not return then or ever.

When he reached home a letter came to the Signory of Florence urging his return, and saying
that he should be safe. But Michael waited until the third letter was received, and only consented
to go when it was arranged that he should be sent as an ambassador of Florence, and be under
the protection of the Florentine Republic.

In November, 1506, when the pope had taken Bologna, he sent for Michael Angelo to come to him
there. Michael Angelo had not yet seen the pope since he left Rome in anger. When he reached
Bologna he went first to San Petronio to hear mass. A servant of the pope recognized him and
led him to his Holiness. Julius was at table, but ordered that Michael Angelo should come in,
and said to him, "You have waited thus long, it seems, till we should ourselves come to seek
you." Michael Angelo kneeled down and begged his pardon, but added that he had remained away
because he had been offended. The pope looked at him doubtfully, when one of the priests, fearing
what would happen, advised the pope not to judge an ignorant artist as he would another man.
Then the pope turned upon him in great anger, and declaring that he himself was ignorant and
miserable, ordered him out of his sight. The poor ecclesiastic was so terrified that the attendants
were obliged to carry him out, and then the pope spoke graciously to the sculptor, and commanded
him not to leave Bologna without his permission. The pope soon gave him an order for a colossal
statue in bronze to be erected in Bologna.

The first cast of this statue failed, and the work was not ready to be put in its place until
February, 1508. This being done, Michael Angelo returned to Florence, where he had much to
do; but Julius soon sent for him to go to Rome, and insisted that he should paint the roof
of the Sistine Chapel, which occupied him a long time.

In 1513 Julius II. died, and Michael Angelo resumed his work upon his mausoleum. The pope had
mentioned it in his will, and his heirs wished it to be completed. At this time he probably
worked upon the statue of Moses and upon the two chained youths. He devoted himself to the
mausoleum during three years.

Leo X., who was now pope, demanded the services of Michael Angelo to erect a façade to the
Church of San Lorenzo in Florence. The artist objected to this great work, and declared that
he was bound to complete the tomb for which he had already received money. But Leo insisted
upon his going to Florence. He had much trouble to get his marble from the quarries--the men
were ill there. He was ill himself, and he passed a year of great anxiety and trouble, when
there came word from Rome that the work must be given up; the building was postponed, and no
payment was made to Michael Angelo! He was much disheartened, but returned to his work on the
mausoleum.

About 1523, when, after many changes, Cardinal Medici was pope, the work at San Lorenzo was
resumed. But in 1525 the pope again summoned Michael Angelo to Rome. The heirs of Julius were
complaining of delay, but at last the pope insisted upon his great need of the artist, and
again he was sent back to Florence, where the cupola of the new Sacristy to San Lorenzo was
soon finished. Our purpose is aided, and our usefulness increased by every introduction which can
be given to our paper, either to a Book Club, to a Lending Library,
or to any other channel of circulation amongst persons of inquiry
and intelligence.


The pope was forced to command the sculptor to rest. His health was so broken by the sorrow
which the political condition of Florence caused him, and by his anxiety about the mausoleum
of Julius, that there was much danger of his killing himself with work and worry. He went to
Rome, and matters were more satisfactorily arranged. He returned to Florence, and labored there
until 1534, when Clement VII. died, and Michael Angelo left his work in San Lorenzo, never
to resume it. Unfinished as these sculptures are, they make a grand part of the wonderful works
of this great man. The statues of the two Medici and those of Morning, Evening, Day, and Night
would be sufficient to establish the fame of an artist if he had done nothing more. (Fig. 107.)

Under the new pope, Paul III., he was constantly employed as a painter, and architectural labors
were put upon him, so that as a sculptor we have no more works of his to mention except an
unfinished group which was in his studio at the time of his death. It represents the dead Christ
upon his mother's lap, with Joseph of Arimathea standing by. This group is now in the Church
of Santa Maria del Fiore, or the Cathedral of Florence. The mausoleum of Julius II. caused
Michael Angelo and others so much trouble and vexation that the whole affair came to be known
as the "tragedy of the sepulchre." "Lawyer Shand tuck my ma to work fur him and I started being
his coachman. He ole and he live in Columbia now. When he done dat, me and ma lived in one
of his houses. He lived on what you knows as Douglas Heights and he had de biggest house dar.
 These are the Leah and Rachel upon the lower stage, and the Moses,
which is one of the most famous statues in the world. Paul III., with eight cardinals, once
visited the studio of the sculptor when he was at work upon this statue, and they declared
that this alone was sufficient for the pope's monument (Fig. 108).

The life of Michael Angelo was a sad one; indeed, it is scarcely possible to recount a more
pathetic story than was his. The misfortunes which came to the Medici were sharp griefs to
him, and his temperament was such that he could not forget his woes. His family, too, looked
to him for large sums of money, and while he lived most frugally they spent his earnings. In
his old age he said, "Rich as I am, I have always lived like a poor man."

In 1529, when Florence was under great political excitement, Michael Angelo was appointed superintendent
of all the fortifications of the Florentine territory. In the midst of his duties he became
aware of facts which determined him to fly. He went to Venice, and was proscribed as a rebel.
We cannot stay here to inquire as to his wisdom in this, but must go on to say that at length
he was so much needed that he was persuaded to return. Then he had the dreadful experiences
of hope and fear, sickness and famine, and all the horrors of a siege, only to see his beloved
home deprived of its freedom, and in the possession of those whom he despised and hated. To
Michael Angelo this was far more bitter than any personal sorrow; he never recovered from its
effects, and it was immediately after this that he worked in the Sacristy of San Lorenzo as
if trying to kill himself.

He was bold as he was angry. He was treated kindly, and advised to forget the past; but he
never concealed his views. When his statue of Night was exhibited, verses were put upon it,
according to the custom of the time; one verse read, "Night, whom you see slumbering here so
charmingly, has been carved by an angel, in marble. She sleeps, she lives; waken her, if you
will not believe it, and she will speak."

To this Michael Angelo replied, "Sleep is dear to me, and still more that I am stone, so long
as dishonor and shame last among us; the happiest fate is to see, to hear nothing; for this
reason waken me not. I pray you, speak gently." He had great courage to speak his anger thus
publicly in the midst of those who could easily destroy him.

In 1537 or 1538 his father died, and the artist suffered terribly from his grief. He wrote
a sonnet beginning:

   "Already had I wept and sighed so much.
   I thought all grief forever at an end,
   Exhaled in sighs, shed forth in bitter tears."

The religious views of Michael Angelo were very broad, and he had a trustful and obedient dependence
upon God, in whose mercy and love he gratefully rested with the simple faith of a child. It
was not far from the time when his father died that Michael Angelo first met Vittoria Colonna.
He was now more than sixty years old; and though his poems show that he had loved children
and women all his life, yet he had allowed himself no attachments; his life had been lonely
and alone. Now, at this late hour, he yielded his heart to this beautiful, gifted woman, who
returned his friendship with the fullest esteem. During these years he was happier than he
had ever been. But in 1541 she fell under the suspicion of the Inquisition, and was obliged
to leave Rome.

During two years they wrote constantly to each other, and each sent to the other the sonnets
they wrote. But Mr. King's pleasing story has also this additional merit, that while his learning
and scholarlike acquirements have enabled him to illustrate the early history, religion, customs,
and superstitions of the North in a most interesting and instructive manner, he has so done
this, as at the same time to throw much curious light on many of our own old-world customs,
popular observances, and folk-lore.

Such of our clerical readers as may be anxious to introduce cheap
maps into the schools under their superintendence, will thank us for
calling their attention to the series of Penny Maps (twopence each
with the boundaries coloured), now publishing by Messrs. Chapman and
Hall.

That they have been constructed and engraved by Mr. J. W. Lowry, is a sufficient guarantee
for their accuracy.
 His health failed, his sadness increased, and his writings show how constantly
he mourned for Vittoria. After this he did much work as an architect, and held the post of
director of the building of St. Peter's. He superintended the erection of the statue of Marcus
Aurelius, and completed the Farnese Palace, and had many improvements in mind.

Now, in his old age, he was authority itself in Rome. He had no rival, and his advice was sought
by artists as well as others. He lived very simply: he dined alone, and received his visitors
in the plainest manner. Anatomy, which had always been a passion with him, was now his chief
pursuit. He made many dissections of animals, and was grateful when a human subject could be
allowed him.

When he could not sleep he would get up at night and work upon the group of which we have spoken;
he had a cap with a candle in it, so that it cast a light upon his work. Vasari once entered
when he was at work upon this group, and had a lantern in his hand; he dropped it purposely,
so that the sculpture should not be seen, and said: "I am so old that death often pulls me
by the coat to come to him, and some day I shall fall down like this lantern, and my last spark
of life will be extinguished."

There are many very interesting circumstances told of his last years and his strength of mind,
and the work which he did was wonderful; but we have not space to recount it here.

At length, in February, 1564, when almost ninety years old, he died. He had asked to be buried
in Florence. His friends feared that this would be opposed, so they held burial-services in
Rome, and his body was afterward carried through the gates as merchandise. In Florence the
body was first laid in San Piero Maggiore, and on Sunday, at evening, the artists assembled,
and forming a procession, proceeded to Santa Croce, where he was buried. The younger artists
bore the bier upon their shoulders, and the older ones carried torches to light the way. A
great multitude followed the procession, and in the Sacristy of Santa Croce the coffin was
opened; though three weeks had passed since his death, his face appeared as if he had just
died; the crowd was very great, but all was quiet, and before morning it had dispersed. The
Duke had thought that a public funeral would recall old memories, and might cause a disturbance;
but Michael Angelo had left Florence thirty years before his death, and his connection with
the city was forgotten by many.

The July following was appointed for a memorial service in his honor; San Lorenzo was splendidly
decorated; Varchi delivered an oration. Leonardo, his nephew, erected a monument to him in
Santa Croce, for which the Duke gave the marble. His statue stands in the court of the Uffizi
with those of other great Florentines, but with no especial prominence. His house in the Ghibelline
Street is preserved as a museum, and visitors there see many mementos of this great man. Mr.
Heath Wilson, an English artist, then residing at Florence, wrote a new life of Michael Angelo,
and the last signature which Victor Emmanuel wrote before his death was upon the paper which
conferred on Mr. Wilson the Order of the Corona d'Italia, given as a recognition of his services
in writing this book. 

For I need grace to bear with you so much.

[Exit.]

QUEEN. So, he is forth. Let me behold myself; I am too pale
to be so hot; I marvel So little color should be bold in the face
When the blood is not quieted. I have But a brief space to cool my
thoughts upon. Who would
place a general or a statesman by their side as equal to them? It is art alone which marks
the prime of nations."

