"You have done for me," she said, in the deep, vibrating tones of her rich contralto voice,
"all that human intelligence could suggest.  You have examined the evidence and conducted the
whole affair with a thoroughness which I never could have obtained elsewhere.  That your search
has been unavailing is due, not to any fault of yours, but rather to the consummate skill of
the assassin, who, I think, we may conclude, is no ordinary criminal.  I do not know much of
the abilities of Messrs. Osborne and Allen, but I understand that M. Godin has the reputation
of being the cleverest detective in America. I cannot learn that he has made any progress whatsoever
in the solution of this terrible mystery.  I do not feel, therefore, that you have any right
to reproach yourself.  Such hope as I have that my father's murderer may ever be brought to
justice rests in your efforts; else I should feel bound to relieve you of a task, which, though
self-imposed, is, none the less, onerous and ill-paid.  Do not consider me altogether selfish
if I ask that you still continue the search, and that I--that I still be held to my covenant.
I am aware that I can never fully repay the kindness I am asking of you, but--"

Maitland did not wait for her to finish.  "Let us not speak of that," he said.  "It is enough
to know that you are still satisfied with my, thus far, unsuccessful efforts in your behalf.
There is nothing affords me keener pleasure than to struggle with and solve an intricate problem,
whether it be in algebra, geometry, or the mathematics of crime; and then--well, even if I
succeed, I shall quit the work your debtor."

He had spoken this last impulsively, and when he had finished he remained silent, as if surprised
and a bit nettled at his own failure to control himself.  Gwen made no reply, not even raising
her eyes; but I noticed that her fingers at once busied themselves with the entirely uncalled-for
labour of readjusting the tidy upon the arm of her chair, and I thought that, if appearances
were to be trusted, she was very happy and contented at the change she had made in the bit
of lacework beneath her hands.  With singular good sense, with which she was always surprising
me, Alice now introduced the subject of the Young People's Club, and mentioned incidentally
that Gwen was to have charge of the next meeting.  Before Gwen had time to inform Maitland
that she intended to decline this honour, he congratulated her upon it, and rendered her withdrawal
difficult by saying: "I feel that I should thank you, Miss Darrow, for the faithful way in
which you fulfil the spirit of your agreement to permit me to order your actions.  I know,
if you consulted your own desires, you would probably decline the honour conferred upon you,
and that in accepting it, you are influenced by the knowledge that you are pursuing just the
course I most wish you to follow.  Verily, you make my office of tyrant over you a perfect
sinecure.  I had expected you to chafe a little under restraint, but, instead, I find you voluntarily
yielding to my unexpressed desires."

Gwen made no reply, but we heard no more of her resignation.  She applied herself at once to
the preparation of her paper upon "Antony and Cleopatra."  Maitland, who, like all vigorous,
healthy, and informed intellects, was an ardent admirer of Shakespeare, found time to call
on Gwen and to discuss the play with her.  This seemed to please her very much, and I am sure
his interest in the play was abnormal.  He confessed to me that every morning, as he awoke,
the first thing which flashed into his mind, even before he had full possession of his senses,
was these words of Antony:

"I am dying, Egypt, dying."

He professed himself utterly unable to account for this, and asked me what I thought was the
cause of it.  He furthermore suddenly decided that he would ask Gwen to propose his name for
membership at the next meeting of the Young People's Club.  I hastily indorsed this resolution,
for I had a vague sort of feeling that it would please Gwen.

The "Antony and Cleopatra" night at length arrived.  We all attended the meeting and listened
to a very able paper upon the play.  One of the most marked traits of Gwen's character is that
whatever she does she does thoroughly, and this was fully exemplified on the night in question.
Maitland was very much impressed by some verse Gwen had written for the occasion, and a copy
of which he succeeded in procuring from her.  I think, from certain remarks he made, that it
was the broad and somewhat unfeminine charity expressed in the verse which most astonished
and attracted him, but of this, after what I have said, you will, when you have perused it,
be as good a judge as I:

                         CLEOPATRA

     In Egypt, where the lotus sips the waters
     Of ever-fruitful Nile, and the huge Sphinx
     In awful silence,--mystic converse with
     The stars,--doth see the pale moon hang her crescent on
     The pyramid's sharp peak,--e'en there, well in
     The straits of Time's perspective,
     Went out, by Caesarean gusts from Rome,
     The low-burned candle of the Ptolemies:
     Went out without a flicker in full glare
     Of noon-day glory.  When her flame lacked oil
     Too proud was Egypt's queen to be
     The snuff of Roman spirits; so she said,
     "Good-night," and closed the book of life half read
     And little understood; perchance misread
     The greater part,--yet, who shall say?  Are we
     An ermined bench to call her culprit failings up
     And make them plead for mercy?  Or can we,
     Upon whom soon shall fall the awful shadow of
     The Judgment Seat, stand in her light and throw
     Ourselves that shadow?  Rather let fall upon
     Her memory the softening gauze of Time,
     As mantle of a charity which else
     We might not serve.  She was a woman,
     And as a woman loved!  What though the fierce
     Simoom blew ever hot within the sail
     Of her desire?  What if it shifted with
     Direction of her breath?  Or if the rudder of
     Her will did lean as many ways as trampled straws,
     And own as little worth?  She was a woman still,
     And queen.  They do best understand themselves
     Who trust themselves the least; as they are wisest
     Who, for their safety, thank more the open sea
     Than pilot will.  Oh, Egypt's self-born Isis!
     Ought we to fasten in thy memory the fangs
     Of unalloyed distrust?  We know how little
     Better is History's page than leaf whereat the ink
     Is thrown.  Nor yet should we forget how much
     The nearer thou than we didst come to
     The rough-hewn corner-stone of Time.  We know
     Thy practised love enfolded Antony;
     And that around the heart of Hercules'
     Descendant, threading through and through,
     Like the red rivers of its life, in tangled mesh
     No circumstance could e'er unravel, thou
     Didst coil,--the dreamy, dazzling "Serpent of
     The Nile!" Thy sins stick jagged out
     From history's page, and bleeding tear
     Fair Judgment from thy merits.  We perchance
     Do wrong thee, Isis; for that coward, History,
     Who binds in death his object's jaw and then
     Besmuts her name, hath crossed his focus in
     Another age, and paled his spreading figment from
     Our sight.  Thou art so far back toward
     The primal autocrat whose wish, hyena-like,
     Was his religion, that, appearing as thou dost
     On an horizon new flushed in the first
     Uncertain ray of Altruism, thou seem'st
     More ghost than human.  Yet thou lovest, loving ghost,
     And thy fierce parent flame thyself snuffed out
     Scarce later than the dark'ning of the fire
     Thou gav'st to be eternal vestal of
     Thine Antony's spirit.  Thou didst love and die
     Of love; let, therefore, no light tongue, brazen
     In censure, say that nothing in thy life
     Became thee like the leaving it.  The cloth
     From which humanity is cut is woven of
     The warp and woof of circumstance, and all
     Are much alike.  We spring from out the mantle, Earth,
     And hide at last beneath it; in the interim
     Our acts are less of us than it.  We are
     No judge, then, of thy sins, thou ending link
     Of Ptolemy's chain.  Forsooth, we are too much
     O'erfilled with wondering how like to thee
     We all had been, inclipt and dressed in thine
     Own age and circumstance.

It was about noon the next day when Maitland called upon me.  "See here, Doc," he began at
once, "do you believe in coincidences?"  I informed him that his question was not altogether
easy to understand. "Wait a moment," he said, "while I explain.  For at least two years prior
to my recent return from California the name 'Cleopatra' has not entered my mind.  You were
the first to mention it to me, and from you I learned that Miss Darrow was to have charge of
the 'Antony and Cleopatra' night.  That is all natural enough.  But why should I, on every
morning since you first mentioned the subject to me, awake with Antony's words upon my lips?
Why should every book or paper I pick up contain some reference to Cleopatra?  Why, man, if
I were superstitious, it would seem positively spookish.  I am getting to believe that I shall
be confronted either by Cleopatra's name, or some allusion to her, every time I pick up a book.
It's getting to be decidedly interesting."

"I have had," I replied, "similar, though less remarkable, experiences.  It is quite a common
occurrence to learn of a thing, say, this morning for the first time in one's life, and then
to find, in the course of the day's reading, three or four independent references to the same
thing.  Suppose we step into the library, and pick out a few books haphazard, just to see if
we chance upon any reference to Cleopatra."

To this Maitland agreed, and, entering the library, I pushed the Morning Herald across the
table to him, saying: "One thing's as good as another; try that."  He started a little, but
did not touch the paper.  "You will have to find something harder than that," he said, pointing
to the outspread paper.

I followed the direction of his finger, and read:

   "Boston Theatre.  Special engagement of Miss Fanny Davenport.
    For one week.  Beginning Monday, the 12th of December, Sardou's
    'Cleopatra.'"

I was indeed surprised, but I said nothing.  The next thing I handed him was a copy of Godey's
Magazine, several years old.  He opened it carelessly, and in a moment read the following line:
"I am dying, sweetheart, dying."  "Doesn't that sound familiar?  It reminds me at once of the
poetic alarm clock that wakens me every morning,--'I am dying, Egypt, dying.'  There is no
doubt that Higginson's poem suggested this one.  Here is the whole of the thing as it is printed
here," he said, and read the following:

                LOVE'S TWILIGHT

     I am dreaming, loved one, dreaming
     Of the sweet and beauteous past
     When the world was as its seeming,
     Ere the fatal shaft was cast.

     I am sobbing, sad-eyed, sobbing,
     At the darkly sullen west,
     Of the smile of ignorance robbing
     The pale face against the breast.

     I am smiling, tear-stained, smiling,
     As the sun glints on the crest
     Of the troubled wave, beguiling
     Shipwrecked Hope to its long rest.

     I am parting, broken, parting,
     From a soul that I hold dear,
     And the music of whose beauty
     Fades a dead strain on my ear.

     I am dying, sweetheart, dying,
     Drips life's gold through palsied hands,--
     See; the dead'ning Sun is sighing
     His last note in red'ning bands.

     So I'm sighing, sinking, sighing,
     Flows life's river to the sea.
     Death my throbbing heart is tying
     With the strings that ache for thee.

"Yes," I said, when he had finished.  "I shall have to admit that immediately suggests Higginson's
poem and Cleopatra's name.  But here, try this," and I threw an old copy of the Atlantic Monthly
upon the table.  Maitland opened it and laughed.  "This may be mere chance, Doc," he said,
"but it is remarkable, none the less.  See here!"  He held the magazine toward me, and I read:
"Cleopatra's Needle.  The Historic Significance of Central Park's New Monument. Some of the
Difficulties that Attended its Transportation and Erection.  By James Theodore Wright, Ph.
D."  I was dumfounded. Things were indeed getting interesting.

"Magazines and newspapers," I said, "seem to be altogether too much in your line.  We'll try
a book this time.  Here," and I pulled the first one that came to hand, "is a copy of Tennyson's
Poems I fancy it will trouble you to find your reference in that."  Maitland took it in silence,
and, opening it at random, began to read.  The result surprised him even more than it did me.
He had chanced upon these verses from "A Dream of Fair Women":

   "'We drank the Libyan Sun to sleep, and lit
     Lamps which outburn'd Canopus.  O my life
     In Egypt!  O the dalliance and the wit,
     The flattery and the strife.

   "'And the wild kiss when fresh from war's alarms,
     My Hercules, my Roman Antony,
     My mailed Bacchus leapt into my arms,
     Contented there to die!

   "'And there he died!  And when I heard my name
     Sigh'd forth with life, I would not brook my fear
     Of the other!  With a worm I balked his fame.
     What else was left?  look here!'

    "With that she tore her robe apart and half
     The polished argent of her breast to sight
     Laid bare.  Thereto she pointed with a laugh,
     Showing the aspic's bite."

"There is no doubt about that," I said, as he laid the book upon the table.  "I want to try
this thing once more.  Here is Pascal; if you can find any reference to the 'Serpent of the
Nile' in that, you needn't go any farther, I shall be satisfied," and I passed the book to
him.   He turned the pages over in silence for half a minute, or so, and then said: "I guess
this counts as a failure,--no, though, by Jove!  Look here!"  His face was of almost deathly
pallor, and his finger trembled upon the passage it indicated as he held the book toward me.
I glanced with some anxiety from his face to the book, and read, as nearly as I now can remember:
"If Cleopatra's nose had been shorter, the entire face of the world would have been changed."

It was some minutes before Maitland fully regained his composure, and during that time neither
of us spoke.  "Well, Doc," he said at length, and his manner was decidedly grave, even for him:

"What do you make of it?"  I didn't know what to make of it, and I admitted my ignorance with
a frankness at which, considering my profession, I have often since had occasion to marvel.
I told him that I could scarcely account for it on the ground of mere coincidence, and I called
his attention to that part of "The Mystery of Marie Roget," where Poe figures out the mathematical
likelihood of a certain combination of peculiarities of clothing being found to obtain in the
case of two young women who were unknown to each other.  If the finding of a single reference
to Cleopatra had been a thing of so infrequent occurrence as to at once challenge Maitland's
attention, what was to be said when, all of a sudden, her name, or some reference to her, seemed
to stare at him from every page he read?

   "'There is something in this more than natural,
      If philosophy could find it out,'"

murmured Maitland, more to himself than to me.  "Come, what do you say?" and he turned abruptly
to me with one of those searching looks so peculiar to him in moments of excitement.  "I see,"
I replied, "that you are determined I shall give my opinion now and here, without a moment's
reflection.  Very well; you have just quoted 'Hamlet'; I will do likewise:

   "'There are more things in Heaven and Earth, Horatio,
     Than are dreamt of in your philosophy!'

"You seem in some strange way to be dominated by the shade of Cleopatra.  Now, if I believed
in metempsychosis, I should think you were Mark Antony brought down to date.  There, with that
present sober air of yours, you'd pass anywhere for such an anachronism. But to be serious,
and to give you advice which is positively bilious with gravity, I should say, investigate
this thing fully; make a study of this ancient charmer.  By the way, why not begin by going
to see Davenport in Sardou's 'Cleopatra'?  You have never seen her in it, have you?"

In this way, I succeeded in getting him out of his depressed state. We got into an argument
concerning the merits of Miss Davenport's work.  I know of nothing Maitland would sooner do
than argue, and, if attacked on a subject upon which he feels strongly, he is, for the time
being, totally oblivious of everything else.  For this reason I trapped him into this argument.
I abominate what is now known as "realism" just as much as he does, but you don't have much
of an argument without some apparent difference of opinion, so, for the nonce, I became a realist
of whom Zola himself would have been proud.  "Why, man," I said, "realism is truth.  You certainly
can't have any quarrel with that."  I knew this would have the effect of a red rag flaunted
in the face of a bull.

"Truth!  Bah!" he exclaimed excitedly.  "I have no patience with such aesthetic hod-carriers!
Truth, indeed!  Is there no other truth in art but that coarse verisimilitude, that vulgar
trickery, which appeals to the eyes and the ears of the rabble?  Are there not psychological
truths of immensely greater importance?  What sane man imagines for a moment that the pleasure
he derives from seeing that greatest of all tragedians, Edwin Booth, in one of Shakespeare's
matchless tragedies, is dependent upon his believing that this or that character is actually
killed?  Why, even the day of the cranberry-juice dagger is long since passed.  When Miss Davenport
shrieks in 'Fedora,' the shriek is literal--'real,' you would call it--and you find yourself
instinctively saying, 'Don't!---don't!' and wishing you were out of the house.  When Mr. Booth,
as 'Shylock' shrieks at 'Tubal's' news, the cry is not real, is not literal, but is suggestive,
and you see at once the fiendish glee of which it is the expression.  The difference between
the two is the difference between vocal cords and grey matter."

"But surely," I rejoined, "one doesn't want untruth; one wants--" but he did not let me finish.

"Always that cry of truth!" he retorted.  "Do you not see how absurd it is, as used by your
exponents of realism?  With a bit of charcoal some Raphael draws a face with five lines, and
some photographer snaps a camera at the same face.  Which would any sane man choose as the
best work of art?  The five-line face, of course.  Why?  Is the work of the camera unreal?
Is it not more accurate in drawing, more subtle in gradation than the less mechanical picture?
To be sure. What, then, makes the superiority of the few lines of our Raphael? That which makes
the superiority of all noble art--its truth,, not on a low, but on a high, plane: its power
of interpreting.  See!" he said, fairly aglow with excitement.  "What does your realist do,
even assuming that he has reached that never-to--be-attained perfection which is the lifelong
Mecca of his desires?  He gives you, by his absolutely realistic goes with you, and interprets
its grandeur to you. Stand before his canvas and enjoy it as you would Nature herself if there.
Surely, you say, nothing more could be desired, and you clap your hands, and shout, 'Bravo!'
But wait a bit; the other side is yet to be heard from.  What does the true artist do for you
by his picture of Yosemite Valley?  He not only gives you a free conveyance to it, but he goes
with you, and interprets its grandeur to you.  He translates into the language of your consciousness
beauties which, without him, you would entirely miss.  It is this very capability of seeing
more in Nature than is ever perceived by the common throng that constitutes the especial genius
of the artist, and a work that is not aglow with its creator's personality--personality, mind
you, not coarse realism--can never rank as a masterpiece.  But, come, this won't do.  Why did
you want to get me astride my hobby?"

I thought it advisable to answer this question by asking another, so I said: "But how about
Davenport?  Will you go?"

"Yes," he replied.  "Anything with a Cleopatra to it interests me. I'll go now and see about
the tickets," and he left me.

I have related Maitland's aesthetic views as expressed to me upon this occasion, not because
they have any particular bearing upon the mystery I am narrating, but because they cast a strong
side-light upon the young man's character, and also for the reason that I believe his personality
to be sufficiently strong and unique to be of general interest.

We went that same night to see Sardou's "Cleopatra." I asked Maitland how he liked the piece,
and the only reply he vouchsafed was: "I have recently read Shakespeare's treatment of the
same theme."

CHAPTER II

   If events spread themselves out fanwise from the past into the
   future, then must the occurrences of the present exhibit
   convergence toward some historical burning-point,--some focal
   centre whereat the potential was warmed into the kinetic.

It was nearly a week after the events last narrated before I saw Maitland again, and then only
by chance.  We happened to meet in the Parker House, and, as he had some business pertaining
to a case he was on, to transact at the Court House, I walked up Beacon Street with him.  
There is a book or stationery store, on Somerset Street, just before you turn down toward Pemberton
Square.  As we were passing this store, Maitland espied a large photographic reproduction of
some picture.

"Let us cross over and see what it is," he said. We did so.  It was a photograph of L. Alma-Tadema's
painting of Antony and Cleopatra. Maitland started a little as he read the title, and then
said lightly: "Do you suppose, Doc, that woman's mummy is in existence? I should like to find
it.  I've an idea she left some hieroglyphic message for me on her mummy-case, and doesn't
propose to let me rest easy until I find and translate it.  Now, if I believed in transmigration
of souls--do you see any mark of Antony about me? Say, though, just imagine the spirit of Marcus
Antonius in a rubber apron, making an analysis of oleomargarine!  But here we are; good-bye,"
and he left me without awaiting any reply.  He seemed to me to be in decidedly better spirits
than formerly, and I was at the time at a loss to account for it.  The cause of his levity,
however, was soon explained, for that night, as Gwen, my sister, and I were sitting cosily
in the study according to our usual custom, Maitland walked in, unannounced.  He had come now
to be a regular visitor, and I invented not a few subterfuges to get him to call even oftener
than he otherwise would, for I perceived that his coming gave pleasure to Gwen.  She exhibited
less depression when in his presence than at any other time.  I had learned that hers was one
of those deep natures in which grief crystallises slowly, but with an unconquerable persistence.
Instead of her forgetting her bereavement, or the sense thereof waxing weaker by time, she
seemed to be drifting toward that ever-present consciousness of loss in which the soul feels
itself gradually, but surely, sinking under an insupportable burden--a burden so long borne,
so well known, that the mind no longer thinks of it.  The heart beats stolidly under its load,
and seems to forget the time when it was not so oppressed.  No one knows better than we physicians
the danger of this autocracy of grief, and I watched Gwen with a solicitude at times almost
bordering on despair.  But, as I said before, she always seemed to show more interest in affairs
when Maitland was present, and, on the night in question, his abrupt and unexpected entrance
surprised her into the betrayal of more pleasure than she would have wished us to note, and,
indeed, so quickly did she conceal her confusion that I was the only one who noticed it.  Maitland
was too busy with the news he brought.

"Well, Miss Darrow," he began at once, "at last your detective has got a clue--not much of
a one--but still a clue.  I can pick the man for whom we are looking from among a million of
his fellows--if I am ever fortunate enough to get the chance."

Somebody has already called attention to the fact that women are more or less curious, and
there are well-authenticated cases on record where this inquisitiveness has even extended to
things which did not immediately concern themselves; so I have little doubt I shall be believed
when I say the women folk were in a fever of expectancy, and besought Maitland with an earnestness
quite unnecessary--(it would have required a great deal to have prevented his telling it)--to
begin at the beginning, and relate the whole thing.  He readily acceded to this request, and
began by telling them the experiences which I have just narrated.  It was, he said, during
the last act of Sardou's "Cleopatra" that the idea had suddenly come to him to change the plan
of search from the analytical to the synthetical.

"You see," he continued, "I had from the first been trying to find the assassin without knowing
the exact way in which the crime was committed.  I now determined to ascertain how, under the
same circumstances, I could commit such a crime, and leave behind no other evidences of the
deed than those which are in our possession. I began to read detective stories, with all the
avidity of a Western Union Telegraph messenger, and, of course, read those by Conan Doyle.
The assertion of 'Sherlock Holmes' that there is no novelty in crime; that crimes, like history,
repeat themselves; and that criminals read and copy each other's methods, deeply impressed
me, and I at once said to myself: 'If our assassin was not original, whom did he copy?'

"It was while reading 'The Sign of the Four,' which I had procured at the Public Library, that
I made the first discovery.  The crime therein narrated had been committed in such a singular
manner that it at once attracted my attention.  The victim had apparently been murdered without
anyone having either entered or left the room.  In this respect it was like the problem we
are trying to solve.  Might not this book, I said to myself, have suggested to your father's
assassin the course he pursued.  I concluded to go to the library and ask for a list of the
names of persons who had taken out this book for a few months prior to your father's death.
I was fully aware that the chance of my learning anything in this way was very slight, In the
first place; I reasoned that it was not especially likely your father's murderer had read 'The
Sign of the Four,' and, in the second place, even if he had, what assurance had I that he had
read this particular copy of it?  Notwithstanding this, however, I felt impelled to give my
synthetical theory a fair experimental trial.  I was informed by the Library attendants that
the book had been much read, and given the list of some twenty names of persons who had borrowed
the book during the time I had specified.  With these twenty-odd names before me, I sat down
to think what my next step should be.  I went carefully over this chain of reasoning link by
link.  'I wish to find a certain murderer, and have adopted this method in the hope that it
may help me.  If I derive any assistance at all from it, it will be because my man has read
this particular copy of this work; therefore, I may as well assume at the start that among
these twenty-odd names is that of the man I want.  Is there any possibility of this crime having
been committed by a woman?' was my next question, and my answer was, 'Yes, a possibility, but
it is so decidedly improbable that I may count it out for the time being.'  Accordingly, I
set aside all the female names, which cut my list down to eighteen.  Several of the applicants
had only signed the initials of their given names, and the attendant, copying them from the
slips, had done likewise; so I was obliged to go to the registration clerk to determine this
question of sex, and, while there, I also ascertained the age of each applicant--that is, of
all but two.  The registrar could give me no information regarding J. Z. Weltz, or B. W. Rizzi.
When I told him that one of the clerks had copied the names for me from application slips,
he informed me that if I would go back to her I would undoubtedly find she had taken the two
last-mentioned names from the green slips used in applying for books for hall use, as neither
J. Z. Weltz nor B. W. Rizzi was a card-holder.

"I decided to let these two names rest a while, and to give my attention to the others.  After
careful deliberation I felt reasonably sure your father's assassin could not fail to be a man
of mature judgment and extraordinary cunning, probably a man past middle life--at all events,
I could safely say he was over twenty-one years of age.  Proceeding upon this assumption my
list was reduced to ten names.  But how should I further continue this process of exclusion?
This was the question which now confronted me.  I could think of but one way, apart from personally
making the gentlemen's acquaintance, which I did not then wish to do, and that was to ascertain
what other books they had borrowed immediately before and after they had read 'The Sign of
the Four.'  This was the course I determined to pursue.

