About three o'clock of the morning after the great wedding-day, the Giant Tur-il-i-ra arrived
at his castle gate. He had walked all the way home, and he felt in such a good humor that the
road never seemed so short to him before. But, for some reason, he could not open the gate.
There seemed to be an unusual number of locks and bolts, and the big key he carried did not
seem to fit any of the numerous key-holes. He could easily reach over and undo the bolts, but
the locks were too much for him; and, I am sorry to say, he got a little angry, and was about
to take his club and smash his magnificent gate, when his wife, who had been sitting up for
him, and had heard the noise he had been making, came down and let him in.

They went together into the great hall, and there Tur-il-i-ra sat down before the fire. His
wife, who thought a great deal of the good Giant, was sorry to see that he was silent and rather
grum.

"What makes you look so, my dear?" said she. "Did you not have a good time?"

"O yes," said he, "good enough,--but that gate put me out. I wonder what's the matter with
it. It's got to be fixed. I won't be bothered and worried in this way."

"It shall all be made right in the morning," said his wife. "But are you sure you did not take
anything that disagreed with you while you were away?"

"Perhaps I did," said he. "It might have been the mince-pies. They told me they were temperance
pies, but I don't believe it."

"How many did you eat, my dear?" asked the good Giantess.

"Well, I don't know," said her husband. "About ten or eleven hundred, I suppose."

"That was too many for you," said his wife. "And I think you had better go to bed, and I will
bring you something to make you feel better."

So the Giant went to bed, and as he slowly ascended the stairs, he winked to himself with his
right eye. And his wife, she went into the kitchen, and winked to herself with her left eye.

After a while she came up to the Giant, and brought a barrel of hot chamomile tea; and when
he had drank it all, she tucked him in, nice and warm, and the next morning he felt as well
as ever.

TING-A-LING'S VISIT TO TUR-I-LI-RA.

One pleasant sunny day, the Giant Tur-il-i-ra was lying on his back on the grass, under some
great trees, in a wood near the palace of the King.

His feet were high above the rest of his body, resting in the crotch of a great oak-tree, and
he lay with his vest open and his hat off, idly sucking the pith from a young sapsago-tree
that he had just broken off. Near him, on the top of a tall bulrush, sat the little fairy Ting-a-ling.
They had been talking together for some time, and Tur-il-i-ra said, "Ting-a-ling, you must
come and see me. You have never been to my castle except when you came for the good of somebody
else. Come now for yours and mine, and stay at least a week. We will have a gay old time. Will
you come?"

"I will," cried the little fairy, in a voice as clear as the chirp of a cricket. "I'll come
whenever you say so."

"Let it be to-morrow, then," said the Giant. "Shall I fetch you?"

"O no," said Ting-a-ling; "I will come on my blue butterfly. You have no idea how fast he flies.
I do believe he could go to your castle nearly as fast as you could yourself."

"All right," said Tur-il-i-ra, rising. "Come as you please, but be sure you come to stay."

Then the Giant got up, and he shook himself, and buttoned his vest, and put on his hat, and
as he had thin boots on, he told Ting-a-ling he was going to see if he couldn't take the river
at one jump. So, tightening his belt, and going back for a good run, he rushed to the river
bank, and with a spring like the jerk of five mad elephants, he bounded across. But the opposite
bank was not hard enough to resist the tremendous fall of so many tons of giant as came upon
it when Tur-il-i-ra's feet touched its edge; and it gave way, and his feet went up and his
back came down, and into the river, like a ship dropping out of the sky, went the mighty Giant.
The splash was so great that the whole air, for a minute or two, was full of water and spray,
and Ting-a-ling could see nothing at all. When things had become visible again, there was Tur-il-i-ra
standing up to the middle of his thighs in the channel of the river, and brushing from his
eyes and his nose the water that trickled from him like little brooks.

"Hel-l-o-o-o!" cried Ting-a-ling. "Are you hurt?"

"O no!" spluttered the Giant. "The water and the mud were soft enough, but I'm nearly blinded
and choked."

"It's a good thing it isn't worse," cried the fairy. "If that river had not been so broad,
you would have broken your neck when you came down."

"Good-by!" cried the Giant, stepping upon the bank; "I must hurry home as fast as I can." And
so away he went over the hills at a run, and you may rest assured that he did not jump any
more rivers that day.

The next morning early, Ting-a-ling mounted his blue butterfly, and over the fields he went
almost as fast as a bird, for his was a butterfly of the desert, where they have to fly very
far for anything to eat, and to race for it very often at that. Ting-a-ling took nothing with
him but what he wore, but his "things" and his best clothes were to be sent after him on a
beetle, which, though slow, was very strong, and could have carried, if he chose, everything
that Ting-a-ling had. About sunset, the fairy and the butterfly, the latter very tired, arrived
at the castle of Tur-il-i-ra, and there, at the great door, stood the Giant, expecting them,
with his face beaming with hospitality and delight. He had had his slaves, for the whole afternoon,
scattered along the road by which his visitor would come; and they were commanded to keep a
sharp lookout for a blue butterfly, and pass the word to the castle when they saw it coming.
So Tur-il-i-ra was all ready; and as he held out his finger, the butterfly was glad enough
to fly up and light upon it. The good Giant took them both into the house, and the butterfly
was put on a top-shelf, where there were some honey-jars, and if he didn't eat!

Supper was all ready, and Tur-il-i-ra sat down to the table on a chair which was bigger than
some houses, while Ting-a-ling sat cross-legged on a napkin, opposite to him. The Giant had
everything nice. There was a pair of roast oxen, besides a small boiled whale, and a great
plate of fricasseed elks. As for vegetables, there were boat-loads of mashed potatoes, and
turnips, and beans; and there was a pie which was as big as a small back-yard. The Giant had
a splendid appetite, and before supper was over he had eaten up most of these things. As for
little Ting-a-ling, he had only got half way through his third grain of boiled rice, when the
Giant was done. But he could eat no more; and after scooping up about a drop of wine in a little
cup he carried with him, he drank the health of Tur-il-i-ra, and then they went out on the
front porch, where the Giant ordered his big pipe to be brought, and he had a smoke. When Tur-il-i-ra
had finished his pipe, and Ting-a-ling had nearly sneezed himself to death, and the whole atmosphere,
for about a mile around the castle, was foggy with smoke, they went in to bed.

Tur-il-i-ra took Ting-a-ling up-stairs, and showed him where he was to sleep; and then putting
him down on the bed, he bade him good-night, and went out and shut the door after him.

Ting-a-ling stood in the middle of the bed and looked about him. It was as if he was in the
midst of a great plain. The bed was a double one, that had belonged to the Giant's father and
mother, and he had given it to Ting-a-ling because it was the best in the house. The little
fairy was delighted with this bed, which was very smooth, and covered with a great white counterpane.
He ran from one end to the other of it, and he turned heels-over-head, and walked on his hands,
and amused himself in this way until he was thoroughly tired. Then he lay right down in the
very middle, and went to sleep. I would like to have a picture of Ting-a-ling in the Giant's
bed, but any one can draw it so easily for himself, that it is of no use to have it here. All
that is necessary is to take a large sheet of white paper,--the largest you can get,--and in
the centre of it make a small dot,--the smallest you can make,--and there you have the picture.

It must have been nearly morning when Ting-a-ling was awakened by a tremendous knocking at
the front-door of the castle. The first thought he had was that perhaps there were his things!
But he forgot that a very small, and probably tired-out fairy (for Parsley's younger brother
was to come with the baggage), in charge of a beetle in the same condition, could hardly make
such a thundering noise as that. But he jumped up and slid down on the floor, and as his room
was a front one, he went to the window, and climbing up the curtains, got outside and looked
down. There, in the moonlight, he saw an ordinary sized man on horseback, directing about a
dozen black slaves, who had hold of a long rope, which they had tied to the knocker of Tur-il-i-ra's
door. They were all pulling away at it as hard as they could (and a mighty pounding they made
too), when the Giant put his head out of his window, and asked what all this noise meant.

"O good Tur-il-i-ra!" cried the man on the horse, "I have ridden for several days" (he said
nothing about his slaves having run all the way) "to come to you, and tell you that the Kyrofatalapynx
is loose."

"What!" cried Tur-il-i-ra, in a voice like the explosion of a powder magazine. "Loose!"

"Yes," said the man. "He's been loose for four days."

The Giant pulled in his head, and Ting-a-ling could hear him hurrying down-stairs to open the
great door. The man came in and all the slaves, and as a good many of Tur-il-i-ra's people
were up by this time, there was a great hubbub of voices in the lower hall; but though Ting-a-ling
listened up by the banisters until the cold wind on the staircase had nearly frozen his little
bare legs (which were not much longer than your finger-nail, and about as thick as a big darning-needle),
he could make out nothing at all of the talk. So he went back to the bed, and got in under
the edge of the counterpane, and lay there, with just his head sticking out, until he dropped
asleep. At daybreak Tur-il-i-ra came into the room, and stooping over the bed, called to him
to get up, as there was to be an early breakfast. As the Giant carried him down-stairs on his
finger, he told the fairy that he was deeply grieved, but that he would be obliged to leave
him for the rest of the day, on account of the Kyrofatalapynx having broken loose.

"But what is that?" asked Ting-a-ling.

"Why, don't you know? It is a--Look here, you fellows! Didn't I tell you that breakfast was
to be all ready when I came down? What do you mean, you lazy rascals? Skip, now, and have everything
ready this minute."

And the men skipped, and the cooks cooked, and the fires blazed, and the pots boiled and bubbled,
and the Giant sat down in a great hurry, with the man who came on horseback sitting cross-legged
on one side of the table, and Ting-a-ling on the other. So he forgot to finish his sentence
about the Kyrofatalapynx. During the meal there was nothing but noise and confusion, and Ting-a-ling
could not get in a word. The Giant had a dish of broiled sheep before him, and he was crunching
them up as fast as he could, and talking, with his mouth full, to the man all the time; and
the slaves and the servants were all eating and drinking, and running about, until there was
no hearing one's own voice, unless it was a very big one. So, although Ting-a-ling was dying
of curiosity to know what the Kyrofatalapynx was, he could not get an answer from any one.

As soon as the Giant was done eating, he jumped up, and shouted for his hat and his boots;
and if the men did not run fast enough, he shouted at them all the louder. If Ting-a-ling had
not stayed on the table, I don't know what would have become of him in the confusion. The Giant
had now pushed off his slippers, and was waiting until the men should bring his boots; and
as one lazy fellow was poking around, as if he was half asleep, Tur-il-i-ra was so irritated
at his slowness that he slipped the toe of his stockinged foot under him, and gave him a tremendous
send right out of the door, and he went flying over the trees at the bottom of the lawn, and
over the barley-field on the other side of the ditch, and over the pasture, where the cows
were kept, and over the pomegranate orchard, and over the palm-grove by the little lake, and
over Hassan ab Kolyar's cottage, right smack down into the soft marsh, back of the sunflower
garden; and he didn't get back to the castle until his master had been gone an hour. As the
Giant sat on the edge of the table, pulling on his boots, he told Ting-a-ling that he must
make himself as comfortable as possible until he came back, and that he would not be gone longer
than he could possibly help. But although the fairy asked him again and again to tell him what
the Kyrofatalapynx was, he never seemed to hear him, so busy was he, talking to everybody at
once. Now Tur-il-i-ra was nearly ready to go, and Ting-a-ling was standing close to the fringe
on his scarf, which lay over one end of the table.

"How I should like to go with him," said the little fairy, and he took hold of the fringe.
"But he doesn't want me, or he would take me along. I would ask him, if he would only be quiet
a minute"--

Just then up jumped the Giant; and as Ting-a-ling had not let go of the fringe, he was jerked
up too. He held on bravely; and as he did not wish to swing about on the scarf, he climbed
up to the Giant's shoulder, and took tight hold of his long hair. With the man and his slaves
in a large round basket in one hand, and his great club in the other, away went Tur-il-i-ra,
with strides longer than across the street, and he walked so fast, that Ting-a-ling had to
hold on tight, to keep from being blown away.

About noon they came to a large palace, surrounded by smaller dwellings; and on the porch of
the palace there stood a King and a Queen and three princesses, and they were all crying. On
the steps, in the grounds and gardens, and everywhere, were the lords and ladies, and common
people, and they were all crying too. When these disconsolate people saw the Giant approaching,
they set up a great shout of joy, and rushed to meet him, calling out, "O, the Kyrofatalapynx
has broken loose!"

Tur-il-i-ra went up to the palace, and sat down on the great portico, with his feet on the
ground, and the people told him (all speaking at once, and not having even manners enough to
let the King have the first say) that the Kyrofatalapynx had grown awfully strong and savage
since the Giant had tied him up, and that he had at last broken loose, and was now ravaging
the country. He had carried off ever so many camels, and horses, and sheep, and oxen, and had
threatened to eat up every person in those parts, who was under age. But since he had found
out that they had sent for Tur-il-i-ra, he had gone into the forest, and they knew not when
he would come forth. Then up spoke a woodman above all the clamor, and he said he knew when
he would come out, for he had been in the forest that morning, and had stumbled on the Kyrofatalapynx,
which was so busy making something that he did not see him; and he heard him mutter to himself,
over and over again, "When he comes, I'll rush out and finish him, and then I'll be head of
them all."

"All right," cried Tur-il-i-ra. "I'll wait down there by the edge of the forest; and when he
sees me, he can rush out, and then you will all soon know who will be finished."

So the Giant went over to the wood, and sat down and waited. After a while, he got very sleepy,
and he thought he would take a little nap until the Kyrofatalapynx should come. In order that
the people might wake him up in time, he tied a long rope to one of his ear-rings (his eyes
had been a little weak in his youth), and everybody took hold of the end of the rope, and they
promised to pull good and hard when they heard the trees crushing in the forest. So the Giant
went to sleep, and the people all listened for the Kyrofatalapynx,--holding their breaths,
and standing ready to jerk the rope when he should come.

Poor little Ting-a-ling was nearly consumed with curiosity. What was the Kyrofatalapynx? He
slipped down to the ground without being noticed by anybody; and, as they all seemed so intent
listening and watching, he felt afraid to speak to any of them. Directly a happy thought struck
him.

"I will go into the wood myself. Whatever the Kyfymytaly-gyby is, he won't be likely to see
me, and I can run and tell Tur-il-i-ra where he is, before he comes out of the wood."

So away he went, and soon was deep in the darkness of the forest. But he could hear no noise,
and saw nothing that appeared to have life. Even the very birds and insects seemed to have
flown away. After wandering some distance, he suddenly met a fairy, a little bit of a fellow,
but somewhat larger than himself, and entirely green. Ting-a-ling spoke to him, and told him
what he was after.

"That isn't exactly his name," said the green fairy, politely, "but I know what you mean. If
you come this way, I can show him to you."

So Ting-a-ling followed him, and presently they came to the edge of an opening in the middle
of the forest; and there, sure enough, was the Kyrofatalapynx. With one of his great red tails
coiled around an immense oak-tree, and the other around a huge rock, he sat with his elephantine
legs gathered up under him, as if he were about to spring over the tree-tops. But he had no
such idea. In his great hands, as big as travelling-trunks, he held a long iron bar, one end
of which he was sharpening against a stone. By his side lay an immense bow, made of a tall
young yew-tree, and the cord was a long and tough grape-vine. As he sat sharpening this great
arrow, he grinned until his horrid teeth looked like a pale-fence around a little garden, and
he muttered to himself as he worked away,--"Four hundred and nine more rubs, and I can send
it twang through him; twang, twang, twang!"

"Isn't he horrid?" whispered Ting-a-ling.

"Yes, indeed," said the green fairy. "When he was young, he came out of the mouth of a volcano;
and the King here, who is very fond of wonderful things, got Tur-il-i-ra to catch him, and
chain him up for him in a great yard he had made for him. But now that he is grown up, no chains
can hold him, and I expect he will kill the Giant with that great iron arrow, before he can
come near him."

"O!" cried Ting-a-ling, "he mustn't do that. We must never let him do that!"

"We!" said the fairy, in a voice of astonishment.

"Yes, yes, I mean us. O, what shall we do? Let's cut his bowstring," said Ting-a-ling, in great
excitement, and drawing his little sword. The green fairy, although polite, could not help
laughing at this idea; but Ting-a-ling slipped softly to where the bow was lying, a little
behind the Kyrofatalapynx, and commenced to cut away at it; but although the green fairy took
the sword when he was tired, they could make but little impression on the stout grape-vine,
nearly as thick as they were high.

"Let's nick the sword," said Ting-a-ling, "and then it will be a saw." And so, with a sharp
little flint, they nicked the edge of it, and the edge of the green fairy's knife (for he had
no sword), and as they commenced to saw away as hard as they could at the grape-vine, they
heard the Kyrofatalapynx muttering, "Only three hundred and seven more rubs, and then--twang,
twang, twang!"

They worked like little heroes now; and as the fairy's sword was of the sharpest steel, they
cut a good way into the vine; but just when they were nearly tired out, they heard the words,--"Ninety-three
more rubs, and--twang, twang, twang!"

"O, let's saw, let's saw," cried Ting-a-ling (and it's a wonder the Kyrofatalapynx did not
hear him), and they worked as hard as they did at first.

"Six more rubs, and--twang, twang, twang!" cried the Kyrofatalapynx, and the two little fairies
fell down exhausted and disheartened. The vine was cut but little more than half through.

Up rose the mighty creature; and with his bow and arrow in his hands, he pushed quietly through
the wood. The two fairies jumped up in a few minutes, and hurried after him; and as he went
very slowly, so as not to be perceived, they reached the edge of the wood just as he crashed
out into the open field.

"O!!!" shouted all the people, and they pulled the rope with a terrible jerk. Up sprang the
Giant, but there stood the Kyrofatalapynx, with his long iron arrow already fitted into his
bow. "Ha, ha!" he cried, "I shall put it through you--twang!" And he drew his arrow to its
very head, and all the people fell down on their faces, and even Tur-il-i-ra turned a little
pale. But snap! went the bowstring, and down fell the arrow! Then up rushed the Giant, and
with one crushing blow of his rock-knobbed club, he laid the Kyrofatalapynx stone-dead!

The King, and the Queen, and the princesses, and all the people, jumped up, and in their wild
joy they would have kissed the clothes off the good Giant, had he been willing to wait.

"All right!" he cried; "I must be off. I've a friend at home waiting for me. No thanks. You
can stuff him now. Good-by!"

And away he went, and poor little Ting-a-ling was left behind!

When he saw the Giant walking away like a steam-engine on stilts, Ting-a-ling began to cry.

"Did you come with him?" said the green fairy. "Well, he's gone, and you can live with me now."

But Ting-a-ling was so overcome with sorrow, and begged so hard that his new friend should
tell him of some way to follow the Giant, that the latter, after thinking a while, took him
up into the King's pigeon-house. Warning him to be careful not to let any of the birds pick
him up, the green fairy pointed out a gray pigeon to Ting-a-ling.

"Now," said he, "if we can get a string around the middle feather of his tail, we are all right."

"How so?" asked Ting-a-ling.

"Why, then you get on, and start him off, and by pulling the string you can make him go any
way you wish; for you know he steers himself with his tail."

"Good!" cried Ting-a-ling, and they both looked for a string. When they had found one, they
stole up to the pigeon, who was eating corn, and tied it fast to the middle feather of his
tail, without his knowing anything about it.

"Now jump on and I'll start him off," said the green fairy; and Ting-a-ling ran up the pigeon's
tail (which almost touched the floor), and took his seat on its back, holding tight on to its
feathers. Then the green fairy ran around by the pigeon's head, and shouted in its ear, as
it was pecking corn,--"Hawk!"

The bird just lifted up its head, and gave one shoot right out of the window of the pigeon-house.
It went high up into the air; and Ting-a-ling, when he looked around and saw which way he ought
to go, pulled his string this way and that way, and he found that he could steer the pigeon
very well, and even make him keep up in the air, by pulling his tail-feather straight up. So
on they went, and they got to the Giant's castle before the Giant himself. The pigeon flew
over the castle, but Ting-a-ling steered him back again, and backward and forward, two or three
times, until the bird thought he might as well stop there; and so he alighted on the roof,
and off jumped Ting-a-ling. The first thing he saw there, after the pigeon had flown away again,
was the green fairy!

"Why, where did you come from?" cried Ting-a-ling.

"O," said the other, laughing, and jumping up and down, "I thought I'd come too, and I hung
on to his leg. It was nice, sitting up among his warm feathers, when his legs were curled up
under him; a great deal better than being on top."

Ting-a-ling was very glad to have his friend with him, and he took him down-stairs. When the
Giant got home, there they were, both in the middle of the table in the great hall, ready to
welcome him. Tur-il-i-ra did not ask where the green fairy came from; but he was glad to see
him, and he ordered supper to be laid on a table out on the lawn; for he was warm with his
long walk. After supper, the two fairies came down to the Giant's end of the table, and he
told them all that had happened, and how fortunate it was that the bowstring of the Kyrofatalapynx
had broken.

"He did it!" cried the green fairy, pointing to Ting-a-ling; and then he told the whole story
of their doings, and Ting-a-ling had to explain how he had gone with the Giant. Tur-il-i-ra
listened until they had quite finished, and then exclaimed, "Well! I never saw such a little
thing as you are, Ting-a-ling, for being in the right place at the right time. Never, never!"
And he brought his hand down on the table with such an emphatic bang, that Ting-a-ling and
the green fairy shot into the air like rifle-balls. Ting-a-ling went up, up, and up, until
a high wind took him, and it blew him over a river, and a wood, and a high hill, and a wide
plain; and then he fell down, down, down,--right into the middle of a soft powder puff-ball,
with which a lady was powdering her neck.

"Mercy on us!" cried the lady, when she saw a little fairy in the puff-ball that she was just
going to put up to her throat.

"It's only I, Nerralina," cried Ting-a-ling, who immediately recognized her; "wait a minute,
until I get my breath."

Sure enough, it was Nerralina, the Princess's lady, who had been on a visit to her mother,
in a distant country, and returning, had ordered her slaves to pitch her tent where she now
was, about half a day's journey from the palace. Ting-a-ling told his story, and they had a
nice time, talking of their past adventures; and in the morning Nerralina took Ting-a-ling
with her to his home in the palace gardens.

As to the green fairy, he came down in a spider web. When he got out and stood on the grass,
he said, "I shall not go back to that Giant. He is good, but he is too violent."

So he went to the river and got a nice chip, and he loaded it with honeysuckles and clover
blossoms, and pushed it off into the stream; he then lay down on his back in the middle of
his clover, and, sucking a honeysuckle, floated away in the moonlight, down to his home, where
he arrived in two or three days, just as his honeysuckles were all gone.

When Tur-il-i-ra saw what he had done, he was in great trouble indeed. He ordered all his slaves
to bring their little children, and he gathered up great handfuls of them, and spread them
out all over the grass, so that they might look for the two lost fairies. But of course they
could not find them; and just as the sun was setting, and the Giant was going to bed in despair,
there came a horseman from Nerralina, telling him that Ting-a-ling was safe, and was going
home with her. Early in the morning Tur-il-i-ra went to the palace gardens, and Ting-a-ling
seeing him, they went down to the wood where they were when this story opened. Tur-il-i-ra
wanted Ting-a-ling to go back and finish his visit.

"No," said the fairy. "I like you very much indeed, but I'm afraid I'm most too little for
your house."

"Perhaps that's true," said the Giant; "and when you want to see them, there are so many good
people here in the palace. I am sure I like common human beings very much, and I would wish
to be with them always, if they were not so little."

"I like them too," said Ting-a-ling, "and would live with them all the time, if they were not
so big."

+---------------------------------------+ |  Transcriber's Notes:                 | |     
| |  Page  56 Mahalla changed to Mahallah | |        75 wofully changed to woefully | |   
138 afrites changes to Afrites  | +---------------------------------------+